D2721 12730378 66457
AN ESSAY Towards the THEORY OF THE Intelligible World. Intuitively Considered. Designed for Forty-nine Parts. PART III. Consisting of a Preface, a Post-script, and a little something between. By GABRIEL IOHN. Enriched with a Faithful Account of his Ideal voyage and Illustrated with Poems by several Hands, as likewise with other strange things, not insufferably Clever, nor furiously to the Purpose. Archetypally Second Edition. Why Should all the  be mad but I? You that are wisest, tell me why. Tribues HIS temporis quantum poteris, Poteri autem quantum voles. Tully's Offices. Printed in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, &c.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS. I. A Tedious Advertisement. II. Concerning Prefaces. III. Of the Approbation this Treatise has met with, and likewise of the Author's Design, his Loyalty and Eminent Poverty.
IV. The great Use of Defamation and of Flattery, when dextrously admini∣ster'd. His ill success therein. V. A Section addressed to great Scholars, that are not very Cunning. VI. A Parphrase upon some Verses in Ho∣mer. Burlesque. VII. The Vanity of Riches, imitated from Anacreon. VIII. A Song. IX. To Flavelia. X. A Song. XI. An Elegy upon Raisins and Almonds, or the Passage from Dover to Calais.
XII. A Song. Two Epitaphs. XIII. Epitaph on a Maiden-head. XIV. The Kalendar. XV. The Divided Heart. XVI. How Dr. Flights, with Mars, Bacchus and Apollo, drank up the Sea to a Chorus of Thunder. An Ode. Phillis in Breeches. A Ditty. An Anagram. Two Ditties. An Epithalamium upon the Death of St. Epiphany. Two more Ditties. A Ballad. A Satyr against Size-Ace. A Panegyrick upon Thir∣teen-pence-half-penny. A Word to the Wise. Seven more Ditties. XVII. The fair Sacrifice, or a Vow to Cupid; a Song.
XVIII. A Copy of Verses upon I don't know what. XIX. The Mourning Nymph; a Song. XX. The same varied by a Friend. XXI. A Section treating of my self, one of the best of Subjects; and such a one as both I and HER MAJESTY have Reason to be peculiarly Fond of. A Discovery what sort of a Person I am, together with something con∣cerning my Mistress, and the same contradicted again. My own just Commendations, especially that of my Great Modesty. Compleat Annals of the First 55 Years of my Life. A Pre∣diction of my much lamented Death. All humbly dedicated to the Manes of Mr. De Montagne, St. Evremont and Sir W—T—e.
XXII. A Section following the former. XXIII. A Chapter chiefly designed for the Be∣nefit of Philosophers and wise people. XXIV. Of the Poetical Philosopher's Stone, or my Royal, Imperial, Angelical, Criti∣cal, Tincture of Parnassus, for clari∣fying, brightening and strengthening the Wit, without the least Grain of Mercury. XXV. My Publick Spirit. My Care for Po∣sterity; and Method of Educating Young Gentlemen. XXVI. How—de Maintenon offered to make me Poet Laureate, upon Condition I would speak in her Praise, and how I could not tell what to say.
XXVII. A Description of the Chaos; the Con∣struction of the Primigenial Earth; its Convulsion at the Deluge; the Rise of this Ruinous Orb; the Generation, Nutrition and Diseases of the Great Le∣viathan, otherwise called the Trojan∣Horse, or a Common-wealth; the Lives of Ignatius Loyola, Oliver Crom∣well, —W—and S—4; a Panegyrick upon Adultery, Sodomy, Sedition, Blasphemy and Atheism; the Natu∣ral History of May-Poles, together with a Chronological Account of the Rule of Three; Reasons proposed against the Maintenance, Breeding and Entertaining of Cats, apparently tending to impoverish the Company of Mouse-trap-makers. XXVIII. A Section containing such sad Truths, that I would not advise you to under∣stand it, nor so much as read it, if it can possibly be avoided.
XXIX. Of a wicked World and sad Times. Of the Present Tense, Infallibility, Tra∣dition, Pope Joan, Queen Dick, and Alexander the Great. Of the Golden Age, Vtopian Regions, Vcronian Days, Formosa, China and Peru. Of Fashion, Faction, Weather-cocks and Chro∣nologers. Of senile Fables, Feavers, Dreams and hard Beds. Of St. Evre∣mont's Woman that could not be found, the Epick Poem of Empedocles, cer∣tain famous Personages that never were Born, the laudable Designs of certain Patriots, and my tender Re∣spect for the Republicans. Of Sr. William Temple's Eloquence, his Pow∣der of Policy, the Philosopher's Stone, and rusty Iron. Of Rbbing Church∣yards, a Barrel of Colchester Oysters, Antiquity, Sempronia, Motion, Muddy Rivers, Hour-Glasses, Saws, Doctor's-Commons, Horace's, Odes, Felicity, Generation, Travellers, Procrastina∣tion, Extreams, Envy, Distance; The Macrocosm, Complaints, Innova∣tions and Revolutions.
XXX. A Section for which the Author could find no manner of Title. XXXI. An imperfect Description of the Raree∣Show, and the Musick of the Spheres. XXXII. A short Apostrophe to the Ideal World, in which all the principal Matters are brought in by the Bye; viz. An Ex∣tasy, a Welcome, Glory, Thanks and Acquaintance. A Quotation, Day all abroad, Mirror of Intelligences, Pillars of the Fabrick of Wisdom, Chaos, All and Nothing, Quakers, Eclypses, Shadows, Visions and six beautiful Non-entities; besides the Haecceiteiteiteiceiceiteiceity of the Haec∣ceiteiteiteiceiceiteity of the Haecceiteitei∣teiceiceity of the Haecceiteiteiteiceity of the Haecceite∣iteiteity of the Haecceitei∣teity of the Haecceiteity of the Haecceity of HAEC.
XXXIII. Of Payment in part, together with fair Promises concerning Unity, Bonity, and Specimens. XXXIV. Of Ancients and Moderns, as likewise of a great Revolution in my Affecti∣ons, and three Schemes of my Na∣tivity, cast according to Mr. Hobbes's new Method of Calculation. Of Dido and her Sister, the Sortes Virgiliana, Chesnuts, and how King Pepin of France was confuted. XXXV. Of the full Moon, Intimations, the Build∣ing of Babel, the Will of Destiny, and how Oliver Cromwel, in a Passion, shot off a Gun at the Solstice. XXXVI. My Discovery. My Lineage from King Lud. My making over all to the Pub∣lick. What Preferments I have be∣stow'd upon the Emperor, and some
other of my particular Friends; espe∣cially upon my self, to manifest the Great Respect I bear to that worthy Person, the dearest to me of all the World; and who seems to entertain infinitely the highest Opinion of my Merits, either from a particular Kind∣ness, or, as I, in Gratitude, rather ought to believe, from a singular Ex∣cellence of Judgment. XXXVII. A Chapter in Imitation of Dr. B—and Mr. Wotton. Of my great Diligence and Success. Of Slackning. Of my Amanuensis, my Pillow and the learned Dr. B—tly, with some other Matters, no less considerable. XXXVIII. The best Section in the Book, concern∣ing seven hundred a Year. XXXIX. The next best Section, concerning six hundred a Year.
XL. Concerning wonderful Things. XLI. Concerning Ivy. XLII. Of Monsters, Long-Distances, Clean∣liness, Chancellors, Transsusion of Blood, Staffrd-shire, and the Foul Disease. XLIII. Of Barbican, Narcissus, Witches and Paper-diet. XLIV. How I rejoyced, and why. XLV. Of the East-India Company. XLVI. Of Criticks. XLVII. A Section, containing no manner of Treason against the Government.
XLVIII. Several Commendatory Verses and E∣pistles sent me from foreign Professors. XLIX. A Catalogue of several Famous Persons of my intimate Acquaintance, toge∣ther with a Political Dissertation upon Green Peppar, written first in Arabick, and now made English from the Ori∣ginal High-Dutch. L. Which End of a Book to begin at. How to betray one's Country with Discretion and Honour. How Pope Colsso got the Cholick in his Thumb, by Yawn∣ing at Dinner; how he cured the same with Black Pudding. How the D— appear'd to H—n and gave him a Ring. LI. Something which you may call either a Postscript or a Preface, according to the Humour you are in.
Advertisement. THAT no Reader may complain of the least Obscurity in any part of the following Papers, Mr. Norris his own Words shall be tran∣scribed, to shew what he means by that Intelligible World, which is here made the Ground of a Satyrical Fable. In his first Volume, between the 8th and the 13th Pages, we have this Account of it. 8. By the Ideal State of things,What  lows, to  8th pag taken o of the F Vol. of  Ideal T ory. I mean that State of them which is ne∣cessary, permanent and immutable, not only antecedent and praeexistent to this, but also exemplary and representative of it, as containing in it eminently and after an intelligible Manner, all that is in this Natural World, according to which it was made, and in Conformity
to which all the Truth, Reality, Order, Beauty and Perfection of its Nature does consist, and is to be measured. The System of things existing after this man∣ner, is what we call the Ideal World, which is not a contingent, temporary, mutable thing, as this, but a self-existing, eternal, necessary and immutable Nature, really simple and one, but yet vertually and eminently multiform and various, and by its multiform and Variety having in it the Reasons, Essences and Specifick Natures of all things, that is, such De∣grees of Being and Perfection as answer to them, and are intelligibly expressive of them, and whereof all things in the Natural World are but as the Prints and Impressions, I might say, the Shadows. In sho, by the Ideal World I understand that World which is Intelligibly what this is Sensibly, the eternal Model and Exem∣plar of all created Essence, distinctly exhibitive of all that is or can ever be, and so the Measure and Standard, not only of what actually is, but of the whole Possibility of Being.
9. This is our Ideal World, the so much celebrated by Plotinus and Philo in his Cosmopoea, the first intelligible World, the World that truly is, and the World of Truth, the great Type and Mould of external Nature, and the measure of the things that are. The only eternal, stable and immutable World, that existed before the Almighty Fiat was issued forth for the Production of this, and would remain unshaken if it were reduced to nothing, that was before the Foundations of the Earth were laid, nay even before there were any morning Stars that might sing to∣gether, or any Sons of God to shout for Joy, Iob 38. This is the World of Original and Essential Beauty, where Order it self, and very Reason and Pro∣portion dwell, that never had a Chaos, and knows no black Intervals of Night, but where 'tis ever Light and Day, and where Truth shines pure and without a Cloud. A World simple in its Variety, and various in its Simplicity, infinite in its Store and Fulness, and stored with incorruptible and unsading Treasures,
universal in its Presence, and uncircum∣scrib'd by any Limit of Time or Place. The genuine Country of Truth, and its proper native Soil, the Place of Spi∣rits, the living and ever springing Foun∣tain of Intelligence, and the great Aca∣demy of all Arts and Sciences. Where those solid Realities, and substantial En∣tities perpetually flourish and shine, whereof we have here only the faint Re∣flections, and in Comparison of which this material World is but a Phantom or a Shadow. Where all is Youth and Plea∣sure, Life and Joy, Essence and Flower, where happy Spirits drink of the Wine that Wisdom its self has mingled, and are sed with immortal Truth. Whoso is Simple, let him turn in hither, Prov. 9. 10. But tho' very great and glorious Things may be spoken of thee, O thou City of God! yet how little art thou known, and how much less art thou in the Thoughts and Minds of Men! Plunged as they are in a Life of Sense they are ignorant of thee, Thou first and only Intelligible, and immers'd as they are in a Body of Flesh, they seldom
think of thee who art all Spirit and Truth, and that tho' thou shinest into their very Eyes, and they see continually by thy Light. Thou makest their Day, and thou thy self art the only thing that is not seen by it. They take the Shadows of this Natural World for most real and solid things, and thy most substantial Realities they look upon as Shadows and Visionary Chimera's, and all Discourse about thee, (tho' never so Rational) as but extravagant and delirous Talking, or at best but as Notional Romancing, pure Metaphysical Reverie, a Subtilising upon a fine nothing. They are indeed united to thee by their Souls, but by their Bodies to this Sensible World, and as their Bodies are to them their prin∣cipal Selves, this latter Alliance makes them insensible of the Former. Thou art nearer to them than this World is, nay than their very Bodies are, and yet they are far distant from thee, meet Aliens to thee, and so utterly insensible of thee, that they will hardly believe that thou art. If any mention be made of thy Name the amazed Vulgar stare,
and the Learned gravely smile, and if the Discourse be any whit long, they sleep. But if they continue awake, they sleep however to thee. Tho' they were cast in thy Mould, and form'd upon thy Model, yet (ungrateful Stupidity) they seldom or never mind their Original, nor look up to the Rock from whence they were hewn. But had Men but one clear and distinct View of thy rich in∣tellectual Scene, could we but draw the Curtain of our Mortality so far, as but once to see thee as thou art, we should be so transported and ravish'd with thy Divine Beauty, so enamour'd of thy glorious System, all shining with the very Essence of Being, and full of Grace and Truth, that we should lose not only all Value for this Sensible World, but even Sense it self too, and pass along in the Croud and Throng of Creatures, without any Notice or Perception of them, all fix'd and intent upon thy more ingaging Views, not minding the Bodies we see, nor feeling those we touch. We should in a manner be dead to this sensible World, and alive only to thee.
II. This great intellectual System is by some term'd the Ideal, by some the Intelligible, and by some the Archetypal World, which are but so many relative Appellations for the same thing, to di∣stinguish it according to so many diffe∣rent respects it carries to the System of created Beings, which accordingly is sometimes call'd the Natural, sometimes the Sensible, and sometimes the Ectypal World. It ought to be farther observ'd here, that when we say the Intelligible World, the meaning is not as if it did exist only in our Conception, and had no real Being out of it, after the manner of an Ens Rationis, but 'tis therefore so call'd, partly because 'tis the first and only proper Intelligible, the sole and im∣mediate Object of all our intellectual Views, and that which exactly speaking is the very thing we always understand and reason about. And partly because 'tis a Word of a Nature purely spiritual and intellectual, and such as is not Sen∣sible, but Intelligible only, and partly again because 'tis a World of a conceiva∣ble Being and Existence, and such in∣deed
as we cannot but conceive to be, not subjected indeed to the perusal and examination of our bodily Senses, but as certain and as really and truly pre∣sent to our Understanding, as this Natu∣ral World▪ is to our Sense. But chiefly is it so call'd because it is the Idea of this Sensible World, as being truly represen∣tative and expressive of it to the Under∣standing. For the Idea of a thing is in∣tellingibly that thing, and as the Idea of a Circle is call'd an intelligible Circle, or the Idea of a Square an intelligible Square, because they express these things to our Thoughts, so in like manner the Idea of the World, or if you will, those Ideas which answer to the several Be∣ings whereof it consists, may very rea∣sonably and fitly be call'd the Intelligible World. Thus far the Theorist. Had not this Philosophy come from so excellent a Person, I should have used more Freedom in exposing it than I have done; but as Mr. Norris is the Author, I would not have allow'd my self so much, did I think it could lessen any
Man's Esteem of his Character and De∣serts. However to countenance my own Reflections upon this Subject, I shall set down the Sentiments of some other Persons, who are allow'd to be good Authors in their several Kinds. And now I assure the Reader, that there is nothing in the Book so hard to under∣stand as this Advertisement it self, espe∣cially considering the first Quotation is to be in Latine. TESTIMONIA DE Mundo Intelligibili. Erasmus in Moriae Encomio. QVID interesse censetis, inter eos, qui in specu Platonico variarum rerum umbras & simulacr demirentur, modo nihil desiderent, neque minus sibi placeant, & sapientem, qui specum egressus, veras res aspicit.
Ii cum nihil omnino sciant, tamen omnia se scire profitentur; cumque se ipsos igno∣rent, neque fossam aliquoties out saxum obvium videant, vel quia lippiunt plerique, vel quia peregrinantur animi, tamen Ideas universales, formas separatas, primas ma∣terias, quidditates, formalitates, instantia videre se praedicant, res adeo tenues, ut neque Lynceus, opinor, possit perspicere. Sunt innumer abiles  de formali∣tatibus, de quidditatibus, haeceitatibus, quas nemo possit oculis assequi, nisi tam Lynceus, ut ea quoque per altissimas tene∣bras videat, quae nusquam sunt. Out of Mr. Baker's Reflections upon Learning. IT is not every one that is capable of understanding Metaphysical Truths, and there are yet fewer that understand their use.Chap. IX. Page 98. They are usually under the Conduct of subtle Men, and these nice Professors, instead of resolving Doubts, have spun out new Difficulties, and fram'd Labyrinths out of which they have scarce been able to disentangle themselves: So that Meta∣physicks,
which were at first only Natu∣ral Theology, are now become the most artificial thing in the World. One need only dip into any System, to see how these Men are plung'd in set∣ting out, for whereas there are two things of principal Consideration in Me∣taphysical Knowledge, its Objects and Affections, and whereas Philosophers are pretty well agreed about the Object of other Sciences, as that Quantity is the Object of Mathematicks; and Matter of Physicks; and so of the rest; the Me∣taphysicians have not come to any tolera∣ble Agreement about the Object of this Science, or Sapience, or what you will call it: Suarez produceth six different Opinions, and himself brings the se∣venth, which is his own. And as to its Affections, they are again at a plunge to find out Affections different from Being (which seems to comprehend every thing) for if the Affections and Subject are the same, their Demonstrations are Identical, and prove nothing. If any Man could have understood Aristotle, Avicen had the best Plea, who
was as subtle a Philosopher, and studied him as much as perhaps any Man ever did; and yet after he had read his Meta∣physicks forty times over, and had them all by heart (which I will venture to say is more than ever any Man will do again) he was forced to lay him aside as unintelligible. I must rank Malebranch in the same Order with Mr. Poiret, whose Recher∣che has furnished out such refin'd and abstracted Metaphysicks, as if they were design'd for Comprehensors; he has ex∣alted Ideas to their utmost Height, and because they bore not with them Cer∣tainty enough, whilst they were barely Operations of the Mind, or Represen∣tations from external Objects, he has placed them in Subject that cannot err, to wit, in the Wisdom of God him∣self, whom having suppos'd to be the place of Spirits, as Space is of Bodies, and that there is an intimate Union be∣twixt God and the Soul of Man, by at∣tending to him, who is always prefen∣tial to our Minds, we are to see all things
in this Ideal or Intelligible WorldRech. L. 3. Par 2. Sect. 6.. Now tho' there can be no doubt, but God can lead us into all Truth, by displaying himself to us, and perhaps may deal thus with us when we are in Heaven, yet this way seems too supernatural whilst on Earth, and too clear for weak and frail Men, who are yet to know by Vision; and is withal so like the inward Light of a new Sect of Men, as not to make it over reputable: To which purpose it is very remarkable, that Malebranche's Opinion having been espoused of late, by an ingenious Person of our own, with all the Advantages of Beauty of Style and Perspicuity of Expression, yet the Men of new Light have taken such hold of it, as to make it necessary for him to write an Apology to disengage himself from the Quakers, who would needs have it thought they had gain'd a Proselytevid. Cond. of Hum. Life, page 183.: Wherein tho' he has distinguish'd himself from these People, yet thus much he owns, That if the Quakers understood their own Notion,
and knew how to explain it, and into what Principles to resolve it, it would not very much differ from his. Out of Hudibras. Of Sir HVDIBRAS. HIS Notions fitted things so well, That which was which he could not tell; And oftentimes mistook the one For t'other, as Great Clerks have done. He could reduce them all to Acts, And knew their Nature by Abstracts. He knew What's what, and that's as high As Metaphysick Wit can fly. In School Divinity as able As he that hight Irrefragable; A second Thomas, or at once To name them all, another Duns. Profound in all the Nominal, And Real Ways, beyond them all, For he a Rope of Sand could twist, As tough as Learned Sorbonist. And weave fine Cobwebs, fit for scull That's Empty when the Moon is Full; Such as take Lodgings in a Head, That's to be let Unfurnished.
Deep sighted in Intelligences Ideas, Atoms, Influences; And much of Terra Incognita, Th' Intelligible World could say; A deep Occult Philosopher, And learned as the Wild Irish are, Or Sir Agrippa, for profound, And solid Lying, much renown'd. In Rosy-Crucian Lore as learned As he that veré Adeptus earned. He'd extract Numbers out of Matter, And keep them in a Glass, like Water. Of Sovereign Power to make Men wise; For dropt in blear, thick-sighted Eyes, They'd make them see in darkest Night, Like Owls, tho' purblind in the Light. By help of these (as he profest) He had first Matter seen Undrest: He took her naked all alone, Before one Rag of Form was on. So th' ancient Stoicks in their Porch With fierce Dispute maintain'd their Church, Beat out their Brains in Fight and Study, To prove that Virtue is a Body; That Bonum is an Animal, Made Good with stout polemick Brawl.
Of SYDROPHEL the Conjurer. THE Intelligible World he knew, And all Men dream on't, to be true: That in this World there's not a Wart That has not there a Counterpart; Nor can there on the Face of Ground An Individual Beard be found, That has not in that foreign Nation A Fellow of the self-same Fashion; So cut, so colour'd and so curl'd, As those in the inferior World. The Intelligible World, saith Hudibras his Annotator, is a kind of Terra del Fuego, or Psittacorum Regio, discover'd only by the Philosophers, of which they talk, like Parrots, what they do not under∣stand. No Nation in the World is more addicted to this occult Philosophy than the wild Irish. Vpon this Distick Where Truth in Person does appear, Like Words congeal'd in Northern Air, he has these Notes.
Some Authors have mistaken Truth for a Real thing, when it is nothing but a right method of putting those No∣tions or Images of things (in the Under∣standing of Man) into the same State and Order, that their Originals hold in Nature. Some report that in Nova Zembla; and Greenland, Men's Words are wont to be frozen in the Air, and at the Thaw may be heard. De Idea Platonica quemadmo∣dum Aristoteles intellexit. DIcite sacrorum praesides nemorum deae, Tuque O noveni perbeata numinis Memoria mater, quaeque in immenso procul Antro recumbis otiosa Aeternitas, Monumenta servans, & ratas leges Iovis, Caelique fastos atque ephemeridas Deum, Quis ille primus cujus ex imagine Natura solers finxit humanum genus, Aeternus, incorruptus, aequaevus polo, Vnusque & universus, exemplar Dei? Haud ille Palladis gemellus innubae Interna proles insidet menti Iovis;
Sed quamlibet natura sit communior, Tamen seor sùs extat ad morem unius, Et, mira, certo stringitur spatio loci; Seu sempiternus ille syderum comes Caeli pererrat ordines decemplicis, Citimùmque terris incolit Lunae globum: Sive inter animas corpus aditurus sedens Oblivios as torpet ad Lethes aquas: Sive in remotâ forte terrarum plagâ Incedit ingens hominis archetypus gigas, Et iis tremendus erigit celsum caput Atlante major portitore syderum. Non cui profundum caecitaslumen dedit Dircaeus augur vidit hunc alto sinu▪ Non hunc silenti nocte Pleiones nepos Vatum sagaci praepes ostendit choro; Non hunc sacerdos novit Assyrius, licet Longos vetusti commemoret atavos Nini, Priscumque Belon, inclytumque Ofiridem, Non ille trino gloriosus nomine Ter magnus Hermes (ut sit arcani sciens) Talem reliquit Isidis cultoribus. At tu perenne ruris Academi decus (Haec monstra si tu primus induxti scholis) Iam jam poetas urbis exules tuae Revocabis, ipse fabulator maximus, Aut institutor ipse migrabis foras.
SECT. II. Of Prefaces. Learned Reader, WHEN you have settled your grand Affair with Mr. Stationer concerning the Purchase of this Golden Manual, you are desired to receive a modest Address from the Author. Some thing must be said to a Person of your Character and Office, towards rendring him attent and docile, especially where the subject Matters are profound and in∣tricate, as well as important; and some Civilities must needs pass between Au∣thor and Reader, towards introducing a better acquaintance, before they pro∣ceed to their main Business. It must in∣deed be own'd, that many Readers of great Candor and Judgment, being en∣dued with a mighty timerous Constitu∣tion, can never enter upon a Preface, In∣troduction, or Apparatus without the ut∣most Circumspection, and very great
Uneasiness, lest in every Line some fly thing should be lurking to circumvent their Judgments. Now I am willing to do all I can towards easing their Minds of such Jealousies, and therefore assure those Faint-hearted Gentlemen, upon the Word of an honest Author, (if an Author can be honest in these times) that they may boldly and safely venture thro', even to the Catastrophe, nay the very Peroration or final Period of All. The only thing to be apprehended, is that by too great Precipitancy, many Graces of Composition may escape notice; much Watchfulness and Advertency of thought being necessary to discern them all, as you go on, where they are strowed so thick in your way. For, tho' I have clothed this Body of Philosophy in the most proper and pellucid Dress, yet the Beauties of it are too Fine to be easily distinguished at first View, as they are too Dazling to be long contemplated. There is also a vigorous Spirit pervading the Whole, and pregnant with Senti∣ments of a surprizing Nature, being either wonderfully Sublime, or vastly
Profound, but generally both; which shews how mighty a Capacity is required to comprehend them. However, there is nothing to trepan any inadvertent Reader, nor the least Design upon him, but what is purely and solely for his own Good. Alas, I am so far from drawing up a subtle Harangue to bespeak your good Will, or prepossess you in Favour of an idle, unorthodox, or injudicious Book, that I am fully resolved to make this very Preface almost as valuable as the Book it self, and perhaps twice as long. Nay I can witness this for my self, that I have had much Debate in my own Thoughts which would serve best for the Book, and which should stand for the Preface; whether it agrees with the Rules of Grammar, or of Heraldry, that the Book should be accounted the more Worthly, or the more Honourable, of the Two. Due Examination being had, and all Arguments weigh'd on both sides, I could not in Equity, but give it for the Preface; as well because, by the uni∣versal Consent of Nations, it was always allow'd the Precedence, as because the
Book has no other Office but that of filling up a Gap in the Middle,See the Treatise in Praise of the Gout. when it happens that a few useless Inter-leaves may be spar'd from the Introduction and the Index. This shows us what a strange Absurdity our modern Innovators have run into, who bring in the Book before their Chief Preface, or which is all one, put off what was promised in the Title-page, till the Candid Reader be∣gins to grow impatient; for who can bear to see things so preposterously dis∣posed, that all the principal Matters, which have an undoubted Right to be admitted in the Preface, should violently be kept out, and reserv'd to make up a pitiful Appendage, that is appointed to come servilely in the Rear of it: as if the Head should be forced to change place with the Belly, or the Brains thrust down to take their Seat in the lower Region.
SECT. III. Of the great Importance of this Theory, and the Applause it has been receiv'd with. Of the Author's Loyalty, Honest Designs and Eminent Poverty. EVery sagacious Person must needs be sensible, how much it imports the High-lands of Scotland, the Dominion of Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, to procure a right understanding of this noble Subject I have undertaken to expound. As for my own Perfor∣mance, tho' I have promised to insinuate nothing that may any way Biass the Rea∣der's Judgment, yet this I may fairly say, that, such as it is, it has been very kindly entertained in the Places above-men∣tioned; neither is any modern Treatise of Philosophy, except the two incom∣parable Works of Father Malebranche and Mr. Asgyl, so much enquired after, studied and admired in all the Intelligible World, which is most concerned in it,
and best understands its worth. It has already been translated into all the Ideal Languages with great and faithful Ex∣actness, in each of which it has sold off near twenty Editions. Nay, such a pe∣culiar Disposition of reserved, private and modest Liberality appears in some Noble and Refined Spirits, that the Au∣thor has been surprized with several ima∣ginary Presents, tho' he could never find out any one Donor, by all the flatter∣ing Designs and cunning Projects that he could contrive. Some of these Boun∣ties were very considerable, being larger Sums than he had ever been Master of, or could now have expected. Hereby to his great Satisfaction, he is grown strangely enriched in Idea, all of a sudden; and has happily attained the great Ends of all his Study, having ever laboured to do Some publick Service to the World, and withal to get a Penny for his own▪ private Use. Till now, he never succeeded to his Wish, nor was Fortune ever so kind to bestow upon him, either a Pen∣sion, or any thing of that nature, suit∣able to his Deserts, and the Greatness of
his Spirit. Neither did it avail him any thing to have been a Person of unsha∣ken Virtue and Loyalty, which he must be acknowledged to have approved him∣self upon all Occasions. This indeed is the more Remarkable in him, as having formerly been known a Furious Iacobite, and continuing at present a Furious Re∣publican, and a Furious Preacher of Scotch Moderation, having some time ago learnt, and settled in his Heart many a good and useful Doctrine, among which this is laid down for a Fundamental, That since by the unanimous Confession of expe∣rienced Statesmen and Casuists, Time is the only thing which brings about all our good Fortune, and is consequently our best Friend and Benefactor, we are manifestly engaged by Gratitude and Generosity to be true to it, and never shrink from serving it to the best of our Power, in any the worst Circumstances, or Revolutions of Condition it can fall into.
SECT. IV. The great Vse of Defamation and Flattery, when wisely administer'd. The Author's ill Success therein. HAving observed that small Advan∣tage accrues from praising Men of Honour and Integrity, or censuring of Knaves, I formerly resolved upon the contrary Method of bestowing Satyrs upon all that are loyal and vertuous, and Panegyricks upon 'tother sort of good People. But in both kinds I found some of my Betters so expert, that I could not hope to find my accounts, or make any Figure in either. The first Essay I made of my Faculty was at Nando's Coffee-house, where, not considering who lolled at my Elbow, I ventured to let fly half a dozen strong Lies against Arch-Bishop Laud, together with a smooth Sentence in Defence of Trimming; and what should I find in Print within a Week, but these very Products of my
own Impudence; the former display'd in the Observator with ample Improve∣ments, and the latter set down in Dr. Davenant's Essay upon the Versatility of his own Soul, and not without a formal Allusion to Tacitus. These are all to be seen still in my Common-place-Book, and any Gentleman that pleases may command the Sight. I resented this Affair, as very unkind Usage from my Brother Touchin, tho' I would not take so much notice of Dr. D—nt's little Theft, because he was then as it were a Stranger, and but newly come over to our Party. A Section. MY next Project was to beg a small Estate of the Muses; in Hopes of whose Favour, I made them daily Li∣bations of liquid Jett, and sacrificed to their Deities, each year, a hundred Reams of Paper. The Reader will see that my Oblations have not been quite in vain, if among all the Poems in this Volume, he can discover which
are my own: and I don't in the least mistrust a Person of his singular, and so well known Humanity, but that he will vouchsafe to Father upon his humble Servant the most deformed Pieces that, with great Diligence, he shall be able to cull out. Pope Joan's Kissing-Dance. BALLAD. I. ALL you that do to Love belong, Mind what my Tale discovers, And listen well to this new Song, A strange Rondeau of Lovers. II. There were eight Lads so Blith and Gay, That loved seven Buxom Lasses; But that's untoward alack-a-day, When each his Love misplaces. III. Young Roger made a Vow (de'e see?) To be a Spark of Lucy's; But Lucy longed the Spouse to be Of Ioseph, that so spruce is.
IV. Now Nan had won the Love of Ioseph, His Heart, and eke his Faney; He'd be content to lose his Nose, if He could but gain his Nancy. V. Nan cut her Heart in two, to share it 'Twixt Marmaduke and Aaron; Both likely Lads, quoth she, I'll swear it, As Maids need wish to stare on. VI. Both Marmaduke and Aaron courted Kate, Daughter to a Prick-louse, Tho' Katern with her Suitors sported, For her Sweet-heart was Nicolas. VII. This Nicolas woo'd young Ioan, who ne'er With such a Spark would take-up, For Ioan, as sure as you are there, Had a Month's Mind to Iacob. VIII. Poor Iacob made a woful Stir To compass nut-brown Lettice, And failed with much adoe, for her Affections never met his.
IX. Lettice likewise her Love was crost in, (Fate order'd it should so be) For once in vain she courted Austin, And now in vain woo's Toby. X. What Maid would wish to be in her Case? For Toby she's so fond on, Run almost mad for little Dorcas, That newly came from London. XI. Whereas she purely came to visit Her Fellow-servant Edward, To see his pretty Face, and kiss it, And gladly would go bed-ward. XII. While Ned his little Dorcas answer'd, For loving I don't blame ye, 'Cause you may take an honest Man's Word, That I as much love Amy▪
XIII. [See Stanza 3.] Amy so passing fair to look on, And slender to behold, Cry'd till her Heart was almost broken, She would be Roger's Consort. This Passage seems to have been cor∣rupted, as may be gather'd from the last Line, in which the Ryme is something stiff and harsh, not coming up to that Easiness of Sound which is found in other Parts of the Poem. This Difficulty is evaded by the ingenious Conjecture of Joseph Scaliger, who is therein universally followed by the Criticks, having restored theText by this Correction. Amy, belike, so stay'd a Body, (You'd say so had you seen her) Doated on Roger So-Adod I Should ne'er a' thought 'twas in her. XIV. These People good, in saddest Mood, With Love grown woundy stupid, Made piteous Plaints, and told their wants To Hymen and to Cupid.
XV. Fain would they wed in Ring so round, Eight Husbands and seven Wives; And doubtless they must needs have found Great Comfort of their Lives. XVI. But 'twas a puzling Case to Hymen; O strange! said he, 'twill work ill, For I've no Licences to tie Men, And Maids in such a Circle. XVII. He bid them be, as 'twas but right, Content with this Expedient, To kiss all round, for so all might Have Kissing, that had need on't. XVIII. [See Stanza 3.] Young Roger should begin the Play, The rest were, in their Season, To put it round in friendly way, And do each other Reason.
XIX. So Roger tall did Lucy call, Quoth he, I'll not abuse ye; Good sooth it would have done one Good To see him kiss sweet Lucy. XX. Then Lucy fair demands her Share Of her dear Sweet-heart Josey, And kiss'd him so, all People know They both grew wondrous Rosie. XXI. [See Stanza 4.] Next Ioe did greet his Nan, as sweet A Damsel as you can see; Nan for this Youth made up her Mouth, So Ioseph kiss'd his Nancy. XXII. [See Stanza 5.] Her Sparks were twain, and that being plain, Some said that she might spare one; She by her Troth, cry'd, none or both, And kiss'd one more than Aaron.
XXIII. [See Stanza 6.] Then Marmadoke and Aaron broke Their Minds to Kate the Slattern; Kind Kate held out her dainty Snout, And O how they kiss'd Katern! XXIV. O Nicolas, Nicolas, where's my Nic laid? Quoth Kate the Taylor's Daughter, And kiss'd, and was with Joy so tickled, She scarce could hold her Water. XXV. [See Stanza 7.] Nic run to Ioan, that had no Stays on, But look'd as red as Claret, And kiss'd her so, that 'twould amaze one How any Maid could bear it. XXVI. Ioan flew at Iacob most outrageous, And kiss'd, and call'd him Sweeting; Could he have bleated, as Cinque-trey does, Uds-bobs, she'd stop his Bleating.
XXVII. [See Stanza 8.] O Lettice, then quoth Iacob stout, On thy true Love take pity; She bid him kiss his kissing out, Because he was so witty. XXVIII. [See Stanza 9.] But Lettice call'd aloud for Toby, As one would call for Mustard; He fain would give fair Lett the Go-by, But Lettice kiss'd him first hard. XXIX. [See Stanza 10.] 'Tis strange to tell, or to declare, How 'Ioby simpered, When he got Dorcas his own Dear, And kist her quite half dead. XXX. [See Stanza 11.] Dorcas, she leer'd on Ned, right wistful, And kiss'd him all to Pieces, So fired, that were she but a Pistol, She had gone off in Face his.
XXXI. [See Stanza 12.] Sir Edward made her no Repartee, Tho' he was kiss'd so Fashion, As knowing well, by Rules of Art, she Had done it in her Passion. XXXII. And then himself was passionate too Of Amy, Queen of Spinsters; He threw his Wig off, and his Hat too, And run his Face ag'inst hers. XXXIII. He tows'd her with his Beard, so Bushy 'Twas far and near admired, And tore her Coife quite off, altho' she Had scarce wherewith to tie her Head. XXXIV. Poor Folks may be, most sartinlee, In Love as well as Ladies, And kiss as well, for ought I can tell, As they with all their Gayities.
XXXV. [See Stanza 13.] Amy ne'er let a Sweet-heart dodge her, But kissed like any Widow, And stifled Roger, tho' poor Roger Loved her no more than I do. XXXVI. Thus finely they all danced the Hay▪ Or the best Boy of Mother; The jest went round, & none were found That would not pledge the other. XXXVII. At length they clos'd, and whisk'd about, As those that Margery-Cree dance, Or like to Folk quite wearied out, Who fain would make good Riddance. XXXVIII. Yet loth to give it o'er, they cry'd, How cursed fast the Day stirs! Tho' before Night, or they're bely'd, heir Lips all needed Plaisters.
XXXIX. There ne'er was known, in all the Town, Such Kissing as this same was; Yet, keeping Lent (as is Decent) Pray who, quo' they, can blame us? XL. For since (as Hymen told them plain) Tho' they most grievously burn, The Wedding-Noose will ne'er contain So many as will Tyburn. XLI. They all resolve to live right Honest, And never be upbraided. O that Young Folk were all admonisht To do no worse than they did! XLII. But for all this, they did not miss Each Sunday after Sarmint, To meet and kiss, some more, some less; For Kissing has no Harm in't. There is a different Reading of this Stanza in the Vatican Manuscript, where it runs thus,
And yet they loved, as you may guess, To do a thing would charm one, And kiss a little, more or less; For Kissing is no Harm, Mun. XLIII. Nor would they fail, for a Dozen of Ale, To kiss before the King and His Gracious Queen, on Turnham-Green, Or any Ground in England. XLIV. Suppose you might see such a Sight, As Cupid and as I did, Whate'er you are, I'd almost swear You'd not be much affrighted. Sic visum est Veneri, cui placet impares Formas atque animos sub juga ahenea Saevo mittere cum joco. Virtus Sipiadae & mitis sapientia Laeli, Quando se a vulg & scenâin secreta Remârant, Nugari soliti & Discincti ludere.
The Ideal, or Precarious Beauty. SONG. I. DAmn'd for ever to complain, Must I court, and court in vain? Phyllis, let Interest make you kind, If nothing else will do; Should Conceit, which makes you blind, Clear these Eyes and change my Mind, What would your Pride come to? II. Foolish Phyllis not to know Where you all these Beauties owe! The wicked Town won't own thee fair, Then thank the Man that will; Beauty you but seem to wear; Beauty's self can scarce compare With Doting Fancy's Skill. III. Fancy paints the Nymph Divine, Thus your very Charms are mine; 'Tis Fancy, Phyllis, make the Chain, And binds me with the same: But should Phyllis slight my Pain, Fancy'd turn me loose again, And spurn the scornful Dame.
IV. Beauteous Angel then no more, But homely Phyllis as before. Ah—never, no—well then comply, Since Fancy all procures: Do but real Blisses try; Pay my Fancy with true Joy; And all the Charms be yours. The Good Advice. SONG. I. CLoe be wie and soon comply, Thirty and five i coming on; Then all your Train, as well as I, Will leave Adoring and be gone. II. When wrinkled Age deforms the Brow▪ All will deride the wither'd Case, The very-Glass which flatters now, Will call Old-Woman to your Face. III. Youth is the Parent of Desire, And Beauty each Beholder burns, But none will et their Hearts on Fire▪ At Flames expiring in their Urns.
The XLII. Ode of Anacreon. Upon CUPID's Darts. Done into English by Dr. w—. AS Vulcan at his , Forging Love's Darts, gentle and good, Of Red-hot Steel; which did retain Some Sparks, that use to burn again; Venus in Honey dipt them all, And Love allay'd the Sweets with Gall. When furious Mars return'd from Fight Without a glimm'ring of Delight. No smiling Looks, no unusual Grace Disturb'd the Majesty of his Face. In's dreadful Hand a Spear he bore, The rougher Instrument of War. And laughing took▪ up Love's light Dart, (But little thought it caus'd such Smart) This is, said he, a pretty Toy, A Play-thing fit for such a Boy; Cupid at length made this Reply▪ Sir, if you please the Lightness try▪ With that he shot the new-made Arrow▪ Which pierc'd him to the very Marrow,
And wounded deep: but Venus smil'd To see the God of War beguil'd. Who vainly pray'd; hence, hence remove The Dart, I feel enough of Love. No, no, Love cry'd, your Pain enjoy, You know my Arrow's but a Toy. The Same, IN Another Translation: Some Verses of which the Translator him∣self dislikes, but could not for his Life make better, such was the great Vnkindness of his Muse. VVLCAN did once his File employ To point new Darts for Venu's Boy; Venus in Honey dipt them all But Cupid temper'd it with Gall Mean-while there came the God of War, Shaking in's Hand a bloody Spear; And laughed at Cupid's Tools, too light, And weak to be imploy'd in Fight. Here's one, says Love, perhaps you'll find Strong and Heavy to your Mind.
Mars took the Dart with no ill Thought, While Venus smiled to see him caught. He could not now the Truth deny, But owned it Heavy, with a sigh, Here, Love, said he, pray take't away; No, no cry'd Love, you keep it pray. Madam Dacier tells us that the Beauty of this Ode transported her Father into a Couple of such Distichs as the Reader will be glad to see.
The Vanity of Riches, Imitated from ANACREON. . I. Could Gold immortalize a man, Or stretch his Days beyond their Span; Could it retain our parting Breath; Or blunt the pointed Sting of Death; I'd cringe, I'd write, I'd fawn, I'd pray All Parties favour, all obey, To raise vast Treasures of the precious Clay. II. But since these Toys, these glittering Baits, These little Arts, these holy Cheats, Since all their Stores will nought avail, When drooping Nature once does fail, Why this Clutter, why this Pain, Why this Sweating all in vain, For great Preferments, and a gaudy Train? III. Death makes the Bays, the Robes, the Gown To lay their fading Honours down, Nor can their Bribes make him relent, Or their impending Fate prevent: Then since these mighty Men, and I, The Rich, the Poor and all must die, Why should I heap up Wealth, O, Tell me why?
IV. No, blooming Garlands round me twine, I'll drink, carouse; the Present's mine. To Wine and Pleasure, come, let's give, The small Remains we have to live; Then lest by Sickness Youth decay, In ceaseless Joys we'll spend away (All over Wine and Love) the Night and Day. A SONG IMpartial Chloe is in hate, Thousands have lov'd, but lov'd in vain: And all have met an equal Fate, Whilst Chloe triumphs o're the slain. 2. I only live, whilst after these So goodly Triumphs of her Eyes, After so many Victories got, Chloe contemns so poor a Prize. 3. Nay why should I, my Chloe, prove The cruel Force of your Disdain? Why shall so base a Victim fall, And all your former Trophies stain?
4. Even Pride at length may Kindness work, And Scorn it self preserve a Slave; For whom your Hate disdains to kill, Your Love can do no less than save. Advertisement. You are to consider that the following Poem was written at Cambridge, about Two Months after I had commenced Doctor of Law. The Design of it is to keep up the Spirit and the Reputation of Ryme, now in Danger to be thrust out of the World by some invidious Persons, notwithstanding the Laudable Endea∣vours of Mr. Bishe, and Mr Wy—ly, to the contrary. I may be bold to say, that my Composition is according to the Dictonary, and to the strictest Rules of Poetry; only with this Improvement of the Poetica Licentia, That Euphoniae Gra∣tiâ, or for Rymes sake, I have presum'd to call several things out of their Names, affixing new Significations to some Words of our Language, which were before too barren; be pleas'd therefore to take ex∣act Notice that
Drum Signifies College-Commons. Black-Art Long Vacation. Make a Mansion Tarry. Origine Beginning. Terminus Term. This Advertisement being duly con∣sider'd and kept in Mind, you may pro∣ceed to the Perusal of the Poem, as it here stands before you, with great Hopes of Satisfaction. A Poem upon Raisins and Almonds: OR THE Passage from Dover to Calais. TO their Respective Halls few Scholars come, Just at this Time, with Teeth to chew their Drum; For this Time being the Time of Black-Art, Most of them all from fair Town-Walls depart; Each makes a Mansion in his Rural-House, Until the Origine of Terminus. Now then they come, dropping to Town in Troops, As thick as any Mill-Stone is, or Hops. If I would tell their-Names, I say if I would do't, T'ud take up too much Ink, and Paper unto Boot.
The Mourning Nymph. SONG. I. IN pity, Fate, let poor Marcellis dy, Pale Death shall come in joyous Hymen's place; That poor Marcellis, and her Swain, may ly In one unrival'd Grave, and cold Embrace. A happy Pair down to the Shades we'll go, And Lover's Pensive Ghosts will give us Joy below. II. Or if in vain to Fate I've pray'd, Yet on my Damon's Tomb Death shall find Marcellis laid; There I'll lament my Shepherd's Doom. I'll weary Heaven it self with Pray'rs, With Sighs, Complaints, and ceaseless Tears, Till all the Powers above relent, Or I turn Stone, to be his Monument. III. For ever will this wounded Breast My Damon, and his mournful story, bear In deepest Characters imprest; There will his lasting Epitaph appear. for ever his dear, sacred, Dust I'll keep, For ever in my Marble weep.
The Same, Varied by Another Hand. IN Pity, Fate, let poor Flavelia dye, And grant me, Death, what Hymen could deny, Lead me, Dear Monarch, to that blissful place Of one unrival'd Grave and cold Embrace; Down to thy Realms, a happy Pair, we'll go And discontented Shades shall give us Joy below. If not, a Coarse, on Damon's Tomb I'll lye, And weary Heaven, if Hell won't hear my Cry. I'll never, never cease to mourn my Swain, Till stiff with Grief, and stupified with Pain, The kinder Gods shall at the Sight relent, And turn me quite to Stone to build his Monument. Then in this Vault his sweet Remains shall rest, Long, long, enjoy their dear Flavelia's Breast, No Poet there shall grave his flattering Song, Nor loud officious Friends lament my Wrong. My Heart, thus chang'd, his old deep Lines shall keep, And ceaseless Streams of Tears the faithful Stone shall weep.
SECT. XXI. A Discovery made who the Author is. Some∣thing said concerning his Mistress, and the same immediately contradicted. 'TIS possible I may hardly find Credit among many well-mean∣ing People, when I declare that this Damon is no other, than my own self, tho' still alive; but as for Marcellis, aliàs Flavelia, that appears to be so desperately afflicted for my Death, I must own that she is utterly unknown to me. However, I pity the unfortunate Lady, not doubt∣ing but she is a very Lovely and very Worthy Person; for, otherwise, 'tis highly probable she would not be so much concern'd. whoever the Lady be, in composing this Poem, I design'd that after my Death, which at that time was hourly expected by my Heirs, it should pass in her Name, both for her Honour and my own; as by the Whiningness of it, you may believe it was indited in a melancholick Season. But since my
happy Recovery, I am taken with a Jealousy, that the said Nymph deals by me disloyally, entertaining my worthless Rival, to her own Dishonour, and my Despair. Therefore I now think it Rea∣son to take to my self the Credit of my own Verses, and make publick my love∣ing Intention of entitling them to Mar∣cellis, that the World may see the Justice of my Dealings, and what she has lost by playing me false. Together with this Ditty I had devis'd an Epitaph for my self, that my Memory might be preserv'd in my own Works; besides that I was unwilling to have Marcellis turn her self to Stone on pur∣pose. Now such is the Nature of that kind of Composition, as necessitated my speak∣ing much in my own Commendation, and making a Catalogue of all my ex∣traordinary Endowments. For this rea∣son it might be construed a piece of Im∣modesty to let it come abroad in my Life-time, and seems therefore more advisable to reserve it for one of my postumous Works. Among these will be found also very par∣ticular Memoirs of all, even the very
minutest of my Concerns; especially my most material Thoughts, which I never yet discover'd, and the wise Say∣ings that I chiefly delight in. Of all which I give this publick Advertisement, because it will be a mighty Help to the Learned Person, who is to be the Writer of my Life, for whom I always enter∣tain a very particular Respect, and there∣fore bequeath to him the said Journal, not doubting but he will perform accord∣ing to the Dignity of the Subject, and thereby lay the highest Obligation upon Posterity. A Section following the Former. IT was well for these innocent Verses here present, as likewise for me and my happy Reader, that Fate provided for their Security from all the Injuries of inclement Seasons, the hostile Invasions of domestick Vermin, and the Rage of devouring Elements; being partly car∣bonado'd out upon the Walls of my Garret, and partly fumigated upon my
Cieling with a Taper of Sheep's Wax. The single Elegy that treats of Raisins and Almonds, happen'd to remain alive in my Cerebellum, having but newly been engender'd there by a wonderful Irradia∣tion from that masculine Muse with which Mr. Wy—ly is now Possessed. Had these, or any of these been intrusted to frail Paper, they had certainly been de∣liver'd over to secular Flames and eternal Oblivion; the same Fate that was un∣dergone by some Thousands of their Fellows, altogether as deserving as them∣selves. That fatal Execution has since cost me a sad Repentance; but it was done in the heat of Passion, and 'tis a Happiness these few were preserv'd for my Comfort. Immediately after the Massacre was committed, I found means to enter my self among a Club of Pam∣phleteers, which was truly the best re∣gulated Society that I have known, ex∣cept only some four or five of our Aca∣demies. When a Volume of any con∣siderable Figure was in hand, every Man had his particular Province assign'd him, according as he was Gifted.
For this excellent Method of Proceed∣ing the Hint was borrowed from the an∣cient and famous Corporation of Cy∣clopses at Bromigham. Alii, saith Dr. Plot, in his incomparable Natural History of Stafford shire, —Taurinis Follibus auras Accipiunt Reddunt{que} alii Stridentia ting unt Aera lacu, &c.— This Vulcan shapes the Hast, that files the Blade; These whet Love's Wanton Darts, and those Death's Fatal Spade. One works the Key-hole, others turn the Wards, And others form the Bolt, which Golden Treasure Guards. Mr. Dryden in Hind and Panther.Haud aliter, si parva licet componere magnis,In our Society,—Pressit Labor omnes Improbus, & duris urgens in Rebus Egestas; Munere quem{que} suo; Grandavis Lexica curae, Et munere the Margin, & horrid fingere Scandal, Sunt queis Praelorum cecidit custodia sorti; In{que} vicem speculantur opus, Velut agmine facto Ignavum Criticos pecus a Praesepibus arcent, Aut oner a Accipiunt collectorum.
One was constantly at Work in com∣piling Prolegomena; there were Two Members that flourished all our Dedica∣tions; a Fourth had a happy Genius for setting out Title-Pages, and my Talent was thought most proper for putting to∣gether an Index. One Month by con∣stant Practice, had made me such a Pro∣ficient in this Faculty, as is Incredible to tell, and it might indeed look like a piece of Vanity for a Man to publish it of himself. Thus much perhaps may be said with Modesty of my great Dexte∣rity, that I am able to set down a copious Index without ever casting an Eye upon the Book. Reader, this is not a thing for every Man to pretend to; but I say no more; you shall have a Sample at the End, if the paper holds out. By this time, 'tis to be suppos'd, you begin to think me a rising Man, and my Business certainly done; as to which er∣roneous Conclusion, I hold my self ob∣liged to undeceive a Person of your Sa∣gacity and Deserts; for tho' I was, and am, Master of such extraordinary Abili∣ties, and my Brother Pen-men in their
several ways, but little behind me, yet were we soon reduc'd to Ruine and De∣spair by private Interlopers. Their Names and Characters, with all their Rogueries, you shall know at a more con∣venient Opportunity. Sua quisque teneat non vitiosa. SECT. XXIII. A Section Principally design'd for the Benefit of Philosophers, and other wise People. SInce the foresaid Index-Trade proves so dead, and the Gains so vastly short of what we had promis'd our selves, it has been in my Thoughts, that if any way could be contriv'd to pass my self upon the World for a Person of rare and singular Wisdom, some extraordinary Preferment, or at least a Good Accession to my poor Income might ensue. Bent upon this Project, it cost me infinite Pains in Collecting wise Sayings, and raking to∣gether a Heap of Proverbs, whereof I found it requisite that a sufficient Fund
should be laid in to deliver out at prop Seasons, by way of Observation or In∣struction. I likewise stinted my self my Walks, to proceed but five Steps three Minutes and two Seconds, not for∣getting to bind up my sweet Countenan to a profound Gravity of Behaviour, that for every Half-smile allow'd to daw upon it for a Half-minute; it has bee some Years under Covenant to look Stu∣dious, and lye overcast with Frowns, fo at least three Hours together. Beside this, it has verily from Nature the pe∣culiar Felicity of a Cloudy, Sullen an Philosophical Beauty, which is of muc Use and Assistance as to the Business Wisdom. Yet being my self, by the Be∣nefit also of my Constitution, wonder∣fully inclin'd to Simplicity, after all my Care and Strivings, I have found ou that 'tis a more difficult Part for a Fool or a Fool's Mate to act the Wise-man; than for a Wise-man in time of Need, or when the Humour takes him, to play the Fool. Thus—I did once read it re∣corded of some Counterfeits, that they have upon Occasion pretended them∣selves
dead, but never knew any, to the est of my Memory, how sly and cunning so ever, that when they were really de∣unct, or dead in good earnest, could make as if they were alive. Misce Stultitiam conciliis brevem. SECT. XXIV Of my so famous Tincture for the Wit, ap∣proved by the Author's own Experience for above two and thirty Years, as like∣wise by several impossible Cures it has wrought upon Persons of Quality in and about this Kingdom; who can testify that it mightily helps Digestion of what you take inwardly, removes Dulness, comforts the Vital Heat, strengthens the Poetick Spirit, helps Inspiration, provokes Rym∣ing, cherishes the Fancy, corrects the Iudg∣ment, &c. By excoriating all▪ mem∣branous Diaphragms in the Musculus Ensiformis; and finally it brings your Vena Docta to a due Crasis of Body, and is a Medicine infinitely Preferable to any hitherto in Vse among the Criticks, and will keep its Virtue in long Voyages for th Benefit of Sea-faring Persons, especially such as dwell in Her Majesty's Navy, otherwise reside in long Voyages.
FOreseeing that this Volume may possibly fall into the Hands of some Person, or Persons, either so very Fruga or so very Injudicious, as to repent the Purchase, I had once thought to throw into my Purchaser's Bargain the mo valuable Thing I could present him with even a Discovery of my whole Art Writing, or the Means whereby I hav attained to such wonderful Perfection This my generous and noble Design wa favour'd by a Rule of Heraldry that I re∣member'd to have seen in Tully, somewhere delivers it for his Opinio that 'tis more Honourable to sell A than the Productions of Art. Now have always been a Person very ambitiou of the most Honourable Imployment (even tho' they should happen to be encumber'd with vast Revenues) and likewise reverence the Philosophical Reasonings of that worthy Author at a
Distance, without presuming to enter, intrude, approach, or pretend the least Acquaintance with their Excellencies; but standing off with a contented Mo∣desty, and paying the Homage of impli∣cite Deference. My foresaid laudable Inclination was likewise encourag'd by the Authority of Father M—che, and ab∣starcted Person who has blessed human Race with such an unparllel'd Compo∣sition as never fails to incite the staring Faculty most strangely, either by way of Astonishment, if the Man have a strong Constitution of Mind, or by way of rency, in Case the Enthusiastick Recipes succeed, and work the desired Effect on the Patient-Disciple's Intellectuals. Yet this Admirable Philosopher has caution'd the World against all Kind of Admira∣tion, as highly pernicious to the Welfare of human Understanding, and a great Obstruction to the Growth of Truth. Now whereas I have a most tender Concern both for the Preservation and Improve∣ment of my good Reader's Sences, and this Treatise of mine is also calculated to provoke the most passionate Admira∣tion,
especially in the greatest and finest Spirits, which are not only most preci∣ous, but soonest endanger'd; in such a Case as this, I judged it would become and Author to use the utmost Precaution for moderating the Surprize that is to come upon his Reader, and no better Expedient occurred to me than that of confessing and laying open the whole Mystery of my Art, since nothing does more take off from our Astonishment than a right Apprehension of the Way a thing is done. On the other side, in Opposition to these Considerations, I plainly saw that many unlucky Conse∣quences would attend the Publication of my Secret, which I may truly call my Choice Receit, or Elixir Scribendi; For First, unless it be taken and apply'd with utmost Caution, it operates too strongly on the Stile, and turns every thing into Elevate and Surprize. Let a Banker, a Doctor, or a Scrivener set himself to dash over a Bill, or Deed of Convey∣ance, he would have his Ink run insen∣sibly into Flights and Metaphors, Quaint Conceits, Grave Apophthegms, Politick
Sayings, and Learned Dissertations, such as the Body of this Treatise consists of; so that such Gentlemen would receive little Benefit by my Elixir; for a wise Man would no more wish that every Pen he handles should flow nothing but Wit, than that every thing he touches should instantly commence Gold. Concerning the Wandring Jew. that Pha∣laris's Epistles were written by a Turkish Spy, who resided 44 Years at Agrigentum. A Dissertation upon the Age of Lucius Bocius. The Novel of Nicthycranculus and Pollidona. IT is but reasonable that in the Second Place, I should consider my own Be∣nefit, not that I design to lock up All —, and thereby endanger its dying with my self, as it too frequently happens by the selfish Humor of Discoverers; but only to make such a reasonable Profit, as ought to be allow'd for Encouragement
to the Ingenious. What I propose is; to teach my Art at moderate Rates, not doubting to raise a sufficient Estate, from the great number of Scholars that I may reasonably expect. And I do here take Occasion to certify Gentlemen of both Sexes, whether Knights, Burgesses, Justi∣ces of Peace or their respective Consta∣bles; that, if they or any of them, will be pleas'd to send their Sons, or Daught∣ers, of any Age between Twelve and Twenty-one, to my House near Flint∣shire, they shall find decent and suitable Entertainment, and be faithfully in∣structed in the Depths of my Art, if Ca∣pable; otherwise my Wife will, not∣withstanding, engage to teach them the choicest Rules for making sweet Powder, Pomatum, all kinds of Pastry-ware, be∣sides Carving, Moulding Cockle-bread, Playing on the Jews-Harp, and all other necessary Parts of Genteel Education.
SECT. XXVIII. The next Section does really contain such sad Truths that I would not advise you to understand it, nor so much as read it, if it can possibly be avoided. THE Cabala, saith Rabbi Talmid, con∣tains First, the Doctrine of the four Worlds Aziluthical; and Secondly, the Doctrine of Sephiroth Now the Second Doctrine of Sephiroth. is the Predicament of Chochma, i. e. Wisdom. Wisdom, saith The Lexicon Zohar, is The Beginning of actuated Ideality, from which it most clearly follows, that it is also The Head and Principle of Aziluth. Besides this, in the Metallick Doctrine, Wisdom is the Degree of Lead or Primordial Salt, in which Salt lies hid the Lead of the Wise. Upon which the great Expositor has this Com∣ment. Cognomina & Subordinate Cochma sunt 1. Jah. 2. Jod Tetr. 3. Principium 4. Primogenitura. 5. Voluntas. 6. Terra Viventium. 7. Jesch, Ens seu Essentia. 8. Lux primitiva. 9. 32 Semitae Idearum. 10. 70 Legis Species. 11. Bellum. 12. Iu∣dicium.
13. AMEN. 14. Liber. 15. Sanctum Sanctorum. 16. Informe. 17. Profundum Cogitationis. 18. Cogitatio. 19. Formido. 20. Eden 21. Olei Vnctionis Scaturigo. 22. Vinum asservatum ab orbe condito.See Burneet's Ar∣chaeolog. whence all this Doctrine is transcrib'd 23. QVIS? 24. Membrum Virile summum. 25. Verbum seu Oratio. The whole Doctrine being thus made out, and illustrated to my hands; it might seem Superfluous to attempt any further Comment, since 'tis evident that nothing can be plainer than the Exposi∣tion already given. However in our Vo∣lumes upon this Subject that Are to be, we shall a little farther expatiate upon the Quiseity of Amen, as likewise upon the Ensophicality of Aziluth; which to an Un∣derstanding rightly prepar'd, will doubt∣less become like the Odour of the Voice of the Beauty of Sublimated Intelligence. Two-legged Truth shall be caught with Saline Essence upon her Caudality; She shall edify and nidificate in the Petticoats of his Pia Mater, or the supercilious Eaves of his Pericranium; She shall fish for Ideas with his Rete Mirabile and Processus
Vermifsormis, and inject them thro' the Infundibulum into the savoury Frying-pan of his Cerebellum. There shall she sit chewing Cuds and Enthymemas, or brood∣ing over infant Sciences; She shall drive him cross the Streets to seek out the Sa∣ges that are gone astray, and salute the unknown Children of Philosophy; to sa∣lute the unborn by Name, and the un∣begotten by Lips Anonymous, is the Delight and Priveledge that Wisdom en∣joys from her Successors, and bequeaths as a never-failing Inheritance, to her Fore-fathers. 'Tis possible some few Persons may have follow'd at least, one part of my Advice at the Beginning of this Section, against understanding, or so much as reading it, if they could by any means forbear. 'Tis possible also, that some Persons may be inclin'd to wonder, why such a Section as is judg'd improper to be understood, or even perused, should be allow'd a Place in the Volume; the true Reason of which is this, that I per∣ceiv'd the following Section would have little Coherence or Relation to the pre∣cedent,
and therefore judg'd it might be convenient to put between them some∣thing of this Nature, for the sake of Connexion. A very Rhetorical Section. 'TIS this that makes me weep, in the most piteous Manner, at the Thoughts of being imprison'd in this Wretched Sublunary World; as Alexander, among the Ancients, is said to have done before me. However, to make the best of my Coninement to so vile a Place, I have been long thinking to retire, together with Sir W. Raleigh, Bp. Wilkins and others, into the most Eligible Time.See Sr. W. Raleigh's Hi∣story, Bishop Spart's Ob∣servations upon Sorbie∣res's Voyage, and the De∣dication before D. Cave's Lives of the Apostles. I knew for cer∣tain, that the Present is the worst of all Times, if Tradition it self can pretend to the least Infallibility. For, this Doctrine is not only Attested by as many living Eye-witnesses, as there are now in Being Persons of the last Age,
but has been always deliver'd down from Father to Son, Ancestors to Poste∣rity, with such satisfactory and uncon∣troulable Evidence, as to obtain the uni∣versal Assent of all Ages and Nations. From hence with great Reason, it may be deduc'd that the Present Time is not the Worst just, Now only, but was also the Worst in every Age since the Cre∣ation; not that other Times were better, but each had its Turn of being the Worst just when it came to be Present; each was compell'd to undergo the same Ignominy before it could be dismissed; upon which Account the Present has never been known to stay more than one Moment, just to hear it self railed at and upbraided, as if it were sensible how Intolerable its longer Continuance would be to mortal Man, who as it is does generally Abuse it. And indeed how should Mankind be like to endure a real Nunc Stans, who are so angry and displeas'd, whenever it does but seem to stand still, or even to move slowly? Neither is there any God, or Godling, above Ground, that shews any manner
of Regard to the Present, but that of Contempt or Aversion. Observe the bashful and demure Cynthia, aliàs Hecate, aliàs Diana, Luna, Trivia, &c. Goddess of Changelings, Fanaticks, State-Ca∣melions, Flying-Squadrons, Menders and Reformers; how she discovers always the same Discontent and Dislike to the Present, as we may read in her very Face. For, is she not always shifting it off for whatever comes next; running over the Changes, and playing Tricks to elude and deceive it? sometimes we have her mounted and riding Post in the Sky, where she puts on a new Look for every new Posture of Affairs; then after a while, grown weary even of constant Changing, she disappears and gets down to the Banks of Eurotas, where she hunts away the Present Time, till tired also of her present self, she turns from Diana to Proserpina, and flies to the infernal Re∣gions, there to converse with Folk of past and future Ages. —quibus Altera fato Corpora debentur.—
If Cynthia's Practise be not Authority sufficient, let us consult Metis, another Goddess that deals in Good Advice, Due Deliberation, and Considering-Caps; and she takes no more Notice of Time Being than Vacuna her self, but prohibits all Enjoy∣ment of the Present as worthless and pernicious; Times Past are indeed of some Value, as furnishing Matter of Ob∣servation, and Reflection, to make one Wise, but whoever is made Wise thereby, must be sure ultimately to refer every thing (never to Now, but) to Here∣after. And what shall we say of Ancient Ianus, who is accounted also one of the Wisest among his Fellow-Gods, but thinks as little of the Present as any Per∣son whatever of that Quality. He neither conceals his constant and steady Regard to the Future and the Past, nor did he ever bestow a single Glance upon the  , or so much as allow it to see his Face. That is not an Object for a Double God Bicipital as is the Muses Hill, Quinunquam Custos absistit limine Templi,
but rather for such a Tricorpulent Mon∣ster as Geryon, or the Tricaniniceps Custos of Hell, Infera qui rabidus Latratu regna Trifaci Personat, immani recubans Immanis in antro. As for Iove himself▪ the Cloud-com∣pelling Grand Seignior of the Gods, or Great Mogul of Heaven, have we not the Testimony of Horace, Coeli Tonantem Culminibus Jovem Regnare Praesens. Divus Habebitur. that he sits like a Lord A Top of Heaven, and flings his Thunder thence To sowr good Ale, and spoil the present Tense. And when he has atchiev'd that fierce Intent, The Future, for his Pains, will call him Saint. To spare the Trouble of more Instances let me advise you to believe, for my sake
that there is not a single God, among the twice ten Thousand, that does in the least regard what we have been dis∣coursing of. So far from it, that if the Condition of their Nature were at their own Disposal, they would rather chuse to secure to themselves one single Month of Future Life, than to enjoy their very Immortality it self, if it were only just for the Present. For farther Satisfaction in this point, I refer you to the following Poems, in the former of which you will find some account of the Principal Gods; the other is Part of a Speech of Apollo's own making, upon Occasion of his Cows being stoln by Vlysses. Money, or the Miser's Speech. By another Hand. OF Gods and your Goddesses tell me no more, King Iove and Queen Iuno're a Rogue and a Whore; Great Mars is a Hero, when e'er he can shew it, Apollo's a Fool, and the De'el of a Poet; Dame Venus a Hag, and so you may tell Her; A poor Rogue is Bacchus, ne'er a Flask in his Cellar; Nay Cupid's a Whim, with feign'd Arrows and Wings; And all without Money meer fanciful Things.
'Tis Money Almighty that fills us with Wonder, That whirls the Globes round, and makes the Skies Thunder, That bullies down Castles, and routs with meer Sound, And makes up a Hero, with never a Wound: Come fill up my Coffers, I'll build me a Throne, I'll scale the blue Heavens, and pull the Gods down; What are those poor God-things without mighty Money? Fair Danae had been kept, and Iove baulkt of his Sweet-heart. Bully Mars without Coin were a pitiful Thing; 'Tis Money takes Towns and lets the Troops in. Though my Skull were quite empty full Coffers Could do't, Could make me a Wit, and a Beauty to Boot. 'Tis Money that keeps up great Bacchus from Sinking, That buys us Champaign, and maintains our good Drinking. For since all our good Wines are set forth to Sale, Without Money poor Bacchus must break and sell Ale. Now as for the Empire of Beauty, and Cupid, I laugh at the Fancy, and think it all Stupid; For who can win Miss without Money a Courting? And where is a Venus without a good Fortune? Then tell me no more, blind impotent Boy, For want of a Passion, that Phillis is Coy; Since Beauty, and all the whole World may be sold, Thy Shafts can ne'er wound unless Pointed with Gold. Out of Homer's Odysseis. WHen Milk-maid Susan told the Sun, How his poor Mulls were dead and gone, He fell in such a raving Fit, You'd scarce have thought him God of Wit.
For with that Phys that makes foul Weather, Away he run to tell his Father. And bounced at Heaven-Hall Gate, like Mad, Till he got in to speak with Dad. Iove was just then at Even and Odd, as is The Sport among the Gods and Goddesses; Who were all 'stounded and affrighted, When Phoebus to the Bench draw nigh did, That one they counted so Wise-nodled, Should look so featly and betwattled; Which made him fall to storm and bully, And sputter at 'em most wofully, Then call them all to naught; he swore This was a Rogue, and that a Whore; They ne'er had heard the like before. Conva-vavart ye now, quo'he, Would ye were all at York, for me. Death and Fuf-furies! What at Play! At Even and Odd-Good-lack-aday! You take your Pleasure, and don't care A straw how other Folks may fare, So your own Carcasses but thrive well; Faith you're as Cunning as the Devil! At this the Gods did all him sooth, with Sweet Words, as any Courtier Moutheth.
Iove chuck'd his Chin, and bid him name Who 'twas had wrong'd him, and he'd pay 'em. With that Apollo strait began, Sir, To blubber something of an Answer. De'e see the Barges there? Po-pox on The Water-men, the've ate my Oxen. They might as well have eat my Horses, Or pick'd my Pocket—where my Purse is. Consume 'em all; I wonder when My Oxen would have eat the Men! They ne'er had injured this Vlysses, Nor plunder'd any thing that is his. My Cows ne'er burnt his Barns at Ithaca, Nor robb'd his Trunk without, or with a Key; Ne'er open broke his Cellar Door, Nor tried to make his Wife a Whore, Nor got his Maids with Child (as some do In every Family they come to) Demolished none o's Mutton-Pasties; But let the House continue as 'tis. I loved the Cows from Top to Bottom, Dearer than if I had begot 'em, So dear, that it rejoyced my Heart Both to go to 'em,—and to part. The Verses in the Original are these. —.
For when my Link-boy Vesper, come, At Setting-time—to light me home, I used to Ogle 'em 'cross my Neck, Till I devised a kind of Trick, And lest my Head might grow awry, Learn'd to ride backward down the Sky. Not a Cow of 'em but, in my O∣pinion, was handsomer than Io. For Simpering, none of 'em could miss T'out-simper Daph-(both)-ne(and) nis. Even tho 'they both should turn to Kine, 'Snigs, they would be two Fools to mine. My Cows were rettier (I don't eer ye) Than your . They gave the sweetest Milk for Posset, Or Syllabub (there's Cupid knows it) I ne'er sipp'd any thing perfecter, Not to disparage sugar'd Nectar. Besides, 'twas good for Physick (mark it) Either Emetick, or Cathartick.
If Milk once fail my Credit crackt is, And Opifer must lose his Practice. The youngest was a Maiden-Body; I little thought that she should so dye. For she could cure Distempers, marry, And was a kind of 'Pothecary. There's Dr. Salmon would have bought her, Tho meerly for herThe Cant-word, or Term of Art for Cow-Piss. All-flower Water, At making which she had such Skill, No Lady better could distill. 'Twou'd cure Green-sickness and the Scurvy; (No Cow in England could with her vye) The Fluor Albus, and the Tumor, Hydropick, and Athritick, Humor; No Beast of 'Natomy e'er knew more. She'd have made Water for a Wager, Had any ventured to engage her. Nay Bromfild's Pills 'twou'd soon have cast out, And Daffy's 'Lixir is an Ass to't. Pray what would Iuno say, if Folk Stole Peacocks, tho' twere in a Joke? I'm sure, I'd sooner eat my Nails Than touch a Feather of their Tails.
She'd set her Clack up, and so scold me; Heaven would be soon too hot to hold me; Nay Iove would rather wish (Udzookers) To have his Chimnies all turn Smoakers. There's Pallas keeps her Owls as chary, Even as the Apple of her Blear-eye, The Goddess-ship of her Divinity, Or Maiden-head of her Virginity, Her very Wisdom, and Puissance, With which she frightens Rats and Mice hence. Could th' Harpies so torment Aeneas, That shortly will be chosen a Deus, And spoil his Dinner with a Vengeance That was as Odious and as Ingens, As the most wisest Hist'ry mentions? Bellum etiam pro caede boum? Quoth th' Old One in a Passion to 'em. I mean that Fury, Dame Celano, So dire a Monster ne'er was seen, ho! Then came the Flock, and set a flut∣tering, A Clawing, Stinking, and a Sputtering; Drove the poor Trojans from their places, All squirting in their Eyes and Faces. Could Hercules, the Giant, take as Much Vengeance as he pleased of Cacus,
Altho' his Cows recover'd were soon, And had no Violence done their Person? And I (forsooth!) that can the Bar throw, Drive Coach, or Shine, or shoot an Arrow, Break a new Horse-shooe, crack a new Rope, Or dry a Stall, and common Shore, up With e'er a Hercules in Europe, Must be affronted and upon pissed! Pray answer me—on what acconp is't? I was induced to recede a little from strict Orthography in the last Line, meerly out of Pity to the Ryme, which would evidently have been in a miser∣able Condition, if I had suffer'd either Ly REASON, or even  ACCOUNT, to get into the Penultimate Place, which they both offer'd to supply, but were both rejected, tho' otherwise very wor∣thy, as not being agreeable to the Society. The Verse and I are greatly, and equally obliged to Syncope the Amputatrix, as well as to some other Reformers of Modes and Superfluities, who were ex∣treamly ready▪ and willing to come into
Assistance in the present Case, ac∣cording to their usual Good-nature and very compassionate Disposition upon all such Emergencies. From these two Proofs out of Poetry, together with the Prose Arguments that preceded them, it seems to be a very Rational Inference, that of all Times, Ages, or Siecles, those deserve the highest Renown, as indeed they are allow'd to be, beyond Comparison, the best, which neither Are, Have been, or Will be Present. Have we not an illustrious In∣stance of this in the Saturnian, or Golden-Age (truly so called, had so pernicious a Metal been consistent with the Happi∣ness of those Blessed Days) and have we another more illustrious in the Millen∣nium at Ierusalem? What more Peaceful and Innocent than the one? What more Devout and Contemplative than the other? And then if we enquire of our own Country in particular, does not Great Britain confess, that the Days now cur∣rent are vile, worthless and illaudable, nor any way comparable for Blessedness to the precious Reign of that most gra∣cious
and magnificent Princess, Quee Dick? Agreeably to this, and no doubt upon the same Principles, has the Sage St. E∣remont determined, concerning naked Goddesses and young Lancashire Witches that the Nymph which Finds her self where, is VASTLY a fine Creature than any that can be Found in Her Se, and must upon every Account carry the Golden Apple from all Her Fellows. We likewise all know for certain, least all that are Unprejudic'd will agree that Empedocles's Epick Poem is a Diviner Piece than either of Homer's, Lucretius's Aeneis must also be owned in∣finitely Preferable to Virgil's; the Truth of this may be put beyond Dispute by one plain Reason; viz. That Virgil actually written an Aeneis, or a certain Book of long Verses, beginning with Ille Ego, and Homer also is judged have made his own Epick Poems, where∣as the other Gentleman has writ and as for Lucretius's Twel Books of Aeneis,See the Disserta∣tion upon Pha∣laris's Epistles. they neve were in Rerum Naturâ.
By Parity of Reason has the Wisdom of the Ancients declar'd, and pronounc'd it for a Maxim, of most in∣disputable Truth,Melius non nasci. That of all Persons in the whole World, none are in such a desirable Condition and happy Cir∣cumstances; none so much to be envy'd, or in so great Favour with Fate and all the Stars, as those innocent Strangers that never knew the Misfortune of being Born, and therefore, as in Charity we ought to believe, had no way deserv'd to be sentenc'd to that Execution, or to have the Penalty of Life inflicted upon them. Now does not all Philosophy, with one Voice, proclaim the Reason∣ableness of the fore-said Maxim? for does it not assure us that Vtopia is a finer Region to dwell in than any other what∣ever; not in this Terraqueous Globe only, but even in either Hemisphere of that other in the Moon? These Reflections may show us how justly the Religion and Virtue of Oliver C—l, the Vertue, Loyalty and Merits of—, the Loyalty, Merits and Poetry of—have been so highly celebrated
by Mr. W—r, Mr. S—, Mr. A—, &c. for what can give to a Man's Virtue, Loyalty and Poetry, or Merits of any kind, so eminent an Advantage; what can make them so Worthy of being highly celebrated, as that singular and characterizing Property of having no Existence? The Life and Exploits of SANCHO PANSA, After his Master's Decease. AS the supreme Temporal Perfection is not found in any Times, but those which neither Are, have Been, no shall Be at all, so is the second Honour very justly ascribed to those, which al∣though they do not come up to the same Perfection of Not-being with the other yet keep however the greatest Distance from the Moment in Being Now namely, at my present Writing, or you present Reading, whenever that happen even tho' at a Thousand years Interval
There is in Nature a parallel Case, that may illustrate this Philosophy. 'Tis not imaginable the nice and strict Analogy be∣tween the Doctrines of Time and of Place, can possibly have escap'd the Observation of so discerning a Genius as my Reader. You see therefore (as I take for Granted) how the several Phaenomena of both depend upon the same Reasons, and may become assisting in the Solution of each other. Did Felicity chuse the Days of vronia And does not she chuse the Country of Vtopia? Are the most distant Times the next in her Favour? and are not also the most distant Climates? Are the most an∣cient Writers the best in their kinds? Are they Giants in Learning, and the Mo∣derns but Puncinello's and Pygmies upon their Shoulders? and are not the most Remote Inventers incomparably the most Inventive? Nay, is it not very remark∣able, that the ancient Greeks and Romans have outstript, in all the Liberal Arts, their Cotemporaries, the modern French and English, chiefly by reason that the Chinese are great Wits? Nor is it less Remark∣able, that no Kingdom, or Common∣wealth,
whatever (always excepting those unrival'd States in Vtopia) is al∣low'd to be fram'd, model'd and consti∣tuted with such a Vein, a Strain, a REACH, a RACE, a STRETCH,See Temple's Essay upon Heroick Virtue. a FETCH, a JIRK, a QUIRK, a SPIRIT, POWDER of Politick and Critique, as those of China and Peru, which are OUT-LYING Nations, I don't know how far beyond the Worlds End. Of Liberty and Property, and several other things that conduce to the better vnder∣standing of this Famous History. SInce all Parties are unanimous in this Principle, that Time becomes more pure and excellent in Proportion to the distance it recedes from the Nunc Temporis, the only remaining Controversy about it is, taking any Degree you please o Distance or Latitude, whether it will not be equally Estimable on either side o the Equator, or the Linea Praesentialis▪
either Arctick or Ant-arctick, Past or Future, (which is all one between Space and Time) or if they be not equally Estimable, which must be allow'd the Pre∣ference? There are a Species of Philoso∣phers, who setting up for Moderation, endeavour to defend the Equality, and urge us with the foresaid famous Ana∣logy of Time and Place, which obtains, as they pretend, in this point as well as any. For, granting that at an equal Distance from the Torrid Zone on either side, the Force of the Sun's Malignancy does equally abate, it seems to them a plain Consequence, that at an equal Di∣stance from the Punctum Tonunicum, which way you please, the Virulency of Praesentialness must in the same measure be taken off, qualify'd and debilitated. Now 'tis true indeed, that the Inference here seems very just and inevitable, but the Ground of it is fallacious and cannot be insisted on; for it supposes the Ana∣logy between Time and Place to extend farther than it ever did, since we see that several Countries, tho' at the same Di∣stance from the Sun, yet have various
Degrees both of Heat and Fertility, oc∣casion'd by their peculiar Situations, and such like Collateral Arguments; whereas in the case of Time, on the same side of the Present, and at the same Distance, Days and Years have always the same Excellence and Worth; because 'tis very evident, that nothing has any Influence upon the Happiness of Ages, but their Distance from the Present only. A Section containing, Two Receits out of Echard'sSee Echard's 2d Dia∣logue, where he treats of boil'd Cushions. Translation of Duns Scotus, viz. How to broil Hazle-Nuts with pickled Ivory-Sauce and Ablative Cases; and the best way of stewing Curds in a Visian. These Levellers or Moderation-Men being set aside, since either the Future, or the Past, must have a Pre-eminence, we proceed to examine the next Point in Debate, viz. To which of them it ought to be awarded. There are hot Zealots, or High-Flyers, on both sides, and so great Animosities are kindled between them, that if either should get the su∣pream
Power into their Hands, their Opposites, or Dissenting-Brethren, will have cause to apprehend a Persecution. To state and represent the Cause at full length, and deduce all the Arguments Pro and Con, in Logical or Rhetorical Array, shall be thy Undertaking, O my next Philippick, —quae Divina vulvêris proxima Famae. This present Oration, Dissertation, or Commentary (or whatever Name you shall please to honour it with) will be mightily satisfy'd, if it can but give hu∣man Race a convenient Insight into the Business before us, by pointing at the chief Topicks, Offensive and Defensive, which the Parties militant employ against each other. Therefore Pergite Pierides— on the part of the Futurists it is confi∣dently talk'd, that a Minute to come is worth an Age that is gone; may, they pretend it to be an avow'd and current Maxim among Philosophers of all Ages,
That a Week in Prospect is not only more valuable, but even apparently longer, than a Twelve-month that is slipt away, by the exactest measure yet known. Nor do they scruple to refer us to the univer∣sal Sence of Mankind, who discover so great an Opinion of the Future, as to long for it with Impatience, while they always acknowledge the Past to be no better than Vanity; the days that are coming, at a distance, being Fine and Delightful, tho' they change to quite another thing, as soon as they are gone by, and begin to show us their Reverse. All this and a great deal more, they en∣deavour to confirm by a great number of Instances, but chiefly insist upon the particular Case of a longing Nymph, who is always very well assured that the Future will make her Happy, but when once that future is converted into Past, perceives her Expectations deluded, and herself betray'd by it into Misery and Repentance. A thousand other Argu∣ments that are mustered for the Defence of this Tenet, I shall reserve for my sub∣sequent Volumes; nor will I now dis∣miss
miss the Subject without this Concession, which all Parties, Orders and Degrees of Men seem to conspire in, That the Future is the only proper Season for mending, and repenting of, Faults that are Past; that it is absolutely the most convenient Opportunity of setting upon any Work of great Labour and Difficulty; and the rather, if it be a thing of such Necessity, or Importance, as should not be enter'd upon with Precipitation; for 'tis plainly impossible to undertake Matters of that Nature, till the Future is come, though some prejudic'd Persons have a Conceit, that this Future tantalizes our Resolu∣tions, and always flies before us. The Novel of the Tall Inquisitive conti∣nued, and that of the Lovely Amphi∣bious begun. THese are really very plausible Ar∣guments, and many other things there are to be pleaded in Favour of the fame Cause, seemingly no less conclu∣sive than these. Yet the prevailing Opi∣nion
runs on the other side, and has many Reasons to support it. In my other Volumes I design entirely to ex∣haust the Argument, by displaying all that can possibly be said in Fa∣vour of Days elapsed,Dr. B—y form'd a modest Design of this Nature, in the Case of Phalaris's Epist. which he promis'd that no Mortal should take to be Genuine, from the time his Dissertation came out, 'till the Confla∣gration. so that for the time to come, no Man shall offer to write, speak, think, or opine any thing a∣gainst the Dignity and Precedence of Times Past. I am so well satisfy'd in the Proofs and Evidence of this Doctrine we are now defending, as to believe that the contrary Perswasion where-ever it be found, can arise from nothing in the World but meer Ingratitude. For is it not even visible, that Men shew a mighty Respect for the Future only, because they have great Ex∣pectations from it, whereas the Hours which have left and bequeath'd to them all the Goods, Possessions and Enjoyments which they are Masters of, are often slighted, turned away, and out of mind, only because they are Past the Condition
of doing them any further Service. Now instead of that Disingenuous Principle, we ought to forget only what Injuries the Age expir'd has done us; to forgive all that is past and gone of that Kind; be easily reconcil'd to its Memory, and willing to speak well of the deceas'd. This I esteem to be one of the most eminent Virtues, yet it has always been flourish∣ing and triumphant, and so much the more conspicuously, because by this Virtue, which by its own Nature is solitary, and even self-subsisting, we are convinced that all other Virtues are either extinct or languishing; upon which Account there is Reason also to be the more fond of this. There is in the World a certain Society whose laudable Disposition, as to the point before us, must not be passed over without due Com∣mendation; a Society well known, of a great Rank and Figure, and bearing a great Sway in sublunary Affairs, ha∣ving produc'd more Persons of Note in all Kinds, than ever appear'd besides. My Meaning is doubtless obvious enough to conceive, for what can any charitable
Reader think of me in his Conscience, but that I do most joyfully lay hold upon this happy Occasion of vindicating our Specifick Reputation, by doing Justice to the noble Race of Mankind; to whom I am known to bear a very singular Affection, as ha∣ving the Honour to belong to that cele∣brated Species, in the Quality of an Vnworthy Individual; so much at least I may say, that this Character is allow'd me by all that love and understand the Good of my Country. For such my Birth and Breeding, I own an infinite Obliga∣tion to the Manes of Sir Samuel Luke, my much Honoured Grand-father, as like∣wise to some others of my illustrious Pro∣genitors, who were good old Men, true Zealots for the Good Old Cause, & —nati melioribus annis. I take the Boldness therefore to main∣tain the Honour of human Race, as to this most excellent Virtue of forgetting what Sufferings Times past brought upon them, as well as remembring and exagge∣rating with the utmost Gratitude, what∣ever
Blessings they enjoy from the Goodness of those happy Days, now departed. Nay, I will venture to go a Point further, the more firmly to esta∣blish my Cause, tho' by seeming to op∣pose it; as some Persons of known Ho∣nour and Integrity, are labouring to un∣dermine something or other, 'tis hard to affirm what, by pretending themselves its Protectors. For since the Press, the Pulpit and the Stage Conspire to censure and expose our Age, Provok'd too far, we resolutely must To the one Virtue that we have, be Just. I assert therefore, for the Glory of our own Time, and will maintain it to the last Drop of my Ink, that it does not fall short of any other in this good Quality of preferring all others to its self; that it does not fail to pay due Honour and Re∣spect to elder Ages, or to aggravate its own Degeneracy. I assert farther, for the Credit of my own Country, that without flattering our selves, we are not out-rival'd in this Point by any Nation
whatever, let our Neighbours think of themselves as fondly as they please. How few among us can ruminate upon the last Century, or revolve in our Minds some glorious Scenes with which it was illustrated, without the sweetest Com∣placency, and even Rapture of Delight? Could the same happy Days return, the same blessed State of things be restor'd, with what Joyous, what Triumphant Acclamations, would the Glorious Day be hailed, and usher'd in by Multitudes of British Souls, and how welcome Quadr agesimus Octavus Revolubilis Annus? How celebrated even among the Ancient Writers are those Times which were Ancient to them? Aurea Prima sata est Aetas— —subiitque Argentea Proles. See Milbourn's Translation of Ovid. The Age was Gold at first, 'tis said, 'till Iove Choused all the World to put his Sil∣ver off.
Aere, dehin ferro duravit secula— For Iove t' allay the Silver-age with Brass, All Pious Men have thought a hardish case; But harder still he makes the Brazen-age, By turning Steel to Iron and to Rage. Mr. Creech Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit Nos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem. Which some Iacobitish Fellow, I don't know who, but possibly it may be the Author of the Memorial, has translated against the present Ministry, or Liberty of Conscience, or what else you please, and deserves to be sent some where or other for his Pains, as you may see. Our Grand-fathers were— Our Fathers Oliverians; Their Sons, 'tis said, are— Ours may be— —omnia satis In pejus ruere—
See Mr. Dryden's Translation of Virgil. What are Fates good for, but to Spoil and Wast? Optima quaeque dies miseris Mortalibus aevi Prima fugit— —See the same Translation. 'Tis never known That better comes, when e're the old one's gone. And we find this confirm'd by the Practice of Mankind,See the Theory of the Earth. which best dis∣covers their real Sentiments; for, in the Primigenial Earth the Inha∣bitants, or old Hero's, were content to live near a Thou∣sand Years; whereas now-a-days, say all that can be said, you will never per∣swade one Man in ten Thousand to live so much as a tenth part of that Time; and all because they are angry at the Degeneracy of the Times, and vex them∣selves to Death to think that the Axis of the Earth should be grown so cross, as to stand in a skew Posture to the Obliquity of the Ecliptick. This Philosophy may seem
not to want any poetick Authority to confirm it, yet it will not be amiss, how∣ever, to use the following Verses as Col∣lateral Proofs. Another Fragment of the Sun's Speech con∣cerning his Cows. THey cost as much in Education, As any Cows of the best Fashion; Not that I ever grudg'd the Money, No, then indeed I'd been a Tony. For Breeding (tho' it were at Goatham) Is better than good Portions to them. And they ne'er wanted for Instruction, Nor ever idly did their Book shun; But learn'd to race as well as dance, So swift—you'd think 'em in a Trance. The fleetest Nag they would out-strip, So wise they▪ were at Footmanship. Yet scorn'd to make Discourse for Ale-houses, Like scoundrel Jades and Hack-Cahalluses, Or like your beggarly Jack-pudding, That gladly on a Sheep's Head cou'd dine. Tho' they themselves did pretty Gambols, As any Tumblers or Funambules.
While one's a-showing of a Trick, Sir, Another follows and Mimicks her, So like an Andrew—you'd swear 'twas one; And one good Andrew's worth a dozen. They'd leap thro' 20 Hopes, or tumble On the bare Ground—they were so humble; Slide down a Rope from any Steeple, To th' great Amazement of all People; Walk on their Hands, with Glass of Ale Brim-ful, erected on their Tail. Nay one (perhaps you'll scarce believe) Would on Hind-leg, or Tail so stiff, Spin her self round, like any Top, When e'er I pleas'd to set her up. You ne'er did see the like (nor shall) Not th' oldest God among ye all. They (let me tell you) were Injanious, And better Scholards too than many o'us. They're reckon'd to be Weather-wiser Than.  himself, that great Adviser▪ They tell It when to rain, or mizle, And show when Riding's good, or is ill.
By snuffling up the Air, according To Art, and Rules of Herme's wording. (You need not sneer, 'tis no absurd thing.) I speak of him that Hight Tris'gistus, Who by the Gypsy-Folk so miss'd was. Nec luisse pudet, nec nondum incidere ludum. To Dr. Bl—by Mr. Flights. I. WE'll consort with Tempests, with Earth∣quakes agree, To a Chorus of Thunder we'll drink up the Sea. And when in Clouds it shall arise From our Nostrils and our Eyes, Up to the middle Region we'll repair, To meet again our Liquor there, And teach the Gods to drink and stare. We'll consort with Tempests, &c. II. Then in our drunken Flights we'll go a Region higher, Where in Harmonious belch our Crew With an Universal Sp— Shall quench out all the Element of Fire. We'll consort with Tempests, &c.
III. Strike Lightning (if smoaking above be allow'd) We'll light our Tabacco with a Tinder-box Cloud; And to see that our Frolicks may fairly go round, Light sixty Wax-candles of three to the Pound. Then stand to your Tackle, and brandish your Pots; We'll ennoble the Gods by making 'em Sots. We'll consort with Tempests, &c. IV. Look narrowly to him there, Iove shirks his Glass; He's an impudent God, fling the rest in his Face. Iupiter flinches and Bacchus; I see The Gods are not half so much Drunkards as we. Then stand to your Tackle agen, And Fuddle, and Fuddle, like Men. We'll consort with Tempests, &c. Dii Patrii! quo Bacche rapis! capite Orgia meom Furius Hybernas canô nive conspuit Alpes.
A Scotch Epitaph. HEre lig I Martin Eltinbrode, Have Mercy on my Saal, Loord Gode; As I would do, if I were Gode, And ye were Martin Eltinbrode. An Epitaph upon John Button. HEre lies Iohn Button—Heavens and Poles! Are Graves become but Button-holes! An Elegy upon the Battle of Landen. O that my Lungs might bleat, like but∣ter'd Peas, And eke with Bleating catch the Itch, To be as mangy as the Irish Seas, Engendring Wind-mills and a melted Witch! I grant that drunken Rainbows, Iull'd asleep, Snort like Welch Hooks in Ladies Eyes; Which made them vex to see a Pudding creep, For creeping Puddings only please the wise. Not that a Hard row'd Herring should presume To swing a Tythe-pig in a Cat-skin Purse, For fear the Hail-stones which did fall at Rome, By less'ning of the Fall, might make it worse.
For 'tis most certain, Winter Wool-sacks grow From Geese to Swans, if Men could keep 'em so. Till that Sheep-shorn Planet gave the Hint To pickle Pancakes in Geneva Print, Some Men there were, who did suppose the Sky Was made of Carbonado'd Antidotes; But my Opinion is, a Whale's left Eye Need not be coin'd All in King Harry's Groats. The Reason's plain; for Charon's Western-barge Running full Tilt at the Subjunctive Mood, Becken'd to Landen Fight, and gave a Charge To fatten Padlocks with Antartick Food. Now the End will be, that Mill-pools must be laded, To fish for White-post in a Country Dance, That those who had the Wrong, and were upbraided; May be made Friends in a Left-handed Trance. These Authorities may be sufficient, though 'tis with utmost Difficulty that I restrain my self from throwing in a hundred or two more, having (if it may be allow'd me to speak so much in my own Commen∣dation) perhaps as fruit∣ful an Invention for this sort of Quotations,See Dryden's Preface to his Fables, or to any other of his Works that you please. as most of my Co∣temporaries; which the World should
see, were it not that I want due En∣couragement to labour in that way; the Pension allow'd me by our Grandees being so slender, that the few vacant Hours, which can be stole from my ne∣cessary Duties, of spreading Lies against the Church and Monarchy, I am forc'd to consume in such Studies as bring in more of Gain than of Fame; and ac∣cordingly shall now immediately endea∣vour to find my way back again to the Subject we have just deviated from, and let almost out of sight. From the foregoing Conclusions 'tis as plain as can be wish'd, how very Ab∣surd some Persons are in their Expressi∣ons, who talk of an Infancy, Minority or Non-age of the world, and seem to sup∣pose that the several Periods of it run in a just Analogy to the ordinary Stages of Human Life; improving at first 'till Years of Maturity come on, then after a while, declining again into a second State of Puerility. Now the Truth of the Case without Dispute is this, that the Age of Nature does not proceed Pa∣rallel to that of common Men, but re∣sembles
the Condition of Adam, who as Dr. Duport in his Sermon concerning the Longaevity of the Ante-Diluvians, has very Reasonably and Ingeniously con∣jectur'd, was created about four or five and twenty Years old; so that he might soon pass into a State of Declension, or gradual Tendency towards the Imbe∣cillity of Age. The World in like man∣ner being brought out of Nothing im∣mediately into its full Perfection, more Probably in Iune than, as some have imagin'd, in Autumn, after a short Con∣tinuance, enter'd upon its Decay; began to languish in the Sprightliness of its Beauty, to fade, and then wither; no shall its Course compleat any more than three Seasons, Spring being excluded by the Will of Fates, who have decree that it shall run no farther than Winter but perish by Antiperistasis of Heat and Cold, about December of the Platoni or Great, Year of Years. This is wha is said by Learned Platonists to accoun for the growing Depravity of the World other Philosophers explain the sam Phaenomenon, each in his manner, ac∣cording
to the Hypothesis he is en∣gaged to. The Epicureans are subdivided into two Sects; the one hold that the Past and Future are equally Excellent at an equal Distance, and endeavouring to prove their Tenet by the allow'd Veracity of our Sences, form their Argument in this manner. EVery Thing Is just as it appears; now 'tis certain Things appear the Greater, the farther they are from us; this they several ways demonstrate, and call even the Sun and Moon to witness, both which are evidently larger in Cir∣cumference at their Rising and Setting, than at Noon while they hang over our Heads, and are nearer (especially to those that live within a few Degrees of the Line) by many a fair Mile. Now by Parity of Reason, say they, the Hap∣piness of the Present Time, or such Times as are not far distant, must of necessity seem less, and consequetly be so, than the Past, or Future, Felicity of a Setting, or a Rising World.
The other Party pretend that the whole World must always be in a gradual and growing Declension, because all the very Atoms of which it consists, are for ever in a declining Condition; and that more and more violent every Age; as we learn from undoubted Records, that they declined more in Epicurus his time, than they did in the Days of Demo∣critus. As for the Stoicks, who are impla∣cable Enemies to Epicurus, and all his Doctrines and Disciples, they assure us that Men are become miserable only by growing so besotted as to think Pain can do them any Hurt; whereas if they were but wise enough to love Pain and Pleasure alike, or to esteem Pain the more Eligible and Pleasant of the two— Why they might live as happy as their Ancestors ever did before them. The Chymists believe that Time car∣ries in it a very strong Menstruum, which debases the Purest Metals into the Grossest;See Boyle's Orig. of Forms and Qualities. has depreti∣ated the Mundane Secul from Gold to Iron, and
proceeds to corrupt even the latter, by a certain Tincture infus'd into it of a Corrosive and Venomous Quality, by which it frets and maligns it self. The Doctors of the Faculty, like their Brethren of the Corpuscularian Philoso∣phy, are also at Daggers drawing about the Vitiation of the Serum temporis; some supposing that the Virtue of it evapo∣rates through the Rapidity of its Mo∣tion, others offering to demonstrate, that the Fault lies in its Sluggishness; that it begins to move too heavily, and tends violently towards a Stagnation. For the several Hypothesis concerning the Heart-burning Acid, the Alkali, and the Nausea Temporis, vide my next Volume; in which also shall be faithfully explain'd the Opi∣nion of the Aristotelians, who impute all to the continual Raefaction of substantial Forms, by the intense Heat of the Sub∣concavo-lunary Fire. Therein I shall like∣wise dilate upon the Pythagorean Doctrine concerning the Abstracted Number, which they hold to be the Quintessence of Things. But, Whether any of these Sup∣positions be the true Account, is more
than I dare offer to determine; or, Whe∣ther it be that the World is the worse for Keeping, like a Barrel of Oysters, or like the late Lord C—r, and other un∣thrifty Fornicators; Whether it takes after the Microcosm that governs it, and equally affects to be —Laudator temporis acti Se primos Numerante annos.— Whether the old Cavalier with the Hour-glass and Scythe grows more and more Difficilis, morosus— querulous and untoward, the more he grows in Years, and loses of his Sand; Whether Time and Eternity, bear Ana∣logy to a River and the Ocean, the for∣mer rising pure at first, but becoming more and more turbid in its Course, till receiv'd again into the same Abyss, whence it took its Beginning; Whether the Felicity of an Age, like that of a Hero, depends entirely upon future Fame, or the After-judgment of succeeding Ages.
However this be, it is undoubtedly true, that there are some five or six Per∣sons, at least, in the World, who dis∣believe the matter of Fact, and seem to be of the Sect of Sceptick Philosophers. You will be surpriz'd to hear what Para∣doxical Notions these strange sort of People have set up. First, they pretend that former Times were, one with another, as bad as the present; and fu∣ture Times also are like to be so, the World being never without Reason to complain of bad Times, if Complaints were to any Purpose towards making them better. For if former Ages have not suffer'd so much of the same Grie∣vances which ours is troubled with, they have had others of their own, which we are insensible of; and all Vices have reigned in their Turns, like Diseases or Fashions, according as mortal Men are pleas'd to change, and grow weary of one after another. Hence they would infer, that for a Man of the present Ge∣neration to tumble over worm-eaten Volumes, and hunt up and down Chro∣nology, in quest of a better Time than
this which keeps him alive, is to imitate the restlesness of a Bed-rid Patient, who when displeas'd, or grown out of con∣ceit with his present Posture of Affairs, tumbles and takes Pains all in vain, to settle his crazy Tabernacle in some other Situation that shall please him longer. Nor was I less restless in Mind during the Course of these sorrowful Medita∣tions, till Morpheus in great Compassion step'd in to my Relief, and not only gave me present Ease, but an infallible Amulet against any Relapse; as will be more clearly understood by perusing the next Section, if you have but any tolera∣ble good Success attending you in your Studies. Quî fit, Maecenas, ut nemo quod sibi Tempus Sors dedit, hoc vivat contentus? —O utinam inter Heroas natum tellus me Prima tulisset! O Tempori! O Moribus! Haec Rhombus sapiens, haec Janus summus ab imo Personat.—
Perpetuo risu pulmonem agitare solebat Democritus— fato nostrum delatus in aevum Si foret, ad risum pulmones mille, genaeque, Pectoris aes triplex, centenorum & laterumvis Ferrea deficeret. Quid si vidisset Elisam, (Vidisset tantùm) geminumve (heu Reptile carmen! Heu mites animos vatis, Musae{que} sequacis!) Arthurum, pietate bonum & fulgentibus armis? Arthuri Aeneae{que} manu victoria vatum Haeret Graecorum; mala plurima passus uterque; Aemulus Arthurus, terris jactatus & alto, Vi Bavii, ob Musarum iram, invitaeque Minervae. Tantae molis erat spoliare Aeneida sensu. SECT. XXX. A Section for which after deep Study, and Sollicitude of Brain many Days together, the Author could devise no manner of Title. AT length my Intellectual Part quite drooping under the Pressure; began to retire from the sensible World,
and would have resign'd it self into the dark State of Incogitancy, had not Fa∣ther Malebranche appear'd, in the very Instant, to divert it from that Inclina∣tion. I had never seen him before, but found an Innate Idea to know him by, without which I could never have known him by any Description,If we had not an In∣nate Idea of a Circle, &c. saith Mr. Norris, we could never acquire an Idea of a Circle by seeing material Circles. or even Sight of his Per∣son. After a few Com∣pliments (which 'tis neither decent, nor civil, to omit upon such Occasions, whether Waking or Dreaming) he told me it was the Re∣spect he had for a Person of my extraor∣dinary Merits, that brought him thither to intrude upon my Privacy; that he knew the Grounds of my present Discon∣tent, and would instantly remove them, by taking me into a better World, where I should be put in Possession of entire Felicity; where every Man had Riches and Honour, Wit and Beauty as much as could enter into his Wishes, or his very Imaginations. I concluded this Blessed World could be no other but
That call'd the Ideal, and therefore growing impatient to be upon the Voy∣age, began to look about for my Wings. They were a very strong and a new Pair; and such I had Reason to provide my self with, having long owed, and design'd, a Visit to an old Acquaintance, who has been settled some Years at Co∣pernicus in the Moon; a very rich and delightful Country as any in those Parts, but a great way from my Lodgings in Barbican. Now I very well understood by my Innate Idea of the Ideal World, that the said World must certainly lie in some of the Lunar Regions, or at least, that we must take the Moon in our way towards it. Notwithstanding which, the Father order'd me to leave my Wings behind, for they would be a mighty Hindrance to me in Flying, and he would undertake for my safe and easy Conveyance without them; only I must needs give my self up entirely to his Guidance, and also submit to be hood∣wink'd; Nay, if my Desire was to be∣come a true Philosopher, by seeing the Ideal World to the best Advantage, there
was nothing so proper or expedient as to put out my Eyes. For this he alledged Examples, both his own, and of ma∣ny other Philosophers of famous Me∣mory; moreover assuring me, the only Reason of imposing this Condition, was the great Inconvenience that arises from the Use of our Senses; for, 'tis Sense, continued he, that is the great Impedi∣ment to Knowledge and Enemy to Phi∣losophy; for Alas—we should find our Eyes infinitely sharper, if it were not for Light; nay we should see even Ideas themselves, did not this Outward Light stand in the way. I greatly fear that it must remain a Doubt in History, whe∣ther I was more surprised by the No∣velty of this Philosophy, or satisfied by the Clearness of it; 'tis certain that I was struck with great Admiration, and likewise receiv'd entire Satisfaction; as every thing that comes from Father Malebranche is new, and admirable, and clear, and satisfactory. Upon this, I immediately banded over my Eyes with my own Hands, and then deliver'd them up to my Guide, that he might pull me
along behind him; treading sometimes upon his Heels, and sometimes pushing him forward out of Eagerness. Not with more Alacrity did the Trojan Hero, of old,See Virgil's sixth Aeneis. and the Cu∣maean Goddess, pursue their Journey, upon a like Occa∣sion; nor shall their Fame be more cele∣brated among late Posterity. And now—Stand off O ye Prophane Vulgar; presume not to pry into the mysterious Secrets of Truth uncreated; pollute not with one impious Glance the pure, and radiant, Scenes of Invisible Light that are coming on, ye that have your Intellects imbodied, or immerst in Matter, and defiled by the Contagion of Sence. But You, Sacred Shades, that inhabit inaccessible Inanity; You Extatick Dreams, Plastick Imaginations and Beatifick Fren∣zies; Parents of the intelligible Uni∣verse: You illuminated Genio's, Hero's intellectual, Sages unbodied, profound Necromancers, transcendent Visionaries; Guardians of the System of superlunary Essences: All Ye revered Powers, Ye
fleet and aiery Inhabitants, indigenar and Born-Members of that Archetypal Republick; Conceits, Whimsies, Hopes Fears, Caprices and Chimera's, with all other sovereign Disposers and Guides of human Conceptions, Designs and At∣temps; Grant me now your kindly In∣fluence; permit me without Offence, to bring to Light Things invelop'd in an∣cient Darkness, and veil'd from human Minds by the Interposition of blind Reason. Of Truth, Prejudice, Delusion, Plato's Re∣publick, Epicurus's Atoms, Blount's Oracles, Baxter's Divinity, Collier's Essays, Pilgrim's Progress, Crums of Comfort, and Mr. D—'s Epistolary Discourse. WE travel'd on very Lovingly together, and pass'd thro' Labyrinth (as I have since learnt) that has a single Path leading to Truth, but ten Thousand that draw you away from it.
Hic labor ille domus, & inextricabilis error, Qui fertur caecas Ambages, ancipitemque Mille viis habuisse dolum quo signa sequendi Falleret.— Among these there are many that carry a Man wrong the first Step he takes, and others that proceed some Length in the Right Course, and then turn aside from Truth, after having far advanc'd towards it. Each of them spreads into infinite Subdivisions, which running out every way at random, do often interfere and twine among themselves; so that one may imagine them to resemble either the Multiplicity of Tracks in a Wilder∣nes, or the Propagation of Veins in an Animal, or rather the Branches of a Tree, which issue from the Trunk at different Heights; as secondary Branches o also shoot out from them; and others still less, from these, in the same man∣ner, frequently confounding themselves with one another. Nam saepe Alterius ramos impune videmus Flectere in Alterius.—
It would be too long to enumerate all the Casualties that are incident to Men in this Labyrinth; causing them so fre∣quently to deviate from the Sight of Truth, and run after Delusions. Many are biass'd aside by the Tendency o their own Nature; many are wrong di∣rected at first, and turn'd a-wandring by false Guides. Great Numbers mistak their way thro' Inadvertency, Precipi∣tation, or Confidence, and bear other along with them in the Crowd. No a few are led astray by a kind of Ign Fatui, or dazled by Appearances of Tr in the grossest Falsities, like Parhelii, Images of the Sun imprest upon a Clou Some pursue Shadows, and lose the way in a Dream; some are corrupt by Bribes, and consent either to hav themselves blinded, or mis-led with the Eyes open. Habit facilitates their Pro∣ceeding, and Pride swells them to an I∣capacity of returning. These Prejudices, and a thousan others, and a thousand Species of eac are the Emissaries of Error, that cont∣nually lie in wait to spirit away our D∣scernment,
and seduce us from our true Guide, faithful and circumspect Reason. Hereby they have distracted Mankind into a Confusion of Sects, Philosophical and Religious; setting opposite Parties to demonstrate Contradictions, and re∣proach each other with equal Justice, as well as Ignorance and Obstinacy. These drill'd on Democritus into an Abyss of Atoms, and have carry'd the Platonists from an Ideal Republick to a Universe of the same No-nature. In my sixteenth or seventeenth Vo∣lume you will find a most accurate Map of this famous Labyrinth, wherein shall be faithfully delineated the Traces of all wandring Philosophers that have been since the Deluge; and of those in par∣ticular, who have ventur'd upon that Subject —Pelago dare vela patenti. For, of the Antediluvians no Foot-steps are now remaining.
—Nil dulcius est bene quam munita tueri Edita doctrinâ sapientum Templa serena, Despicere unde queas alios, passim{que} videre Errare, atque viam palantes quaerere vitae. —Nil tam absurdum quin a Philosophis assereretur. Quid tam vulgare quam desipere? —Ridentem dicere verum Quid vetat? One Characteristick observed, by which the Path of Truth is distinguish'd from others. THE Path that leads to Truth, is said to be the only one, in this Intellectual Labyrinth, that gives a Man any solid Ground to proceed on, support himself steadily. This, had known in it time, would have damped all the fond Thoughts that I was possessed with of my Ideal Voyage; for the way I was conducted there was seldom any Footing at all to be felt under me. often thought my self treading the Air sometimes by way of ordinary Steps,
more frequently skipping by uncertain Intervals, and springing forward I knew not how. Vadentem aequavi patrenm —non passibus Aequis. Of the Cartesian World and its Vortices. The Perfection of a Vortex. An extra∣ordinary Way of Travelling. What happen'd to me in my Voyage, and to my Head. Of Gravitation. Our Arrival at the Ideal World. Our Reception there. Several Symptoms and Properties of Ide∣ality. My Guides Complaisance. The calefying Quality, and remarkable Nature of a good Fire. THE Vortex of the Intelli∣gible World,According to Mr. Norris. like every thing else that appertains to it, is infinitely more perfect than any Vortex, Whirl-pool, or Whirl-gig that our Sensible World can boast of; now this Perfection consists in such a Rapi∣dity cui nihil deest ad constituendum suun
Esse. As soon as we came within the Sphere of its Activity, you may imagine it was some Surprize to find my self very Gravely turning round upon my own Axis; which to me was a strange way of proceeding, and very much against my Inclination, having never travell'd in that manner before. And this probably might be the Reason that my Brain was seiz'd with a most violent Sickness; as if a great Number of Windmills had been very diligently at work within it; and I verily perswade my self, that there is no going over to the Ideal World without being so affected. We were easily suckt down by the Vortex; as you may guess that weighty Bodies have no great Appetite to resist in that Case; being seldom known so obstinate as to insist upon nothing, or fly upwards when they are mov'd to the contrary. My vertiginous Circumstances of Brain were not in the least abated by the continued Rolling of my Person, which grew more violent as we descended. At last I de∣scry'd something that seem'd to be a Scull, and was making very discernible
Circumvolutions about its own Center. My Guide bid me welcome to the Intelli∣gible World, and immediately we were a it; for this Scull was no other than the Shell of it, or the Ideal Scull. It is the Archetype of all Real Sculls, and a Promptuary of all Ideas whatsoever; from which, as from a never-failing Spring-Head, they are constantly drawn forth into Things; each at its appointed time, when summon'd by Fate to exert it self, and put on Real Existence. Within the Cranium, tho' for certain there is little or nothing of Brains, yet 'tis thought, there is the Idea of Brains, which is al∣together as good, and accounted even far Preferable by the more subtile and refin'd Species of Philosophers. I saw also the Ideas of two Eyes; the Pupil of the one just discover'd it self peeping from behind the Lid, like the Sun half-set; but the other had turn'd its self quite inward. From this I concluded that if they had any Sight at all, they must fee things Double. However, they were evidently more Perfect than Real. Eyes; for the Perfection does not consist
in external Seeing, but in pleasing the internal Sight; now these were endued with a very shining Je. which may be esteem'd the true Emblem of Illuminating Darkness; and if they were not clear∣sighted themselves, that was compen∣sated by a more rare and admirable Vir∣tue; for both of them were transparent, and might clearly be seen through. My Guide propos'd to my Choice, whether I would content my self with a distant View, or make Application for personal Admittance. We might take a Prospect conveniently thro' those Inlets of Sight, whereas there was no way to enter, but along the same Ductus, by which all kind of Vapours insinuate into the Pe∣netralia of human Head. I declin'd the Proposal of getting in, being come only upon Likeing, and loth to be initiated at a Venture; conceiving also that for the present, it would be satisfaction enough to make my Observations at a distance. Thereupon we fix'd each at his Pos like two considerable. Leeches; my Guide giving me as a Stranger the Com∣pliment of his Right-hand. In this Po∣sition
were we rowl'd about by the Ro∣tation of the Scull, so that (if you are in a very good Humour, and willing to over-look a small Disproportion in point of Magnitude) you may conceive us to have resembled either two Spots in a Planet, or a brace of Flies, should they chuse to plant themselves, for the Benefit of a warm Fire, upon some convenient part of a Goose as 'tis roasting. —Sic parvis componere magna solebam, Mollia sic duris, sine pondere habentia pondus. —O te felicem, Bollane, cerebri, Cui caput assiduâ fervet vertigine raptum? Ceu quondam torto volitans sub verbere turbo. The Address, or Kentish Petition. TO Cupid I address'd my Prayer, Cruel Cupid would not hear; Then Venus I in vok'd with Tears, Cruel Venus stopp'd her Ears; Now to fair Sylvia, Hapless Swain, I fly to tell my amorous Pain.
Sylvia, like Venus, could bestow The fairest Nymph the World can show; Fate still depends on Either's Will, Kind or Cruel, they can kill. For did not Venus once destroy, By granted Bliss, the Trojan Boy? But loving Corydon must dye, If Sylvia should the Bliss deny. SECT. XIII. To Mrs. C—s. Epitaph on a Maiden-head. I. BEneath these Stones in tomb'd, is laid, Something that was a Maiden-head. That Word alone doth here lie dead, Whose Substance into Nought is fled. Does any ask me how I lost my Breath? I broke a fatal Vein, and bled to Death.
II. Some think (and 'tis a common Fame) That I (howe'er a Place I claim With Beings of Substantial Frame) Am but a Nothing with a Name. Else Man did my Reality create, Since he alone can it annihilate. III. Yet I, the Guardian of the Zone, (While such) unbuckled it to none; But since that I am dead and gone, The wincing Minor hurries on: Lavish of Love, at once turns Prodigal, And Spend-thrift-like keeps open House for All. SECT. XXXIII. Of Payment in Part, together with fair Promises. THUS was I conducted, and thus have I faithfully conducted my very good Friend, the Reader, to the
Place propos'd at our setting out. He must not expect that I should now go on in the same manner, or undertake to lead him thro' all the Discoveries I have there made. Non mihi si Linguae centum— Ferrea vox— Ferrea Latera, &c. Non mihi si'  (Metri Gratia. heu!) There are many Things of the Pro∣duction of the Ideal World, which have this unhappy Property adhering to their Essence, that they can never be of any use to poor Mortals in the Way of Reason neither can they become any way Agree∣able to their Sense and Understanding As for the rest, in my several Volume upon this Subject, which in due time are to be forth-coming, there shall be deduced a large account of whatever is Remarka∣ble. The fourth Volume shall present you with the History of the Ideal Common∣wealth, their Policy, Discipline, Con∣stitution, present Security and flourish∣ing
Condition; what severe Cognisance they take of traiterous Ministers; what Speed they use in dispatching Affairs, especially in Nice Extreams, and how they suppress all Teachers and Nurseries of Sedition. The fifth shall contain a true account of their excellent Attainments in all Arts and Sciences, and more particularly of their Architecture, i. e. their Method of erecting Castles upon Aerial and Pensile Foundations; which are Edifices of such a Nature, as may truly deserve a place among the Wonders of the Ideal World. In the fixth Volume you shall find a Dissertation concerning their manner of Conversing, Thinking, Dreaming and Propagating their Kind. These, and many other Particulars shall, with my Country's Leave, be re∣fer'd to the said subsequent Volumes; towards compleating of which, I shall call in all the Assistance that can be drawn from Iamblicus, Porphyry, Celus, Suarez, Spinosa, Moor, Hobbes, Glanvil, Fox, Pen, Bourignion, Asgyl, Mendeza
Pinto, King Oberon's Pneumatologia, and the two Orthodox B—s; besides many other Luminaries of Philosophy, Authors and Benefactors to the ancient and famous Corporation of Letters. At present the sensible World must be con∣tented with a Specimen of those curious and inestimable Rarities, that will in time be imported from the Ideal, and become common among us. SECT. XXXI. The Raree-Show describ'd according to the Author's Innate Idea, he having never bad the Honour to be otherwise acquainted with it. Hereby is made appear the Per∣fection of such Ideas, and a Parallel in∣troduc'd between the Raree-Show and the Ideal World. HAve you not at any time inspected the travelling Theater, or little in animate World Erratick? Have you not penetrated into the System of Rar Wonders, which either the Art of pla∣stick
Nature, or the prudent Architect's Daedalean Hand, has enclos'd in that magnificent Frame of Things, circum∣fusing the exteriour Regions with a solid Atmosphere of Oak Dodonean, or of Bri∣tish Pastboard? Thus constituted, it has erst been seen to move aloft, and in slow Procession, thro' the spacious Ways of some re∣nown'd Metropolis, Mosco or Pekin, or where St. Patrick's Shrine is visited by Paludigenous Wight, Doublinion; while Phoebus from his Eminence, with busy Rays play'd round the Surface, curious to peep into the absconded Scenes, and view this new-form'd Universe; so emulous of the Old, and celebrated by Fame among the Stars. But they, who dwell in those calm and peaceful Regi∣ons, want not his Beams, enjoying more refulgent Day within from their own Lucid Sky, —solemque suum, sua sidera norunt. Nor has it not been seen defixt, or erected conspicuous, in the Center of
some populous Forum; the Arvonian Mart, or annual Wake of Morg anumia, antient Town, high famed. Nor fails it there to be encircl'd by attending Multitudes of judicious and inquisitive Sages, Burgers, Burgomasters, Aldermen; aged Coun∣sellors and potent Magistrates, that crou'd and press, and struggle to satisfie their impatient Thirst after true Know∣ledge, by contemplating the internal Constitution, or real Essence of such an amazing and portentous Phoenomenon. The sullen Officer, by Fates appointed Guardian of this sacred Treasure, still mindful of that great Trust, and the Duty of his Administration, staves of the rash and eager Clients, all inex∣orable to their vain Intreaties, rebuking, menacing, and chastising each audaci∣ous or unqualify'd Intruder; but ad∣mits in due Order, according to their Rights of Precedence, those Favourites of the Stars, that can give in for Cre∣dentials an Authentick Medal of the Face Royal, or Portraiture of the King's Person legally copied out on Metal ge∣nuine of Corinth.
There lies near the Equator of this Mundane Fabrick, a private Aperture or Hiatus, wrought, as it is reasonably suppos'd, by the Force of penetrating Heat, or violent Perustion; where, by Virtue of a certain Pellucid Quality, the Species Intentionales are freely transmitted and pass to and fro at pleasure. Hither is directed each dignified Virtuoso, to make his so desired Speculations; he bows himself approaching Submissive, and lifts off the wide Circumference of his renident and pinguedinous Bonnet, in Token of Reverence to the Guardian's Person and Office. No sooner has this Inquisitive rightly fix'd the Telescope of his ocular Vision, but immediate Astonishment and Con∣fusion surrounds him; nor can he sud∣denly believe the Testimony of his own Sence, That the same individual Body, whose external Phases represented it as a Cabinet of portatile Nature and exi∣guous Dimensions, should prove upon a closer Survey, to be really of such a pro∣digious Profundity within; where even Lyncean Sight would lose it self, in a
more boundless Expanse than the Ho∣rizon of the open Heavens could spread out, either from the Aetherial Achme of Teneriffe, or the snowy Mountains of Melambaia. The Speculator continues Speechless, entranced and incredulous, 'till what time exerting his inspective Faculties with more resolute and violent Attention, his Doubts all vanish by the perfect Discernment of undoubted Rea∣lities; lofty Mountains, naked Rocks, fierce Savages, bloody Armies, tow'ring Cities, rapid Streams, flowery Dales, beauteous Nymphs, loving Swains, be∣sides Feastings, Fightings, Caballings, treacherous Practices, and barbarous Assassinations. Nor does the faithful and knowing Keeper forget to expound the Nature of these surprizing Objects, or to set forth their famous Histories, by declaring the most secret Thoughts, Plots, Projects, wise Counsels and wicked Ma∣chinations of every General, King or Emperour, that shows himself in any Transaction of Affairs; all which this great and experienc'd Minister, by his wonderful Sagacity, either Natural or
Acquired, does as perfectly lay open as if he were versed in Astrology, or could see into the inmost Recesses of their very Hearts. Mean while his Hand so delicate and skilful, is observ'd to have strange In∣fluence on a certain Machin of slendid Steel, attrie by Use (what will not Use atteare!) and of versatile Form reflex. Which actuated by over-ruling Impulse, flies round describing Circles swift, un∣number'd and delusive of the Eye; and works rare Melody Delectable and Jo∣cund, by Sympathetick Power, On golden Wires enchanted, dancing Keys, Or tuneful Spheres unseen, that answer sweet In various Tone, solacing human Ears, Arrect, nor Impotent to sooth the Mind, All lost in turbid Wonder at such Sight, Of Visions strange and new; or to demulce Beholder's Bowels, when at trait'rous Deed Descry'd, or tragick Spectacle, he weeps In tender Sort, and sore aggriev'd, makes Moan Piteous to hear; or when indignant Ie Rises with boisterous Fury to revenge Foul Villany, and rip the Traitor's Heart. Sic primo medium, medio sic discrepet imum, Ut fiat sermo modo tristis, saepe jocosus.
The several Particulars of the foregoing Section apply'd. The Raree-show prov'd to be an Emblem of the Ideal World. How the Governour of it may represent Father Malebranche. How they both agree in their method of Instruction and Philosophising. That the Ideal Spheres Aequipol to the Raree Musick. JUDGE now, by your own Experi∣ence of this surprising Spectacle▪ how I was Wonder-struck to behold a new Universe beautiful and immense, opening it self so suddenly to my View; and within a Scull of no larger Propor∣tions, than might have fitted a good reasonable Giant. Imagine how my Guide's paternal Care explain'd the Scenes Ideal, and my curious Eye directed, to survey ori∣ginal Forms naked of Being, and un∣essential Essences, Specifick or Gene∣rical, that lye for ever buried dark and deep, in the unfathom'd Womb of bot∣tomless and inexhausted Nothing.
Nor did the intelligible Orbs surcease their Raree Harmony, but blest my Ear with Song unutterrable, (not carnal Ear, but that which inly hears the gentle Whispers and still Voice of Truth, in Philosophick Slumbers) nor does its Loudness drown the Harmony in Si∣lence, as of old of Chrystal Spheres by learned Sage was sung. For Who is with the Faculty endued of innate Deafness, here has Priviledge undoubted to enjoy the rapturous Song. Even Deafness 'self has equal Power to hear Th' Ideal Musick of Ideal Spheres. Obscuris vera involvens. SECT. XXXII. A short Apostrophe to the Ideal World, wherein all the principal Matters are ex∣plain'd by the Bye. HAIL to the happy Mansion of se∣parated and quintessential Truth, the serene and bright-shining Region of
intelligible Light and Glory! Welcome thou, my dear Reader, that hast tra∣velled with me thus far, and art now safe arriv'd, and already much en∣lighten'd in thy Intellectuals. Thanks to the good Father for his Guidance, and Thanks to thee for thy good Com∣pany, without which all my Attempts had been Unsuccessful, my Travel void of Satisfaction. I know and can evidently read it in thy Countenance, how thy Heart is ravish'd, and beginning to bless the Hour that brought thee to my Ac∣quaintance. But with what Gesticu∣lation, what Elocution, shall we signify the Emotions of our Spirits, express our Joy, and proclaim our Raptures? Shall we fall into a Trance together, or shall we leap out of our Essences for very Gladness? See the very intelligible The∣orist is at hand in our Necessity, to teach the impetuous Motions of mirifick Ex∣ultation. Here the contemplative Eye is saluted with a fair and beautiful Pro∣spect of a bright and glorious World,See Theory of Ideal World, p. 1. p. 133. as with the Rays of a
rising Sun, shooting forth Beams of stream∣ing Glory, bringing Light enough with it of its own from its Eastern Treasures, to render its Beauty visible, and to charm them that behold it. And now we may say 'tis Day all abroad, a serene and refulgent Day, now our intellectual Sun is up, that shining Orb of Ideal Light, the great Luminary of Spirits, and bright Mirror of Intelligences. We carry forth our View into the Regions of Truth, and can descry the very Basis and Foun∣dation upon which it stands, Pillars upon which Wisdom has built her magnificent and stately Fabrick. They are the eternal Essences of things, which we view in our World of Ideas, or intelligible World, all shining with the Light and Glory of essential and substantial Truth. The only World that is eternal; that was in the Beginning, and yet never be∣gan, that was never made, and can never perish, neither subject to Time, nor Chance, nor Alteration, where are those Essences of things, that are neither generated nor cor∣rupted, which had their orderly System when the Earth was without Form and Void, and shone forth in full Light and Lustre, when Darkness was yet over the Face of the Deep,
and should still persevere what they are, tho this sensible All were reduc'd either to Chaos or Nothing, where there is Substance without Shadow, (that is, where we are all in the Dark) Act without Capacity (i. e. where a Man does more than he can) and Light without Darkness. And will not this convince Mr. Dodwel, that Light and Darkness are Persons of different Opinions, and the most oppo∣site Parties? Does not he see what An∣tipathy has been rais'd between them, purely by this unhappy Disagreement in their Principles? Let him try his own Skill, exert his whole Eloquence, and see if by any means he can perswade them to set their Horses together (as no less a Man than our English Varro, ex∣presses the thing.) And after all, if he should succeed thus far, yet it would be in∣effectual to his Purpose; for such is their untoward and sullen Obstinacy, that whenever they are brought to an Inter∣view, nothing comes on't but squabling and falling foul upon one another: the Darkness immediately sets a dazling the Light without Mercy, and the Light
on the other side, if it have not Strength to eclipse the Darkness, yet annoys it more spitefully another way, and forces it to shine, whether it will or no, in a most wonderful manner. An impartial Enquiry into the Etymology, Orthography, and various Acceptations, of the Particle Least or Lest, adorn'd with 5 or 6000 Quotations out of lost MSS. in Foreign, as well as English, Libraries. A Work very useful for all Criticks and Students in Casuistical Phi∣lology, inscrib'd to Dr.  by his humil. and  obeiss.  and most votat. and ossequiosiss. Ammirat. Gabriel IN this World, we are now visiting, there is not to be found any thing so mean and despicable as Things, but pure Essences only. Here Entity and Quiddity, The Ghosts of Defunct Bodies fly; And Truth in Person does appear, Like Words congeal'd in Northern Air.
Even Error in the Ideal World, is Truer than whatever is most True in the Sensible. Nor is it any Wonder, that Truth should be here in Person, when very Personality in Person, and the Per∣son also of Personality of the Personality of the Person of Personality is here to be seen in Person. All other things have only the Shadow of a Person, whereas this is the True, the only True, Sub∣stantial, Compleat Person; and a very Charming Person it is indeed. Here is likewise to be seen simple Visibility, the Optick Glass intelligible, the Actus Purus, or eternal Essence, by which all things are seen; and therefore 'tis easy to conclude, how plainly it must needs be seen it self. O thou Visible of Visibles! Thou Queen Regent of glorify'd Glory! Thou super∣lative and untransmountable Visibility! You Haecceiteity of Haecceity, Idea of Ideality, and Thou also, O great and celebrated Non-Entity of all high and mighty Not-Beings, disembogue your unsubstantial Vacuity; shed forth the genial Rays of your incommunicable Impotence upon the Glandula Pinealis,
of my Ideal Essence; enabling me to see all things that are, and all things also that may be, nay and even those things themselves, which never were nor can be, and have therefore by blind and bar∣barous Anti-Idealists been abus'd, just as if they were so many nothings, and had no manner of Intelligence. How the Countess of Z—X fell upon the Turkish Fleet a-horse-back. How she overtook the same at St. Omers, and put them to flight with a Cross-Bow. THE next Observation we shall ob∣lige you with, will in all likelihood be that which follows. 'Tis well known, how the sensible World is disfigur'd by innumerable Blemishes, and a mis∣shapen Brood of Monsters, that affront all the Laws of Nature, and disgust the judicious Observer. Now in the Ideal World, on the contrary, every Species keeps to its just Proportions, and never appears distorted, in any Instance, or otherwise than exactly as it should be.
There might you behold all shining, unsullied and compleat, the Essences of every Virtue and Grace, of Love and of Beauty; which, in the sequel of my Works, shall be drawn at full Length. Nay, the naked Essence of Deformity it self is so exquisitely Deform, that what is most Beautiful and most Charming, in the sensible World, can never compare with it for Handsomness. How Geometry and Physiognomy were im∣prov'd by the famous Mathematician Malmesbury. MY Reader being so celebrated a Well-wisher to the Mathematicks, (which is as much as to say, Student in Physick and Astrology) will doubtless re∣ceive a very particular Satisfaction from the News I am to tell him, concerning all manner of Figures and Diagrams. These abound in the Ideal World, and are esteem'd the most excellent in their several kinds, that can any where be met with. There are Circles, for in∣stance, many of them much resembling
Hoops, which also are reputed the Causa Exemplares, or primitive Patterns of all Hoops whatsoever. There are other Circles to be seen of Mr. Hobbes's Square sort, which 'tis possible a common Spectator might scarce know to be Circles. They are of great use in establishing a Common∣wealth, and demolishing immaterial Sub∣stances; but the Logicians disallow them as altogether unserviceable to a Dispu∣tant. For, these Circles, say they, will afford no Assistance towards drawing up an Argument into the Round Figure; which is universally acknowledged the most compleat of all Figures, and to be of soverain use in War, as well as in Philosophy. The Difference in the two Disciplines is only this, that Warriours never conject themselves into an orbi∣cular Body, but in Cases of Extremity; whereas Philosophers do not only recur to this expedient, when they act upon the Defensive, or when they are pressed by some Necessity of their Affairs; but frequently surprise the Enemy by it, and use it not unsuccessfully for a Feint, in making their Attacks. Nay, sometimes
(so habitual is this most excellent Practice become to them) they run into it with∣out thinking of it themselves, or so much as knowing what they are about. Witness a Thousand Demonstrations in the Works of C—s, M—che, N—s, S—t, H—s, S—ck, and a Thousand other worthy Authors, all either as round as Ideal Hoops, or at least, blest with as much Dissipability as Carmina Cumaeae foliis mandata Sybillae. O Theorists! Foliographers! Cosmar∣chitects! Enlightners and Distracters of Sense and Reason,  Cogit enim excedere propositi formam operis erum∣pens animo & pectore indignatio. Nil egistis, O  nil inquam egistis, nis Insanire juvat— —certâ ratione modoque. —Vos ego tandem Insanus inter verearne insanus haberi▪
All Objections and Evasions answered. Diffi∣culties solved. An Hypothesis proposed for assigning the Essential and Efficient Causes of the Perfection of the Ideal World, together with a perfect Idea of the said Causes, and the Causality of the said Idea. THE Ideal Hoops, or Circles, are not without their Cylinder, or Ideal Tub; but this Vessel is now become a very empty and dry Subject,According to the Dissrtator upon Aesop's Fables, and Monsieur de Meziarac's un∣seen Biography. ha∣ving lately been exhausted, as it were, in the Telling of a merry Tale. Yet still it can afford. Or Pun ambiguous, or Conundrum quaint. Touching this Chapter, my Reader will doubtless agree with me, that thus far it is wretched Stuff, or at least, that it is not extraordinary Fine; but 'tis such as frequently comes into Tully's Head, and Mine, and likewise Dr. B—ly's. O fortunam Natam me consule Roman. Aesop was too short a Man to make a
PROPER Ambassador. However,See Dissert. upon Aesop's Fables. We Three are not without something to say for our selves, for Wit, like Terse Claret, when't begins to pall, Neglected lies, and's of no Use at all: But in its full Perfection of Decay Turns Vinegar, and comes again in Play. Your Belief of this great Exactness in the Ideal Figures will be mightily eased, when I shall have informed you, that the Ideal Compasses, &c. by which they are described, are no less exact than the Figures. For Quod habet potest dare, and the Perfection of Diagrams must follow the Perfection of Instruments. Now 'tis certain, that material Tools are but so many clumsy and lame Busi∣nesses, if compared to the admirable Contrivance of the Intelligible; and yet even these material Goods, how mean soever, were not of human Invention, but only copied from those exquisite O∣riginals in the Ideal World. There, and there only, are reposited the Patterns of all things that are, or can be devised; and 'tis certain, that even the famous
Standards at Winchester were, one time or other, all borrow'd from thence. The same we must acknowledge of all other Utensils, and all Contrivances what∣ever; which may serve to take down the Vanity of our conceited Discoverers. For, Whoever first thought of Eating or Drinking, Living or Dying; or pre∣tended to invent Shining, Sneering, Half-crowning; Acrosticks, Eclipses, Lord-Mayors, Bread'n'butter, &c. he did no more than look into the Ideal World, and make Transcripts of what he saw there. A Panegyrick against Basilisks, by a Person that pretends to be in Love with Flavelia, which I believe is all a Sham. STrange Serpents that in Lybian Desarts lie, Unarm'd can wound, and murder with their Eye; But then we find the Gasping Sacrifice, When once it falls, is never known to rise. But you, Flavelia, can do more than these; Your Eyes can kill and quicken when they please. Hence I by fatal Turns, Unhappy Swain, Die but to live, and live to die again. N. B. This seems to be the Person above-mention'd, that Invented Living and Dying.
The Kalendar. 1. NAY never talk, 'tis a whole Year Since first I saw, and was undone; The Time I have exactly here, And to a Moment written down: Don't be prophane and laugh; this Diary Is Love's whole Body of Divinity. 2. Other Historians as they please, May light Occurrences omit; But said, or done, whate're it is, We take the Book and enter it. The pettiest Circumstance of When and Why Is of vast Weight in Love's Chronology. 3. To see me register that Smile, You'l call me heinous Fool, I know; But laugh, and banter as you will, 'Tis down, and in Great Letters too: Should Frowns and Smiles be cancell'd hence, no doubt My Kalendar would half be blotted out. 4. That others may, I don't deny, Quite different Schemes for Seasons raise; But 'tis by These alone that I Know all my Fasts and Holydays: Ah! could I there record one Kiss from Thee, That Kiss alone begins my Jubilee.
How old Authors ought to be transfus'd into modern Languages, in such manner that the Spirit of them may evaporate. How the Caput Mortuum must be hermetically rimed up. The way of making Lucretius∣Water, and Sirrup-o'-Virgil; of which the Reader shall have a Taste, when he he gets towards the end. How to tinge them both with a false Colour. MY tenth Volume shall be imbellished with an account of these Essences, among others, viz. the Essence of a Chaffing-Dish, of a Bell-founder, of a Clock-maker, of Stewed-Prunes, of the Number 16, of Pain, of Mustard, and of Apples, which in the new World are generally Golden; besides which will be inserted the Effigies Amoris, the Idea Mo∣ralis Philosophiae, 7258918 different Ideas of Wisdom, 12345678987654321 of Unity, and 392351782 41862749283163859 of Cushediship and Wee∣weesiness.See Bp. S—t's Letter to Mr. Lock.
Tractatus de Suppositalitate suppositi sup∣ponentis, seu de Alleg oriarum Mallea∣lium Individuatione. THE Idea of Harmony is infinitely more charming than the most ex∣quisite Compositions of Purcel, Baptist, Carissime. This Discovery does happily supply us with Answers to several acute and judicious Quaeries. What are become of the Charms of Musick (says the great Author that chose himself to represent the Ignorance of the modern People) Charms by which Men and Beasts, Fishes, Fowls and Serpents, were so frequently e∣chanted, and their very Natures chang'd; by which the Passions of Men were rais'd the greatest Height and Violence, and then as suddenly appeas'd, so as they might justly said to be turn'd into Lyons or Lams, into Wolves or into Harts, by the Power and Charms of this admirable Art? There now remains no difficulty of solving th important Doubt. What are become of these Charms of Musick? 'Tis evident they are all in the Ideal World, where they ever were, and ever will be; and
safe enough from being lost by Inunda∣tions, either of merciless Waters, or bar∣brous Enemies; for either of these, it seems, hath at certain Periods, over∣power'd the Charms of this admirable Art. The Life of Merlin and Mother Shipton, extracted from the Miscellanea. WE have found something also that may be reply'd to the following Demand—What have we remaining of Magick, by which the Indians, the Chal∣daeans, the Aegyptians, were so renown'd, and by which Effects so wonderful, and, to common Men, so astonishing were produc'd, as made them have Recourse to Spirits, or Su∣pernatural Powers, for some Account of these strange Operations? Though it must be granted, that the fore-mention'd Science is no where at that Perfection as in the Ideal, or Supernatural World, yet are there some visible Foot-steps, and Rudi∣ments of it, that seem to be known, in the Natural. Witness that Sympathetick Pow∣der, which being infus'd by Military
People into long pieces of Brass, will kill a Man, by Conjuration, without coming near him, or letting him know any thing of the matter. Tho' this Instance might be sufficient to our present purpose, a few more shall be added, and by that means we shall put the Case beyond all Dispute. 'Tis certain there is still extant in the Natural World, that famous Raree-show, so deservedly celebrated as an Ectype of the Intelligible; not to mention the En∣chanted Labyrinth we travers'd in our way thither. Besides, who has not seen the strange Operations perform'd by the admirable Art of German Magicians? Who has not had his Purse enchanted out of his Pocket, or been himself enchanted out of his Senses? Who knows not, that a Jargon of sound∣ing Periods, tho' perfectly insignificant, shall carry a Cause against the most powerful unregenerated Arguments,See F. Malebranche's Treatise concerning Sir K. Digby's Grand Eli∣xir, or regenerated Me∣dicine. and con∣vey Delusions by the Enchantment of mee Sophistry?
Who knows not, that our modern Gypsies, either Stroulers or Domesticks, or by what other Title soever dignify'd and distinguish'd, have Power to Bewitch such Persons as take a Fancy to them, or bestow upon them any kind of Bene∣volence? And don't we every Day see a thou∣sand strange Operations from the Power of Obstinacy and Conceit; which Be∣witch Men, and Turn them to perfect Asses, in a most astonishing and unaccount∣able manner? Thus much we may modestly affirm in Vindication of our modern and natural Magick, that A—, and B—, and C—, and D—l are most certainly bewitched; the last especially in a very eminent degree, tho' by some erroneously taken for a Conjurer himself. Carmina vel sanos possunt avertere sensus. Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis —in vultus ac terga ferarum. Did it not seem an Affront to the Me∣mory of so great an Author as Sir W—
T—, I should be tempted to suspect, either that he had not duly perused, or did not well remember the learned History of the Renowned Dr. Faustus, or of our famous Fryar Bacon, toge∣ther with the merry Waggeries of his Man Miles, and the Exploits of Vander∣master the German, and Fryar Bungy the English Conjurer: how they studied the Art-Magick, in making a Brazen-Head, and a Brazen-Wall, to have Walled all England with Vinegar; which were Effects as astonishing to common Men, as most of those renown'd Operations per∣form'd by the Ancient Indians and Chal∣daeans. You are desired to take particular notice, that there is not the least witty Passage in this Section, nor so much as two Words cleverly put together; at least, I am not conscious that any thing of that kind has here escaped me; but since Accidents may happen, 'tis but a reasonable Request, that, if you should here and there have met with a Period, or a Phrase, a little brighter than its Fellows, you would be pleased to believe
the Author entirely innocent thereof; and that 'tis purely a Mistake of the Printers, or some Blunder occasion'd by Inadvertency. Apollo's Impeachment of Ulysses for Rob∣bing his Cow-roost. Abridg'd by way of Paraphrase, in Seven Canto's. Canto III. THey've hackt and mangl'd 'em so Bar∣barous, 'Twould grieve Keil's Heart or Dr. Scarborow's. Here Rumps and Sirloyns, there a Man see Kidnies, and Maws, and Purtenances. Brains, Guts and Gore (so mash'd and clotted That one would think 'em all besotted) With Hearts (O quam mutata now!) That in their Life-time were so True. Poor Beasts! they're chang'd in Shape so, and in Their Faculty of Understanding, That if I met them in a Dish, We scarce should know each others Phiz. But (that which makes me fret most basely) Here does the Devil of the Case ly; The Limbs, and Pieces which remain Are maumauk'd so, that though I fain Would stitch and patch 'em up again,
They'll ne'er be put together more, So clever as they were before. These Jaws and Hoofs don't suit so well as They ought to do, if they'd be Fellows. That Tongue and Udder ne'er will hit it, And these same Horns can scarce be fitted. Here's a Tail's End wants t'other Piece; And there be Ribs won't Coalesce. That Thing without a Rump, or Skull, Makes but an Oddish kind of Mull. O my Dear Cows and Heifers Dearest! Whom I so oft and sweetly Caress'd, Am I Awake, or in a Vision? See the Beginning of Mr. Dryden's State of Innocence. Is this a Case, this a Condition, For you to meet my loving Eyes in, And kill me with the Sight, like Poison? Is't thus you welcome in your Phoebus; That us'd to leap, and fawn, and me buss? I mean-while Inscious and Ignarous Of what had happen'd in my Ware-house, Was just contriving a new Ballad, To make you Merry at your Sallad, But now my Heart will break in Pieces, At the sad Spectacle my Eye sees. In vain I kept you safe from Lions, And Wolves, that often Patience try ones. For what has all my Caution booted, That saved you to be thus Cut-throated, By a vile Strouler, as infamous. As ever any Varler's Name was?
'Tis true I had as fair a Warning, As any Cuckold of his Horning. For might not his old Tricks have taught us; Or is Ulysses now sic notus? This Rogue the Son of Old Laertes, And what de'e call his Wife?—A Fart he is! Or 'tis as sure as we do breath here, The Son will ne'er be like his Father. How should such Vagabonds and Errants E'er prove a Comfort to their Parents? Laerts is a true Old Lad; A special Work-man at his Trade; That goes about his Work a Mondays, And never Rambles as his Son does; But lives in good Repute, and, furder, Kept all his House at Home in Order. But now Ulysses and his Rivals, Pull back him, he'd be sure to thrive else. He keeps a Mug of stout October; This Curr, I fancy, will keep no Beer, And yet 'tis hard to catch him Sober. Th' old Gentleman will take his Pot, 'Tis true enough; but what of that? Pray can you tell me who will not? He can be Wise and Merry both; You shall ne'er hear him swear an Oath, Nor a worse Word than Faith and Troth. For when h'has had a Cup o'th' Creature, You'd say he is nothing but good Nature; He takes his Pipe and talks so Loving In his old Corner next the Oven.
The Method of making a Chasm, or Hia∣tus, judiciously; the great Reach of Thought required for the Contrivance thereof, together with the Difference be∣tween the French Academies and the English. SUpposing my Reader to be grown weary of the Words Sensible and In∣telligible, I will so far comply with his Humour, as to change them for the Terms Old and New; being also the more inclinable to get them dismiss'd, because, though they have hitherto done me faithful and laudable Service, yet they seem now to Reflect upon me, and sel∣dom agree to my Proceedings: Upon which account I make no doubt but His tu prima malis oneras, at{que} objicis hosti:
meminisse pigebit Elisae.The Author very well understands that a good sizable Hiatus discovers a very great Genius, there being no Wit in the World more Ideal, and conse∣quently more refined, than what is display'd in those elaborate Pages, that have ne're a Syllable written on them. Yet this Vacuity, now under your Conside∣ration, was not designed, or compiled, upon that Inducement, but full sore against the Author's Will, who has been forced to suppress a Multitude of his choicest things, in Com∣pliance with Mr. Stationer; a Person of so scrupulous Intellectuals, as to refuse to print Things which, he said, he could not under∣stand.
These, O Europe, are wonderful Specu∣lations, nice, dark and abstruse, but im∣portant; the Philosophy lies deep abscon∣ded, but may easily be drawn out, and laid open in the following Scheme. You are to keep in mind that Sensible and Intelligible, Old and New, are the Matter we have to work upon; and the very Words point out to us the Way we must proceed, namely Partakingly of both Algebra and Geometry; by the Equation of Cubick Sections and Conick Roots;See Hobbes's Treatise at the End of his Letter to Bp. Bramhall. for the most part Graphically, but always Parallelipipe∣donically, when the thing can be con∣veniently so done. Explanation of Fig. 1. N new. O old. w word. W world. I intelli∣gible. S sensible. D december. T totum. P pronouns.
From which substracting the fourth Operation by Cylinders, it will stand thus, aa — ax — dad — bc — 5xb — og — y21/20 — 11/1 — 3/47183165291 — 9 — 6Quod erat demonstrandum. All this the Ancients used to perform by nine Cyphers, though something more obscurely indeed; so that I must beg of the Learned Reader, that he would be∣stow upon it the greater Application of Thought, in order to comprehend their way of proving it, as exhibited in this Scheme; The Cyphers were carefully rang'd in the Order you see, as we may learn from the Description, or rather Directions, that Virgil has left us in the Second of his Georgicks.
—Omnis in unguem Dispositis signis, secto via limite quadret. Vt saepe ingenti bello, cum long a cohortes Explicuit legio, & campo stetit agmen aperto, Directaeque acies, ac late fluctuat omnis Aere renidenti tellus, necdum horrida miscent Proelia, sed dubius mediis Mars errat in armis. Omnia sunt paribus numeris dimensa vi∣arum: Non animum modo uti pascat prospectus inanem; Sed quia non aliter sptium dabit omnibus quum Charta, neque in vacuum poterunt se exten∣dere rami. Thus translated by Uncle Ogilby, Danc∣ing Master to Mr. Wicherly's Muse. —in every Tract The Cyphers range in Distances exact, As when a mighty Battel's to be fought; Up to the Front the order'd Files are brought, Troops hide the Fields, and ready for Alarms, All the vast Champaign shines with glittering Arms; Before in horrid Fight the Battle joins, And doubtful Mars to neither part inclines: Even so thy Circles Thou, like Nine-Pins, place, That Lines may have both Elbow-room and Space
Now the Spirit of Quotation is upon me, there is no Possibility of Suppressing Lucan's Noble Thoughts upon the same Subject.See Lib. V. Verse 237. Interea domitis Caesar remeabat Iberis, Victrices aquilas alium laturus in Orbem. Sphaer a autem justocontent a sit Aequore Campi, Impune ut tenuis circùm se Linea flectat, Lasciva, & spiris intact a immanibus errans. Maeander qualis Labyrintho ludit aquarum, Et vastos liquidis montes complectitur ulnis. Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed vict a Catoni. Quem super-imposito moles geminat a Colosso. The translating of these Heroick Lines I most humbly recommend to the Inge∣nious Dr▪ Br—n, or the most Ingenious Sir R—d Bl—, hoping that they will at their Leisure, make proper Reflections upon this other Semi-Distick, Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua Camina, Maevi. For this, I can assure them 'tis to be found in a great Passable Writer of Ver∣ses,
if they please only to consult Dol∣phin-Indexes with due Care. Matters being thus prepar'd, and all things tending violently towards an En∣gagement, the two Parties, Opponent and Respondent, stood in Posture, with Pencils and Compasses drawn, the one to mark Whence and Whether a Line of Communication should be describ'd, the other wholly bent to execute the said Orders, not without the utmost Con∣tention of his Abilities; Trembling with high Ambition, and impatient Love of Applause. Whoever had the best hand at bring∣ing round his Lines a Quovis Cypher ad Quodvis Cypher, not allowing them to touch, or intersect each other, was in those learned Ages, accounted the wisest Philosopher; and great were the Honours decreed him, of which I shall but name one. This victorious Person was wheel'd round a publick School with much Pomp, in a kind of Vehicle contriv'd for that Purpose, and not unlike to a modern Barrow. During the Procession he kept his Face fronting directly towards the
Spectators; which being all over planted thick with Plumage of Subfuse Appear∣ance, not without the Ornament of a proportionable Beak affixt in its proper Place, did much resemble the graceful Countenance of an Athenian, or Palla∣dian Bird, so call'd from being Favourite to Minerva. The Eyes only were suffer'd to show themselves, and these appear'd very Glaring and Illustrious, by the Ad∣vantage of two Magnifying-Glasses, which were Concave, like the Chrystal of a modern Watch, of Blazing Dark-Lanthorn. Many other Ceremonies and Triumphal Decorations being laid out upon the Sucessful, lest too great an In∣flation of Mind should ensue, there was appointed an Officer to follow at a cer-Distance, supplying him with frequent Sprinklings of Dust and Cinders, and at the same time loudly calling upon him, Not to forget that he was still but a Mortal. This Custom was afterwards reviv'd by the Romans, upon wise Considerations, and us'd for many Ages on warlike Oc∣casions, among that noble People.
Aristotle is said to have rode Trium∣phant in the foresaid manner, some five and thirty Times, and gain'd himself thereby so great a Reputation, for a shrewd Person at this way of disputing by Cyphers, that Alexander the Great chose him for his own Master. It must be ac∣knowledg'd, that the Exercise we are speaking of, seems to have been in Vogue chiefly among the Stoicks, 'till it was taken up by Plato, some Years be∣fore, for the Practice of his own Scholars; which is thought to be the only Reason why Diogenes so fiercely inveigh'd against it, as an Artifice design'd purely to serve the ends of Popularity and Vain-Glory. I think it has never been deny'd, that this very Thing occasion'd the famous Quarrel between Pythagoras and Archi∣medes, concerning the Invention thereof; as likewise their late unhappy Duel at Roterdam, in which Archimedes de∣bauch'd Semiramis, the Wife of Don-Confuchu, and Pythagoras was so success∣ful, as to confute King Pepin Le Grand, by distinguishing directly through his Lungs.
Of the Building of Babel. THE very Bottom of Designs being thus discover'd, and even laid be∣fore your Eyes in the foregoing Schemes, you will doubtless acknowledge, that I have therein show'd a high Degree of Wisdom, as well as a great Insight into Philosophy, both Natural and Civil; though 'tis possible that you might other∣wise have wonder'd what these Proceed∣ings were driving at. To manifest my Desire of dealing openly and fairly with my Reader, I judg'd it convenient to give this publick Notice of my Terms being alter'd, that all things being duly perform'd on my side, if any Mis-understanding should happen, the Fault mayly entirely at his Door. I therefore farther advertise him, that by the Old World shall be un∣derstood the Sensible; from which he may readily collect, that the Intelligible is to be meant by the new. For, altho' the Sensible World be in very Deed the Recenter of the two, in regard to Age;
having been created but of late Days, whereas the Intelligible has been a World from the first Moment that Eternity it self saw the Light; yet the Discovery of the Intelligible is of later Standing than the Creation of the Sensible. The Discovery of the former is owing to a Lucky Accident in the Building of Babel, upon which I am not now at Leisure to dilate. This Accident gave the Hint; but had it not been favour'd and coad∣juted by the Conjunction of certain Cir∣cumstances and Planets, together with a benign Irradiation from the Moon, we had been buried in Darkness to this day, and the Curtain would still have con∣tinued Drawn between human Minds, and that bright Region of Intellectual Light, tho' seated and residing even within them; such having been the Will and Pleasure of Fate, that not∣withstanding the New, or Ideal World consists in nothing else but every Man's Knowledge, yet sublunary Things should be so nicely order'd, that for many Ages together no Man should know it.
A Disappointment that gave me much Vn∣easiness and Astonishment. A very good Iest. The Nature of a Praedicable. AMong all the Particulars I discover'd, there was one which dissatisfy'd, as well as surpris'd me, to such a degree, that I blest my self not a little for my happy Caution in keeping out of this Ideal Enclosure. Not one of my own Species could I set Eyes on, (I mean the Eyes of my Understanding) nor dis∣cover the least Idea of a human Creature in any Corner of the Ideal World. This I remonstrated to my Guide, and plainly told him my Suspicion, that there was no being made Free of the Ideal World, without being first divested of the Ra∣tional Nature, and assuming some other Specifick Essence. A very good Jest, said he, I thought I should catch you shewing your Ignorance; and now do I know, as well as can be, that you imagine the true Idea of a Man must be like such Men, as you are us'd to see and converse with—This 'tis to be
under the Prejudice of Sense! But take it from me, that Men are not changed in the Ideal World, but 'tis the Idea that suffers an Alteration, when it be∣comes a Man. Look about you now and see, tho' there be no Men in the Ideal World, whether you can't dis∣cover the Idea of a Centaur. Plain enough reply'd I; there are several be∣tween that same Chimaera yonder, and the Dimunitive Hircocervus. Very well,See the Musae Anglicanae and Smiglefius. said my Guide; now a Centaur (de'e mark) is the compleat and original Idea; for, Centaur, or Animal, being the Genus, its two Species, Rational and Irra∣tional, are only broken Ideas of a Centaur dismember'd, or distributed into the Parts of its self. This Division the Aristotelians, if they shall see fit, may pretend to have happen'd in the Life∣time of their Master; but the Thing is undoubtedly of a much ancienter Date, as having been a necessary Effect of that great and ge∣neral Dissolution at the Noe∣tical Deluge.See the Sacred Theory of the Earth.
A Corollary. 'TIS absurd therefore, and ridicu∣lous, to talk of the eternal and unchangeable Idea of a Man, or of a Horse; Since, taken apart, they are no better than Monsters in Nature. For the Truth of this, as far as concerns the former Species, I may appeal to Observation of Particulars; such as Tarquin, Nero, Domitian, our Richard the Third, the West-India Spaniards, East-India D—, Regicide English, and the Iesuitico-Fanatical Saints, where∣ever dispers'd; not to instance in Cain, Iudas, Sir Satanides Goatham, and a Mul∣titude of other great Worthies, very nobly qualify'd to adorn a Black-List. Advertisement very necessary to be here inserted. YOU are to know, that this Sir Sata∣nides Goatham, is a certain Man in Office, who by several great Attempts
has made himself very considerable, and purchased an invaluable Reputation, Honour and Esteem, among all the No∣bility and Gentry that live within the Sound of his Name. The Particulars are, a harmless Rape upon a Young Lady of extraordinary Virtue, as well as Wit and Beauty; a civil Design to murther one of her Relations; together with sincere Endeavours to ruine and defame her whole Family: in all which laudable Undertakings, by the Spite of envious Fortune, he has come off with Disappointment and Infamy, though not Shame. A second Corollary in Honour of the Trojan-Horse, or Great Leviathan. IF we remember how that great Doctor Freneticus, Thomas of Malmesbury, has irrefragably demonstrated the State of Nature to be a perfect State of War; and if we add to that Conclusion what has now been discover'd concerning original Centaurs; these Doctrines, so laid together, will amount to a full proof,
that in our degenerate Times, nothing can approach so near the true State, whether Natural or Ideal, as Fighting a-Horse-back. From this Consideration is chiefly de∣rived the great Dignity of a Trooper, and more particularly of such as rode in the Oliverian State of War. A further Account of Centaurs; A Mistake concerning them rectified. The Ancient Poets censured. That Pegasus was nei∣ther Proteus, nor Ben Johnson. That— is neither St. Peter, nor St. Paul. I could not but observe, to my great Amazement and Indignation, how basely Learned Men have all along been mis-led in their Notion of a Centaur; and that by taking up with such lame De∣scriptions as the Poets have deliver'd, in their Metaphysical Histories. These Gen∣tlemen have, most certainly, either had very poor Information themselves, or been very unfair in suppressing Part of the Truth. For though in their Chro∣nicles concerning Ixion and his Ideal
Iuno, they have given us a fair Account of a Centaur's Generation, yet there is another Point wherein the whole Na∣tion of Poets have greatly deviated from the Truth, and brought an ugly Suspi∣cion upon their own Veracity. For, with what Reason, or Countenance can it be pretended, that the entire Genus of Centaurs is comprised within the two Species of Risible and Hinnible, or Man and Horse? Doubtless they were induced to this Partiality, either thereby to do an Honour to their own Pegasus, or to make their court to some Knight-Errant, or other puissant Person that delighted in Chivalry. For, had they reported the Truth, we should have been informed, that the Generality of Centaurs are of other Compositions, our Ideal Humanity being coupled with more irrational Kinds than Proteus could put on seeming Transformations, or than Human In∣dividuals were really transformed into, when Metamorphoses were in Fashion. This I can fairly attest, that in my most accurate Survey of the Ideal World, I could not descry more Men-Horses, than
Men-Bulls, Men-Camels, Men-Ele∣phants, Men-Sharks, Men-Cuckows, Men-Foxes, or Men-Asses, which make as good Centaurs as the best. An Essay towards the Theory of Human Nature. 'TIS from these primitive Copula∣tions that mortal Men inherit the great Disparity in their Tempers and Constitutions; every one retaining a Tincture of that Nature to which his Human Essence is Individually, or In∣telligibly united. This gives an amorous Disposition to one, and a revengeful to another;See what Aristo∣phanes saith in Plato's Sympos. makes one a Friend, and another a Traytor. This makes Sir Midas C— love himself alone, and yet use himself as if he hated no Body else so much; and the same— inclines W—h, T—t, and G—er, to enjoy their own Wealth, but find the greatest Pleasure in that part of it which they communicate.
Hence it is that some prefer their Countries Interest to their own, and others betray the Common-wealth ra∣ther than be a little eclips'd in their Do∣mestick Greatness. Hanno, the Cartha∣ginian, is said to have acted in this manner; I cannot certainly tell, whe∣ther there are any other Instances that could be given. See Dispensary. Milo derives Athletick Vigour hence; Hence—his Atheism and his Impudence. Hence Lewd Sempronia has her wanton Fire, And—raves with Impotent Desire; Hence—so muddy, S—p so Clear, Rich Vulpo Slie, Poor Stuttereero Queer. How to deduce Ideal Genealogies by the Qualities observable in particular Per∣sons. SIR Satanides Goatham, the foremen∣tion'd Animal, boasts his Ideal Pedi∣gree from the Satyrs, or Man-Goats; a celebrated Branch of the Centaurean Race. There is in this Family an He∣reditary Distemper, something allied to the Syphilis, and the Furor Priapeius,
which ferments in their Veins with few Intermissions. It once threw Sir Satanides into a raging Fit, that most deplorably distress'd for some Relief, and even wild with Impatience, he demanded an Exchange of Blood with a Nymph de∣scended from the Phoenix; but that be∣ing attainable, neither by Love nor Money, nor the Charms of his Elo∣quence, nor the Might of his Puissant Arm, in a most outragious Fury, to ease his Spleen of the Satyr, he transfused into his Jugular an incredible Quantity of Hounds-Blood; so that now remain∣ing Man-Goat as to his Concupiscible, and Man-Hound as to his Irascible, his very Name is become frightful to Male and Female; neither of which can endure to meet him in the dark, being a dange∣rous Person in Quality, either of an Enemy or a Lover; in the latter Capa∣city especially; for, the meanest Opera∣trix would be loth to transfuse with him since the unhappy Accident of Dr. Har∣borough's Death; that convenient Gra∣duate Physician, so Famous in the Daily Courant.
The Doctrine of intelligible Centaurs further prosecuted. WHezius and Querpillo, the two Bre∣thren Ramnusides, bear the Arms of so many Families, that a good He∣rald might be at a loss where to begin their Pedigree. Consider'd in their talkative Capa∣city, they discover the Jay, Magpie, or Parrot; In their Port they bear great Resemblance to a Peacock, though their Pertidapperipragmaticofinicality betrays the perfect—. Take them in their Poetical Dress, and Mr. P— will vow and swear that they are descended from the Aesopea Daw; and the very P—that calls them both Virgil and Maecenas to their Faces, does really think them two Cuckoos or Ninnyhammers; or instead of being Transmigrated from the Mantuan Swan, to belong to the other Species, which once indeed preserved the Capitol by the obstreperous Sweetness of their Singing, —argutos inter strepit anser olores.
Some imagine they came from the Italian Wagtail, but Mr. B—ls pre∣tended he knew them to be Canary Birds. Notwithstanding this I have known others mistake them for City Mice, and plead several Arguments in Defence of that Error. The Principal of these are drawn from their Faculty of skulking, and creeping into fat Places; as likewise from the great Disorder of Mind, which has been visible in them at the very mention of the Fox and Weasel;See Aesop's Fables. and from the ex∣cellent Courage they lately discovered in their single Combat with Sir Ioseph Fl—ton. N. B. This Chapter was written about the time of that Transaction. See Ld. Cl—n's Hist. Vol. 3. R— and S— will have them to be more probably Bat-Mice, having ob∣served their Trick of shunning the Light, and that remarkable Weakness that renders them so subject to be dazled; especially by the Rays of a Louis'dor, or any splendid Body of that Nature.
Time was that Dr. D—r adjudged them to the Wolf-Men, and that with great Appearance of Reason: For who, but ravenous Animals that came From th' Ideal Wolf of Wolfingam, could ever have proved so Redoubtable— in the Hesperian Fleecing. Office?See Ovid. Met. 7. Were we at leisure to enumerate all Surmises and Allegations, there would be thrice as many Savages found to claim Kindred with Whezius and Querpillo, as Cities contended for Homer, or Re∣ligions for Mr. Bays.This last Paragraph was written of late Days. See the Rehearsal, and T. Brown's Dialogues. But in this there is a Disparity, that those Animals are all certainly a-kin to these Ramnusides in some or other Degree; whereas Homer might possibly be born in the Country, and Mr. Bays might possibly be of the same Lay-Religion with Smith, or Iohn∣on, or Ramnusides themselves.
Concerning my Pedigree, and the present War. I know not whether I may expect Thanks for my Discovery of a new World;See Dr. Bent∣ly's Dissertat. for I am resolved to stand it out, that 'tis entirely my own Discovery, tho' the thing was long since discovered by my Predecessors. Therefore We the Author of this Theory, in our own Name and Person, pronounce , and challenge Mankind to appear, and do us Homage for the new Province put into their Hands. We may fairly presume, that a New-found World, so much more Per∣fect, Fertile and Delightful than the Old, should reflect no little Glory upon our Age, and upon our selves the Dis∣coverer. Let me add that we, who boast the Happiness of our Birth from this Noble Island, and our Descent from the Ancient Britons, are able so clearly to make out our Country's Title, that there is great Probability no other Nation will set up any Pretensions
against our Propriety and peaceable En∣joyment; for the King of France him∣self discovers no Inclination to quarrel with us about any part of the Ideal World. Concerning my impartial Distri∣bution of the Preferments in my Gift. THERE are, 'tis true, several Honourary Dignities now vacant, and several large Countries, that have neither Names nor Governours yet as∣sign'd them. Finding these unoccupied, I have an indisputable Right to confer them on whom I please, producing for Precedents those late Discoverers that disposed of all the finest Dominions in the Moon by an Arbitrary Nomination. There is a Province peculiarly re∣markable for a People of great Loyalty, for Godfathers, to which I have provided two noble Brothers, the Joy and Glory of Ancient Rome, who have freely be∣stow'd upon it the illustrious Name of
Gracchia. In this Laudable Canton, purely to gain my Reader's good Will, I do constitute and appoint for Lord Lieutenant—any one he shall please to recommend. Many a good Title have I granted away, either upon the Application of a Purse dexterously transferr'd, or in Re∣compence for Passive Obedience at Bag∣gamon. Many a one have I parted with freely (for the sake of Old Acquaintance or the Old Cause) to Persons of Prime Quality, and not a few also to my In∣feriour Friends. The—, in Conside∣ration of the Great Services he did to Me and my Family, during our unhappy Rupture with the late Grand Seignior, I have elected King of Bubleria and New Formosa; and when ever the Arch-Bishoprick— or—Dutchy of Puntillonia shall Fall, being a—Tatter'd— Superbe Im—s and August Oscitancy— I am very willing to entail it upon any Branch of the House of—or—or—or —or—
The other (especially the European) Monarchs shall have no reason to com∣plain of any unequal Favour, or the least Neglect of any one's Merit; for having observed, that in making their Court, they have carefully avoided all those Squablings and Sinister Practices that are usual among Competitors, I have determined that they shall all have their Shares in my Bounty, and be pro∣moted each to such Posts and Offices as he shall be found best qualified for. To make these Honours the more Honourable, and Illustrate the Noble List, I have faithfully enrolled my self, erect∣ing my Pillars on a certain Hesperian Pro∣montory, that is to rejoyce in the Deno∣mination of Gabriel Iohannes; and be∣cause some of my select Favourites, whom I admit to a great Degree of Fa∣miliarity, have got a Custom at merry Seasons, to Salute me by the Name of Timothy; that I might deal impartially between both my Appellations, which are equally dear to me, I have appointed one of the most coniderable Islands in
New Vtopia to go by the Name of TIMLAND. A CHAPTER In Imitation of—and Some∣Body else that shall be Name∣less. I am not a Person of the same Humour, and Principles, with your Ordinary Preface-Authors, to fill my Worthy Rea∣der with high Expectations of what he is invited to, and then put him off with a Flat and Beggarly Entertainment. 'Tis well known that I made Promise, some few Hours ago when we first met, to be at extraordinary Expence, for providing him a Treat in some Measure suitable to His great Quality. And now upon the nicest Review of all that has been set before him, I cannot but bless my Good Genius, that every thing has succeeded
so well, and pleased him in so extraor∣dinary a manner. 'Tis a mighty Satisfaction to reflect upon my Happy Performance; to find that the most sharp-sighted Philosopher can never de∣scry the least Flaw in my Theory;See Theory of the Earth. nor charge me with an illgrounded Position, Inconsequent Deducti∣on, or the least Glimpse of Obscurity: to assure my self that the most Captious and Cynical Critick can spy out no Failure in the Composition; the whole being compiled with so natural a Cohe∣rency of its Parts, and enriched with such Delicate Sentiments, Surprising Turns, Ravishing Antitheses; and these all adorned with the most lively Beauty of the Brightest Phrase, and the Quaintest Harmony of most Elaborate Cadence.
Of my notable Meekness in taking Advice. Of judicious Advisers. Dr. B—y's Head, my own Pillow, and some other Matters no less considerable. AS to the few Pages that are still be∣hind, you must excuse me if I suffer my Pen to run a little more at Random. Thus I shall greatly ease my self, by relaxing that Intention of thought which is a Posture too wearisom for Human Mind to be long held in. And this I take to be the properest Season for taking out my Freedom, and entring upon the said Enlargement; for which you shall have my Reason immediately. Be it known then, that after long con∣sulting my Sagacious Pillow, and my Learned Friend Dr. B—y, I have at last come to a Resolution, that the con∣cluding Word of this Paragraph shall be accounted the End of my Preface, so long as my Book and this Universal Frame of Things shall continue in Being; and I do hereby charge and command all dutiful Readers and other Loving Per∣sons,
wheresoever dispersed throughout the Face of the habitable Globe, that they so acknowledge and respect it ac∣cordingly. Now this being declared, 'tis certain I shall drop some of my chief Readers the next Moment; being Per∣sons that fall off, and prudently with∣draw, as soon as the Preface is over. There are a Number of Persons in Eu∣rope, who bearing an unaccountable Aversion to us learned Authors, esteem the Entertainment of our Compositions no less insipid than that of our Conver∣sations; or if ever they grow a little re∣conciled to either of them; yet still they will have it that We affect a ridiculous Singularity in Both. This, say they, puts us upon that preposterous Method of serving up our choicest Dainties in the first Course; which so palls the Ap∣petite for any thing less delicate, that few Guests have Patience to sit out the Bill of Fare, or accompany the Author till he orders Finis to take away. This is Rea∣son sufficient why I should not be so cu∣rious in Cooking that plain, but sub∣stantial Meat, which is still to come in▪
Wherefore in evidence of this, I do earnestly entreat all my worthy and well∣disposed Readers, to bear Witness for me that this Instant, the First of April, Old Style, 1701, but of my own Age 57, We Gabriel Iohn, aliàs Timothy, do issue out Directions to our trusty and well∣beloved Amanuensis Ezekiel Philodash, that in order to prevent all future Dis∣pute between our Book▪ and its re∣spective Preface, as likewise all erroneous Mistakes of the hasty and ill-advised Peruser; he, the said Ezekiel Philodash, lawfully begotten Son to Ananias Philo∣dash and Tabitha his Concubine, of the same Name and Vocation, do instantly and carefully fix up an Index, with a brief Inscription in Capitals, notifying that ☞HERE ENDETH THE PREFACE
SECT. XXXVIII. The Best Section in the Book, concerning Seven Hundred Pounds a Year. I Doubt not in the least but some Thousands of my Readers are e'en overjoy'd to see that the Preface has some End at last; having long since been quite jaded in their Spirits, and vainly flattering themselves at every Section▪ they were travelling through, that there would be no more to come. But if any one should have Strength of Heart to hold out; if any Individual Person of indefatigable Industry, innate Courage and undaunted Resolution, will still press on, being smitten with sweet Love of Truth, and filled with glowing Zeal to search, to comprehend, to digest; —Siquis tamen haet quoque, siquis Captus a more leget—
let him be assured that I can give him no manner of Encouragement; nor do I any more know what is immediately to follow this Sentence, than L—can tell what shall be his next Throw at the Groom-Porters, than P—can predict to what Point the Wind will change, or than S—can prognosticate what shall be his next No-Religion SECT. XXXIX. The next best Section treating of Six Hundred Pounds a year. HAving now thought of something to go on with, I require of my Rea∣der that he put himself in a Posture to believe it, whatever it shall prove; that he give up his whole Understand∣ing, Sense and Reason, entirely to my Disposal; for I am now enter'd upon an Ideal Pontificate, and already got into an extraordinary Humour of Infallibility▪
In Consequence▪ whereof▪ We Servus Servorum Animae Mundanae Platonicae, have resolved, determined and made a Decree, that 'tis safest Sailing in the Winter, provided always you don't trouble your self to find whereabouts Rocks and Quicksands lie, as long as they are covered over with Water; and therefore we do pronounce Ex Cathedrâ, that whoever offers to speak, or so much as believe otherwise, is Schismatick Heretick, Enemy to the Ideal Hierarchy, and ipso facto, becomes liable to Eccle∣siastical Censure, and all the Penalties thereunto annex'd. For if my Lady FORTUNE should come Leering and Simpering, and address her self to my— in the Person of—telling me forsooth how mightily she is in Love with me, and bringing I don't know how much —or Fourty Thousand Acres of Ploughed Ground in her Lilly-white Hand —cry Here Tim, or Here Gabriel, take what thou wilt have—a Thou∣sand Pound—nay thou art very wel∣come; take Two Pence more, or as much as you have a Mind to—Secre∣tary
of State—will you be King of—or have you a Fancy to be an Al∣derman? De'e think now that I will take a Farthing of all this? No, that were a good One indeed. Timothy knows better things, I thank ye; for you must not think to put Tricks upon Travellers. The Plot thickens. A Surprising Catastro∣phe. The whole unravel'd. My merry Moments. How the self-enamour'd Youth died Ideally. My Ware-house and Garret. Of Shadows, and their strange Agility in vanishing. —falsis datur exitus umbris. —portâ emittuntur eburnâ. —manus effugit imago, Par levibus ventis, voluerique simillima somno. Invalidasque mihi tendens, heu, non mea, palmas. TUrning, accidentally my internal Opticks towards my Ideal Garret in New Barbican, what should appear to me at the Window, but the Counterpart, or the beautiful Idea, of my self. It was
sitting as solitary as a Hermit, but in a violent Fit of Mirth, and undoubtedly under the Operation of some pleasant Conceit, which is a thing very familiar to me in my Retirements. And as 'tis sung of the former Narcissus, that his Idea in the Water, as cruel as he found it, never refused to smile, when it saw that he smiled in Return; I on the other side, Narcissus alter, could not chuse but rejoyce to see my Idea so joyful. But here indeed I fell into a fatal and de∣plorable Oversight—here was I seized with a rash Curiosity, which has proved the sad Occasion of so much Regret, and such grievous Lamentation, to me and to my poor Reader. Hic subito incautum Dementia cepit, —ibi omnis Effusus labor— for by endeavouring to stare hard upon my Idea, my Eyes burst open, and I saw my self at that Instant, relapsed into the Sensible World. Thrice did I call for Help to my Guide, and thrice I endea∣voured,
but in vain, to clasp hold of him. My Guide, the Ideal World, and my own beloved, and lovely, Idea were all ravished from me, and vanished on the sudden; and, behold! I was sitting in the Place Father Malebranche and my own Idea had appeared to me, even by my Garret-Window in Barbican; where the Good Reader shall be very welcome to Paper-Diet, and may be furnished at reasonable Rates with all sorts of Ballads, Madrigals, Anagrams, Acrosticks, and Heroick Poems, either by Whole-sale, or by Retail; the Excellency of which I give him leave to judge by the following Samples. ☞HERE BEGINNETH THE POSTSCRIPT.
A Vow to Cupid, OR The Fair Sacrifice. SONG. I. CVPID, how oft must I implore Thy cruel Deity in vain? Grant me one Boon; I'll ask no more— I mean, till I'm in Love again. II. Thy Chains I wear, yet ne'er repine; Ne'er pray to be releas'd: I'm Sylvia's; let the Nymph be mine; Let both be Slaves, both pleas'd. III. Grant this, Kind Love, and hear my Vow That Sylvia's self shall lye Thy Lovely Victim. O do thou Both give the Wound and Flames supply!
Virgil's Description of the Old Man's Garden at Tarentum, beginning Namque sub Oebaliae—Georg. 4. Dissolved into English according to Art. AMong th' Oebalian Fields, that owe their Pride These are admirable Lines, and seem to have no∣thing of the Author's Sense; upon which account, you know, 'tis so much the better Translation; as may be learnt from Dryden's Virgil, and the Works of some other Expedite Versifiers. To the kind Waterings of Galesus' 'Tide A poor Corician Villager had found See Boileau's Epigrams. One little Plat, and that Unhappy Ground. Pish! Nor Pan nor Ceres had a Harvest there, T'invite or recompence the Tillers Care; No Cluster smiled, no Vintage crown'd the Year. Puh! Yet this obdurate Soil the Swain compel'd Some thin-set Herbs and poppy Flow'rs to yield. Helas!
The springing Vervain did his Garden grace, And Lillies flourish'd in the Brambles place Thus, late at Even, his daily Labours past, Returning he enjoys an unbought Feast; Rich with content, and more than Monarch's blest. He saw his forward Buds and opening Rose The dawning Beauty of the Spring disclose. Pox on't! The Original might perhaps be thus render'd more tolerably. Nor fails each Spring to crop the earliest Rose, Each Autumn earliest Fruit from loaded Boughs. And when bleak Winter-Months, with Scythian Wind. Burst the hard Stones, the rapid Torrents bind; Whether either of the following Dissolutions would be worse than this I cannot tell; they are all as bad as I would wish. The 2d Dissolution. And when the barren Winter's piercing Cold Could split hard Rocks, and rapid Torrents Hold.
The Third. See Dryden's Virgil. But when the Winter's penetrating Force Now bursts the Rock and stops the Rivers Course, Sad indeed. Three Versions of the same thing may excuse me from translating the next Line at all; which consisting of Terms above my Understanding, viz. Ille comam mollis jam tum ten ton debat Acanthi; I desire Mr. London and Mr. Wise to English it between them, being abundantly better able to do it than I am. Then would he wish the envious Winter gone Winter again. Worse and worse! And beg the tardy Spring to hasten on. His Bees the first their flowing Combs prepare, Clouding with early Swarms the Vernal Air. The Words —spumantia pressis Mella favis— are well render'd by Mr. Addison, in this manner,
—his Vessels foam With the rich Squeezings of the juicy Comb. His sapless Earth made hardy Pear-trees bloom, Oh! And Thorns were taught to bear th' adopted Plumb. Very well. On faithful Boughs each growing Burden hung, And Autumn finish'd all the Spring begun. Which I take to be Fustian, as indeed every thing should be that designs to be admired. The Meaning is only, that all his young Apples hung till they were ripe. He had his Lindens too and thriving Pines, And knew to range his Elms in nicest Lines. Excellent! His Plane-tree flourish'd and began to spread For chearful Hours a Sociable Shade. Ravishing! 'Tis true, Composing is the Nobler Part, But Good Translation is no easy Art. How many Ages since has Virgil writ? How few are they that can translate him yet? Approach his Altars with Religious Fear; No Whining, Canting, Riming Devil can inhabit there.
I lose my Patience when with sawcy Pride, In Barbarous Rimes I see his Numbers tied. The Genuine Sense, intelligibly told, Shews a Translator both Discreet and Bold. Excursions are inexpiably bad, And 'tis much safer to leave out than Add. My Lord Roscommon's Essay. O Had He lived to hail the Glorious Day, And sing loud Paeans thro' the crowded way. When in Triumphant State the British Muse, True to her self, refuses Barbarous Aid, Appearing in the Roman Majesty, Which none know better, and none come so near. —Talis nostri est Farrago libelli. Phoebus's Oration. Canto IV. The Argument. The Sun kept some West-country Cows upon Houndslough-Heath, some time before the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, accord∣ing to the best Chronology, having had a
particular Fancy for that Imployment ever since he grew up from aAccording to Ptolomy. Little Star. Now it happen'd one Day, when the Sun's Back was turned, that half a Dozen Water-men, belonging to Ulysses's Barge, made bold with as many of the Sun's fattest Kine, and likewise Ravish'd his Milk-maid, Susanna Skimmington of Cheesewick, who would not have been ravish'd for Any Thing. Vpon which Phoebus unharnessing one of his Horses, leaves his Coach to its own Discretion, and trots away full Speed to tell his Fa∣ther Jupiter how these naughty Men had abused him. HAVE I for this kept such a Pother To let you all see one another, And often been upon the Road, When one would scarce send Dog abroad? For not the very Sirian Cur In a Cold Morning will e'er stir, But leaves me, like a surly Elf, To open all the Gates my self. What if a Wheel should fall a Blazing? 'Twould put me a Consumed 'Maze in; For I've no Engine to throw Cloud-water: Vslid, I'd as lieve drive Stage to Loud-water.
Is it my Wages for Day-Labour To lose the Cattle that I pay for? When tho' I drove in worst of Weather, A Mighty Comfort to me they were. The Fates, forsooth, must take 'em from me Those Gypsies always strove t' undo me. And now the Bull-Dogs that have are 'em, Would put me off with Temples; Rat 'em! We'll take no Temple ('tis below us) 'Twere something if they'd build m'a Cow-House. For sure when e'er Occasion urges, Apollo need not want for Churches. But 'tis at least full one to ten e'er shall get such Cows agen. The Raskals e'en may keep their Temples, Or build my Calves one, if it Them plea They have already (thank 'em finely) Bestow'd some Altars on 'em kindly; And should they raise another Shrine, Who knows but they would steal more Kine? So Faith, unless you'll bid the Men Spew all my Cattle up agen; And drown Vlysses in the Main, With all his damned Beef-eating Train; Or send the Villain into Bridewel, To teach him not to live so idle; I'll leave your Godships (dee all Mark?) Every Mother's Child i'th' Dark, To run your Noses against Post, Or shift with Candle-Light at most.
I'll Put out all your Stars, and, you know, Ioan will be then as good as Iune: And Happy he can buy a Link For Love, or Money (now called Chink.) 'Fore George, ye'd best to use me well, Or I'll go shine to th' Devil in Hell. And Devil a God of all your Crew But should e'en Troop to Old Nick too, If you'd but Give the Devil his Due. The way to become a Philosopher. How many Rare Philosophers have been quite spoiled by Dr. Tyson.—pol me occidistis, Amici. DIsappointed as I was, in coming to my self again so unexpectedly, yet I cannot but rejoice and triumph in this, that my Mind is now become Illuminated, the Dimness of my Understanding cleared up, all the Film that Mortales hebetat visus,— wiped away, and the Essence of all things grown Intelligible. The subtile Philosophy of F. Malebranch, the seraphick Speculations of Mr. Norris, and the irrefragable Argumenta∣tions of Mr. Dodwel's Epistle; which (I must confess with Shame) appear'd formerly to my weak and dull Brain, in the Shape of visionary Imaginations, double-minded Sophisms, Sha∣dows of Eccho; and Sick-men's Dreams, do
now put on another Form, and show them∣selves in the clearest Light, to be as finely de∣duced, and as strongly coherent as if Truth her self had joined them together by way of De∣monstration, as no doubt She has taken that Pains in some Cases. From this strange Effect and admirable Elu∣cidation of my Intellectual Powers, 'tis a reasonable Conclusion that whoever makes a Visit to the Ideal World, is as sure to return a Philosopher, as he that Dreams upon Par∣nassus to awake a Poet. The great Reason I have to rejoice for the Death of Mr. Scarron. That He would have been the most likely Person to have made a Iest of my Theory, or Tra∣vested it into some whimsical Bur∣lesque, as soon as ever Mr. Boyer shall have finish'd his French Translation. I know the Malice of the World, and there∣fore can well enough foresee that the Ho∣nour I shall gain by this elaborate Work, will provoke a great many envious Persons to set upon me, with pretended Answers and real Abuses. This indeed I am little concern'd at,See Theory of the Intelligible W. P. 1. . 149. being satisfied that no part of my Theory lies open to the least Objection; and therefore
the only Adversaries I greatly apprehend are your unlucky Drolls, to whom these reined Speculations may appear like Unintelligible Iargon. These Persons being endued with sufficient Ill-Nature, and abundant Leisure-Time from their Business,See abundance of Places in the Sacred, and the Ideal, Theories. will probably endeavour, in∣stead of answering my Theory, to turn the most Weighty Parts of it into Comical Con∣ceits, or expose them in some Odd and Hu∣mourous Disguise; thereby to Banter Man∣kind into an Opinion, that 'tis all no more than a mere Fancy, or a kind of Philosophical Romance. I am sorely afraid if an Angel should write such a Theory as this, these Men of Parts would pass the same Iudgment upon it, by reason of the Narrowness of their Spirit and Vnderstand∣ing. 'Tis certain, that a pleasant Vein of Rail∣lery may sport it self with the noblest Composition, and make the most sublime Truths a Subject of Laughter; and there are a Crew of Little Wits, the very Pest of a Common-wealth, that will be nibling at every thing that's great; and by these I expect to be Digniied with the Title of Visionist, or Enthusiast; only because the Truths I deliver are above their Compre∣hension. Be it known to them, that whether these, or whatever other Names, they shall chuse in their Great Wisdom, to sit me withal, I shall not think them worth a serious Answer; and to write in their trifling manner is below
If any Learned Person shall make an Attempt upon my Book, in a Logical, or a Metaphysical way, he shall be considered; but this, as was said, I don't at all apprehend. If I here ex∣press my self with some Assu∣rance,See Preface to the First Volume of Mr. Norris's Theory. 'tis not that I prefer my Rational Abilities before those of other Men, but it must be consider'd, that I have been long Con∣versant in this kind of Studies, and therefore may see things in a better Light than they do, though not with better Eyes. Nay, so many thoughtful and solitary Hours, so many nightly Lamps and Lucubrations, have these Studies cost me, that indeed my poor Eyes, what with Age, and what with assiduous Poring, have the one departed this World, and the other almost worn it self out with incessant Grief for the Loss of its Fellow. By this I am accidentally reduced very near to that State of Illuminating Blindness, which F. Male∣branch had at first recommended to me; and I think therefore 'tis very hard, if by this Time, and with all these Advantages, I may not be allow'd to know something of the matter.
Another Panegyrick upon my own Perform∣ance. An Epitaph upon some of my Abortive Works. The Causes of their Abortion. My Grief and Weepings there∣upon. Polyuhemi lata Acies. The Beauty of an Excrescence. 'TIs with Tears in my Eye, and great Anguish of Mind, that I am going to mention how many Witty Things I have Iudiciously blotted out; how many Dainty Thoughts and Curi∣ous Strokes, I have either cramp'd, or quite erazed, tho' it went grievously against my Will, and I could not be so cruel to my own dear Conceptions with∣out a very tender Reluctancy of my Bowels. All this I was forced to in De∣ference to the Authority of Milbourn, Dennis, Rymer, &c. Tyrannical as it is; because tho' the Sentences were ex∣treamly fine and beautiful, it happenned that they were not much to the Purpose. The Reader will see that my Book as now it stands, is remarkable for the same Pre∣cise Justness with the Writings of Virgil;
there being nothing that can be taken from either without maiming the whole; nothing that can be added to either without the Deformity of an Excresence. This is the chief Point, and a very rare Piece of Mastery, Never to say too little, nor too much; and yet it makes good Mr. Waller's Say∣ing of us Poets, that we —lose half the Praise we should have got Could it be known what we Discreetly blot. This is my Case, and to satisfie you that it is, any Gentleman who will please to buy Six of my Books, shall command a Sight of my foul Copy and my Adversaria; both to see the Truth of what I am asserting, and to enjoy the Pleasure of those lively Sketches which must now be for ever lost to the World, and for the Loss of which, the World owes but small Thanks to those Cynical Criticks above-noted.
Among other Remarkables, you may see a Panegyrick upon Whip-stitch, Slap∣dash, and Collier's Essays; another— touching—L—R—s Council during his Intowerment, and the—of—his Political Apostasy from G—B—'s Reli∣gious Principles. You may see also a smart Saying upon Wise-acres, and a charming Phrase for opening an Oyster, both Fire-new; besides two various Lection of great Importance to History, upon the famous Garismachides, a lost Au∣thor who is thought to have written nothing. Not one of these shall ever be seen but upon the Conditions proposed, and I am not a Man to be Wheedled out of a Purpose once settled in my Mind; tho' it were to translate Hickeringil's or To∣land's Works into Latin Verses; any more than to be perswaded out of an Opinion I have once imbraced, tho' it were that Toland and Hickeringil are both Saints, or either of them a Phi∣losopher.
Why the Author is so Desirous of being thought a Wit, now in his Old Age. An Humble Request that the Reader would Humour him therein. I Am well aware that among Persons who Canvas matters Nicely, and are very Circumspect in putting Things and Things together, it may seem a Problem, how this Edition should so un∣expectedly happen to be the Second. And because Wise Philosophers are back∣ward to believe what they are unable to comprehend, (as I have frequently found in my own Disputes with the So∣cinians, Atheists, and other Great Wits) they will probably imagine, that either the Bookseller, or the Printer, has made some Mistake in the Title-Page as to the Number of Editions; Nay, 'tis not im∣possible but some unlucky Surmise may fall upon the Author himself, as if he had designed to impose upon the Pro∣fessors of Title-Page-Learning, upon whose good Opinion he has so great De∣pendance. And this would ruine his
Credit for a Philosopher, by bringing into Question the Truth of his Narra∣tion, and those very Positions that are the Hinges upon which his whole Theory turns. Now in such a case, 'tis evident the Theory could be of no Benefit to the Common-wealth of Philosophy, nor work its desired Effect upon the Under∣standings and Opinions of Mankind. It doubtless lies upon me to obviate so grievous a Calamity as this by all Ways and Means that my present Circum∣stances will bear. Accordingly I de∣clare upon Honour, that had such a Mis∣take happen'd either by the Printer's Neglect, or Librarii Incuriâ, it should have been acknowledged in ample Form as the Principal Erratum, viz. In the Title-Page, instead of Second Edi∣tion, lege Tityre, tu Patulae— —potitur que suâ puer Iphis lanthe. For your farther Satisfaction in the pre∣sent case, you are to consider that Second, Third, or Fourth Edition, &c. among us
Authors and our Respective Publishers, are no more than so many Terms of Art, which every one has the Liberty of applying to what Meaning, or Idea he shall see convenient; provided he freely explain himself, and make known what that Meaning or Idea is, either by a just Definition, or sufficient Descrip∣tion. In Compliance with which Rule, I shall endeavour to Define, as concisely as may be, that Notion of a Second Edition which in my own Mind I have affixed to the said Term. A Second Edition then is. Qualitas quaedam Sensibilis, Occulta, Instrumentalis, Bipes, Subjecti sui per Hysteron-Proteron, quodammodo Per∣fectiva, quae Subjecto ejus Qualitatis capaci, ita super veniens, & inhaerens, ut sit veluti Praemissarum Altera, facit ut cui ejus rei, quae hujusmodi subjectum est, naturalis & antecedens inerat Appetentia, in eo genere∣tur Duplum hujus Appetentiae versus idem Objectum, & cui nulla fuerat hujus objecti antecedens Appetentia in illo generetur ali∣qua, it a ut plerumque consequatur Rei cu∣jusdam
contentae ex continente desumptio, quo fiat ut Objectum illud praedictum in ean∣dem rem aptam natam aliquid continere, demitti possit naturali lege motus praeter & propter Fugam vacui. This Definition being laid down, there will remain little Difficulty in the Sequel of our Argument; for tho' some Editions never disown themselves for the First, as if they were fond of Pri∣mogeniture; yet 'tis evident from the Terms Duplum and Appetentiae, that for a Book to make its first Appearance in the Shape of a Second Edition, is a me∣thod far more Auspicious. This will also save me, or my Publisher the Expence of a new Title-Page to the same Edition, which is commonly found a necessary Expedient for bringing these Affairs to a good Issue. I am not a going to deny that Messieurs Gronovius and Le Clerk were very impor∣tunate to Have this Be rather the Twen∣tieth Edition than the Second, and so to have run down by the Nineteenth, &c. in a direct Line to the First: an Advice
which notwithstanding all the Reasons they urged, I resolved to reject. I very well saw that it was a Proceeding so much out of the Way, and seemingly Ex∣travagant, as would very ill become a Treatise of this nature; besides that, after the repeated Editions should have exceeded the Compass prescribed, and exhausted the Lower or Single Numbers, they must at last either have come to Nothing, or divided Unity it self into Innumerable Fractions to have re∣ckoned by; as we see that though a Multitude of streight Lines, all from a single Point, may be produced in Infini∣tum, yet whenever such Lines are con∣tracted into a Point, from any Indefinite Distances, if their Occasions Require them to go farther, they are obliged to separate again, and expatiate on the other side in Proportion to their former Contraction. And thus, I think, we have clear'd the Controversy by a plain Demonstration.
N. B. The Reader must not take it ill, if I once again put him in mind of his Old Engagements to Secresy; for though this Doctrine touching Editions be im∣parted to him as a Friend, I would not have it go any further for twice the worth of my Copy-money. I, fuge, sed poter as tutior esse domi. —Monstror digito praetereuntium, —quod statuâ taciturniùs erro, Et risu populum quatio, risurus & ipse; Quem bis terque bonum cum risu forte stupebunt Lectorum chorus omnis, inexpletùm Lecturi. Humano capiti cervicem Pictor equinam Iungere si velit, & varias inducere plu∣mas, Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?
Variantes quaedam Lectiones. The following Various Readings could not conveniently be disposed in their proper Pages, because the Margin would have been too much crouded, and also because we did not receive them till the Book was Printed off. P. 24. Instead of all of a sudden, the Alex. MS. reads all on a suddain Grut. all on the sudden. Gembl. and Bruil. and Pal. of the sudden. Gulielm. (prave ut videtur) soding. Vict. and Manutio placet All so done. P. 28. Stanza 1. Bodl. reads▪ And listen to this merry Song, A mere Round O of Lovers. St. 11. Id. Bodl. And fain wou'd travail Bed-ward.
St. 22. Bodl. and Pemb. But Nan grew wroth, And claiming both, Kiss'd Duke as much as Aaron. St. 24. Ascon. Paed. and Cujac. Where's my Nic led? Lamb. Where's my Nic led? Hot. and Steph. O Nicolas, Nicolas, where's my Niking! Quo' Kate the Taylor's Dafter; And kiss'd so mainly to her liking, She scarce cou'd hold her Wafter. St. Camb. —so wistful Fired with his Charms and Graces; 'Tis said that, if she were a Pistol, She wou'd go off in Face his. Cujac. and Alex. and all the lost MSS. read Fly off in Phys his. St. 33. Codices Impressi fere omnes habent. And tore her Coif to rags.
Bemb. legit And tore her Pinner off. Quod placuit etiam Hotomano, sed nobis videtur non admittendum. 35. Alb. But kiss'd like old Queen Dido. Quod videtur durum & parum probabile. 39. Multi MSS In all Our Town. Page 75. Bodl. Jove was just then at Ev'n and Odd, as is The Sport 'mongst Gods and their Fine Goddesses. 79. Turneb. legit The Goddess-ship of her Virginity, Or Maidenhead of her Divinity. Idem in the Kentish Petition, P. 127. leg. When Venus I invoked with Tears, Venus was DUNNY to my Pray'rs. Idem, P. 113. For Vatum Graecorum, leg. Vatum Grajugenum.
ERRATA. Not withstanding the great Care that has been used in Correction, the follow∣ing Errata have escaped the Press; which you are therefore desired to rectify with your Pen. IN the Table of Contents, N. XXVII. r. as apparently tending. N. XXXII. instead of Haecceity, r. Humility. N. XXXVI. instead of the Emperors, r. Cae∣sar of H—and Aug—s of S—. N. XXXVII. instead of Mr. Wotton, r. the very Learned Mr. Wootton. Page 1. instead of the Ground of a Sa∣tyrical Fable, r. The Subject of an Epick Poem, or any thing else that you shall think better. For an Intelligible, r. an Vnintelligible manner. P. 2. System of Things—supply i. e. Ideas. I might say
the Shadows—Add—as a Man's Face is the Shadow of its Representative in the Looking-Glass. P. 4. For whoso is Simple let him turn in hither, r. Whoso is VERY SIMPLE, &c. For we should lose even Sense it self, r. lose our Senses. To not feeling those we touch, add, nor understand∣ing what we talk of. P. 8. To the Idea of a Thing is intelligibly that Thing, add, as the Idea of an Idea is Intelligibly that Idea; and so likewise vice versâ a Thing or Object is Sensibly its own Idea. P. 9. To so hard to understand, add, except what ought to be Vnintelligible for the sake of explain∣ing something else. P. 19. For Learned Reader, lege, Gentle Reader. P. 27. For my Brother Touchin, read, Tutchin. P. 33. St. r. Good sooth it wou'd Have done one Good, &c. P. 73. The Words What we have been discoursing of being Equivocal, and there∣fore very Fine, you are desired to Read them in Italick Letters, though not Prin∣ted so.
P. 97. The Translation of Damnosae quid non, &c. is thus to be supply'd, Our Grandsires they were Papists, Our Fathers Oliverians; Their Bearns, 'tis said, are Atheists, Ours must be Cursed Queer ones! P. 117. r. pushing him forward sometimes out of Ideal Eagerness, and sometimes treading upon his Intelligible Heels. P. 142. After Exert his whole Eloquence, add, Quote all the Fathers. P. 148. r. Insanos inter. P. 114. In the Margin, For If we had not an Innate Idea of a Circle, r. If the eternal Idea of a Circle were not presented to our Minds by and in God, so as to be inwardly seen by us, &c. I am obliged to retract the word In∣nate, or at least to Advertise my Reader that it is not to be strictly understood in this, and other Places where it recurs, having found since my writing those
Passages, that Mr. Norris rejects it. Ne∣vertheless the Absurdity of his Notions will easily fall in with that of Innate Ideas, and bear the Representation I have here made of the Ideal World. Valete & Plaudite. FINIS.
