G1031A 99828003 32430
Good Admonition. OR, Keep thy head on thy shoulders, And I will keepe mine. To the tune of, Merrily and cherrily, &c. THough Wenthworth's beheaded, Should any Repyne? Ther's others may come To the Block besids he. Kéepe thy head on thy Shoulders, I will kéepe mine; For what is all this to thée or to me? Then merily and cherrily Lets drinke off our Beere, Let who as will run for it, We will stay heere. What meanes our brave Gallants So fast for to flye: Because they are afraid That some danger might be, They car'd not for séeing The Deputy dy, But what is all this to thée or to me: Then merrily and cherrily Lets drinke off our beere, Let who as will run for it, We will stay heere. Since that Finch, and Windebancke First crost the Seas, To shun some great danger Its thought they fore-sée; Ther's many hath catched The Running Disease, But what is all this to thée or to mée, Then merrily and cherrily Let's drinke off our beere, Let who as will run for it, We will stay heere. Although some by running, To scape had the hap, Which formerly feared They punisht should be, Yet others as cunning, Were catcht in the trap, But what is all this to thée or to mée, Then merrily and cherrily Let's drink off our beere, Let who as will run for it, We will stay heere. A man to doe evill And have too much Grace, He thinkes it's a wonder Most strange for to sée, So little in person, Yet great by his place: But what is all this to thée or to mée, Then merrily and cherrily Lets drinke off our wine. Keepe thy head on thy shoulders, I will keepe mine.
WHat strength hath an infant To doe any harme So long as the keeper Doth it ever see? It's fit that a Suckling Were led by the arme But what is all this to thee or to mé Then merily and cherily Let's drinke off our wine, Keepe thy head on thy shoulders, I will kepe mine. Though Jermin and others Were loath to rehearse, What they thought in England, Here acted should be, Let Davenant write downe Their travells in verse, But what is all this to thee or to me, Then me rily and cherrily Lets drinke up our beere, Let who as will run for it, We will stay heere. Since no Canterbury, Nor old womans tale, Or dissimulation Will credited be, The Popish Supporters Begins for to faile, But what is all this to thee or to mee, Then merrily and cherrily Lets drinke off our wine, Keepe thy head on thy shoulders I will keepe mine. Though some with much patience Have suffered long, Who after much tryall Are lately se frée: And others be punish't Which did them such wrong, But what is all this to thee or to me, Then merrily, &c. Suppose that the Masse-Priests And Iesuits all, Which troubled our Nation Should banished be; Wee'l never be danted At Babylons fall, For what is all this to thee or to me, Then merily, &c. Let never be sorry For that which is past, That each man in's calling Most Iocond may be Still hoping long look't for Will come at the last, And times at more certaine, We shortly shall see, Then merrily, &c. If that all false Traytors, Were banisht our Land, And that from all Popery It once might be free, Then England and Scotland Might joyne hand in hand, Then times will prove better to thee  to me So merrily and cherily Wee'l drinke wine and beere, Let who as will run for it, We will stay heere. FINIS. LONDON.
