G178 13104275 97455
REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Johnsons NOTES ON THE Pastoral Letter.
REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Johnson's NOTES ON THE Pastoral Letter. By WILLIAM GALLAWAY, A. M. Chaplain to the Officers of their MAJESTIES Sea Train. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers Hall. MDCX IV.
THE INTRODUCTION. HE who enters the Lists with the Famous Mr Iohnson (tho he hath no Lords and Com∣mons to Patronize his Book) may just∣ly expect a Clear Stage and Fair Play, and cannot be deny'd to Arm himself, and fight with the same Weapons his Enemy makes use of, tho they should be Impudence and Vanity. I have been long convinc'd, that lofty, promising Titles, or prefixing the Names of Great Patrons, add nothing to the intrinsick Value of any book. Nay, I have seen the King's Arms flourish'd on a Quack
Doctors Bill, which hath been scarcely read through before apply'd to its pro∣per use. Nor am I fond of presenting these following Reflections to Mr. Iohn∣son's Patrons, because it looks so like Mrs. Iames, whose crasie Example my was∣pish Adversary hath so often imitated. I am sure, had he left out his own often repeated Merits, scurrilous Reflections, and impertinent Stories, they would have been oblig'd to him; and might have read the empty, swell'd Book, with as little trouble as her Half-Sheet Who hath not seen, or heard, A Kil∣ling, noisy Bombastus, make a great figure in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, speak mighty things of himself, but at the same time to amuse his gaping Ad∣mirers, he always provides a Zany, who is to be plaguy satyrical and witty, is no matter on whom, or what sub∣ject,
so it pleases, and by that means the Powder of Post goes off the better. Be it known unto all men, that I am an English Freeman as well as Mr. Iohnson, and will assume the liberty of being as dogmatically proud and Phan∣tastical in my following Reflections, as he in his Notes. The different conceptions of other mens reasonings, are as moulds to Metal, the self same Ore run into the mould of an Angel, shapes an Angel, or into the mould of a Devil, represents a Devil. As for my own part, I can see nothing in the Pastoral Letter, with my Poli∣tick Spectacles, but what is rational, and tends to promote the publick good, by perswading an Universal comply∣ance to tbe present Government. Mr. Iohnson, in his own, distorted, and forc'd Sense, represents it as a Vial of mis∣cheif
pour'd forth on the Nation. Upon which account I'le examine how far his rambling Notes make good the Charge. But by the way, when our waggish Noter had luckily thought on the word, Bewitch'd, I wonder he did not think himself so, because, whilst only fighting with the Windmils of his own brain, he wildly fancies that at the same time he mauls the Bishop. Perhaps I have mix'd some sharp re∣flections with my private thoughts, for which I have only this to say, Is there not Iust Cause?
REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. Johnsons NOTES ON THE Pastoral Letter. 'TIS the Usual, but plausible way of some men, when they have express'd their utmost ma∣lice, dipp'd their pens in the blackest Ink, just to wipe their mouths, and then write and miscall themselves Civil, and good natur'd to a fault. Mr. Iohnson of all men in the world might have spar'd himself that Hypocritical pains Because His Notes plainly speak his own true Character. Our Noter in his first line seems to insinuate, as if his bare touch were as fatal as the Devills, nothing follows it, but Leprosie or Death: But the Doctrine in the Pastoral Letter will live, because his Impotent efforts and weak
Notes, have not power sufficient to destroy it. His sulphurou stinking Ammunition, is but like the Chy∣mical Pulvis fulminans, which makes a roaring noise, but without doing the least execution But I advise you as your Friend Mr. Iohnson, I would by no means have you take a Wyth into your hands, least, when I have reflected your Mountanous Rhodomontadoes into no∣thing but meer noisy boasting you should employ it to A particular use not at first design'd: Besides 'tis A dangerous weapon in any mans hands, who is general∣ly suppos'd to be, Non Compos Mentis. Who could have Imagin'd that the topping Mr. Iohn∣son, the All destroying Mr. Iohnson, should condes∣cend so low as to have A controversy with, or to rake in the Ashes of A senseless Book, without Station, or Cardinals Horse top knots But by your favour amongst all your law, let us have no Abindon Law, don't hang the book first, and then Judge it afterward. He proceeds now to tell us, and without blushing, too, that The design of it was to make men swear to the Government at any rate, and because only the Iacobites stood out against the Oath of Allegiance, and were dissa∣tisfied with it, the Government is made Iacobite, or what they will, that these men may swear upon their own terms. I begin to perceive our Noters cloven foot already, I mean, Ex pede Herculem, The Bishops deign (if we, may beleive his own words in the Pastoral Letter, page the 2d) was, to offer such motives and reasons to his Clergy, as might Answer and satisfy all scruples and objections that might arise concerning your Alle∣giance which was due to the King and Queen, lest
by their Example of Nonswearing, the minds of the people should be distracted, and so consequently alie∣nated from the Government. So that Mr. Iohnson hath either ignorantly but I rather beleive willfully mis∣represented the plain design of the Bishop, which was to make the Government all Williamite, and that it was the duty both of Clergy and Laity to comply with it. What is nothing to the purpose, needs no answer; Neither am I at leisure, having so many pag∣es before me to follow Mr. Iohnson in his wild goose chace. I don't know Dr. Sandcrofts Heirs, and the Late Bishop of Ely's Letter, is not the Pastoral Letter. Now Oracle. To bring men into this Government with their Iacobite Principles along with them, is to let so many Vipers into its bosome.p. 3. The Bishop was Expelling these Poysonous Princi∣ples; he was perswading their Compliance But how could they comply without Conviction? Unless Mr. Iohnson would have them, though unconvinced, swear at any rate, and so be perjur'd. When Men swear, 'tis presum'd they are convinc'd; If so, then their for∣mer Principles are quitted, they are no longer Iaco∣bites. The Bishop would have all Men swear to the Government; and if Men will act contrary to its In∣terest after they have taken the Oaths, they are to be censur'd as guilty both of Perjury and Treachery. 'Tis my Opinion, that the Iews, who Crucify'd our Savi∣our, were not so highly guilty as Iudas, who kiss'd, and at the same time betray'd him. I'le assure you Mr. Iohnson, the Bishop only designs to catch the good Fish in his Drag-Net, notwithstand∣ing you modestly tell us, he is resolv'd to catch them
all, good and bad, and to make them swear at any rate; to effect which, he endeavours to fright hem into his Net, with a Venient Romani, The French, the Irish, and Popish Tyranny will be upon you, if you do not take the Oath. The Bishop, in his Pastoral Letter, page the 3d and 4th, informs his Clergy, ;That by refsing the Oath, they might do a considerable Prejudice to the Pub∣lick Peace, and shake, as far as in them lay, the pre∣sent Settlement of the Nation; and therefore they ought to consider well the Grounds of their Non-Compliance, before they adventur'd against a Wok which in the whole Progress of it has had so many signal Characters of a Favourable Providence: and then he adds the Advantages we have reap'd by it, and the mischievous Consequences that might ensue in case they did not take the Oaths; which were, Popish Tyranny, An Irish Conquest and Massacre, and French Barbarity and Cruelty. To which he subjoyns, A Man that adventures on so dangerous a Thing as refusing the Oaths, had need be very sure that he is in all this matter in the Right, Otherwise he runs a Risque of sighting against God, if he should hap∣pen to be in the wrong. Upon the whole matter the Bishop makes use of the Topick of Divine Providence to perswade their Com∣pliance; and the great Miseries we might bring on our own Heads, after so great a Deliverance, if there were not an Unanimous agreement amongst us. Ga∣maliel, I presume, must be acknowledg'd as Wise a
Doctor as Mr. Iohnson can be thought by any of our great Council; and as a Proof of it, the whole bo∣dy of the People o Israel were concluded by his Ad∣vice, in the great Sanhedrim purposely conveened to determine that Important Affair, in Relation to those Doctrines and Miracles which were wrought and preach'd by the Apostles, and which they were so zea∣lous to oppose. You may at your leisure read the whole Transaction in the 5th of the Acts of the Apostles; but because 'tis pertinent to my present purpose, I will recite Gamaliel's Advice in the great Council, contai∣ned in the 38th and 39th Verses; And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this Counsel, or this Work, be of Men, it will come to nought: But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. So that as that great Revolution in Religion, and the New Face of Affairs in the World, was brought to pass by the pow∣erful Hand of God, and could not be resisted: So also there are many Instances to be given of the Visible Providences which attended and procur'd our happy Settlement, and preserv'd that Faith of Christ which we profess in its Pimitive Purity, and against which the utmost Eforts and Artifies of a Resolv'd, and Attempted Power, could not prevail. We might still have enjoy'd an uninterrupted continuance of its kind Influences, had not our Ingratitude, Divisions as well as Treachery and Malice to each other, those most pro∣voking sins, loudly call'd for Judgments to fall on us. Now; I am the Fairest Adversary in the World, tho I, say it my self. You have let out, Who should not
ay it? But I will no more believe you, than if you should say you were a Saint, or that your Gall did not lye in your Scull; because you have almost in e∣very Particular throughout your Notes, vented your ungovern'd Passion more than Reason. One of the things, he says, we ought to fear and trem∣ble at, is, Popish Tyranny. I would fain know whe∣ther the word Popish added to Tyranny, makes it better or worse? In this Note Mr. Iohnson thinks himself safe; but I'le inform him, that the Word Tyranny may be made Blacker, that there's no false Heraldry in it, That Po∣pish and Protestant Tyranny are not alike, and that their Effects are not the same. Popish Tyranny is the worst of Tyrannies, it attempts to enslave mens Conscien∣ces, their Religion as well as Liberties and Properties: And because I will be before-hand with him in Instan∣ces, French Tyranny is Popish Tyranny, and a late Au∣thor tells us, that Danish is Protestant. I have no∣thing to say against your Story of Sir Ellis Leighton, and that the late King's Design was to subvert the Government; The Papists do not deny it: And as for those Imprudent Discourses (if there were any such) let the guilty answer for themselves. He may please himself with his several Descants on the Word King. Our King makes the Laws of the Kingdom his Rule to govern by, and desires no more Power than to be able to do all the good he can to his People. ;I go therefore in the next place to set before you those Reasons that seem convincing to me, even tho
there were no more to be said for the presen Settle∣ment, but that we have a Throne filled, and a King and Queen in Possession. After Mr. Iohnson hath made a Flourish, he tells us, I shall take the pains of examining them One by One, and find out, if I can, their power of Conviction; which I am afraid is like an Estate left in Diego's Will. He is so merry a Gentleman, and hath such an Over∣flowing of frothy Conceits, that I am afraid he won't live long. But to the Reasons; The Bishop never design'd, nor ever hopes to convince you with his Reasons. Instead of being as good as your Word in examining the Bi∣shop's Reasons, a fancy comes in to your Head, that the Throne is widened; and then you tell us (for wha Reason I know not,) That you believe that a King and Queen in possession alone, or a King and Queen de Facto together, in Opposition to de Jure, would have frighted Cook, Littleton, &c. I will repeat no more of what's nothing to the pur∣pose; and I thought you had lov'd the great Dead Lawyers better than to contrive any Scare-crows to fright them. The Bishop, in his Pastoral Letter, page 21st. Declares the King and Queens Right to the ;Crown from the Determinaion and Declaration of the Peers and People of England, chosen and Assem∣bled together with all possible Freedom. So that he hath nothing to do with the Distinction of de Facto and de Iure.
Possession is a very good Title, till a better appears; and the Bishop tells us, the King and Queen have a Lawful Title and a Right to our Allegiance for seve∣ral Reasons; And there is no need of the Bishop's na∣ming the Cause, or how they came into the Throne; because this Reason is press'd only on Supposition of their bare Possession of it. But to the following part of the Paragraph: The ;bringing the State of the Question so low, may seem at first View not to be of so much Advantage to Their Majesties Title; but since I intend to carry the matter further before I leave it, I hope it may be no incongruous method to begin at that which will take in the greatest Numbers, since there is no dis∣pute in this, that they are actually in possession of the Throne; that they protect us; and that we by living under their Protection, and enjoying the be∣nefit of it, are therefore bound to make some returns for it. Our Noer in the page and  following answers not to the Point in debate; but ly insinuates as if the Bishop were starting new Titles, and then talks of Chymical Drops; for which we an a Comment. Well, but now he comes to mind the Process. ;Pos∣session of the Throne infers Protection, and the be∣nefit of Protection infers a Reciprocal Duty. To which he answers; I will wait for better Arguments; for as for this, it will never convince. It is no Dispute indeed amongst the Non-Swearers; but is their great grievance, that there is an actual possession of Kingship, where there is not a legal Right first proved, and made out.
The Bishop is convincing the Non-Iurors; and we know you are already convinc'd. There are Babes in Politicks as well as Religion, who cannot digest strong Meats. Prithee, Dear Mr. Iohnson (if thou hast not bestow'd all thy good Nature on Sir Roger,Pag. 92.) suffer the Bishop to be so charitable as to feed them with Milk. The Bishop hath prov'd their Legal Right, as I have already observ'd: But though they will not own them to have any Right, yet the Bi∣shop urges them to pay their Allegiance to the King in Possession, because they are protected by him; and in that they have virtually given their Consent by their Representatives, that he should be King: Besides, their Allegiance is due, and must be paid to the King in Possession, because the Late King not being here, it is impossible to be paid to him. Protection supposes, and implies a Right to Allegiance; for which Reason the Bishop argues in his next Paragraph: A Man may ;Lawfully promise to do every thing that he may Law∣fully do: So that if it is Lawful to Obey the King, it is also Lawful to promise to do it. And therefore since it does not appear that any persons do doubt of the Lawfulness of Obeying, it cannot without a∣ny colour of Reason be said to be Unlawful to pro∣mise it: And if it is Lawful to promise it, it is also Lawful to Swear it; for an Oath being only the sa∣cred Confirmation of a Promise, we may Lawful∣ly Swear Every Thing that we may Lawfully Pro∣mise. After he hath diverted himself with his Mouse-Trap Iest, he tells us, That he will allow the Axiom, or Postu∣atum
in the first Sentence, at the present, and talk with it anon. But what he subsumes in the next Sentence, is begging the Question, and Absolutely False, in these words. ;And therefore since it does not appear, that any persons do doubt of the Lawulness of Obeying it cannot with any Colour of Reson be said to be Vnlawful to pro∣mise it. For I will demonstrate on the contrary, that it does appear. That all that refse the Oath, and Ten Thousand Men more, do doubt of the Lawfulness of O∣beying. But by the way, Mr Iohnson, to call Ten Thou∣sand Men Knaves at once, is something too reflecting; for as sharp sighted as you are, I am sure you cannot see their Hearts. Now follows our Demonstration: If the Non Swearers could give thiir Assent and Consent to Obey, they would certainly give their Oath likewise, and all that is within them. But by their doubting the Law∣fulness of an Oath of Obedience, they plainly doubt the Law∣fulness of simple Obedience, and not the Lawfulness of an Oath; for unless they be Quakers they cannot do that. To which I answer; 'Tis Matter of Fact, That the Non-Swearers do actually obey, and only doubt the Lawfulness of taking the Oaths. They do Visibly ac∣quiesce, and do not openly oppose the Government. They pay their Taxes according as the Law directs; nor do they think it a sin so to do. Upon which ac∣count the Bishop argues, they may promise to do so; and tharefore if promise, then swear; and so let their Hearts be where they will, the Law is against them; their Persons and Estates are protected by the Govern∣ment, and they are wiser than to go and starve at St. Germans. I am of Opinion, if Mr. Iohnson is over and above Officious on this Point; and (with Hum∣ble
Submission) I presume, if they, or any others, pay their Taxes Honestly, the King will not be concern'd on what Principles they pay their Obedience; and dou∣ble Taxes are as a Mark on those who disown him as King, that both He and We may be the better aware of them. Because Mr. Iohnson hath such ill Fortune in Demon∣strations, I'le try mine; and endeavour from the two Pages following, Sillogistically to demonstrate him, neither better nor worse than a Beast. He hath Liber∣ty to undemonstrate it in his Second Part. If Mr. Iohnson did not voluntarily submit to his hard Usage, then his Submission was an involuntary Act. But Mr. Iohnson did not voluntarily submit to his hard Usage, Ergo; this is evident from his 16th Page, where he tells us, that he sent the Marshal word, that he had rather be shot than so used. Now, Secundum te, page the 15th. All the World knows, that an involuntary Act is not an Humane Act; and so consequently must be the Act of a Beast. I know no way he hath to e∣vade this Argument, unless he owns himself a Fish or a Fowl. If he says he is Fish, I'le call him the great Le∣viathan; if a Fowl, an Owl; because being all Face and Feathers, he nearly resembles the Bird of Pallas. But I verily believe, by its description, he is that very Ass he mentions in his 34th page, who looks like Wisdom and Gravity, and is not. I always thought Vnvoluntary Acts, as well as Voluntary, were Humane, and the Acts of Men; but Mr. Iohnson tells us in his 48th page; If it were not lawful to advance Paradoxes and Contradicti∣ons to common Sense, how could Men shew their Learn∣ing? Or wherein would they differ from other Men? Ex
Ore tuo Iudico. And now I am at leiure to reflect on his Instances, with which he pretends to destroy the Bi∣shop's Axiom: ;A Man may lawfully promise to do e∣very thing which he may lawfully do. Observe our Noter: I will give him an Instance to the contrary. It is certainly lawful for me, because our Savi∣our commands it; If any man compel me to go a mile with him to carry his burthen, go with him twain. (But by the way, when he misrepresents our Saviour's Words, 'tis no wnder he serves the Bishop so; for the Text doth not speak of carrying any burthen. But, not to inter∣rupt his Instance, I will admit of it for once) though all such Precepts are to be taken with a Grain of Salt. But is it therefore lawful for me to promise this man to be his Pack horse all my Life, and so starve my Wife and Children in not providing for them; and in so doing to be worse than an Infidel? I trow not. 'Tis a mighty thing to destroy a Bishop's Axiom, and nothing can be more proper to do it than a Text of Scripture. Observe the Axiom; ;A man my lawfully promise to do every thing he may lawfully do. Now the Instance; Our Savi∣our commands, If any man compel me to go a mile with him, to carry his burthen, to go with him twain. From which he iners; But is it therefore lawful for me to promise this man to be his Pack horse all my Life, and to starve my Wie and Children? &c. No, no, by no means lawful; Besides, you can't be a Pack-horse; and your own Instance will not let you be worse than an Infidel. There is a great difference between lawfully promising, and being compell'd to do any thing; and therefore your Instance is nothing to the purpose (I can find no power of Conviction in it, and I am afraid
it is like an Estate left in our late Diego Wickhams' Will) because all Compultion takes away the Liberty of doing, or not doing; Promises to do, or not do, signifie nothing when I am Forc'd, or Hinder'd: Be∣sides, your Inference is an unlawful Action; and you cannot lawfully promise; therefore you are oblig'd not to promise any man to be his Pack horse, and by that means to starve your Wie and Children; and there∣fore you may not lawfully do it. I may lawfully pro∣mise to assist my Neighbour to carry his Burthen; and therefore I may lawfully do it. For any thing I know, our Noter may be a good Lawyer, but I am sure he is but a Dabbler at instancing. To proceed to the Se∣cond Instance. 'Tis as great a Conquest for a Philosopher to refute an Axiom, as a General to take a strong Town in Flanders; and therefore our Noter brings another battering Instance against it. I'le assure you Mr. Iohn∣son, I have no prejudice against your Person; I will neither lessen your Merits nor Sufferings: But I am in the way of writing, Mr. Iohnson; my Controversy is only with your Book; and though I by my self, I;Pag. he 17th. I say that my Motion I was sure was Right, being drawn by my own Hand (which is more positive perhaps than Old Bracton would have said) so I by my self, I say that your Instance is wrong; therefore I will mind the Process: Out of this long and truly impertinent Story, I put this short Case: It was cer∣tainly lawful for me to submit to this Vsage, when I could not help it; but I had deserved to die the Death of a Dog, and had betrayed the Rights of an Englishman, if I had entred into Engagements to abide by it. Observe the
Consequence; therefore a man may not lawfully promise to do every thing which he may lawfully do. O profound Logician! Now I would fain understand how Mr. Iohnson will reconcile his lawfully doing of that which he tells us was compulsorily, wrongfully and illegally inflicted, and more especially when he declares in his 15th page, That Forc'd Obedience is not the Obedience of Men; It is Passive and Dog-kennel Obedience. If I should pursue this Point, and prove that he hath a Grain of Passive Obedience about him, he would certainly hang him∣self; therefore I desist, and won't be guilty of Mur∣der. This is so pretty an Instance that I can't chuse but repeat it once more. It was certainly lawful for me to submit to this Vsage, when I could not help it. Ay, ay, 'tis very true, too true, we must all submit when we can't help it; there's no Remedy but Passive Patince: But you know the Old Saying, Patience per Force is a Medicine for a mad Dog. Now I don`t find by the Story thar you lawfully promis'd to submit to this U∣sage; which you might have done too, if you had thought it fit; because you tell us, It cost you Two or Three Fees not to be kept in Acta Custodia. So that our Impregable Axiom holds out still, ;That a Man may lawfully promise to do what he may lawfully do. Having defeated your first and Second Line, jam ad Triaris ventum est, I think I had as good stop here, lest in his Second Part I should be noted on as a Couquer∣ing Clergyman; But the best on it is I fear no Cha∣racter he can give me, and therefore will attack him in his third Instance.
At the Parliament at Oxford in 65, when they made the Five Mile Act, there was the same enslaving Project on foot, as there was afterwards in Seventy odd, to Swear to the Government in Church and State without Altera∣tion. The Wise Lord Treasurer Southampton was against it, and said, that though he liked Episcopacy, yet he would not be Sworn to it; Because he might hereafter be of another Opinion. And perhaps he had been fur∣ther off rom that Oath, if he had lived till now. I smell your design in this instance, 'tis to let us know that you don't like Episcopacy so well now as formerly, for any story that you could have thought on, had been as much to the purpose as this. If the Lord Southampton was satisfied with Episco∣pacy at that time, he might have taken an Oath to it, especially if it had been Enacted into a Law so to do, A Law would have concluded his Opinion, and de∣termin'd his Compliance, till it had been repeal'd; and had he liv'd till now Episcopacy would have been the same thing as then: The Virtual Consent of every in∣dividual Person is given when a Law is made; and therefore I must obey when what is commanded is not undeniably a sin; and my Disobedience is a sin, when the matter is lawful. So that rebus sic stantibus, a man may lawfully promise to do what he may lawfully do; and if there be an evident and publick Alteration in the Subject Matter, the Obligation ceases: Neither do I apprehend any Reason from the Law of God or Men, but that every Man may swear Allegiance, or to be qui∣et under our present Government (though they would have had things otherwise setled) because a private O∣pinion
is not to be oppos'd against the general Deter∣mination of the Body of the Nation; And to me it appears Imprudence and Mockery, that after the Non-Iuring, Passive Men have beat King Iames out of the Kingdom (as far as their Principles allow'd) with their Primitive Weapons, Prayers and Tears; That is, that now we are deliver'd by Providence, and Second Cau∣ses, from Popery and Slavery, that the very same men (some of which put their Helping Hand too) are pray∣ing it back again; for the French Court is the worst in the World to instruct Princes to govern according to Laws; and I don't hear Father Peters is turn'd Prote∣stant. Now to the part of the Bishops Paragraph, which follows in these words. ;And as it appears that there lies no just Objection to the swearing Obedience, so there arises none from the word Allegiance; for that being in its Original Signification, nothing but the Service that a Vassal owed to the Chief Lord of the Fee. If the King, is owned in Fact to be our King, then he is the Lord of the Fee, and by Consequence Allegiance is due to him; Allegiance being also now in our present Acceptation, An Obedience according to Law, that is to say, not a Blind nor absolute Obe∣dience, but such an Obedience as is defined and li∣mited by the Law, then the Scruple that arises out of the Word Allegiance vanishes. In this short Remnant, our Noter tells us, there are abundance of things liable to Exception. Fist, That he out-runs the Constable, in taking for granted an Oath of Obedience, where he hath neither pro∣ved
bare Obedience, much less a promise of Obedience on∣wardly to be due; for which I refer my self to what passed on the former part of the Paragraph. There was no need of a Promise of bare Obedience, because they did actually Obey; and therefore the Bi∣shop argues, as I before observ'd; That or that Rea∣son they might Promise to Obey; and if Promise, then Swear. The Bishop always own'd them to have the Point of Right, and how they came by it, in his 21st page; which I have already taken notice of. Secondly, He here gives us a Notion of Allegiance by the halves; for he says, ;It is in its Original signifi∣cation nothing but the Service due to the Chief Lord of the Fee. You only give the Bishop's Sense by halves; therefore I will recite his own Words contai∣ned at large in the 24th and 25th pages of the Pastoral Letter. ;The very Term of Allegiance rises out of the Feudal Law; by which the Chief Lord of a Fee, when he made any Grants to his Vassals, took them bound in cosideration of these Grants, to adhere to him, to defend his Person, and to assist him in his Wars; but all this being done by the Vassals, in consideration of the Fee that was granted, an Origi∣nal Contract is plainly implied in it; so that if the Lord of the Fee should go to take away the Fee it self, or to change the Nature of the Subjection in which the Vassals were put by the first Grant, then the Oath which was grounded on it could not be suppos'd to bind them any longer. So that the Bishop supposes a Reciprocal Duty between the Lord of the Fee and the Vassal, because if the former violated his
Contract, the Obligation of Allegiance ceased. Thirdly, He makes the King the Lord of the Fee; to entitle him to our Oath of Allegiance. It is nothing so, for the people of England do not hold of the King, what Holy Church does I know not; they may be his Vassals for ought I know; I am sure I am none. 'Tis fixing your own private Construction upon the Bishop's Words, when you write as if he should sup∣pose the King to be Landlord of all England, or as if Holy Church (as you are pleas'd to express your self) own'd or paid any Allegiance different from other peo∣ple. The Bishop tells us plainly, ;Our Allegiance in general is an Obedience according to Law; which he explains; Not a Blind nor Absolute Obedience, but such an Obedience as is defined and limited by the Law. Which imports, that we owe no other Obedience, and therefore if we are commanded to do or suffer any thing that is contrary to Law, the Obligation of our Obedience ceases, and we may refuse it. And here I will insert what the Bishop affirms to this purpose, in his Measures of Submission to the Supream Authority; which may serve to clear him from the unjust ond ma∣licious Imputations of ignorant as well as prejudicial Men. Pag. 9. ;There is nothing more evident than that England is a Free Nation, that has its Liberties and Properties reserv'd to it, by many positive and ex∣press Laws: If then we have a Right to our Proper∣ty, we must likewise be suppos'd to have a Right to preserve it: for those Rights are by the Law secu∣red against the Invasions of the Prerogative; and by consequence we must have a Right to preserve them against those Invasions. It is also evidently declared
by our Law, that all Orders and Warrants that are issued out in Opposition to them, are null of them∣selves; and by consequence, any that pretend to have Commissions from the King, for those Ends, are to be considered as if they had none at all, since those Commissions being void of themselves, are indeed no Commissions in the construction of the Law; and therefore they who act in vertue of them, are still to be consider'd as private persons, who come to in∣vade and disturb us. Fourthly, He makes a King in Fact to be Lord of the Fee. We have been too long haunted with this word Fact, and therefore I will try to lay the Goblin. The Bishop hath nothing to do with your Goblin Fact; He always own'd the King's Right to the Crown to be Legal, and by the Virtual Consent of the People. If the Bishop chances to write any word, though in the Ap∣plication of it, it relates to other persons, without e∣ver weighing, or considering the intention or dsign of it, He runs away with his whymsical mis-apprehen∣sion of the mater, and from his own mistake makes and forces the Bishop to say or write any thing to his squinting purpose. The Bishop applies himself to the Non jurors, because, as they could not deny him to be King in Fact; that is, to be in possession of the Throne, so they ought to swear Allegiance to him in considera∣tion of the Protection he gave them, and that they liv'd under his Government, whether they did or would own him Rightful King or not. Your Supposition of Forcible Entry, which ollows, is altogether imperti∣nent, as to the Bishop; because he hath told you over and over, that the King hath a Right to possess the
Throne, by that Legal Possession of it, which was gi∣ven him by the Lords and Commons. Fifthly, He would have people swear an Obedience ac∣cording to Law, in Opposition to a Blind and Absolute Obedience, though they are still to retain their Passive O∣bedience, which is certainly Blind and Absolute Obedience, or else there is no such thing in the World. In this place more particularly, I appeal to Mr. Iohn∣son's greatest Amirers (if they have but common Ju∣stice for Truth) whether any Iesuit could have perver∣ted the Intention, or Sense of any Author more Villai∣nously and Bare-fac'd than he hath the Bishop's in this Note: Is here the least shadow of an Insinuation of Passive Obedience, when our Allegiance is declar'd an O∣bedience only according to Law; that is to say, Not a Blind or Absolute Obedience; but such an Obedience as is defined and limited by the Laws. Now what could have been express'd more opposite to Passive Obedience? Nor can they, or any others, retain their Passive Obedi∣ence if they keep to the Laws, because Passive Obedi∣ence is a tame submission to those illegal Commands of a King that are evidently against, and tend to destroy all Law. No Man hath asserted the Laws, and Pub∣lick Liberty with more Reason, nor more Nervously enforc'd than the Bishop of Salisbury (which appears from the Quotation I made out of his Measures of Sub∣mission to the Supream Authority.) And 'tis a base Impu∣tation to say, That he would have any body retain the mistaken Notion of Passive Obedience, or shews how it should not hurt them; when at the same time he so plainly and positively declares the contrary. But 'tis enough for Mr. Iohnson to make the Bishop enter a Sal∣vo
for, or to be an high Asserter of the mistaken Doctrine, when he only mentions the word Obedience, as in this place; and much more when he repeats the Highest Principles of Passive Obedience, in the 20th page. Tho at the same time 'tis impossible, if a Man be but honest, or hath but a mean Judgment to apprehend them any bodies (as the Bishop supposes) but the Non-Iurors; which will evidently appear, if you will take the trou∣ble to read part of the 19th and 20th pages of the Pa∣storal Lettter; where 'tis as apparent also that the Bishop argues from other Principles, That the Non-Iurors ought to swear to the present Government, even though they should retain, or according to their Highest Principles of Passive Obedience. I will only repeat a Line or two in the beginning of that Paragraph, to inform you of the Bishop's design. ;But I will in the last place carry this matter further, to justify the present Settlement, as a thing Right and Lawful in it self. Should I have said, that I was the Fairest Adversary in the World, and should have had so many plain Instances of misrepresen∣ting plainly prov'd upon me, I should have expected but little Credit to be given to me: But I'le warrant you, Face and Feathers will stare it out. And now I'le leave our Noter to roul and tumble in his own wit, and divert himself with his story of the Welchman, his Bow-string and Black-Box, his Thebaean Legion, his Mine-take-it and Your-take-it. And because I will be sure to win his Favour, I do own that I have, and al∣ways had as great an Aversion to the mistaken Notion of Passive Obedience, as he hath to Maxims. But by the way, he must let me be convinc'd by my own fol∣lowing Reasons, though he will not let the Bishop by
his; To which I will only premise, That 'tis the Na∣ture of Mankind to be easier perswaded and convinc'd by modest and plain Reasonings from their Errors and Mistakes, than banter'd and hector'd; and that 'tis more Christian and Generous rather to lend an helping Hand to a Blind Man, who hath mistaken his way, than rail at his Imperfection. I wonder how this Doctrine of the Cross came to be call'd the Doctrine of Passive O∣bedience; and I much more wonder how it should ob∣tain so much Credit in a Country where the Christian Religion is the Establish'd Religion, and the Laws are the Rule and Standard of all Obedience. I think moreover, that Passive Obedience is as great a Bull in Terms as Roman Catholick, Vniversal Particular; for all Obedience is Active, and to Obey is to do the thing commanded; and Passive Non-obedience would have sounded much better, because the Design of the Do∣ctrine is to suffer rather than obey, or when I will not o∣bey; and the Primitive Christians were under an Ob∣ligation to suffer even to Death rather than deny the Faith they had confess'd, and so become Apostates. What I ap∣prehend to be the proper and true meaning of the Doctrine, is, to suffer rather than Apostatize. But to reflect on the practice of it amongst us. As where the Grand Seignior's Horse once sets his Foot, no Grass grows, so where this mistaken Notion of the Doctrine takes place, all Laws must be trod under Foot: The Doctrine of the Cross was, and is a true Doctrine; but not calculated for the Year 1688. in a Christian legal∣ly establish'd Government, and is altogether impracti∣cable amongst us; because if any man, upon what ac∣count soever, or from whomsoever commission'd, shall
attempt to take away my Goods or Life by force, or in an illegal manner, I may lawfully resist them, by the Laws of God, Nature, and my Country; Otherwise that which should be my Rule, would be my Snare; So that it can be no sin in me to do what the Laws of God, Nature, and my Country direct. Were I in Turkey, and the Grand Seignior should send an Express to acquaint me, That I must either turn Mahometan, or kiss the Bow string; 'tis my Duty, and I hope God would enable me rather to suffer Death than deny and renounce the true Faith of Christ. But there is a great difference between a Turkish, Arbitrary and Mahometan, and an English, Limited, and Christian Government. Theory and Practice are two different things, and the latter many times discovers the Absurdity of the for∣mer; and I am sure, though I should have preachd my Lungs out in the Neighbourhood where I liv'd, not one thickskull'd Miner or Collier would have been perswaded that 'twas his Duty to sit tamely with his Hands in his Pockets, whilst an Irish Dragoon trimm'd his Ears and Nose off. Nature, Humane Nature will struggle. Thus having stated this Point, I think it will not be improper in this place to offer my Sentiments to those who do not take the Oaths, in relation to the Oath of Allegiance which they have already taken, and by which they account themselves bound up. 'Tis allow'd, that a Law is to be obey'd, and an Oath to be taken according to the sense and intention of the Legisla∣tors. In the late times there was a distinction between the Kings Person and his Authority, upon
which account there was an Oath fram'd to obviate and take away any such Mischeivous Distinction, And tho it extended to secure the King as to his person and legal rights, yet it was never design'd as a foundation of an arbitrary and irresistible power, or that the sub∣ject might not resist any violent and illegal proceed∣ings, and more especially when the whole rights of the Community were struct at, and a subversion of the Government undeniably put in practice. 'Tis Rebelli∣on to invade the Kings right, but not so, to preserve and defend what the Laws and constitution of the Government have given me a just and legal right and title to. There is a latitude imply'd in this Oath, Unless when we take it we swear to be slaves from that day forward, for if taken in a strict sense it cancels all our natural and positive rights and Laws at once; we are bound hand and foot, and only left at the mercy of an Absolute King, and contrary to all reason and justice, the Impostumated and unnaturall Power and will of one, is superiour and preferrable to the good and preserva∣tion of all the rest of the body Politick: the Original Government was by the consent of the people, as also the form and kind, and the good and welfare of Man∣kind is the undoubted end of it. Salus Populi, Supre∣ma Lex. To which purpose I will only add the Opini∣on of the Judicious and Ingenious Author of the Cha∣racter of a Trimmer page the 7th; When all is said, There is a natural reason of State, an undefinable thing, grounded upon the Common good of Mankind, which is Immortal and in all Changes and Revolutions, still preserveth its Original Right of saving a Nation, when a Letter of the Law perhaps would destroy it;
And by whatsoever means it moveth, carrieth a power with it that admitteth of no Opposition, being suppor∣ted by Nature, which inspireth an immediate consent at so critical times into every individual Member, to that which viibly tendeth to the preservation of the whole: And this being so, a wise Prince, instead of controverting the Right of this Reason of State, will by all means endeavour it may be on his side, and then he will be secure. But to return to my Noter, who would have done but honestly to have clear'd the Bishop from this false Imputation, by informing the World with what he says in his 26th page of the Pastoral Letter; where he pre∣sumes those Men to have been very much mistaken, who have taken up an Opinion, ;That there is an uncon∣troulable and Supream Power lodged with our Kings by a Divine Deputation, which exempts them from being call'd to an account, or resisted by their peo∣ple, let their Violations of the Law be never so ma∣ny, or so Eminent. And in the next page, he proves it from the Original Articles granted by King Iohn, which he there repeats with this Inference ;And the Subjects are not only warranted, but rquir'd to en∣ter into Associations and Oaths for that Effect. This is an Evidence, that by the Ancient Constitution of England, there was no such irresistable Authority in our Kings. as some have been inclin'd o imagine. To which the Bishop subjoyns this wise and seasonable Caution: ;But after all, if there are any who are so possest with their pre-conceited Opinions, that they either cannot lay them down, or will not confess that they have been mistaken in their Notions of Politicks,
these ought to be very sure that they are in the right, before they will adventure, as far as in them lies, to undermine and shake the present Constitution. To what base shifts is impotent Malice put, to compass its wicked, but unsuccessful designs? But to proceed to the Bishop's 4th Paragraph: ;This is either true, or those who live upon a Continent, and that are subject to the Conquests and Invaions of their Neighbours, must be miserable: For tho our happy Scituation has exempted us for a whole Age from falling under any such difficulties, yet this is a Case that falls often out in all different States which are on the same Continent. Upon which our No∣ter observes; This is shifting the Scene; for he knows that we are a World by our selves, and have nothing to do with the Continent. It is a Land-loping Argument, and till we are in the Condition of the Flanderkin Towns he need not urge us with their Practice and Example. And he is wholly out of the way in every word he utters. For we are not deserted or forsaken, nor conquer`d or subdu'd, nor under the power of an Enemy, nor treated as Enemies, nor cudgelled into an Oath of Allegiance, nor ever will be. Our Noter in this place is cudgelling and conquering his own shadow; for the Bishop hath not affirm`d that we are so barbarously us'd, but knows that we are in profound peace. What is Reason in England, is Reason in Flanders, and all the world over; The Bishop is on∣ly comparing and stating the Point and Case of the Non jurors with that of the Subjects on the Continent, who are often subject to Conquests. He is not come as yet to the Merits of the Cause, but argues, That a bare posses∣sion, which gives protection, obliges those who live under it
to swear Allegiance; and 'tis matter of Fact, that the Flan∣derkins do swear Allegiance to the French when he is Master of a Town, and so in like manner to the Spaniard; so that he infers the lawfulness and reasonableness of so do∣ing; and offers it as a Reason and Argument to the Non-jurors; and the inevitable destruction of Cities and Societies if they did not; and so by consequence, that Allegiance is a diffeasable thing, and may be transferr'd when there is a pressing necessity for it. If I should say, Mr. Iohnson was wonderfully subject to error and mistakes, and that he was no more Infallible in his Notes than the Pope of Rome, we should have him call it a Land-loping Argu∣ment in his Second Part; but I am sure what he hath no∣ted on the Bishop's Argument, by way of Comparison is Forreign and Outlandish to the purpose. But our weak Noter proceeds in his mistake, and tells us; If I were hired to write against the Oath of Allegiance, I would use such Arguments as this is. I verily believe you would, because I find by Expe∣rience you are very apt to write what is altogether impertinent to the matter in hand, and in most places your Notes are quite contrary to the Point. Are we in the Case of those that are slaves under the Spaniard, and slaves under the French, that often change their Master, but never their Condition, that are Prize, and re-taken, and Prize still? Let him answer me that. I will answer for the Bishop: No, we are not. Nor hath the Bishop mention'd one word of Slavery, or compar`d our condition with theirs. We have indeed chang'd our Master some time since, and I think much better'd our condition. But in all his Travels, could he find no Copy for us to
write after, nor no body to match us with, but a conquer'd People? The Bishop hath unluckily made use of the word Conquest and Invasions; tho apply'd to the Continent, and our Misrepresenter will have it, that the Bishop is matching our Condition with a conquer'd people. But I think any man who hath a Grain of Sense, must own the Bishop intended nothing like it; but only as he evi∣dently tryeth to prove the Absurdity and Falseness of In∣diffeasable Allegiance. Mr. Iohnson tells us; I love to talk with Maxims as I do the sight of an Ass, who looks like Gravity and Wisdom, and is not. I know the Reason of it, a Jest upon an Ass is thrown away, and Maxims are such wise and grave things, that they are above the short reach of your Understanding and then you lose an Opportunity of shewing your dogrel parts. But to the other part of our Paragraph. ;For if subjects owe their natural Prince such an Obstinate Allegiance that neither desertion nor conquest can dissolve it, then in what a mise∣rable condition must they be, when they fall under the power of their Enemy, that never thinks himself secure of them, but treats them still as Enemies till they swear Allegiance to him; upon which observe our Noter. I can tell him (And that's all, I know you can't prove it, and I am sure the Bishop is not apt to beleive every thing you say) that Allegiance is so Obstinate a thing that neither desertion nor conquest, nor any thing in the World but what is intrinsical to it (that is breach of Co∣venant or consent of both parties) dissolve it: It is a mo∣ral duty, and Heaven and Earth may pass away before Allegiance can pass away.
Sincerely, Mr. Iohnson, I thought you had been a better Lawyer than to tell us that Allegiance is a Moral duty, I always apprehended it to be a Legal Duty, and Having a Gude Memory I remember you tell us in the 21st page, that besides the service due to the Lord of Fee, as it was the Duty that the Liege Lord owed to his Liegeman. I must confess I never met with Lord in Fee, Liege Lord, or Liegeman in any book of Morality, or that treated on Moral Duties, that I ever read. But Mr. Iohnson is a great Scholard, and hath con∣vers'd with old musty Books which I never saw. Now, for want of judgment you are prophaning Scri∣pture with your Heaven and Earth may pass away before Allegiance can pass away. I suppose I shall have a con∣venient opportunity to prove, that Allegiance may pass away, in this page, or the next; therefore I'le defer it. Our Noter is now upon his Queries, which I will an∣swer. As for Desertion, we must first know what it is, be∣fore we can know whether it will affect our Allegiance. A Soldiers deserting, nnd running away from his Colours, we know; but what is this to deserting a Crown or a King∣dom? 'Tis just like a Soldiers running away from his Colours; 'tis running away from his Kingdom. You ask, Did the King desert willingly or unwillingly? I be∣lieve unwillingly, because he would have willingly staid and set up Popery and Arbitrary Power: Besides, I am sure he had no such Kingdom to go to. Did not his people desert him first? No; he deserted his people first, in that he dissolv'd our Allegiance, and destroy'd our Laws with his Dispensing Prerogative, and by employing Papists, who were incapable by Law to act in the Go∣vernment; and then because we were such foolish Pas∣sive
Rebels, who would not help the Irish Dragoons to cut our own Throats, he withdrew, and left us in a state of Anarchy; but we took care not to continue so long. The matter of Fact in truth is this, K. Iames resolv'd to bring in Popery and Slavery upon us. The generality of the Nobility, Gentry, and Common People, were resolv'd neither to be Papists or Slaves. Our desperate Circum∣stances were represented to the P. of Orange, who readi∣ly engag'd to attempt our Rescue. He came; The uncon∣cern'd Nation did not think it an Invasion, but were ra∣ther glad of an opportunity to free themselves from those imminent and real dangers they were surrounded with. Upon which account some joyn'd with the Prince, others expected the Event. The Officers of the Army hought themselves under no Obligation by K. Iames's Favours, to betray their Country, or draw their Swords more effectually to destroy their Liberties and Legal Rights; (which would have been the consequence of their suc∣cess) and therefore would not sacrifice these for any future precarious Interest, when 'twas viible their for∣mer Advancements were only design'd for sinister ends; and they who would not promise to do every thing they were Closeted about, or what Father Peters thought necessary to carry on their designs, were either frown'd on, or displac'd. The King's trusty darling Subjects, the Papists, who would live and die with him, they threw down their Arms, deserted, and were ready to run in∣to Awger-holes, when a Sham-Declaration threaten'd to leave them to the mercy of the Army, Fin-landers in Bear-skins; and Mirmidons with broad Swords, and bright Armour. As for what follow'd, K. Iames may thank
himself, his Bigottry, and Prince-destroying Caterpillars. Experience hath always verify'd what Seneca the Tra∣gedian hath observ'd, speaking in the Person of K. A∣gamemnon: Violentum nemo unquam Imperium continuit diu, Mo∣derata durant. Well, now we are coming to the Merits of the Cause; Had the people reason to forsake K. James or no? Had he oreited? Had he broke his Allegiance (let it be some o∣ther Law-word; for I never heard that the King owed Allegiance to his People) first; Was he the aggressor? Yes. The Bishop owns all this that I have answer'd, in his Pastoral Letter, and was one of those who actually came with the Prince to rescue us, and to re-settle and pre∣serve our Government according to its Legal Consti∣tution. But the Argument the Bishop employs to per∣swade the Non-jurors to take the Oaths, is, from the mis∣chiefs that attend Indefeasible Allegiance; and that 'tis no true Maxim, that the bare desertion of K. James, without considering the Cause, was a sufficient ground for the Non Iurors to comply, and take the Oaths. I am indebted to you a Proof, that Allegiance may pass away,pag. 37. and I will discharge it with five of your own words (which you little dream'd would do it) What is impracticable is void. Our Allegiance to K. Iames is impracticable; therefore 'tis void. For if we are here, and K. Iames is I know not where, we can't pay our Allegiance to him; and therefore must transfer it to the King in possession, who protects us. In the next Page you say, If he deserted, he was forced to desert; for the very ground he stood upon fell from under him. But what wicked Rogues do you think undermin'd the ground
he stood on? Why, Father Peters, and the rest of the Iesuits and Monks, who work'd night and day to un∣dermine and subvert the Government: The very Spawn of those who undermin'd, and laid Powder, with a de∣sign to blow up your Patrons Predecessors. So much or Desertion (and so much for nothing to the purpose); Now for Conquest. Tho there is a great diffe∣rence between aying what could and migh be done, and what is actually done; yet Mr. Iohnson, I must beg your excuse for a page or two on this Point; and tho you have taken the liberty to reflect on Kings, Marquisses and Bishops, with several other of the Nobility; yet I have so great a deference to, and must be concluded by all Decisions of the great Council of the Nation; and I am convinc'd it would be a great piece of Impudence, as well as Impudence, to offer any thing on this Point, tho it were agreeable with my private Sentiments; and there∣fore as you have been bantering upon partial I'le endea∣vour to repay you in your own Coin, in your suppo∣sition of a true Conquest. The Point you propose, is, Whether a true Conquest dissolves Allegiance? Suppose a King and his people (who are all of a piece, till either of them break Faith with the other) are both run down, and fall under the Chance of War. It is no matter which of them is in the Conquerors hands, because they are all as one. If their King have that hard fate, they must either rescue or ransom him, tho their private Money and their Church Plate go for it. And if any of his people fall into the Enemies hands, he must do the same by them. I perceive already we are like to have a rare Quixo∣tian Conquest. Our Noter supposes a King and his peo∣ple (of one iudividual and indivisible piece) to be con∣quer'd.
Well, what then must be done? Why, i their King have the hard fate, they must either rescue or ransom him, tho their private money and their ChurchPlate go for it. Why not their own HousePlate, Mr. Iohnson? But I presume he supposes the Conqueror, or his Soldiers, had secur'd that before, or that the Church Plate might be better spar'd. No, no, the poor solitary King is only conquer'd; and in this part o the suppsition, the people are in a pretty good condition. But, Mr. Iohnson, in my Opinion this was a cleaver Tip of this Coqueror too, only to tip the King down. By the story, this King of yours did no more carry the Government in his Pocket than K. Iames.pag. 40. But 'tis an improper time, Mr. Iohn∣son, to rescue a King, when he is truly and wholly con∣quer'd; and what should he be ransom'd for, when his Country was lost, and in the Conquerors possession. To proceed: And if any of his people fall into the Enemies hands he must do the same by them. Very true, One good turn deserves another. I thought, Mr. Iohnson, you had set aside partial Conquest, and were come to that which was true and total; and if so, you would have out-done all our Conquering Bishops, which you tell us, meant that K. James was conquered, and not the Nation, because you now suppose the people o be conquer'd, and your Eutopian King unconquer'd. But the truth o't is, you run away from the Point here as you have done all along in your Notes; and we find only a few Prisoners taken, and no true Conquest, according to the supposition. If neither of them can do this, but they are over power'd, and unable, the next thing is to advise the party that is in the Briars, to make the best terms they can; Redime te captum quam queas Minimo.
If neither of them can do this, but they are over∣power'd, and unable. Oh hard fate!pag. 27. What a Fer∣vour would such a Conquest leave upon this King and peoples minds! Prithee, Mr. Iohnson,pag. 35. (I know your Soul pity'd the Case of the miserable Flander∣kins) give this distress'd King and People your sage ad∣vice. And in return of your kindness, I'le advise you to get clear of this Briary Supposition upon very easy Terms; Own you did not write it in one of your lucid Intervals. We must not forget the Inference which follows: But how then does Conquest dissolve Allegiance, when it is plainly the agreement of the parties themselves, which sets them ree rom one another. I am of Opinion, the sober∣est man in Bedlam cannot imagine how, from your Sup∣position, which is partial, total, and all the while No Conquest at all—Risum teneatis. But to proceed to the last part of this Paragraph: ;Now all the true Maxims of Government being such, that they must tend to the preservation, and not to the ruin of Mankind, it is certain that all those are false which tend to the inevitable destruction of Ci∣ties and Societies; and therefore this of an indiffea∣sible Allegiance must be reckon'd among these, since the fatal Consequences that must attend upon it are evident; and this is the Opinion in which all who have considered this matter, either as Lawyers or Ca∣suists do agree. I have ever had a great aversion to all Maxims of Go∣vernment, true or false; for there always lies lurking this Deceit in Generals and niversals, that tho they be true for the most part, yet they are conceiv'd in Terms large e∣nough
to be falsly applied; and then they become false, and are usually the ools that dishonest men go to work with: And I never saw a man deal in transcendental Politicks, wich are over our Heads, and avoid coming down to particulars, and to the point, but with a purpose to deceive. But why an Aversiou to true Maxims, Mr. Iohnson? Maxims are Truths of Quality, and ought to be respect∣ed and lov'd as well as meaner Truths: If I had not prov'd your Maxim of Indiffeasible Allegiance no true one, you would have thought me very simple and un∣mannerly, if I had any ways express'd my hatred to it, only because it was a Maxim. What is true, and of use, ought not to be rejected, because it may be abus'd and perverted by ignorant and malicious men. And by what I find in your Notes, you have avoided coming down to Particulars, and the Point, eiher for want of Judgment, or to deceive your Readers. But the Bi∣shop of Salsbury may thank your roaving Brain, in that you have only trancrib'd his Oracular Maxim, and pas∣sed it by unnoted on at present. Our Noter hath such an Exalted Imagination, that no meaner a Ghost can enter into it, than that of a Duke or Bishop. But I will offer my presum'd advice, that for the future you be not too witty and severe on the Remains of so Judicious and Learned a Prelate as Bishop Sanderson, (tho at the same time the greatest Men are but Men, and subject to mistakes as well as the most inconsiderable) lest when the Renown'd Mr. Iohnson shall be no more, his Notes shall be trampl'd on like common dust. I have been credibly inform'd a matter, not unknown to a Lady of great Honour, that Mr. Iohnson hath been offer'd very good Preferments (by the means of the Bi∣shop
of Salisbury too) since the Revolution; but what's a Deanary to a Mouth-watring Bishoprick or Archbi∣shoprick? Now to speak with the Freedom of an ho∣nest Englishman, I am glad that I am engag'd with Mr. Iohnson, and not Your Grace; because, if we may be∣lieve your own envious Remarks on Episcopacy and Bishops, tam vivos quam mortuos, dead and alive, I am apt to conjcture, we should have had a Wolf in Sheeps cloathing. Well, but as Monsieur Montaigne says, since we can't all be great, let us have the pleasure of railing at Greatness. Our Noter hath spar'd the Bishop's Maxim at present, and hath brought a Volunteer to the stake. Necessity has no Law, is another Maxim, but it is pity there is no Law for it; for it has always been on the Court side, and never on the Countries, tho one would think the Maxim lay equally betwixt them both; but the truth of it is, they either are, or should be all one. Try your Interest, Mr. Iohnson, the next Sssion, and procure a Law to be made against all Maxims but your own. I warrant, we have some Old Story of K. Charles the first's time, or of some dead Lord Chief Ju∣stice to be hook'd in, which signifies nothing to the Maxim, which all Mankind have a Right and Title to. A pretended Necessity is no Necessity; and a Real Necessity supercedes, and is superiour to all Law. The Court and Country agree very well together, and may equally make use of the Maxim. So that the Subject of these Two Pages, as of divers others, are but as fea∣thers to stuff out our Noter's bulky book. And now I leave it to the Judgment of the imparti∣al and unprejudic'd Reader, whether Mr. Iohnson hath
either answer'd or destroy'd the Bishop's Reasons and Topicks offer'd to the Non-Iurors; He hath posiively affirm'd many things, but propos'd no one Argument to prove, That bare Possession doth not entitl a King to our Allegiance, or that Desertion is not a suffiient Argument to transfer it; or that Allegiance is indifea∣sible: So that upon the whole matter, he hath only for∣ced and misrepresented the Bishop's Dsign and Sense, and hath endeavour'd to confirm and continue the Non-Iurors in their Opinions, if they will not come up to his own. As to the remaining part of his book, which is a kind of confus'd Narrative, or Invective against former mi∣stakes and mismanagements, and of scurrilous Rflcti∣ons of his own, I do not see any good can be intended or proceed from it. Nor is this, or any other, a pro∣per time to rake into, and revive the expiring Differen∣ces and Divisions that have been amongst us: Nor can it any ways promote, but visibly tends to obstruct the publick good. Come, come, Mr. Iohnson, we com∣plain of our fore fathers, and censure former Transacti∣ons; and succeeding Generations will do the same by us, in that we have been too much addicted to our own private humours and Interests, instead of laying aside all foolish Animosities, and joyning hand in hand to act seasonably as well as vigorously against the common Enemy. But there always was, and is, and ever will be, Fools, and Knaves, and Madmen, who did not, do not, and will not see the true Interest of their Coun∣try. Some Men who prefer their own ungodly gain, private Revenges and Picks, who don't care whether the floating Island sink or swim, if they do not sit at
Helm, tho unable and incapable to steer the least Cock∣boat: But notwithstanding all this, Men had always different Sentiments of things; and 'twill be for the most part found as equally impossible to perswade a considerable number of men, tho the matter be in a manner obvious and plain, unanimously to assent to the how, and what is to be done, as to do it. Mr. Iohnson's angry and peevish, because all Men did not see with his Eyes, and judge by his Sentiments; when at the same time they know him to be subject to Error and Passions as well as others; and they who are imperious and supercilious in their Positions and Dictates, must expect to meet with Opposition and Reflections. No meer Man was ever in the Right in every thing he did or said, unless we will be so Phantastically credulous as to believe him to be possess'd with an Almighty At∣tribute of Infallibility; yet humane Nature apologizes for all that's mistaken through weakness and misappre∣hension, without Perversity and Obstinacy. Let Man∣kind jar and quarrel, the World rubs on in its Old Course; One Generation passes away, and another comes, and there is nothing New under the Sun. In our late Reigns the Bullet hath had its swing both ways; but in all Reigns, the Moderate Men have preserv'd his Nation on its true Basis, and defeated the designs of all Achitophels, whilst Whig and Tory have been ma∣nag'd and out-witted by those, who were Enemies to boh, and laugh'd behind the Curtain (as the French did formerly at the Dutch and us, who were both bub∣bled by the same methods) to behold their designs car∣ried on by turns with a bitter, but imprudent Zeal. 'Twas the Observation of that great Statesman and Sol∣dier,
the Duke of Rohan, That England was a great Beast, and could not be destroy'd but by its self; and therefore the French King, being no Fool in Politicks, thinks he can do nothing so much to his own advantage and our prejudice, as to divide us, and hath sent over these following Instructions with his Lewidores to his Emissaries here amongst us, and all under the disguise of Pity and Compassion for the miserable condition we labour under. The first thing they buz in your Ears is, The Church, the Church; Oh the Church! Now I would know of any man, in what danger the Church is at this time, when it has the same Laws to support it, the King and Qeen, Zealous Professors of its Doctrine and Disci∣pline, and in a manner the whole Body of the Nation, (especially all those in Employments) of its Commu∣nion. 'Tis true, the Law hath given the Dissenters Liberty of Conscience, and 'tis the Opinion of Wise Men, 'twill lessn their Number; howsoever, their Mouths are stopp'd, and by this means we are more united, and our Chariy is more enlarg'd towards each other: I dare be bold to affirm, that were our Lives as generally sound and good as our Doctrines, few of the wise and sober amongst them would dissent from us; and I have observ'd in those Parishes where the Ministers honestly and conscientiously discharge their Duties, there are but few Dissenters. But we have some amongst us so wise, as to think the way to rescue the Church out of its contriv'd danger, is to bring Father Peters back with French Dragoons, to be Shepherds to take care of our English Flocks, which is the true meaning of their conceal`d design.
The next doleful Topick is, the Taxes, the Taxes: But commonly they complain most, who pay none. 'Tis true, the Taxes are great; but was there ever more occasion than now? Is our Religion, our Liber∣ties, our Properties dear at any price? No Miser but will part with some of his Money to Purchase these, because it gives him a sure Title to the remaining part, and makes him live easy. Compare our Condition with that of the French; our Taxes are given by our own Consents; no forc'd Impositions; no grinding Ar∣bitrary Gabells; our Money is not call'd into the Ex∣chequer at a low rate, New-coin'd, and Paid out for more than 'tis Current: New Offices and Officers are no Establish'd to Oppress the poor People; these are presing Miseries we only hear of, and our Enimies en∣dure. We are told the Nation's Impoverishd our Money is all Transported abroad: But how doth this appear? Is the Luxury visibly less than formerly? There is little sign of Poverty, when Buildings, Fur∣niture, Equipage, Cloaths, all things that are Costly and Expensive are to be seen every where; Land keeps up its Price, notwithstanding its Taxes, and there is nothing to be Sold a Bargain, but there's a ready penny for it. Nor is it an Indication of Scarci∣ty of Money, when above a Million is subcrib'd to the India Company in some short time; and almost a Mil∣lion Voluntarily Advanc'd in two Months on a Lottery Fund. What a prodigious quantity of Plate and Iewels is there in the Nation at this time, which is of no more use to the Publick than if it were Earh? But, tho all this is true in Fact, and every where Evi∣dent; yet our noisy French Schreech-Owls are whi∣ning,
Poverty, Poverty; I believe their own Pensions are not so well paid as fomerly, and that France is the more proper place at present for their croaking Notes. But they subtilly intend that we should hoard up our Money, with other Riches, till such time as they have taken Flanders, and conquer'd the rst of the Confederates, and then they will be at more leisure to come and dispose of it. They tell us too, that all our Ships are taken, and that we have no Trade. I is not to be deny'd but that we have sustain'd gea Lsses; but then our Merchants, to make amends, have had considerable Gains by the good Markets they have found for their Commodities, both abroad and at home: We have never had great∣er Exportations, and 'tis not to be wonder'd at, that many Ships are lost, when our Enemies Ports lie so ob∣noxious, and their whole Force is converted into Pri∣vateering: Nor is all our Naval Force sufficient to se∣cure us in every part of our Trade, tho our Enemy were not near so strong as he is. But our Trade still goes on, and the benefit accrues to every part of the Nation; when our Losses only enrich a few Maritime Towns, and the main Continent at the same time suffers extreamly, occasion'd by a total decay of Trade, which wih their other insupportable Oppressions, will in some short time reduce them to the utmost mi∣series. But I hope a little time will discover who are in the better condition, the French who take all, or we who lose all; I am apt to believe all is not Gold that glisters; and had our Lewisites such Extraordinary Ac∣counts from France, we should not be long troubled
with their Company here; but they have shew'd them∣selves such unthinking creatures, that the Mobb begin to laugh at them and their Politicks, which are but Skin-deep, and are like to do but little mischief for the future. Another Instruction is to traduce, and rail at the Parliamentmen, because they Vote a vigorous War a∣gainst France, and Money to carry it on; to call them Courtiers, and Pensioners: I am apt to believe the Friends of this Government would think them French Pensioners, if they did not do what necessarily tends to our preservation; and 'tis a Malicious and Villainous Imputation to say, That our Representatives are, or must be pension'd not to destroy us. I might instance several other of their little Artifi∣ces to amuse the weak and unsteddy Minds of those who are frighted with their own shadows; but they have found so little success, that 'tis as little worth my pains to reflect on, as theirs to publish them. But I will suppose the worst, and what these Men boast, That the French King is strong, powerful, and Rich, and that there is no prospect that the War will end in 2 or 3 years. What then? Shall we tamely and foolishly submit to his intolerable Yoke? Shall we sneak for a Peace to him, whom neither Oaths, Sacraments, Treaties, Arti∣cles or Edicts can bind? No, no, let those who are for Slavery and Woodden Shooes, go flatter their Grand Monarch, lick and live on Dionysius's Spittle, whilst every true Englishman, with our united Confederates, will resolve to pursue Nobler and greater Ends, vigo∣rously endeavour to the utmost Extremity, either to lower and force the Disturber of Mankind to such a
Peace as shall prey on, and vex his ambitious humbled Soul, and make us all secure beyond the Humane Pro∣bability of a Relapse, or bravely perish in the At∣tempt. 'Twas a brave Genius that exerted it self amongst the Romans of Old, when two Great Men Voluntari∣ly embrac'd Death, the one to preserve; the other, be∣cause he would not out-live the Liberties of his Coun∣try. Let England once more hold the Ballance of Eu∣rope, retreive that Envy`d Power, which will make us both a Safe and a Great People. We have a Noble Ex∣ample to imitate, who exposes himself to, and under∣goes Herculean Labors and Dangers, to support and rescue the Miserable and Oppressed, who attempts to break the Fetters design'd for Europe, and to chain up that insulting Power which hath been too long em∣ploy'd in devastations, and the destruction of Man∣kind. Whilst our King shines with his own unsully'd and unborrow'd Glory, and like the Sun, with his kindly dispers`d Influences, warms and cherishes eve∣ry Confederate and Ally; The flatter'd Grand Mo∣narch, with his false Light and weak Beams, visits on∣ly Turks and Tartars, and his own Slaves, and like the Moon with her borrow'd gloomy Light, and comfort∣less Heat, instead of refreshing, only shines on Bats and Owls, and Beasts of Prey. I will not positively affirm, whether I am in the right or wrong, in what I have offer'd in this Digres∣sion; Neither do I impose my private Opinions on a∣ny Man, or will be concern'd whether they gain As∣sent. But this I will say, my Pen writes my real Thoughts and unbrib`d Sentiments, and as my intenti∣on
is neither to please or displease, so neither am I afraid to expose any Truths that may be useful and servicea∣ble to the Publick; and one would think the meanest Reasons and Motives should be of force to perswade Men 'tis their Duty to omit no Opportunity to do what may tend to the advantage of their Native Countrey, and not foolishly and treacherously to betray it. But to return to my Noter, who should not have heard of me, if his unseasonable, mistaken, and mali∣cious Notes had not appear'd; I know no End they can be design'd for, unless to divide us; and I am sure 'tis the Judgment of others, that they chiefly publish his own Ill-Nature and Indiscretion. 'Tis our buiness at present to look forward, and let past Miscarriages and Mis-managements be as so many Lght-Houses or Buoys to steer our Course so as to preserve us from a total Shipwrack. I know of no Gievnces, N Ar∣bitrary Power, N Illegl Practices now on Foot; most mn hve qre and are cvinc'd of their former Mtakes, and o believe tha we have Laws, and Rights, and Liberties, and that they may be preser∣ved and defended, so that M Iohnson migh have spar'd, or employ'd his pain to a better prpose. 'Tis true, the IllNatur'd World are pleas'd with sharp and bitter Satyr, whether the Subject of it be true or false, and some mens Notes are read mch to the same pur∣pose, as the Mobb Listen, and are tickl'd with the Hu∣mours and Wit of a Ick-Pudding; they laugh all the while they stay, but are not a Dam the wiser when they g wy for his impertinent Stories, and scurrilous Jt. What relates to your following Mxim, p. 46. (it being privately transacted, and deliver'd as a pri∣vate
Opinion to my Lord Russel by way of Letter) I am altogether a stranger to that matter how it was stated, and therefore have nothing more to offer about it, but that I am perswaded it was designed with a good intention, and that the publishing of it at this tim is insignificant, and can serve to no other end, than to discover your own inveterate spleen. If it be an Honour and Reputation to a man of Learning (as certainly it is) to own and retract an Er∣rour and to embrace the truth, by what Motives, or at what time soever he Apprehends it, Why then should the Learned Dean of St. Pauls lye under an Imputation for owning his mistakes. The greatest men sometimes err, misconceive, and are easily carry'd away with a current, tho mistaken Opinion. Some indeed are so obstinate, and proud that they rather persist to eat sowr grapes, than discover a weakness in their choice; but it shews a man hath a true relish for truth, when being convinc'd of his former Errour, He readily em∣braces her. The same Principles and reasons which convince me, have not perhaps the same force with another man, occasion'd by our different conceptions and Judgments, therefore we must bear with, and be∣lieve the best of each other. Could we suppose an e∣qual capacity to Judge, we might conclude that most men would have the same sentiments of things, presuming they were alike Impartial. But there are weak Judgments, Prejudices, Prepossessions, Interests and Passions, which like so many strong Biasses draw and incline us from truth. 'Tis a Censorious and un∣charitable opinion positively to affirm, that Interest without any conviction hath changed a mans senti∣ments,
And the Deans Works express so deep and Noble a sence of Religion, that I should think it a in in me, to harbour the least thought, that he should make ship-wrack of his conscience for any advantage what∣soever. If the Dean hath been mistaken in his case of Rsistance, I am sure Mr. Iohnson hath misrepresented his sense (cording to custome) in his case of Allegi∣ance, for the Dean hath not Authoriz'd Tyranny in Title or Vsurpation,Pag. 55. but only endeavour'd to prove how far our Allegiance is due upon sup∣position, or even tho we were under a Tyrant o uur∣per, which misapprehension he obviates in the pre∣face to his case of Allegiance, and delares ou prsent King to have a different title from that of Usupation. I will not trouble my self to repeat or rflct on his confus'd medly of stories and transactions in the late Regs, we all very well remember the Illegal and Arbi∣trary proceedings from which we have had a happy deliverance, and for which an act o Oblivion is past, And I see no Reason why any man should peevishly vx himself for what is past and cannot be recall'd; If men had been Honest and for the publick good of the Nation, things would not have been manag'd as they were; but at present we have no fullom Ad∣dresses with false names no Oxford Plot, Irish Court Wit∣nesses, Noli Prosequi's, No dispensing power, Nor are New Crters sent into the Country to establish a nw ki of Government, but all things go on in thir proper Cannels, the Laws take place and the seat of Jdicature are fill'd with Men of Integriy and Ai∣lities who will not be made State tools, nor bri'd or fightd from what is Law. If M. Iohnson had look∣ed
behind the Curtain too, He might have seen seve∣ral new actors, who were thought too Honest to have any part in the administration of Affairs in the late Governments, therefore he might have omitted his foolish and impudent suggestions as if arbitrary pow∣er were forgeing on the Court Anvil. He might have spar'd his insolen and uncharitable reflections as i those who have been advanc'd and employ'd at Court, were for exposing the Kings Person in Flanders, whilst they Domineer at home. Mr. Iohnson because he looks on himself as the House of Commons Champion, takes a great deal of Liberty to bespatter whom he pleases. But wise Men always despise the Aspersions of a Craz'd Understanding and an evil tongue, and a Cer∣tain Philosopher assures us, that if an Ass should Kick a Man, He would be the greater Beast of the two, if he should Kck him again. But who could have Ima∣gin'd that Mr. Iohnson who conceits himself qualifi'd to Govern a Kingdom, to direct King, Lords and Com∣mons; should be out in his politicks; and because Aristo∣tle in his politicks is severe upon Guards, therefore He would have no standing Army. There is a great deal of difference between having Guards, and an Ar∣my to protect and secure our liberty and Properties, and on the contrary to be employ'd to destroy them; besides times and seasons Change and vary, And Kingdoms now must Arm to deend themselves against a Popish Tyrant, who wih a Saracen-like Head, Sawcer Eyes, a wide throat and insatiable stomach, attempts to devour and swallow up his neighbours Cities and Territories. Mr. Iohnson thinks we have no business in Flanders, but I presume he may be mistak∣en,
for the preservation of Flanders was always esteem'd the Interest of England,Pag. 80. and 'tis but Common Prudence, that when our neighbours House is on fire to help to quench it before it comes to our own; who can foresee the ill consequences of Flanders being intirely in the French Hands? The Dutch will be oblig'd to make peace, and prhaps Joyn with the French who make a great figure at Sea, and then we may want Crutches to support us, and keep the seat of the war out of our own Country. The rest of the Confederates will soon be overpower'd, and forc'd to any terms; But so long as we unite our forces to pro∣tect and defend each other, (upon which the afey of the whole Confederacy depends) we shall be safe and secure, because in all probabiliy the force and weight of Confederated Nations is not long to be resisted, and like a bundle of Arrows, when taken singly, are easily snap'd asunder, but when bound up together, resist the strongest Power. We know the Sea is our Element, and the cheifest strength of our Island is ship∣ping. Nor hath our Naval force been so much neglected as Mr. Iohnson Insinuates:Pag. 81. 'Tis the opinion of some, that Our maritine affairs have not been so well manag'd in some particular cases as they might have been. But I hope our bought experience will make us wiser for the future, and that the force of our Fleets may be so employ'd, as to retreive our lose, and give more security to our trade: But a great many ships miscarry because our Merchants for their private advantage, trade without Convoys, but in time they will be sensible, that 'tis better to come to a late Market at Cales, than an Early one at St.
Maloes. The Refin'd polities, and the other prevail∣ing Methods of France, had so far obtain'd, as to blind the Eyes or lull asleep their impolitick neighbours; in∣somuch that they have been so far from opposing, that they have raised them to their present Grandeur; and 'tis well, if their lae discover'd mistakes, and united forces have power to secue themselves, and reduce their encroach'd Enemy within his proper ounds. For as in diseases, if timely discover'd and oppos'd, they are easily cur'd, but when by neglect, or increas∣ing the causes, the malady becomes Chronical, it re∣quires time, skill and the utmost application to restore the body to its former sound Habit. 'Tis true, we alone have been an overmatch for France, and so hath Spain, what then? Time and Circumstances alter the unsetled affairs of this world, and France is now too strong for both, and yet in the reverse of things it may be too weak for either; but it matters not what a Kingdom was, but what it actually is: Mr. Iohnson tells us,Pag. 82. tho such a raw thing as our present Militia does well enough to keep House; Yet it must be a well train'd, if not a Veteran Army that shall do any great matters abroad. To which he subjoyns What then? shall we have a mercenary Army to supply this defect, and loose Old England to win France? I hope not, but so it would be; for a standing Army plainly destroys this Governmnt. If our Mercenary Army can but win France, Old England will of Consequence be preserv'd, and not lost; and then there will be no need of a standing Ar∣my; and I dare engage King William will send his
Danes back, as you inform us Knute did. A standing Army employ'd against France,Pag. 83. tends to preferve our Government. 'Tis not very Politick to send away our Forces, when we have most Occasion for them; and 'tis our true Interest to employ Forreigners; for it will both preserve our People at home, and when the Disbanding Time comes, those Officers who have serv'd their Coun∣trey, may be easier provided for; and perhaps we may have fewer Theives. Pag. 85.Mr. Iohnson tells us, He doth not love Digressions; but at the same time he hath taken leave long since of his Point of De∣fence,Pag. 59. and hath been only Digressing from one incoherent Story to another, for thirty Pages together; some men are pleas'd to reflect on the past Dangers and Misfortunes they have escap'd and out liv'd, whilst others fret themselves and lose their present pleasure, because their Thoughts are wholly taken up with past Oppressions and Plots, and writing Invectives against those who have never injur'd them. If it be difficult for those who have deserv'd well to find Friends, 'twill be the highest Imprudence to demean themselves so, as to dis∣oblige those who have Endeavour'd to serve them. How many Men have lost their best Friends, nay Created Enemies, rather than conceal or check a sower unmannerly Humour?Pag. 95. What Reason had Mr. Iohnson to insinuate as if Kendall (according to his civil way of Expressing
himself towards those who have the Honour of the Kings Commission for a Government, or as in the 78th page, to confirm themselves in their ill-gotten Honours) were to serve some evil Court Turn, when 'tis well known that Collonel Kendall did neither comply with King Iames when settled, and was otherwise very Instrumental in the Re∣volution, and therefore might very well deserve the Employment he was advanc'd to, but Sir Peter Coryton was not sent, and that was a sufficient Ground for Mr. Iohnsons Reflection. Had he spar'd some few Hours from his Old Musty Law-Books, and spent them in Reading a Chapter or two in the Whole Duty of Man against Self-conceit and Back-biting, though not so good a Noter yet I believe he might have been a better Christian. 'Tis no Imputation to a Mans Memory or Morals, to forget and forgive Injuries; and the Man who tells us he is Good Natur'd to a Fault, need not have publish'd. Mr. Chiswell's Message. It would be a difficult Qestion for Mr. Iohnson to Answer, What Wise or Sober Action he hath done since the Reformation, notwithstanding the good Opini∣on he hath of his Intellectuals, when he hath, like a Mdman, been throwing of Dirt at every Body. He tells us the Reason (Page 94.) Why he hath taken this Freedom, with the Bishop of Salisbury, because he hath taken a greater Latitude with me, and hath given me out for a Mad-man above these four years.
I am in the way of Writing, Mr. Iohnson, and though I must own you to be a great Man, yet I will Adventure to declare, what I apprehend a great Truth; but without any design against your proper Person, Preerment or Breed, or any Wise Notes you shall hereafter Wrie. There are three most Convinceing Reasons (without enquir∣ing whether the Bishop hath said so, or not) which command my Assent in this matter, which you know are as much as three Thou∣sand.Page 10. The first, That you have been Fighting with your own shadow, and Writing whatsoever came uppermost in your di∣sturbed Brain. The Next, That you have been over and above Witty. You remember the old saying, Nullum Magnum Ingenium sine Mixtura De∣mentiae. And last of all, If what Seneca saith be true, That, Ira furor brevis est, 'tis a Natural and strong Consequence, that he who hath been very Angry for four or ive years last past, hath been so long very Mad. Note upon these Reasons the next Lucid Interval. Who but a mad man would have thrown away a Witty Reflection on Two meer insensible Dutch Elements, Earth and Water? And 'twas something Ungrateful and Unseasonable too, in respect of the Catastrophe of my Lord Shaftsbury, as well as in Gude Remembrance of the Protection and Civilities the Worry'd Peer receiv'd at Amsterdam.
Mr. Iohnson having already mis-represented the Bishop's Sense, and the Antipathy he seems to hav against all Bishops in General, gives me Good Reason to suspect he hath a little strain'd his Two Bishops Meanings; And truly I am afraid that he hath either had a Knock in the Cradle, or that having Out-done some English Herb Wo∣man in her Civil Way of Banter, she hath hit him a Rap on the Skull; Otherwise he would not have us'd his Fanatical Reflections, Common Prayer-Book Mass-Book, or Laudean Religion, Anglice Popery, to prove his Two Mooted Points. If he pleases, he may talk of Self-Defence, and the Wellcome Assistance of the Prince of Orange, without any Distinction or Contradiction. Bless us! I am surpriz'd: Is it a Ghost I see, or hath our Noter been in the Third Heavens ever since he wrote his Forty Third Page.Page 2d. But to be Serious Three∣score and Five Pages together, is an Unusual and Frantick Digression. But our now Noter tells us the Reason of it in his 97th Page, (where he hath only made a short Digression of Ten Pages) that 'tis occasion'd by the Impeti∣nencies which continnally cross his Way, mean∣ing Brains. Hving a Gude Memory, I remember 108 Pages past, he tells us, That the Doctrine hat is in the Pastoral Letter, shall not live while it plea∣ses God to let him live.
I verily believe notwithstanding my reflections he will malitiously or ignorantly pervert the Bishops own meaning and design to his dying day. But to see the Contagious power of ill Company and bad Example. The two last dying pages of the Book can't depar in peace without breahing out destruction against the Maxims of the Bishops Book, and therefore I must se∣riously observe its dying Nonsense. The Bishops maxim is, ;That all which tend to the inevitable destruction of Cities and Societies, as Indiffeasible Allegiance does, are false Maxims. I will not trouble my self with Excluion times, other peoples Mxims, and no Maxims, are forreign to the Bishops Maxims. Because I am sure what Mr. Iohnson affirms here with Assurance of Indiffeasible Allegiance is not prov'd, therefore I desire you will be pleas'd to look back to his Supposition of a true and total Conquest, which I have long since deeat∣ed. I must confess 'tis a babarous thing to take a Coat away from a Man who hath but just two, And I am sure the Bishop would no more take his Allegiance from King William and Queen Mary, than rob him of an Honest Mxim, but I will make bold (for his own good) to destroy his darling Maxim of Indiffeasible Allegiance; because if King William and Queen Mary should chance to slip away to Lapland, without taking lave, and so consequently be Dead in Law, Mr. Iohnson will
be oblig'd to transfer his Allegiance to the next King in Possession, or take a tedious cold Jour∣ney, or if true to his own Principle, resist himself into a Jayl. Mr. Iohnson having mistaken the point, lays a hea∣vy charge, with a, Now I say that all his Lawyers and Casuists never said a Word of Truth in their whole Lives. Now because you may bring an Old House on your Head, Ile take the lye upon my self, and say, that the true End of Government is the preserva∣tion of Mankind. That Indiffeasible Allegiance is a false Maxim, because it tends to the destruction of Mankind; For when a King hath Abdicated, 'tis impossible for me to pay Allegiance to him; and 'tis an undeniable Maxim, Nemo obligatur ad Im∣possibilia; So that where the Duty cannot be per∣form'd, the Obligation necessarily ceases. Mr. Iohnson, if he pleases, may destroy these Maxims in his Second Part. Which having but nam'd, Oh, how I long! I am impatient to see it. I must confess, I have been a little too serious with the First Born but when t'other Young Master appears in the World, (the Second Off-Spring of his Prolifick Brain) perhaps at present only in Embrio, I'le persecute the unlick'd Cubb whilst I have a Day to live. And because (Kind Rea∣der) I`le make you amends for the Trouble I have
already given you, not having been so Comical in my Reflectious, as Mr. Iohnson in his Ban∣tering Notes, I'le promise to present you with a pleasant Scene, by way of Dialogue between Mr. Bays and Mr. Iohnson. FINIS.
