G1960 09825943 44220
A TREATISE OF THE Nature and Use Of the Bitter Purging Salt Contain'd in EPSOM, And such other VVATERS. By NEHEMIAH GREW, M. D. Fellow of the College of PHYSICIANS, and of the ROYAL SOCIETY. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1697.
ADVERTISEMENT. THat this Salt is made and sold in greater or lesser Quantities, by Francis Moult Chymist, at the Sign of Glaubers-Head in Watling-Street; And this Translation at no other Place.
TO THE READER. THE Reason of my publishing this Book in English is, the general Use I observe to be made of the Bitter Purging Salt in this Town and elsewhere, by all sorts of Persons, and that promiscuously, in all Cases, as Peoples Fancies or Humours prompt 'em, without any Advice beyond Publick Fame, or the good Woman that last visited. The Sellers of this Salt are likewise such as use to dispose of other Catholick or Universal Medicines, who neither know how to direct the Buyer, nor care what becomes of the Taker, so as they attain their End, their part of the Profit. There is indeed this diffe∣rence; That other Medicines that have grown Popular were always usher'd out with prin∣ted Directions, or Certificates of it's Virtues and numberless Cures, as Daffy's Elixir, Spi∣rit of Scurvy-Grass, Atkins's Oil for the Gout, &c. Nay, the very Disciples of
Ponteus afford for publick Benefit a printed Encomium for a Voucher to the Twelve-Penny Packet. This I thought sufficient to Vindicate my Translation of Dr. Grew's Na∣ture & Use of the Bitter Purging Salt, which I intend to give to those who buy any quantities of the Salt. And I'd have the Reader take notice, That this is no Quack-Bill, no boasting Rhodomontado of any Ignorant Pretender, no guilded Bush to set off bad Wine, but the Ob∣servations of an Ingenious Physician, Fellow of both Societies, and publish'd by him in Latin, for the Information of the Practicers of Physick, and for no Private Interest or Profit. But, I can scarce believe the Doctor ever foresaw the Consequence of his Commen∣dations wou'd be the pushing every Body up∣on the Use of it Hand over Head; there∣fore I doubt not his Pardon for my Translating it without his Knowledge, my Design being not to discover the secret Method of its Pre∣paration, but to prevent by these Directions the Mischiefs he tells us may ensue the Abuse of so good a Medicine. Farewell.
Part the First. OF THE NATURE OF THE Bitter Purging Salt. CHAP. I. How the bitter Purging Waters were first Discovered. THE Mineral Waters arising near Epsom in Surrey, the chief of all the bitter Purging Waters, were found out by a Country Man, in or about the Year 1620. For near, the first Ten Years, none but the Country People made use of them, and they only to wash External Ulcers.
Afterwards the Lord Dudley North, Fa∣ther to Francis the late Lord-Keeper, la∣bouring under a Melancholy Disposition, for which he had formerly Drank the Spaw-Waters in Germany, was resolv'd to try the Vertue of these Epsom Waters flat∣tering himself (I suppose) that he had found Chalybeate-Waters at his own Door. However, tho' they answer'd not his desire and expectation as to their Nature, yet he did not repent of his Experiment, but from that time drank these Purging Waters, as a Medicine sent from Heaven, with abundance of success. Many others, encouraged by his Exam∣ple, try'd the operation of these Waters; and amongst the first, Maria de Medicis, Mother to the Wife of King Charles I. the Right Honourable George Lord Goring, Earl of Norwich, and many other Persons of Quality. These, and all others, who drank the Epsom-Waters, came not for Pleasure but Health, and therefore always consulted their own, or some Neighboring Physi∣cian, for the Rules they were to observe. In a little while Physicians came of their own accord to these Waters by whose Au∣thority they acquir'd so great a Reputa∣tion, that 2000 Persons have been there
in one Day, to drink or divert them∣selves. About 30 Years since, many of the In∣habitants of London, whose Business or Poverty obstructed their going to Epsom, had the Waters sent to them. Thus the Ice being broke, others brought great quantities to Town, which they sold as well to Sick Persons as Apo∣thecaries, and continue still to do so. No wonder then that so few sick People go to these Waters, 'tis not that the Mo∣dern Physicians esteem them less, but be∣cause the Numbers of such as Drink at home, and at other Wells of the same Nature, do every Day mightily encrease. For a few Years after the Discovery of the Epsom-Waters was publish'd, others of the same sort (found out by Enquiry or Chance) grew into tolerable Repute and Use. The Names of the Principal are, Barnet in Hertfordshire. North-Hall in Hertfordshire. Acton in Middlesex. Cobham in Surrey. Dullidge in Surrey. Strettham in Kent. Besides these, the Curious and Inquisitive may discover very many more to us un∣known, especially if they take along with
them this Direction, that sweet Waters generally arise from the tops of Hills, but these from the Bottoms. CHAP. II. Of the Nature of the Bitter Purging Waters. THese Waters have no taste, but a moderate bitterness, which is very sensible. Some that have Travelled into Syria and Egypt, mention bitter Waters in those Countries; and St. James, in his Epistle, takes notice of sweet and bitter Waters, as very common things in the Eastern Parts; all which bitter Waters, 'tis pro∣bable, are of this sort. These Fountains are not of an equal Strength nor Vertue, but some are much stronger than others; with the strongest Dullidge is justly reckon'd with the gentler Epsom. These Waters in their Springs are with∣out smell, but kept some Days or Weeks in Vessels close stopp'd, they putrifie and stink, especially in Summer time; which will happen to all Waters, and sometimes also to the clearest Spring Water, as we
are told by those that Sail near the Equa∣tor. Pour a little of this Water to Sirrup of Violets, and 'twill remain blue and un∣chang'd, as if 'twere mix'd with common Spring-water. By the adding Lime water, it gives a whitish Muddy colour, as if some drops of Milk were mix'd with it, and the white parts will, in about an hours time, subside in the form of a cloudy curdling, produc'd from the Union of the chalky Lexivial, and the acidity of the Cathartick Salts. All these Waters will curdle Milk, if it be added to them when they are hot, or boiling, but not at all if mix'd when they are cold. The Waters of any of these Wells, eva∣porated in a glazed Earthen, or any other proper Vessel, will yield a kind of a Cream a top, and a sediment at the bottom of the Vessel, of both together, 6, 8, or 10 Drams from a Gallon. This Cream is of an Ash colour, Stony substance, and resembles Plaister, but cer∣tainly not at all Lixivial, for every one knows that the Lapis Calcarius, or Lime-Stone, calcin'd, altho' actually cold, will grow very hot by pouring Water upon them, and emit a very great and thick
fume, and that apply'd to any part of the Body 'twill burn. Therefore Chirurgeons use it for a Potential Cautery; but the fore-mentioned Cream calcin'd in a Cruci∣ble, and Water pour'd upon it, causes neither smoak nor heat, nor does it ac∣quire any the least Pungency. Sometimes, as in Acton-Waters, the thin Minute Particles of which it consists Will be very resplendent and brittle, and wholly insipid, tho' Calcin'd as aforesaid, yet by the pouring on any acid Liquor, chiefly by Spirit of Nitre, an Ebullition, with a sensible heat, will be excited. The lesser part of this Sediment is like in substance to the before-describ'd Cream; the remainder is purely Saline, but com∣pounded of two kinds of Salts, one a Mu∣riatick or Sea-Salt, the other a Salt proper or special to these Waters, whose Nature and Vertues I here design to treat of. In Epsom-Waters, the Muriatick Salt is about the 20th part of the whole Saline Composition; it is something more in Dullidge, and in most of the fore-mention∣ed Springs. In its biting Tast, as well as in the Fi∣gure of its Chrystals, 'tis not unlike Com∣mon Salt; whence it is that Waters, in which there is less of this Muriatick Salt, purge not so strongly as others.
The other Salt, as we have said before, is the proper, or peculiar Salt of the Pur∣ging Waters; 'tis made after the same manner as all Lixivial Salts, viz. by Eva∣porating, Filtring, and Chrystalizing, Calcination only excepted. In this Pre∣paration, the Earthy or Plaistery part, is first to be separated from the Saline; then the Muriatick Salt, and a yellow and thick Liquor from the proper Salt of the Waters. CHAP. III. Of the Nature of the Bitter Salt, peculiar to the Purging Waters. THis Salt, if it be rightly prepar'd, is of a delicate whiteness equal to new fall'n Snow. This bitter Salt is much more evident in the Salt it self, in a dry Form, than in the Water, and smites the Tongue with a very penetrating Pungency, but without any Acrimony. If you dissolve a Dram of this Salt in a Pint of Common Water, which is its Na∣tural proportion, 'twill have the same pro∣perty of curdling Milk, and be ennobled with the same bitter Tast and Purging Vertue peculiar to its Mineral Water. And therefore 'tis not improperly di∣stinguish'd
from the Sal Mirabilis, (made of Oil of Vitriol, and Common Salt) and from all other Salts, by the Name of the Bitter Purging Salt. This bitter Purging Salt, from the dif∣ferent manner of evaporating its Water, or degree of Cold, to which 'tis afterwards exposed, and other circumstances, will shoot into Crystals of a greater or lesser Magnitude. But let the Dimensions be what they will, the Figure is the same; for most of their Crystals, if they shoot not too thick, are small rectangular Prisms, with four parallel sides; the two opposite sides something flatter than the other. Sometimes they have two more sides, and are Sexangular; but these are so small that the naked Eye can hardly discover 'em. Their length is about half an Inch, but their thickness not above a fith, sixth or seventh part of their length; their Basis, a lump of the same; the Summit very different, having sometimes three, but for the most part four sloping Plains, and with the fore-mention'd parallel sides make obtuse Angles, or pointed, or of∣tener sharpned, like a Pen Knife: One of the sloping Plains is generally bigger than the other three taken together, and of a
Pentangular or Sexangular Figure; the opposite to this Quadrangular or Pentan∣gular; the other two Triangular and less; the last, sometimes invisible, without a Microscope. These Cristals, in their Oblong Figure, do most resemble Salt-Petre; in their Rectangular they come nearest to Sea-Salt. This bitter Salt, dissolv'd in common Water, and standing some Days in a Glass Vessel, shoots into Branches like little Trees round the sides of the Glass: To the producing this Figure, the before-describ'd Cristals of this Salt and of Sal Nitre (the points of which are terminated sometimes into Right, sometimes into Acute Angles) are very proper; the sloping Plain of one Cristal joyning to the pa∣rallel Plain of the others. Which I have also demonstrated to be done in the Ge∣neration of Leaves, by the Figure of their proper Salts. Plant. Ang. 9. lib. 4. p. 1. c. ult. Where note by the way, That in that Discourse I have set down the Figures of Sal Nitri and other Salts, not altogether as they appear to us, but, probably, as they do exist in the Plants themselves. Five Drams of this bitter Purging Salt, mixt in a Vial with half an Ounce of
common Water; and shaken together, by that Agitation only and the gentle Heat of the Hand in Winter, will all presently dissolve, except a few Grains; by which you observe it to be more dissolvable than any other Salt. 'Tis distinguish'd also by its Specifick Gravity from all other Salts; 'tis heavier than Allom, lighter than common Salt, and than Nitre, as we shall hereafter prove in the fifth Chapter. A dissolution of this Salt, and Salt of Tartar, and any other Urinous or Lixivial Salt, will generate a white Coagulum, or a Nuetral Salt, of the taste of neither, but something Styptick. Strong and new Oil of Vitriol, poured upon this Salt, will cause a moderate Ebul∣lition; from whence we may conclude it to be of an Alkaline Principle, and in some manner Lixivial. But if you add any other Liquor that I know of, either Acid or Alkali, to this Salt, 'twill neither ferment nor grow hot. This Salt in a Crucible, with a strong fire, will melt and swell like Allom into a white Porous and boiling Calx. But this Calx will (except about a 40th part of the whole) dissolve in a sufficient quantity of common Water, which the
Lapis Calcarius, or Lime-Stone, will not. This Calx, in a Crucible, with a vehe∣ment fire for an hour, will be as hard as Alabaster, nor will it afterwards be soft∣ned by the Air: Much otherwise 'tis with the Lime-Stone, which Calcin'd, and ex∣pos'd to the Air, falls to Powder. Altho' by this Calcination it loses some part of its weight, yet its bitterness con∣tinues, and is rather increas'd. The Calx of the bitter Purging Salt, by the affusion of Spirit of Salt, or any other Acid, will presently ferment, which is more or less conspicuous according to the strength of the aforesaid Spirit; from whence also we may allow it to be in some sort Lixivial. From a Pound of this Salt Distill'd in a Glass Retort well Luted, with a Rever-beratory Fire, you'll have in the Receiver a little above half a pound of an Acid Spi∣rit in smell and tast, every way equal to common Spirit of Salt. Oil of Vitriol pour'd upon common Spirit of Salt, yields a dark and smoaky Vapour, which will likewise happen, if you drop the same Oil very strong into the Spirit of the Purging Salt. 'Tis very well known, that all the Cha∣lybeate
Waters will change to a Purple, by the addition of Galls, as will White-wine Vinegar, tho' more obscurely; but the infusion of Galls will be in no wise alter'd by the Spirit of the Purging Salt, tho' an Acid, nor by the Spirit of {sulphur}, or Oil of Vitriol, from whence, as well as many other ways, the different Nature of these, and other Acids, may be shown. I took 8 Glass Bottles of River-Water, and with some drops of Sirrup of Violets colour'd them all blue alike; one of which I let stand without any thing else added to it. To a 2d I put a little Sal Nitri; to a third some of the bitter Purging Salt; to a fourth a little Lime-Water; to the fifth a dissolution of the Calx of the Purging Salt; to the sixth an infusion of white Tar∣tar; to the seventh the Distill'd Spirit of the Purging Salt; to the last, a little of both Lime-Water and the Purging Salt. In the three first, the Cerulous colour remain'd only a little faded. In the 4th and 5th, the Cerulous co∣lour was converted to a manifest Green; in the former turbid and paler, in the lat∣ter like a Smarag'd, very deep and clear. In the 6th and 7th it turn'd purple; in the first obscure, but the latter was like a true Amethyst.
The green colour, in the 4th and 5th, vanish'd in about 3 hours, but the 5th was much deeper, and more durable. From this manifold Experiment we may observe, that as Nitre, although by accension it will yield a fix'd Lixivial Salt, and by Distillation an Acid Spirit, yet has neither a Lixivial, nor Acid tast, there∣fore gives neither green nor purple colour to the Sirrup; so we may conclude the Purging bitter Salt to consist of like princi∣ples, that is not solely Acid, but also Al∣kalious, and a little Lixivial. But it may be evidently demonstrated, that its principles do partake of both, by the acidity of its Spirit, and the green co∣lour; its Calx gives Sirrup of Violets like Aqua Calcis, and other Lixivial Liquors. In the last Bottle the colour was deeper and more durable, by the combination or union of the twofold Alkalious Salt, the bitter Purging Salt, and the Calcarious, as Ink is made by the union of two Astrin∣gents. And 'tis very plain, that the existence of these Salts, and their efficacy in altering Colours, depends not on the fire, because the infusion of white Tartar will, like the Spirit of the Purging Salt, die the Sirrup of a purple colour.
Lastly, Take notice that I call the Al∣kaline Principle in this Purging Salt po∣tentially, and after a sort Lixivial. For, as we have observ'd in this Chap∣ter, you can perceive no Lixivial tast even in the Calx of this Salt, which does not hinder, but that an Alkaline Principle may be in this Salt, as appears from the fore cited Experiments, tho' it has never endured the fire, but after Calcination it is prov'd to be I know not how Lixivial. I call it Lixivial, tho that, nor any other Name in Use that I know of, is justly adapted to its Nature, for there is a want of proper Words to express our meanings in nothing so much as in Philosophy, such as should lead us through the Footsteps of Nature, and Intelligibly express its admi∣rable variety. CHAP. IV. Of the difference between the bitter Purging Salt, Allom, and the Muriatick Salt. FRom the fore-cited Experiments, and those we shall now mention rightly understood and compar'd, 'twill evidently appear that the Purging bitter Salt, tho' it may have some Qualities common to other Salts, does differ in its Nature and Species from all other Salts.
Very many have confidently affirm'd it to proceed from an Aluminous Minera, but inconsiderately, for from whence is it they prove it, but because they coagulate Milk, which is no reason at all, for by the same ridiculous Argument, Vinegar, Wine, Beer, and whatever curdles Milk, must be Aluminous. Nor does it appear from hence, that like Allom, when melting, it swells and rises in bubbles, for Borax melted will have the same Elevation, but Borax does not curdle Milk, therefore is not Aluminous, nor from thence can the bitter Purging Salt be so. Moreover, from an Ounce of Allom cal∣cin'd half an hour in a Crucible, there will remain half an Ounce of Calx. To this pour a sufficient quantity of common Wa∣ter to dissolve the Saline parts, and there will remain about 52 Grains of an insipid and simple Earth at the bottom of the Vessel, which is six times as much as the like quantity of the Calx of the bitter Salt will leave behind it. Nor is the Spirit of Allom Distill'd with a strong Fire any thing like the Spirit of this Salt, for the first has a greater acrimo∣ny, and much less grateful tast; and which is worth Observation, a Fetid
smell very like to the Spirit or Gass of Sulphure. The tast likewise of this bitter Purging Salt and Allom is so different, that nothing can be more; for that of Allom is austere and has no bitterness, the other no man∣ner of austerity but wholly bitter. Besides, they are evidently distinguish'd by their Natural Figures for the Chrystals of Allom, the Factitious at least consider∣ing its Altitude are something flattish, and consist of 8 Planes; two, viz. those at top and bottom, Sexangular and Parallel: The greater and less sides of these Planes are so placed alternately, that the 3 great∣er answer to the 3 less. About these are plac'd 6 Quadrangular Planes with une∣qual sides and angles, the greater bending towards the Centre of the Chrystal, and the less accordingly How very unlike this is to the before-describ'd Figure of the Purging Salt, may easily appear by comparison. Nor can this bitter Purging Salt with more Justice be reckon'd amongst the Mu∣riatick or common Salts, which well pu∣rify'd has a very different tast from the Purging Salt, and also from Allom; its Figure is likewise as different, for it shoots not long ways, but contracted almost in the form of a Cube.
Besides, the Purging Salt calcin'd in a Crucible, with a strong Fire, emits no visi∣ble vapour, nor loses more than half of its weight; but common Salt thus calcin'd, as 'tis much more fluid, so it ascends in thick smoaky vapours, leaving scarce an 18th part of the whole in the Crucible. Neither (which may seem strange) does the Spirit of common Salt Distill'd, as the Spirit of the Purging Salt, coagulate Milk, unless added to it when 'tis Boiled. To be certain of this, I try'd the fol∣lowing Experiment. To a Pint of River Water, impregnated with a Dram of the bitter Purging Salt, and boiling, I threw in 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of Milk, and let it boil again; presently the curdled Milk swam upon the Water. It did the same with as much of the Spi∣rit of the bitter Purging Salt. Lastly, Instead of the Spirit of the Pur∣ging Salt, I us'd the Spirit of common Salt, and that much stronger than the for∣mer Spirit, in the same proportion and method, but the Milk remained fluid in its Natural state without any coagulation.
CHAP. V. The difference of the bitter Purging Salt from Nitrous and Calcarious Salts. NOR does this Salt differ less from all kinds of Nitrous Salts; from which, by its bitter tast alone, its enough distin∣guish'd. Nor less by its Figure, for the Chrystals of Nitre shoot not into four corner'd Pa∣rallel Planes, but always into six; nor into right Angles, but obtuse, and their tops seldom terminate in 4 sloping Planes, but mostly in 2, and sometimes in 6, and those more equal than in the Purging bitter Salt. The Purging bitter Salt thrown into the Fire is not at all inflamable but Nitre burns with a bright flame and roaring noise, till the most part of it evaporates. I have said the most part of it, nor do I retract my assertion, for in the 3d Chapter we have observ'd about a 20th part to re∣main after the deflagration, which is in no wise Nitrous, but Lixivial, from Wood-Ashes mix'd with it by the Nitre-Makers. But further, the bitter Salt in a Spoon, held over the flame of a Candle, will melt
in a moment, and bubble up as if thrown in to the fire; but Nitre, with such a heat; will scarcely melt, but take up at least 8 times the space of the other, and emits a most resplendent flame. On the contrary, tho' Nitre melts with difficulty, 'tis when melted much more fluid, for in a Crucible, in a strong fire, it boils not like Allom, or the bitter Salt, but flows like Rosin or melted Metals. From Nitre melted in a Crucible arise thick Exhalations, which you never see from the bitter Salt, tho' in the strongest Fire. Add likewise, that they differ from one another in their power of coagulating Milk. For half a Dram of the Purging Salt, thrown into half a Pint of Milk, will turn it very gray; but Nitre mix'd after the same manner, tho' in much greater pro∣portion, has no such effect. The solubility of Nitre, as we have be∣fore prov'd, is two parts in three less than the Purging Salt, for half an Ounce of common Water will, in the Winter, by agitation and a warm hand, dissolve not above a Dram and half of Nitre. Its gravity is likewise very different, which appears by the following Experi∣ment.
I put Oil of Turpentine into a Cylindar to the height of 3 Fingers; I then put in two Ounces of the Purging Salt, which rais'd the Oil a Finger higher, but from an equal weight of depurated Nitre, the Oil was elevated not higher than 3 fourths of a Finger; therefore the bitter Purging Salt is a 4th part lighter than Nitre. But Water impregnated with the Pur∣ging Salt occupies a less space, its bulk considered, than the same quantity with as much Sal Nitri dissolved in it. That is, Water instead of Oil mix'd with the Salts in a Vial; when they are dissolv'd, the former subsides lower than the latter. Lastly, I Distill'd Dantzick Vitriol, Sal Armoniack, and a like quantity of the bit∣ter Salt, instead of Nitre, in order to make the Aqua Regia. Now if this had been a Nitrous Salt, this Water wou'd, like Aqua Regia, have dissolv'd Gold, but we could find no such power in this Water. Nor is it the Nitre of the Ancients, for 'tis nothing like that of the Egyptians so often mention'd by Hypocrates; something like which is describ'd by Dioscorides and Pliny to be of a purple colour and biting; nor that of Etius, like Earth calcin'd and quench'd with Wine.
Nor, lastly, can it be reckon'd with the Sal Calcarius; for the Purging Salt, or Water only, coagulates Milk with a much harder Curd, and greater plenty of Se∣rum, than the Lime Water will. And, if that Power of Coagulation were equal, how many Liquors have we mention'd that curdle Milk, which are neither Calcarious nor Aluminous. Spirit of Nitre, dropt into the Cream that swims atop of the Lime-Water, or upon Lime it self, will cause a visible Ebullition; but the same Spirit will have no such Effect upon the Purging Salt. There can be no where more diffe∣rence in the taste of Things, than be∣tween the Purging Salt and the Calcari∣ous; for the one is Lixivial and Sweet; the other, as it were Cold and Bitter. Lime will, by pouring a little Water upon it, presently fall to Powder. On the contrary, the Calx of the Purging Salt powder'd, will, by the same means, run immediately into a hard Substance, and in a few Moments be like a Stone. Lamb's-Conduit Water, mixt with Lime-Water, will in a very little time grow white, with a dark clowdy Curd∣ling; as it will with the Purging Wa∣ters:
But, if you mix it with Water im∣pregnated with the Calx of the Purging Salt, no Muddiness nor Colour will fol∣low. Common Water impregnated with this Salt, and afterwards evaporated, will restore you the whole quantity you dis∣solv'd, without any waste; but Lime-Water evaporated, the Salt is for the most part transmuted into a stony and tastless Substance: The Cause of which is, that the Saline Parts of the Aqu. Calcis do so intimately imbrace and unite with any other Aerial Salt, that they make a third Nurtral Salt; as in Oil of Anisseeds and Vitriol, shaken together, you have a Refine, properly so call'd, which, if you wash, will yield you no manner of taste. This may be illustrated by the follow∣ing Experiment. I kept Lime-Water in a Glass close stopt with a Cork, and as much in an open Vessel, for a Week or longer; that in the stopt Vial had no Cream upon it; but that in the open Vessel where the Air could freely arrive at the Water, was cover'd with an insipid and stony Cream. But Water, in which the Purging Salt is dissolv'd, kept in an open Vessel, and
many Days expos'd to the Air, will have no Cream at all on its surface: And that which appears in boiling the Purg∣ing Waters, is not in the least Calcarious, as we have formerly prov'd. Add also the very different solubility of these Salts; for half an Ounce of the Bitter Purging Salt will be easily, and without Heat or much Agitation present∣ly dissolv'd in six times its quantity of Water. But to the dissolution of so much of the Calcarious Salt, is required two Gallons and a half of Water, which is 640 times its weight. For so much com∣mon Water is necessary to edulcorate an Ounce of Calx Vivens; which done, there remains in the bottom of the Vessel about half an Ounce of pure white and Insipid Calx. But the Bitter Purging Salt is eminent∣ly distinguish'd from the fore-mention'd (if there were no other way) by its Me∣dicinal Virtues, as we shall evidently de∣monstrate, in the latter Part of this Tract, where we speak of its Use. In the mean time, we do not deny a small Portion, as well of Nitre and com∣mon Salt, as of a stony Substance, may be contained, not only in the Purging Wa∣ters, but even in the Salt it self. And,
indeed, 'tis probable that no Body, exi∣stent in Nature, is purely simple. Sil∣ver, every one knows, is mixt with Cop∣per or Lead; Gold, with Silver in the same Mine Vein; nay, and Metallick Mass: But it does not follow, that Sil∣ver and Copper, or Gold and Silver, do hereby constitute a third Species; but the two, or more, separable Metals exist together. Nor, can we inferr an Identity of Bo∣dies from their agreement in some quali∣ties; for Lead and Gold do so agree; both are solid, opacque, ductile, fusible, heavy Bodies, &c. and therefore are both Metals; but nothing is Gold, that has not all the qualities of Gold. For Gold does not differ more ways, nor in a more eminent manner from Lead, than the Bitter Purging Salt is di∣stinguish'd from all other Salts; and therefore is in its own Nature the most Noble.
CHAP. VI. Some additional Observations of the Nature of the Bitter Purging Salt. THE most special Qualities of this Salt, that we have already describ'd, are a taste gently and almost simply Bit∣ter; and of all sorts, that we know, most resembling the Crystals of Silver in simi∣litude of Taste. For these, indeed, are bitter, but very much so, and not without some Austerity joined with it. I have in another place observ'd the Lapis Calaminaris to have some Qualities common with Silver, therefore I dropp'd into the Powder of this Stone some drops of Spirit of Nitre; and the fermentation over, I wash'd the mixture with common Water. This Water, like the Chrystals of Silver, is not only very styptick but bit∣ter, and is the only bitter Mineral that I know of, except the Salt of Luna, and the Purging Salt. But whether the Purging Salt do arise from any Silver Minera, whol∣ly or in part so, or from the Lapis Calami∣naris, or rather from any other, I leave undetermined, being never able to get any of the true Minera of this Salt.
But this is very plain from the fore∣mentioned Experiments, that the Bitter Purging Salt is compounded of some parts in their nature Acid, and others Alkaline, and a little Lixivial. In Salts compounded of various Princi∣ples, the Proportion, the Nature and the Union of those Principles are to be con∣sider'd. Some Acid Particles are frequently found in Lixivial Salts, but in a small pro∣portion. But in Tartar, which is the Salt of Wine, the Saline Parts are much lesser than the Acid, which exist in a much greater proportion. And 'tis almost the same in the Bitter Purging Salt, with this difference only, That in the former the Acids are actually mix'd with the Alkaline, but in the latter Potentially. Moreover, all Lixivial Salts are Acri∣monious, but those commonly call'd Testa∣ceous are not without reason accounted the more gentle. As likewise are some Acid Liquors, such as the Juice of Wood-Sorrel, a Disso∣lution of the Cream of Tartar, &c. but the Purging Salt is gentler than any of these.
Indeed, by Distillation it gives an Acid Spirit, but this Acid Taste is not percep∣tible till its Principles are intimately dis∣solv'd and divided by a most violent Fire. For the Salt it self has neither Acrimo∣ny nor Acidity. Nor is it Tastless, but very subtle and biting, and therefore a most Efficacious Medicine. Its Admirable Subtilty will appear by its penetrating any Earthen Vessel, if not very well Glaz'd about the bottom; of which, on the outside, there will be a woolly or hoary Concretion in colour like an Amethyst. The Principles of this Salt are also more closely united than in Tartar, and afford many other Remedies. For the Union is so firm, that one of its parts, viz. its Acid, cannot be above the one half of it separated from the other, and that not without a reverberatory Fire. Whence 'tis, that when other gentle Purges frequently elude the Physicians expecta∣tion, this does very seldom or never de∣ceive him. For such Medicines do work most up∣on the Humours of the Body, which are least alterable by those Humours: In
the number of which this Salt, and other Minerals, are to be accounted. Last of all; This Salt, tho' it does consist of different Principles, is very pure, if rightly and diligently prepar'd; inso∣much that it does not retain the thou∣sandth part of any extraneous Body with it self. For, if you evaporate destill'd Water, impregnated with an Ounce of this Salt, 'twill yield not a Particle of any Heterogeneous Salt, stony Sediment, or Cremor, but the very same Ounce of most pure Salt. The End of the First Part:
Part the Second. OF THE USE OF THE Bitter Purging Salt. CHAP. I. Of the more General Use of the Bitter Purging Salt. THE Use of the Purging Waters of Epsom, &c. is so excellent and manifold, and so very well known to London Physicians, that no Body can doubt of it. For in many grievous Diseases, Expe∣rience has prov'd 'em a most efficacious Remedy, endued with no unwholsom Quality; which, rationally prescrib'd, I
never knew attended with any unex∣pected ill Effect. One Objection there is brought against these Waters, with some shew of Reason; 'tis, That the Waters in boiling sepa∣rate a stony Cremor: From whence we may fear a Matter may be supply'd, fit to generate the Stone in the Body. This Objection is answer'd by two Ex∣periments; one before-mention'd; and the Second drawn from Physical Obser∣vations. For 'tis plain, from what we have before prov'd, That this stony Cre∣mor does not arise upon the Purging Wa∣ters, nor upon Aqua Calcis, unless expos'd to the Air, and in an open Vessel; and therefore no stony Substance can be ge∣nerated by the Waters in the Body. But, say they, the Air is mixt with the Humours of the Body. We grant it; and likewise with Waters; as may be demonstrated by the Air Pump. But Wa∣ters cannot petrifie without the free and open influx of the Air. Add likewise, That the Air cannot enter the Body, but as it were through a Strainer. Secondly, Practice contradicts this, for 'tis notoriously known, not only to me, but to many other Physicians, That after drinking these Purging Waters plentiful∣ly,
by intervals, for 20 to 30 Years toge∣ther, Persons have been always free from the Gout or Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, and enjoy'd a perfect Health. And the fore-mention'd Lord North, who drank both Epsom and Barnet Waters, live'd free from those Distempers to 85 Years of Age. And this Lime-Waterm, which so sud∣denly proceduces a stony Substance by the admission of the Air, is frequently and safely given by physicians. And our Su∣gar-Refiner use it in the purifying their Sugar; by which means the Trea∣cle is better seperated from the concresci∣ble part; and it acquires a greater fineness and whilteness. But, if the Purging Water is a good Medicine, how much more is the Salt to be accounted so? For, if we should, for Arguments sake, grant what is objected against the Waters; yet that will make not at all against the Salt, depurated from its stony Substance. Moreover, if the Water you take do abound with plenty of the Muriatick Salt, sometimes it may Purge too violent∣ly; but the purified Salt, which is freed from it, is of all Purging Medicines the most gentle.
'Tis likewise totally free from the Ma∣lignant Quality of most Catharticks; it does never violently agitate the Humours, nor cause Sickness, Faintings, or Pains in the Bowels. It never fails a Physicians design in Purging the Patient; nor ever puts him in fear of a Hypercatharsis. Besides, the strength of the Waters is not at all times alike; for 'tis either en∣creas'd by a dry Season, or diminish'd by a wet; 'tis stronger in Summer, weaker in Winter; and 'tis common for those that fell them, upon occasion, to mix 'em with common Water: From whence the Physician, prescribing the usual Dose, fre∣quently fails of success. But the Salt of this Water, purely and rightly prepar'd, is every Particle alike, and endued with the same Purging Virtue. Add to this, That the London Physici∣ans do not prescribe the Waters crude, but, for the most part, boiled: For taken this way, the Dose being lessen'd, and the Strength increas'd, they slip easier through the Stomach and Guts. In Summer you boil to the consumption of a third, but in Winter to half the quantity; which will require two or three Hours. But the Purging Salt of the Water, dissolv'd in any convenient Liquor, and once
boil'd, is a Medicine always in a readiness; accommodated to Apothecaries, chiefly to sick Persons, who, in urgent Cases, suffer much Pain and Uneasiness while the Waters are so long a boiling, and may often times be in danger. The last, tho' not the least, considera∣ble is, That the Water kept a little too long, especially in Summer or hot Wea∣ther, will stink; but the Salt of this Wa∣ter, neither Age nor Place can cor∣rupt. But some, I foresee, will Question the wholsomness of this Salt, from the Acid Spirit it yields in Distillation; but this Objection does as much oppose the Use of the Water, as of the Salt contained in them: For the same Reason, we may as well pretend to leave off the Use of Ho∣ney, Sugar, or White-Bread; every one of which, by the help of Fire, will yield a Distill'd Spirit violently Acid and Biting. Wine also, and the wholsomest Food, when its Principles are let loose by Fer∣mentation, or any other way, do obtain Noxious, and sometimes Poysonous Qua∣lities. Nay, even the Food of Infants, their Mothers Milk, will in a warm place presently turn Acid; but by dissolving the
Purging Salt in a proper Vehicle, its Prin∣ciples are neither deprav'd nor divided, but 'tis given in its compact Body, or uni∣ted Essence, as we are fed with the fore∣mentioned Eatables. For as the Salt it self, so also the Water we drink, from which this Salt is prepar'd, is sensibly, tho' moderately bitter, and without any mixture of Acidity. CHAP. II. Of the Method of prescribing the Bitter Purging Salt. THis Salt may be taken Dissolv'd in any Vehicle agreeable to the Palate, or grateful to the Taste of the Patient; such as Spring-Waters, Barley-Water, Water-Gruel, Posset-Drink, Whey, &c. I do most commonly prescribe common Water Boil'd, and Aromatiz'd with a lit∣tle Mace, to two, three, or four Pints; of which I add half an Ounce, or an Ounce, or a greater Dose of the Salt. As for Example: Take of Spring-Water two Quarts, Mace a Dram, boil a little and strain
it; then dissolve in the strain'd Liquor an Ounce or 10 Drams of the Salt for an Apozem, to be taken in the Morn∣ing in the space of two hours, hot, warm, and sometimes cold, with a lit∣tle Exercise. This Apozem you may give by it self, or during the Working of other Purging Physick. It is proper also, when there is occasion, to add Senna, Manna, or both, to the Mace, to promote the efficacy of the Salt, in this or the like Form: Take Spring-Water four Pints, Mace a Dram, Senna three Drams, boil them gently, and add of the Bitter Purging Salt an Ounce, Flakey-Manna an Ounce and half, or two Ounces, and strain it. The Lord Dudley North was the first that drank the Purging-Waters with Milk, which did not at all agree with his Sto∣mach, because he mix'd them cold; but Physicians afterwards altered the Waters, by adding Milk when they were boiling, which way, if you please, you may also most safely take the Salt it self. For Ex∣ample:
Take of the Salt an Ounce or 10 Drams, dissolve it in 3 Pints and half, or 4, of common Water, and when it boils pour in half a Pint of Milk, and strain the Curd from it. In the Summer, when Medicinal Wa∣ters are every where frequented, the Cha∣lybeate, or the Purging-Waters, taken immediately from their Springs, is the best Vehicle. A Dram, or a Dram and half of this Salt, taken in 3 or 4 of the first Glasses of Tunbridge, or any other Chalybeate Wa∣ter, for the three or four first days, will render the Humours and first Passages better prepared for the design of Drinking. Chalybeate-Waters do frequently bind, which will be prevented by a small quan∣tity of this Salt dissolv'd in the first and last Glass. But 'tis best of all taken in its own Wa∣ters, for a Dram of it, dissolv'd in every Draught, does Purge with more certainty and a less quantity of Water, and by con∣sequence is less burdensom to the Stomach; 'tis sometimes also very proper in Glisters, to mix 3 or 4 Drams of it instead of Sal Gem.
CHAP. III. Of the more particular Use of this Salt, and first of all of its Use in Diseases of the Ventricle. WHat I shall now insert of the Pur∣ging-Waters and their Salt, is not from uncertain conjectures, but is de∣monstrable by the daily Experience of other Learned Men as well as my own; all whom have us'd both the Salt and the Water, in the following Diseases, with happy success. And first of all, this Purging-Water, or its Salt, is a most Amicable Medicine to the Stomach, exciting an Appetite, and promoting a good Digestion; which it does partly by its Acid Principle, partly by the bitterness of the whole, or its Al∣kaline Mixture. But chiefly from the former, because it affords a Spirit in some sort Analagous to the Spirit of the Salt, with which all Meats are season'd; and also from the latter, for we do every day Experience the Stomach to be strengthned by this, and most other Bitters. 'Tis also well known, that the
Appetite is chiefly strengthned by the Use of Compound Salts, for almost all Pickles are prepar'd not with Salts alone, but with Salt and Vinegar. French Red-Wine we allow to be very wholsom with our Food, because of its Tartarous Salt, of all others, the most Compound; and Salt of Steel, a very Compound Salt, is as Famous among Stomach-Medicines. The two Universal Digestives, Bread and Spittle, do one of them contain an Acid, and the other an Alkaline Salt, and mix'd supply the place of a Compound Salt. And the Natural ferment of the Sto∣mach consists of Acid and Alkaline Par∣ticles; the first from the Arteries, or the Blood, the latter from the Nerves, or the Excrement of the Animal Spirits, which may be prov'd by very many Arguments not here to be insisted upon. Therefore while there is the Natural proportion of either Salt in the Stomach, Concoction is duly performed, but when either prevail, sometimes the Acid, some∣times the Alkaline, are necessary to restore it to its Office. When the Concoction of the Stomach is Vitiated by too much, or improper Meat and Drink, Vomiting often follows;
for the quieting which, the Bitter Pur∣ging Salt, or Waters, is a most excellent Remedy, for the same reason that the Salt of Wormwood, and Juice of Lemons, is so Famous, tho' this Salt is highly pre∣ferrable to it, with one stroke destroying and carrying off the Peccant Salts. Also in the Cardialgia, or Heart-burning, and other pains of that kind, no Medi∣cines can be more safe and efficacious, nor in a hot Hypocondriack Disposition. In the fore-mentioned Cases, I have sometimes prescribed the Purging Waters, or Salt, without any other Medicine, but more often with the assistance of other Remedies, as Bleeding, Vomiting, and the like; for 'tis not the part of a prudent Physician, in dangerous Diseases, to trust his Patients Health, and his own Reputa∣tion, to one only Medicine, tho' never so Famous. Remedies of this kind may be infinitely varied according to the Indications. Some Forms of which I shall here add. For a lost Appetite. Take of Spaw, or any other Chalybeate-Water, or if not to be had, Spring-Water Aromatiz'd with Mace, a Quart, or three
Pints, of the Bitter Salt half an Ounce six Drams, or an Ounce; drink it warm and fasting. And all sorts of Chalybeate-Waters may be drank warm, which is better, and without the loss of its subtile Spirit, by dipping a Bottle close stopt into hot Water for a few Moments, and after pouring out a Glass, stopping it as before. While you take these Waters an hour be∣fore Dinner, take also 20, 30, or 40 drops of Elixir Proprietatis, in a Spoonful of Sherry or Hock, and Wormwood, and continue their Use every Day, or every other Day, for four, five, or six times. Or, Take of the Conserve of Roman Worm∣wood two Ounces, Garden-Scurvy-Grass an Ounce, Candid-Ginger half an Ounce, Aromatick-Powder of Cloves a Dram and half, of Winters Bark, of the true Salt of Wormwood, of each a Dram; with Sir∣rup of Cloves make an Electuary, and take the quantity of a Nutmeg every Night going to Rest; and of a small Wall-Nut every Day an hour before Dinner, with a little Wormwood-Wine, if the Patient be not subject to the Head-Ach.
Or, Take of the Filings of Steel new and shining 3 Ounces, Roman Wormwood half a handful, Roman Cypress-Roots, Calamus Aromaticus, of each a Dram, Ga∣langall the less; Cinnamon and Saffron, of each half a Dram, White-Wine or Sherry a Quart, digest in a Vessel close stopt, with a gentle heat, for 3 Days, sha∣king the Glass every Day, and take two or three, or four Spoonfuls, two hours before Dinner. In Vomitings. Take of any Chalybeate-Water, or Maced-Water, three or four Pints, and dissolve in it six, eight, or ten Drams of the Purging Salt, to be drank in the Morn∣ing, hot or cold, as you please; and re∣peat it three or four Days following; or every other Day, if there be occasion. And to this joyn the Use of the following Pills. Take of red Roses, of Cinnamon, of each a Dram, Cloves, Salt of Steell, of each a Scruple, Saffron half a Scruple, Chimical Oil of Mint eight Drops, with Sirrup of Steell; make 24 Pills. Take three every Day two Hours before Din∣ner,
and at Night going to rest. Some∣times a Fomentation of red Wine, with Venice Treacle, red Roses, and Mint infus'd in it hot, is very profitable. In a Bastard Collick. Take Senna two Drams, Macea Dram, boil in Spring Water to three or four Pints. Add to the strain'd Liquor six, eight or ten Drams of the Purging Salt. Take this Apozem as there is occasion, ei∣ther with or without Senna, and by it self, or with the following Pills. Take of Stomach Pills with Gums 25 Grains, of Steell-Filings powder'd ten Grains, with Syrup of Steel; make four Pills, to be taken going to rest, and the Apozem as above, the following Morning, and repeat 'em for three Days succes∣sively, or longer. Sometimes 'tis neces∣sary to mix Extract of Gentian, or some other Bitter with the Pills, and also a little Laudanum, if the Pain be vio∣lent.
In a hot Hypocondriack Distemper. Take of any Chalybeate-Water three or four Pints, dissolve in every draught half a Dram or a Dram to eight times, and drink it cold. Or, instead of Chalybeate-Waters, use simple Milk-Water, or distill'd from Borrage or Pimpernel. In the Heart-Burning. In this Disease the Salt, taken as in the former, will have very good suc∣cess. CHAP. IV. Of the Use of the Bitter Purging Salt in Diseases of the Intestines and Parts ad∣jacent: And first of the Collick. IN this Disease there is no need to ad∣vise the Learned and Experienc'd Physician in the first place to let Blood, and seldom or never to omit it. Then 'tis most Advisable to give this or the like Glister.
Take of the common Decoction for Glisters one pound, with the addition of 3 Drams, or half an Ounce of Senna; to the Ingredients to it strain'd, add half an Ounce, or more, of the Bitter Purging Salt, Species of Hiera Picra a Dram and half, or two Drams, brown Sugar two Ounces From the Use of these, and the like Glisters, Chollick Pains are often dissipated; at least, by their passing up the Intestines, the way is opened. Oftentimes Pill Rudii one Scruple, or half a Dram, with a Grain of Laudanum, is given with good success. And some∣times crude Mercury, if the Patient will swallow a sufficient quantity; that is, four, five, or six Ounces: Especially, if taken with two Ounces of the Tincture of Hie∣ra Picra in White-Wine, or any other proper Purging Medicine. But the most Noble, of all Remedies, is the Purging Water, or the Salt taken in this, or the like manner. Take of Spring or River Water, aromatiz'd Lib. iij, Chamomile Flower, or Mint-Water six Ounces, Bitter
Purging Salt an Ounce, or ten Drams, Flakey-Manna an Ounce and half, or two Ounces; make an Apozem, and let the Patient take about 17 Ounces at a time, hot, so often that the whole may be taken in an hour, or an hour and half; yea, tho' some part of it be Vo∣mited. The force of this Medicine may be some∣times increas'd by the addition of the fol∣lowing. Take one or two Spoonfuls of the Tincture of Hiera Picra, before every draught of the Apozem. In Worms. This Salt, if the Nurse give the Child a Dram and half, or two Drams, in its Pap, 'twill exterminate the Worms, especially if the Physician will give before it, in any proper Vehicle, a Grain or two, or three, of Mercurius Dulcis, according to the Age of the Patient, or Chrystals of Silver.
Or if the Purging Salt be given in Bitter Glisters, in the Stone, Here also, as well as in the Chollick, we must begin with Bleeding, which very often requires a repetition. To this, a Vomit is properly added of the Vinum Benedictum, or Salt of Vitriol, especially if the Patient has a Nausea; by the force of which, the Stomach, general∣ly the offending part, is not only Unload∣ed, but the whole Nervous Body conti∣nuous with the Kidnies, and in this case very much affected, is mightily reliev'd. Then give the following Glister, espe∣cially if no Stool succeeds the Vomit. Take of Chamomile-Flowers a Hand∣ful, Seeds of Cummin, Sweet-Fennel, Parsley bruis'd, of each an Ounce; Marshmallow-Roots, cut and bruis'd, two Ounces; boil these in common Water to a Pint, in the strained Liquor dissolve Venice-Turpentine an Ounce, the bitter Purging Salt half an Ounce, Sy∣rup of Althea three Ounces.
If the pain encreases, add to the Glister 40 or 50 drops of Laudanum. These, or the like Glisters, will frequently bring away the Urine, either with, or without a Stone, or Stoney Matter, and the Pains vanish. But if the pain continues stubborn, we must have recourse to the following Apo∣zem, as a most powerful Remedy. Take of Barley-Water Maced 3 or 4 Pints, of the bitter Purging Salt 6 or 8 Drams, Syrup of Althea 3 or 4 Ounces, take this warm in an hour and halfs time, more or less, altho' the Patient does Vomit some part of it. In heat of Urine. The above-mentioned Apozem is effectu∣al, whether it proceed from the Acrimony of the Blood, or from a Venereal taint. In suppression of Urine. Which happens either without a Stone, or with so great a Stone as to stop the Urinary passage.
But if this Disease has continued for some days, Bleeding, and that plentiful∣ly, is the first thing necessary; then a sharp Glister, with Syrup of Buckthorn, and the Purging Salt, must be Administred, and while it Works, drink the fore-men∣tioned Apozem, or some Draughts of it, and expect success, especially if before every Draught you take a Spoonful of the following Mixture. Of Fennel, and Saxifrage Water, of each an Ounce and half; Salt of Ambera Dram, Tartar vitriolated a Scruple, Mil∣lepedes prepar'd two Drams, Syrup of Althea an Ounce Mix. In a Diabetes. In which most dangerous kind of Di∣sease, if there be need of a Medicine that will gently purge, and cool very much, this is the safest of all purging Medicines, and, indeed, the almost only one; by the help of which, and the constant Use of the Chalybeate-Waters, I have recovered some young persons from the very Gates of Death.
In the Jaundice. Also in this Disease, bleeding is seldom to be omitted, but sometimes to be re∣peated if the Patient be Feverish. Vomits are here very Useful, for as much as they exterminate the Morbifick Sordes of the Stomach, as well as press out the Boil stag∣nating in its Vessels; and therefore, if there be occasion, it ought to be now and then repeated; but if the Use of these, or other Remedies, prove unsuccessful, we may suspect the Biliary passage is stopp'd, either by the bigness, or number of the Stones generated there: Therefore we ought to persist in this Method prudently, and with courage. In any sort of Jaundice, Calculous or Simple, the Purging Water, or its Salt, is an excellent Medicine, given in this or the following manner. Take Pill Ruffi half a Dram; Rhu∣burb, Volatile Salt of Urine, of each half a Scruple, with Syrup of Worm∣wood; make 6 Pills, and take them at Night going to rest. The Morning following take this Apozem:
Shavings of Hartshorn two Ounces, boil them in 3 or 4 Quarts of Water, to two; then add Mace and Turmerick of each a Dram, boil a little, strain and add an Ounce of the bitter Purging Salt, as much Syrup of Steell, and make an Apozem, to be taken as above di∣rected. If the Physician sees fit, in the place of the Pills give the following Draught. Take of the Tincture of Hiera Picra an Ounce and a half, or two Ounces of Syrup of Cichory, with Rhuhurb an Ounce, Tartar vitriolated half a Scru∣ple; mix and take it at six or seven in the Morning: Two Hours after drink the foregoing Apozem, and re∣peat these Medicines at least every other Day. If Aloeticks are too hot, give in their place the Infusion of Rhu∣burb.
CHAP. V. Of the Use of the Purging Salt in Cephalick Diseases: And first in Madness. VVHere, besides Bleeding and fre∣quent Vomits, Chephalick Unguents, Setons in the Neck, Vesicato∣ries, especially to the Leggs, Catharticks and other Remedies are frequently us'd. But to quicken the working of all, even the Helleborate Purges, nothing is more proper than the Purging Water, or its Salt, prescrib'd after the following man∣ner: Take of Bawm and Borrage of each a handful, infuse 'em in four or five Pints of boiling Water, in a Vessel close stopt, for half an Hour. To the Infusion strain'd add of the Bitter Salt ten Drams or less, Syrup of Violets three Ounces; mix and make an Apo∣zem, to be drank by it self; or, in∣stead of Posset-Drink, with any other convenient Purge. Or, take 8 Drams of the Salt in 8 Draughts of the Spaw, or other Chalybeate Water, in a morn∣ing fasting.
In the Intervals of other Catharticks, especially in the Summer, 'tis very bene∣ficial, taken in the preceding Method; for it wonderfully quiets the raging Dis∣orders of the Humours and Perturbations of the Spirits. In the Head-Ach. In which Distemper, especially arising from a hot Cause, or in a hot Constitu∣tion, I have never found any thing so ef∣ficacious as the following Method: In the first place bleed a sufficient quan∣tity, and from such Veins as the Circum∣stances of the Patient do indicate. This done, give a Vomit, if the strength will permit: After, let the Patient take the following Medicines: Of Scammony powder'd, Rhubarb pow∣der'd, Mercurius dulcis, each half a Scruple, or 12 Grains, with Syrup of Buckthorn, make five Pills, to be taken at four or five in the Morning, and sleep after 'em: Three hours after drink the following Apozem: Of Water aromatiz'd with Mace 3 or 4 Pints, of the Purging Salt 6 Drams, or an Ounce, Syrup of Violets two Ounces; mix and take it, keeping your Chamber.
Repeat this Apozem and Pills every 3d or 4th Day, and without the Pills in the intervening Days; and continue this Method for a Fortnight or three Weeks, if the Case require it. In a Virtigo. Here also we must begin with Bleeding in the Arms, especially if the Disease be the consequence of too much drinking. Then apply Cupping Glasses with Scari∣fication to the Shoulders and hinder part of the Head. For in this Disease, as well as in the former, and for Inflamations of the Eyes, I do always prescribe 'em to that part rather than another, and with better success. These things premis'd, take the follow∣ing Pills, &c. Of Mastick Pills two Scru∣ples, Chymical Oil of Marjoram 5 Drops. Take 'em at night going to rest, and next morning the following Apozem. Of Spring Water aromatiz'd a Quart or three Pints, distill'd Water of Sage four Ounces, of Marjoram two Ounces, of the bitter Purging Salt 6 Drams or an Ounce, mix and make an Apozem, to be taken as afore-mention'd.
Sometimes 'tis good to take before eve∣ry Draught a Spoonful of the following Mixture. Of Marjoram and Sage of each two Drams, Roots of Gentian, Species of Hiera Picra, of each two Scruples, White-wine four Ounces; digest 12 Hours in a close Vessel, and clarifie the express'd Tincture by settling. CHAP. VI. Of the Use of the Bitter Purging Salt in some other Diseases: And first in Hyste∣rical Fits. IN this Disease, after the most terrible Symptoms are quieted by Opiates, ten or twelve Drams, or two Ounces of the Tincture of Hiera Picra in equal parts, White-wine and Hysterical-water may be given, with very good success. But, if the Physician thinks fit to purge with a more temperate Medicine, the bitter Salt may be properly and safely taken; especially, if, in the room of the Aroma∣tiz'd Water, you use the Spaw or Bawm-water, as a Vehicle for the Salt.
In the Wandring Gout, vulgarly, but erro∣neously, call'd the Rhuematism. For this seises the Muscular Parts only, and that none but the Joynts. 'Tis a stubborn Disease, and frequently eludes the force of many Medicines. Bleeding must begin, and be repeated at least every other day, to four times; and, if occasion, to five or six. After the first or second time, a Vomit is very proper; for, as long as the Sto∣mach is disordered, it daily transmits a new supply of Morbifick Matter to the Blood and Joynts. But Catharticks, and of the strongest, sometimes for several days together are never to be omitted; for one strong purge does often weaken this Disease, more than bleeding 3 or 4 times repeated. But the operation of the Purging Wa∣ters, by the help of their Salt, when the Patient is Feverish, (as they almost al∣ways are) is much more gentle, and per∣formed without any fermentation of the Humours, if taken in the following man∣ner.
Of the Powder of Resinous Jallap half a Dram, Scammony prepar'd six Grains, Calamelany half a Scruple, with Syrup of Buckthorn; make a Bolus to be taken at five in the morning, sleeping after it two or three Hours; and then drink the following Apozem. Of Pearl-Barley an Ounce and half, Currance three Ounces; boil in Spring-water to a Quart or 3 Pints, adding towards the latter end Mace half a Dram, and when it is strain'd, of the bitter Salt an Ounce, Flakey-Manna an Ounce, or an Ounce and half. If the Patient be difficultly wrought upon, and other Indications require it, add to the first Draught six Drams, or an Ounce of the Syrup of Buckthorn, and repeat the Bolus and Apozem every 3d or 4th day, as the Physician shall Advise, or with longer Intervals, till the Patient be per∣fectly recovered. In the beginning and increase of the Disease, at least every other Night, and always after a Purge, let a proper Opiate be given to prevent any new Ebullitions of the Humours, and their Influx upon the joynts. When Purging must be for∣born, because of a Fever, or the weakness of the Patient, Vesicatories are apply'd above or below the Joynt with very great benefit.
And sometimes the Serous Latex of the Blood is so very hot and fiery, that it will not yield to the united strength of the fore∣mention'd Remedies, without the help of Blisters, to separate some part of it from its remaining more Balsamick and gentle. In this Disease, Sweats, tho' very plenti∣ful, seldom profit, but Diureticks very much; and therefore the Apozem, with the Purging Salt, is very proper, work∣ing at the same time both by Urine and Stooll. In the time of the Cure, abstain from all Wine, Vinous and Malt Drinks; Posset-Drink is, of all Liquors, the most proper for their constant Drink. In a Scorbutick Itch, Not Contagious, but arising from the Scurvy, and affecting sometimes the whole Body; at others a particular part, as the Pudenda, &c. I have often Cur'd with the Apozem alone, without any other Purgings; and some perfectly tired out and tormented with perpetual scratching. I've blest with a happy Deliverance, espe∣cially if you join with the Use of the Apo∣zem the Chalybeate-Waters, and drink them daily and plentifully instead of Malt Drink.
This Apozem is likewise very profitable when the Small-Pox are dry'd off, and may very properly be drank with common Ca∣tharticks instead of Posset-Drink. Lastly, 'Tis good for Travellers, who by much riding, especially in the Summer, are generally Costive; but two or three Drams of this Salt, in a Draught of Spring-Water, will cool and relieve them. CHAP. VII. Of the Abuse of the Bitter Waters and their Salt. 'TIS the Duty of a Physician, not on∣ly to shew the Use of Remedies, but also to Admonish the Reader of their Abuse, by which he prevents a treble in∣jury to himself, to the Patient, and the Medicine; therefore this Salt must not at all be us'd in some Diseases, and in others with particular respect had to the Causes and Symptoms. In all Hydropicks 'tis hurtful doubtless, because the Natural heat of the Blood is decayed, and the Spirits contain'd in the Grumous part of it are very poor. Moreover, in such persons, the Use of
moist things, tho' in their Food, do in∣crease the Influx of the Serum of the blood into the Morbid parts. 'Tis also improper in a Synochus, where tho' the Cause of the Disease must be some∣times lessen'd by Purges, yet such must be moderately hot, as the bitter Potion, Pill Ruffi, and the like, by which the Con∣coction of the Humours may, at the same time, be promoted; and therefore all things that cool too much ought to be avoided. Nor is it good for such as labour un∣der Intermittent Fevers. Nor in a Chlorosis, or Green-sickness, where warm Fermentations must be exci∣ted; and because the Humours are too Acid, they must be alter'd with stronger Alkalies. This Salt is also forbidden to all that spit Blood, lest by its exquisite Subtilty, and penetrative Force, it should tear open the Mouths of the Arteries. And in the Cholera Morbus, where vio∣lent wastings of the Spirits do attend, as sudden Evacuations. To the quieting such turbulent and over-hasty Motions of Nature, Cordials and Opiates are to be given by intervals; but, after the Disease is tamed, if Eva∣cuation
be needful, the Patient of a Bi∣lious Constitution, whether Natural or Accidental, he may take this Salt with a good prospect of success. 'Tis not proper for Paralyticks , lest it more enervate the Muscles, already de∣stitute of their native Heat and Vigour. But, if the Disease arise from a hot Cause, as Wine, or Vinous Liquors, this Salt may be given safely and profitably to the Patient. 'Tis not to be given Women with Child, without a great deal of Cau∣tion. Nor in a suppression of Urine, before you certainly know it does not proceed from an Ulcer of the Bladder, or a large Stone; for in both Cases the Patient ought to abstain from all Diureticks. Otherwise we have given it with admi∣rable success; I mean, for the forcing away of Urine and Stones of no little magnitude. FINIS.
