J443 12830957 94326
NAZIANZENI QUERELA ET VOTUM JUSTUM. The Fundamentals of the HIERARCHY examin'd and disprov'd: Wherein the choicest Arguments and Defences of the most applauded and lat∣est Hierarchick or Prelatick Writers, A. M. D. D. the Author of An En∣quiry into the New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians in Scot∣land, the Author of the Fundamental Charter of Presbytry examin'd & disprov'd, and many others are sincerely expended, the Plea they bring from Ignatius's Epistles more narrowly discuss'd, many things much enlightening this Con∣troversy, either not at all, or not so fully hitherto unfolded, are, from ancient Church-Writers, and other unsuspected Authors, advanc'd. By William Jameson. . Would to God there were no Prelacy, no Prerogative of Place, no Tyrannical Priviled∣ges, that by Vertue alone we might be discerned. Now this Right and Left Hand, and midle Rank, these higher and lower Dignities, and this Statelike Precedence, have caused many fruitless Conflicts and Bruises, have cast many into the Pit, and carri'd away Multitudes to the place of the Goats. Gregorius Nazianzenus Orat. 28. GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, for the Author. Anno DOM. 1697.
The Introduction to all the sincere Lovers of the Christian, truly Ca∣tholick, Protestant Principles; and the Haters of Romish Dross and In∣novations, but Chiefly to these of the Church of SCOTLAND. I Can truly say I am so far from loving a Salamandra's Life, the line of Contenti∣on, or Controversie for Controversie's sake, as to pray earnestly that all our inte∣stine Heats and Strugglings may re∣solve into that happy and lawfull Striv∣ing, how each of us may best please him that has called us unto Holiness & Peace, and that there be no Provocation, save unto Love and to good Works. My main End is only to Dis-abuse my Pro∣testant Brethren mislead by some who are so uncharitable as to Vn-church and Damn the greater and better part of the Reformed, because they imbrace not as Divine that which, at best, is but of Humane Device, and who thus conspire with the mortal Enemies of all Protestants, a∣gainst these of 'em whom the common and unsatiable Adver∣saries most implacably hate: for, above all others, the Pres∣byterian Puritans (as they speak) are acknowledg'd to be most irreconcilable to the Roman Catholick Doctrine, and on this account, the prime Object of their Malice. This
is obvious in the Writings of the Romanists; but chiefly in these of the Jesuites; witness (to name no more) Peta∣vius in his books of the Hierarchy and Appendix thereto, and another Papist the Author of Presbytries Triall, prime Armories whence our present Adversaries fetch most of their weapons. The Papists in this, as in many things else, are followed by the Quakers, as is evident from most of their Pamphlets, but more especially from a pretended Answer to a part of a Book, wherein I gave some further Disco∣veries than had been already made of the Impieties and Self-contradictions of that Sect. This Answer they (for I do not think that it belongs all to one Parent) name The Plow-man rebuking the Priest: of which I can say, with with the Prophet Jeremiah, that I have suffer'd Rebuke for my God's sake; and, with Job, can take mine Adversaries Book on my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me, hav∣ing receiv'd all along thro't, in stead of a Confutation, a most strong Confirmation of the Truth of the Doctrine I pro∣pugn'd, and much more ground to abhorr the Impieties of Quakerism, and to bless God who hath brought to pass that their very Attempts to palliat their Abominations, prov∣ed a further Detection thereof. Read, pray, earnestly, and compare it with mine, and you shall find them most frequently yealding the whole Controversy, as also over∣skipping the marrow of what I had adduc'd, and yet anon triumphing as if they had never, in the least, been guilty of such dealling; you shall find that the most pardonable pieces of their Book are wild Gibberies, extravagant Rove∣ries, meer Impertinencies, palpable Perversions, loud Lies, Heresies, Blasphemies, and, in a ward, a lump of stuff so Atheisticall, that it proclaims the Authors neither to fear God, nor regard man, never to have consulted Conscience, nor to have remembred of future Judgement, or of the ac∣count
they must give at the tremenduous Tribunal of God. Yet all this is but what I expected, and is not unworthy of these, who, with Satan's sworn Slaves, renounce their Holy Baptism, and, therewith, whatsoever is constitutive of a Christian. For a further Manifestation whereof, hear the Quakers themselves, who are now split into Factions; to wit, into Keithians, after George Keith a prime Pillar of Quakerism; and Foxonians, as they're called: These reckon the Keithian Quakers for lost, and call G. K.Judgement given forth &c. Page 12. Brat of Babylon, Apostate, worse than prophane, a Liar, De∣vil, one that always endeavoured to keep down the Power of Truth, gone into a spirit of Enmity, foaming out his own shame, without the Fear of God before his Eyes, a Preacher of two Christs &c. Again G. K.Ibid. who is herein ap∣prov'd by his Keithian Quakers, calls them Fools, ignorant Heathens, Infidels, Liars, Hereticks, rotten Ranters, persecut∣ing QuakersThe Trial of Peter Boss &c. Page 6.; And informs usPlea for the Innocent. Page 12. that no such dam∣nable Heresies &c, are tolerated in any Christian Society as are among many called Quakers. For Example thatPag. 11. they deny the Day of Judgement and any Resurrection, but what they have already attained; that they make the Light sufficient without any thing else excluding the Man Christ Je∣sus, and his Obedience, Death and Resurrection, Ascension, and Mediation for us in Heaven. I am grieved (writes J. Humphrey'sMore Divisions amongst the Quakers Page 15. to hear some say they expect to be justi∣fi'd by that Blood which was shed at Jerusalem. Wherein, as G. K. shews, he's patroniz'd by not a few. Another great Zelot among the Quakers said, and affirmed boldly (saith G. K.Judgement given forth &c. Page 17. and Append. to the History of the Quakers. Pag. 16. that he expected not to be saved by that which di'd at Jerusalem, to wit the Man Christ. And a∣gain
G. K.Ibid. pag. 12. calls them Pelagians and Deists. Andibid. pag. 17. To many of the Quakers (saith G. K.) all are Christians [to wit, Jews, Mahumetans, Painims] in whom any good seed of Religion appeareth, and which they say is from Christ, yea is Christ himself. Andibid. pag. 20. Many, yea the most, or rather almost all the Ministers among the Quakers (very few excepted) do affirm, that this inward Light is sufficient to bring forth the new Birth, and to give eternall Salvation, without any thing, without us, that is, without the man Christ that was outwardly born, and crucified and rose again, whom some of their Ministers in my hearing, hath called an out∣ward thing, a shell, a husk, that doth little or nothing pro∣fit us, and the Faith of which doth nothing profit us. And William Penn (continues G. K.) in that Meeting at Ratcliff, where he falfly called me an Apostate, did publickly proclaim after this manner: Friends, said he, I see no great need of preaching, the Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, for all England and all Christendom hath that Faith, and it doth not profit them. But the Faith which profiteth Men is the Faith of Christ within, and that Friends preach. Let now (saith G. K.) the Author judge, or any other intelligent Person (professing Christianity) whether William Penn hath not sufficiently by these words proved himself an Apostate from the Christian Faith. Thus you have a taste (for it is no more, compar'd with what I could produce) of Quakerism from the Quakers themselves. Surely most admirable and adorable is divine Providence in so prodigiously strange, and clear a Dete∣ction of these infernal Blasphemies and Abominations, from the very Mouths of the chief Actors themselves; to the end, doubtless, that all may hear and fear, tremble and quake indeed to meddle, in the least, with these Quakers,
least God (as is the Lot of these Wretches) by giving them up to so strange Delusions and damnable Lies, make their Plagues wonderfull. May God mercifully grant, (as the Effect of this Discovery) that the sound and stable Christi∣ans may regard the Operations of his Hand, and give due Praise to him that preserves them from so deadly an Infe∣ction; that the Weak may be confirm'd in their Belief of these Divine Verities which are reveal'd in the Holy Scriptures, and that these who are catch'd in the Gin may yet escape, like a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler. But of Quakers enough; only I must repeat that I can∣not think my Plow-man to be the sole Author of the Book that bears his Name; no, I think some good part thereof belongs to some, who own neither Name nor Profession of Quakerism. It's true, they hate all Protestants, and, chief∣ly, Presbyterians; yet, there is in that Book something sin∣gular, its Author appears rather to have studi'd the black∣ning and bespattering of Presbytry, than either the De∣fence or Palliation of Quakerism: for in lieu hereof, I find, in many places, only Libells larded with such Lies, Calumnies, and Slanders, as the more invective Roma∣nists, and other invective Hierarchicks used to throw at all true Protestants, but mainly at the Puritan Pres∣byterians. There is, moreover, in some places, more plain∣ly express'd, but all along couch'd, yet obvious enough to the observant, a warmth and kindness for these of the Hierar∣chick, or Prelatical Principles. In a word, much of the Book breaths forth another Species or sort of Malignancy, than is that of Quakerism, a Malignancy peculiar to the Author of Presbytries Triall, and such professed Romanists; to Heylen and Le Strange, and such barefac'd Papaturians, much ra∣ther than to these more fallacious and spiritual Antichri∣stians. Neither can any sensible Man earnestly read their
Book, and not perceive so much. Strange! Cann't they not uphold their Hierarchy, except they thus study to under∣mine Christianity, and join with its deadly Enemies, and that too with such Varlets of 'em whose Brutishness and molish despicableness, as was the good fortune of Aesop's Ass, are their only security, and set them too low for any Man to nottice them? I'm also inform'd that the pretend∣ed Author us'd to have most closs and frequent Converse with an Episcopal Minister of no mean Rank. Moreover, seeing many of the Prelatists oppose the sometimes receiv'd Sentiments, yea and common Articles of the Church of Eng∣land, for which they pretend such Veneration, by Espousing, with Papists, Quakers, and the like Opposers of Truth, the Tenets of Pelagians, and Arminians, no great wonder tho' they syncretize with such Sectaries against the Presbyteri∣an Calvinians (as they speak) and accordingly the Neope∣lagian Hierarchicks (for there are Episcopals, surely of a better Mind, and Judgement more Orthodox) make a third Squadron of this unsanctifi'd Army, and in Railing, Anti∣christian Sophistry, and such unworthy Methods, labour to come short of neither Quakers nor Papists. Such a black Combination would well nigh move one to say of Presbyte∣rians as Tertullian said of Christians, There must needs (saith he) be some good thing among Christians, seeing they were chiefly persecuted by such a Monster as Nero. It's a sign of your greater Glory (saith HieromeInter Epist, Augustini 25. to Augustine) that all the Hereticks abhorr you. And here I cannot but not∣tice how the Author of The fundamental Charter of Presbytry &c. (having most untruly insinuated, as if we ascribed to our first Reformers an Impeccability, and espoused every particular Sentiment or Expression of every one of 'em, as infallible) no less falsly gives out and earnestly studies to
perswade the World that all these our first Reformers, and especially Mr. Knox, were nothing but a pack of treacher∣ous bloody Rebels and most odious Men: see, to name no o∣ther places, from page 334. to 346. and is not this suffici∣ent Evidence that the Author has a large measure of the Spirit of Ham the curs'd Exposer of his Father's nakedness, but he knows who'll thank him, Hoc Italus velit & magno mercetur Abaddon. The matter is, these Men are much grieved that ever we were fre'd from Rome's Tyranny and Superstition, and so know not how to be even with these precious Instruments of that our most happy and admirable Deliverance. Ano∣ther of their Arts is that they use boldly to pretend the Doctrine of their Hierarchy to be most Catholick and abso∣lutely necessary, and so Vn-church most of the reformed Churches; and, which is no less Vn-christian, they strive to support it with such Arguments as equally serve to e∣stablish an universal Papacy. Again, they use to Eng∣lish these Romish Sophisms, and yet quite dissemble the An∣swers and Refutations the Reform'd have giv'n thereto, as, to name no more, is the constant Practice of A. M. D. D. Moreover they now darr to assert, contrary to the acknow∣ledgement of all Men, and the Concessions of the greatest Prelatists, that our first Reformers were of the Prelati∣cal Perswasion. They would possess Men with the same thoughts of the Transmarine Reformers, and therefore, a∣mong other Means to effect it, they use to work on the ne∣cessituousness or ambition of some forraign Protestants, as the Romanists do on needy Greeks and other Easterns, and bribe them to publish, for the receiv'd Doctrine of the Churches they were bred in, what is quite contrary to their known and common Sentiments and publick Confessions. I only give some Examples of these their Arts (for who can
recount them all) this is certain that if ye ransack and un∣fold their Methods, you shall find none of 'em without some noteable Cheat and fallacy at bottom. Their Hierarchy leans on three Props, as its fundamental Supporters: The first is their wretch'd perversion of some Scriptures, the second is their Fancy that it still obtain'd in the primitive Church, the third, that 'twas believ'd by all Ages to be of Apostolick Institution. These Conceits are the very Funda∣mentals of the Hierarchy, which I here examine, and, as I trust, disprove, and accordingly so Intitulat the subsequent Papers. I repeat as little as is possible of what has been said before, and especially meet with the Hierarchys most applauded and latest Asserters, and among these A. M. D. D. and the Author of the Fundamental Charter &c. the far more considerale part, yea the very substance of both which Books I examine and exartuat. I discuss moreover the Plea they bring from Ignatius's Epistles, as also detect most of the foremention'd Artifices together with many such un∣generous Methods not hitherto so fully discovered Hence I hope I cannot be justly accounted an Aggressor or Pro∣vocker, nor yet my Papers superfluous: I don't notwith∣standing impeach as guilty of these Deallings all Epis∣copall men, for of these there have been and doubtless now are both good men and stout Protestants, and such, I know, will never be offended if I lay open open the Weakness and unworthy Deallings of such as anathematize whosoever pre∣ferr the Model of the prime ptimitive Church-Government, the Apostolick Humility and Simplicity, to their Diocesan Hierarchy, the secular Grandeur of subsequent and more de∣generat Times, if I, among many other Demonstrations here∣of, bring a Cloud of most competent and unsuspected Witness∣es, who depone that during the Apostolick Age and the prime Primitive Church, there was a Bishop for each Congregati∣on,
an Identity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter, and, fi∣nally, a compleat Parity of ordinary Pastors; if I make appear that the greatest Enemies to this Truth and Adorers of the Hierarchy are (maugre all their Cunning) compell'd to subscribe and seall it. If yet some hesitat and admire, how then so many of the Learn'd can give their Hierarchy a di∣vine Sanction, or set it so high as the times of the Apostles, such wowld remember that to fewer, at least, and these of no less Learning, no less confidently pretend a Divine Origen for many things, the Foundation whereof notwithstanding is undenyably in the dust of humane Corruption. How many Torrents of Wormwood hide their little heads in sources in that Christian  the space of about an hundred years after the Canon of the Scriptures was sealled, whereof so few gen∣uine Monuments now remain, and wherein Christians (as they were also for a good many yeares after that time) be∣ing astonish'd at these more prodigious Heresies, and wholly imployed in quelling these Hydra's, were kept from watch∣ing against more fly and subtile Assaults of the Enemy, the Danger of whose Tares was scarce discernable till they were hardly to be eradicated. Again, 'tis to be remembred that there are vast Ods be∣tween the Cases of the Contending Parties; many things tempt and invite men to patronize the Hierarchy, whereto the other side is not obnoxious: for whosoever confides in his own Parts and Abilities may probably promise to himself a graduall Ascent even to the satiety of worldly Ease, Riches, and Honour. Did not these and such Motives byass too many men, together with the Liberty Prelacy gives to He∣terodox Principles and to licentious Practices, how few should there be found to agent its Cause? On the other hand Preherian Discipline they think too rigid against both these Enormites: and as to worldly Encouragements, there's
nothing in Presbytry but a mediocrity of Stipend with a hard and perpetuall Labour without any Hope of Ease, Grandor, or more opulent Fortune. I should now have doon, only I can not but express how desirable 'twere that haying aside our own unscripturall Fancies, the Grounds of these most lamen∣table Contentions, all of us followed after the things which make for Peace, ad things wherewith one may edifie ano∣ther. Who would have thought, not many years hece when all true Protestants were at the very brik of Destructi∣on, but that the admirable Deliverace God give us, should have had this most desirable Consequent. How a∣mazing is it that a number call'd Protestants should vent their Spite, Malice and Treason against the most happy In∣strument of this our Delivery in Peace, His Majesty King WILLIAM, who is under God, the main Stay of Protestants, whom yet God protects, and I pray may pro∣tect, maugre all the malicious Machinations of wicked Men. God yet continues to call us to the same Duty of Christian Concord, to name no others, by terrible Moni∣tors: for at one Quarter we are besieg'd by nominal Theists but real Atheists who ridicule God's Sacred Word as the product of Rogues or Sots, and explode the Doctrine of the Existence of Angels and Spirits, and consequently of the Beeing of God the Father of Spirits, as the Dream of some Brainsick Weaklings, and below a man of sence: and at a∣nother Quarter, by a direfull Combination of Infernal Fiends and wretch'd Mortals. It's pleasant notwithstanding to ob∣serve how the latter of these Satanical Machines split and undoe the former: for the well known and confess'd Compacts and Commerce between these wicked Spirits and Miscreants of human Race, and Operations of Demons, and such Effects undenyably proceeding from preternatural and incorporeal Causes are sure Proofs of such immaterial Beeings, and so
demonstrat the Falshood of what is broach'd by these abomi∣nable Saducees, —aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo. O how clossly ought all of us to joyn in Weeping, Sighing, and Crying, not only for our oun Guilt, but also for these & such horrible Abominations that be doon in the midst of the Land. In the mean while these and a thousand such Mis∣chiefs mostly owe themselves to this Controversy, our Di∣visions, Ignorance, want of Church-Discipline, and other such its odious Effects. How many, thro' God's Blessing, should that Zeal, Learning and Industry spent for the sup∣port of mens unscripturall Conceits, have brought to the O∣bedience of Christ from both Romanists and open Infidels? Heu, quantum potuit Terrae, pelagique parari Hoc, quem Civiles hauserunt, sanguine, dextrae! Bless'd then in this Case should be the Peace-Maker, wherefore, let all of us Pray for our Jerusalem that Peace may be within her Walls, and Prosperity within her Pa∣laces. Let us also with TertullianAdversus. Hermoenem. adore the fullness of the Scriptures; which (as AugustineDe Doctrin Christiana. Lib. 2. Cap. 9. teaches) con∣tain all things needfull either for Faith or Life. The Books (saith Constantine the GreatTheodoret. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. & Hist. Triprtit. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. of the Evangelists, Apo∣stles and ancient Prophets, clearly teach us the Mind of God wherefore laying aside hostile Discords, let us seek from these the Determination of our Controversies. Surely this is a Catholick Principle: Good had it been if the Fathers had as cloly stuck to't in Practice as they firmly believ'd it. You assert (saith OptatusLib. 5. to the Donatists) We deny; between your Assertion and our Denyal the Peoples minds Wa∣ver; let none believe either you or us, we are all contenti∣ous Men, Judges must be sought, if these be sought for among
Christians, they can be found among neither of the Parties, be∣cause the Truth is impeded thro' Partiality; we must seek for Judges from without, if the Judge be a Pagan, he cannot know the Mysteries of Christians; if a Jew, he is an Enemy to Christian Baptism; on Earth therefore there cann't be roud a Determination of this Controversie: a Judge must be sought from Heaven; but why should we knock at Heavens Gates, when, hearing the Gospel we have Christ's Testament. And having elegantly compar'd the Scripture to Man's Testa∣ment, which is able to determine every Controversie that may arise among his Children, adds, He who let us this Testament is in Heaven; let his Will therefore be sought for in the Gospel as in a Testament: for the things which you now do, Christ forsaw before they came to pass. The same Justice and no more do we require in the present Case; we require, with CyprianEpist. ad Pompejum. that Custom or Tradition which is without Scripture, tho' otherways never so Old, be thrown away as mouldy Errors. Let not the Hope of Emoluments, secular Grandeur, or Power, make Men rack their Wits to Dprave and Detire the Truth, and despise the Aposto∣lick Humility, and Parity. Then (saith Chrysostome In Acta Apost. Homil. 3. speaking of these Apostolick Times, and that by way of Opposition to his own Age) Church-Government was not Honour or Grandeur, but Watching and Care of the Flock. Seeing it's evident (saith Isidorus Pelusiota) how vast a dif∣ference there is between the Ancient humble Ministry and the present Tyranny: Why don't ye Crown with Garlands and Celebrate the Lovers of Parity or Equality? Let not the gay Pageantry of foppish Ceremonies steal away our Hearts from the simplicity of the Gospel. Is such trash worth the patronizing? Nay rather, Let the Sword of God (The're Jerome's wordsIn primum Haggaei. cut off every thing that men, without
the Authority and Testimony of the Scriptures, have devised and pretend as if they had it by Apostolick Tradition. Let all such things be broken in Pieces called Nehustan, and, finally, sacrific'd to Truth and Peace. Whatsoever thing God commands us let's observe to do't, and neither add there∣to nor diminish from't. This I'm sure is the old Path, and the good Way wherein if we Walk we shall find rest to our Souls, our Peace shall be as a River, and our Righ∣teousness as the Waves of the Sea, we shall Dwell toge∣ther in that Brotherly Vnity, which is a true Antecedent of Life for evermore. And thus I can freely say, is the ultimat Design of Composing and Emitting the ensuing Trea∣tise, and is and still shall be the fervent Prayer of Will. Jameson. Nazianzeni
THE CONTENTS. PART I. SECT. I. The Scope of the ensuing Treatise. The ancient Church for no Divine Right of Diocesan Episcopacy. pag. 1. The ablest of its late Patrons of no other mind, where Dr. Sandersone is noted. 2 An examen of the Conveniencies and Inconveniencies of Prelacy undertaken. 5 SECT. II. The Aphorism No Bishop no King discuss'd. Prelacy contributes not a little to introduce Tyranny. ibid. Prelats severall ways most hurtfull to Princes. 6 Presbytry well agrees with Monarchy: where their Charge of Sedition and Disloyalty is largely vouch'd to be most unjust, from the most applauded Writers of our Adversaries themselves. 8 SECT. III. Their Argument taken from Order weigh'd. Their strange Improvement thereof. 17 It equally serves Prelatists and Papists. Ibid. SECT. IV. The Plea for Prelacy drawn from Unity discuss'd. Dissentions most frequent where Bishops bore sway. 18 Unity and Parity harmoniously lodged in one and the same Assembly. 19 SECT. V. The Argument Prelatists bring from antiquity canvass'd. Ibid. SECT, VI. The Instance of Aërius condemn'd by Epiphanius prov'd to be unserviceable to our Antagonists. They joyn with the most disingenous of Papists in using this Argument. 21
The choicest of the Fathers for the Scriptural and Apostolick Identity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter. 22 Epiphanius giveth little Patrociny to our Adversaries. 23 His Injustice to Aerius in this matter. ibid. If Aerius was Arrian largely disputed: the affirmative whereof is rendred impro∣bable by the profound Silence of those who were concern'd to have mention'd it. 24 The Tractate ascribed to siliu  is judgd supposi∣titious: wherein there's nothing to be found concerning Aerius. This report of Aërius his Arrianism leans on Epiphanius's testimony alone, whose great Le∣vity and Credulity is universally noted. 25 It is instanc'd in his dealing with the Donatists whom on no good ground he ac∣cuses of the same crime of Arrianism. 26 They're absolv'd by Augustine and Optatus. Ibid. It's objected that Aerius his commerce with Eustathius of Schastia may give countenance to the report of Epiphanius. Ibid. Eustathius tho' a Heretick yet was not Arrian but a Macedonian, who seems ra∣ther to have been dangerously shaken then intirely wedded to Mace∣donianism. Ibid. But on supposition of the worst several reasons are brought making probable that nothing can be inferrd from his commerce to prove Aërius Heretick. 27. The loss of the Writings of the Ancient and traduced witnesses of truh is lamentable. Ibid. The Judgement of Philastrius concerning Aërius related; against whom the Aërians are vindicated from the Crime of Encratitism. 28 They were fiercely persecuted and why. 29 Between Philastrius and Epiphanius no good agreement. The negative testi∣mony of both Philastrius and Rabanus Maurus against what is delivered by Epiphanius. 30 SECT. VII. No Diocesan Bishops in several ancient Churches. This Instanc'd in the Churches of Ireland, of Africk, and of Scotland. 30 The ablest of our Adversaries brought to a sore pinch hereby. 34 Sir George Mckenzie's Epistolary Defence of Prelacy canvassed: where Bede is vindicated against the Bishop of St. Asaph, and Buchanan and Hector Boethius vindicated against Spotswood, to whom the Advocat referred. Ibid. That we had a constitute Church before the coming of Palladius evinced against both Bishop and Advocat. 38 Our Primitive Doctors why called Monks. The cavills of Spotswood and the Bishop of St. Asaph removed. 39 Smal power of Prelats for a long time after Palladius. 40 The most memorable result of the Combat between the Advocat and the Bishop of St. Asaph. Ibid.
D. M.'s exceptions removed. His negative argument no argument. 42 ndel vindicated. 44 D. M's perversion of Baron's clear testimony detected. Ibid. He in vain attempts to deprave, and then to exauctorate Prosper himself. 46 Other specimens of D. M's unhandsome dealing. 47 SECT VIII. Prelacy opposite to the Principles of our Reformers. The Hierarchy is condemn'd by our Confession. 49 Knox and his fellows are proved to have been most opposite to the Hierarchick Domination. 50 The Author of the Fundamental Charter of Presbytry adventures not on our special Arguments. Ibid. Against whom Knox's great aversness from Prelacy is evinced by vindicating of his Letter to the Assembly. 51 And by vindicating of Knox's words and actions at the Installment of John Douglas. 52 And from clear and unsuspected records: where 'tis also evinc'd that the bulk of both Ministers and People were then opposite to Prelacy. 54 This Authors cavills from the meeting at Leith 7½ and from some expressions of the Assemblies canvass'd and annihilated. 56 Knox's antiprelatical judgement demonstrated from Beza's Letter, which is vindicated from this Authors exceptions. 60 Who pretending to make Knox a Prelatist only labours to prove him and our other Reformers self-repugnant Bablers. 61 His ridiculous Sophisms examin'd and expos'd. 62 Knox alloweth no Prelacy to England. 66 He exhorts the English to embrace a Church-government and Discipline alto∣gether Antiprelatical. 67 The Assemblies letter 1566. vindicated from this Author's pretended allowance of Prelacy. 69 Knox acknowledged by the fiercest Prelatists to be truly Presbyterian. 70 Superintendents in Scotland a temporary expedient. The nullity of this Author's reasons to the contrary detected. 72 The falsness of his Gloss of our first Book of discipline largely demonstrated. 76 Superintendency not really inconsistent with parity. This Authors unchristian rallery, his overthrowing of the great principle of Hierarchicks are discover∣ed, and his bottomless cavills enervated. 77 The stock of Prerogatives he pretends to have belonged to Superintendents e∣vinced to be unserviceable to his design of giving Superintendents a superi∣ority over their Pastors. 81 He at once yields the whole cause, and clasheth with himself. Our first Reformers their opposition to, and hatred of Prelacy's being damnable demonstrated. The
Helvetian and other  Churches opposite to Prelacy as beeing destitute of Scripture-foundation. 86 SECT. IX. The forraign Reformed Churches truly Presbyterian. The Judgement of Luther and Lutherans. 89 The mind of Calvin and those called Calvinists both in their private capacities, and confessions of the most famous Churches. 90 Specimens of the chiefest objections adduced and removed where the uncandide dealing of our Adversaries is unfolded. 91 Who yet are forced to acknowledge the truth of our assertion. 95 The eminent Opposers of Popery before Luther truly Presbyterian. 96 The first Reformers and body of the Church of England at that time for no divine right of Prelacy where some of Saravia's qualities are noted. Ibid. SECT. X. Some of the manifold Inconveniences attending Prelacy briefly mentioned. A Spirit of Persecution still attended it. 98 The Principles of Prelacy and practise of Prelatists most Schismatical. Ibid. It's native tendency to introduce Popery. 99 And to a Papal Domination and enslaving of the Kingdom. 100 The spite and hatred the Hierarchicks shew against our Reformation from Po∣pery, their impiety, and affection to Popery. Ibid. Dr. Burnets exceptions from the Regulars ther trampling on the Bishops and the dealing of the Papalines at the Council of Trent enervated. 102 Another exception or retortion of this Author cashier'd. 105 Lousness and Prophanity the constant attendent of Prelacy. 106 PART II. SECT. I. Of Ignatius and his Epistles. Papists and other Hierarchicks make a fairer appearance from humane than from Divine Writings. 109 A short account of Ignatius and of the Epistles bearing his name. 110 Various Editions thereof. Ibid. Our Adversaries now acknowledge to be spurious that they once gave out for genuine: where of the Florentine Copy. 111 Debates among the Learned concerning it. Ibid. The unhandsome arts of our Adversaries to free themselves of further dispute. 112
The great Confidence they place in Ignatius. 113 Three Hypothese laid down, according to each whereof Ignatius becomes un∣serviceable to the Prelatists. Ibid. SECT. II. The first Hypothesis viz. that Ignatius is, at best, interpolated. Writings pretending to greatest proximity to either Old or New Testament carry most manifest signs of spuriousness, in which Divine Providence is observed. 114 Their Epistolick Ignatius's want of Apostolick Gravity and Humility: his ensla∣ving of the People and flattering, yea deifying of all Church-men. 115 Dr. Pearsons Exceptions removed. 119 Du Pin's self-repugnancy. 121 Dr. Wake's Error discovered. 122 A brief sum of the Arguments evincing our assertion. 124 Other things very early falsly father'd on Ignatius. Ibid His Journey to Rome uncredible. 125 SECT III The second Hypothesis, viz. That the Antiquity of the true Ignatius could not secure him from all Lapses or Escapes, nor serve to prove that there were no declension in his time. Whole Churches suerving during the life of the Apostles themselves. They grew worse after their death. 126 Papias's mistakes and multitude of Followers. 127 The failings of Justine Martyr and Irenaus. Ibid. The influence they had on the Church. The common mistakes of these times in Practicks no less than in Dogmaticks; which is instanc'd in their debate about Easter. 128 Both parties went contrare to the Apostolick practice; which is proved by clear Testimonies of Iranus and Socrates. 129 Their strange conduct in managing this debate, who Metamorphosed some Apostles into Jewish High-Priests. 130 The Credulity and Oseitancy of Hegesippus. 131 We are to hearken to God before the chiefest of Men. Divine providence ob∣servable in the mistakes of the Ancients. 132 SECT IV. The third Hypothesis, that there is no real disagreement, but a true concord betwixt the Doctrine of Ignatius and that of the present Presbyterians. They are reconcil'd by sustaining the Hypothesis of ruling Elders, which Office is vouched to be of greatest Antiquity; and where Ambrose or Hilary is vindi∣cated against Dr. Field. 134
Ignatius most express for the reciprocation of a Bishop and a Pastor of one Congregation 136 Our Adversaries yield the whole Controversy; where Dr. Maurice's Mist is dispelled. 138 Vindiciae Ignatianae destroy their Authors ultimate design. 140 SECT. V. The Objections they pretend to bring from Scripture against the Doctrine now deduced from Ignatius, removed. D. M's reasonings for the Diocesan Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, annihila∣ted 140 No power properly Apostolick ordinary and permanent in the Church. 143 Willet's answer to the Iebusites vindicated against their Advocat. D. M. 147 The Office and nature of an Evangelist declared out of the Ancients. 148 D. Ms mutilation and perversion of Eusebius. 149 That Timothy & Titus were Evangelists, and not Diocesan Bishops made out from Scripture. Ibid. Apostles and Evangelists degraded by the Hierarchicks. 150 Their Arguments for Timothy and Titus their Diocesan-ship houghed by the very Authors in whom they most confide, both ancient and modern. Ibid. Their Argument from the Asian Angels several ways overthrown, and D. M's shifts and perversions expunged. 151 Malach. 2. 7. vindicated against Dr. Hammond. 153 His Correction of the receiv'd Greek Coppy of Rev. 2. 24. corrected D. M's strange and wild Gloss. Ibid. Salmasius vindicated against him, and the mind of Presbyterians concerning Apo∣calyptick Angels fully sustain'd by Scripture and Fathers. 154 The best of our Adversaries really acknowledge Episcopacy destitute of Scripture warrant. Dr. Hammond wholly destroys Episcopacy while he attempts to establish it. 155 SECT. VI. Our meaning of Ignatius confirmed from the writings of the Apostles his immediate Ancestors. Acts 20. v. 17, 28 vindicated against Dr. Maurice and others who are by the ears among themselves. 157 Philippians 1. 1. vindicated; where the Diocesanists their Digladiations are exposed. 158 Philippi no Metropolis; where Dr. Maurice his weakness is detected; the fiction of the existence of Metropoles in the Apostolick age exploded by the Hierarchy's truest friends; Dr. Maurice's slippery dealing. 159
The first to Timothy 3. vindicated against Bellarmine, and his Friend D. M. 162 As is also Titus 1. 164 SECT. VII. The grand objection taken from the Commentaries of the Ancients. The primitive Doctors (as themselves acknowledge) were subject to many considerable lapses and escapes. 165 The causes thereof. 167 Several reasons demonstrating that if ever the Fathers so glossed these texts as not to hurt Diocesan Episcopacy, they then gave not their genuine sentiments. 168 SECT. VIII. Moe clear testimonies of the Primitive Doctors against the Divine right of Diocesan Episcopacy produced and vindicated. The testimony of Ambrose or Hilary: Bellarmine's perversion discovered. 171 Petavius's vain attempts both to exauctorate and deprave Hilary. 173 The testimonie of Chrysostome 174 He's vindicated from Bellarmine's depravation. 175 The testimonies of Pelagius, Sedulius, and Primasius. 176 Augustine vindicated against Bellarmine and his Plagiary D. M. 177 Apart of Jerome's testimony on the epistle to Titus vindicated against the dish∣nest dealing of Bellarmne and D. M. 178 No ground to think that ever Jerome accounted James Bishop of Jerusalem. 180 All Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments are in Jerome's account the Apostles Successors. 181 The rest of Jerome's testimony on the Epistle to Titus vindicated. 182 His testimony out of the Epistle to Enagrius vindicated against Bellarmine and D. M. 183 This doctrine of Jerome most catholick and universally received. 188 SECT. IX. The testimenies of Ignatius his Contemporaries and Suppars disproving what our Adversaries would force him to speak, and confirming what we have prov'd to be his mind, viz. that he cashiers a Diocesan Prelacy. Negative testimonies. 190 Clemens Romanu's positive and clear testimonies. 192 Petaviu's exceptions met with. 194 As are these of his Underling D. M. 197 The testimony of Polycap: where Dr. Pearson's strange evasion is routed: and D M  ill gronnded vaporing exploded. 199 The testimonies of Hermas: where the vanity of D. M.  Romish Cavills is discovered and Blondel vindicated. 200
The testimonie of Justine Martyr where Dr. Maurice's perversions are detected, as is also the unreasonableness of D. M's. reasons against Justine Martyr's plaine meaning. 204 Irenaeus identifies Bishop and preaching Presbyter. 206 D. M's. Popish querie. 207 SECT. X. Other Observations and Arguments eversive of Diocesan Prelacy. A Bishop is a name of labour, a Presbyter a name of honor, Ibid The true notions of the Apostolick and Hierarchick Bishop diametrically oppo∣site one to another. 209 The example of the Apostolick Bishop followed, and the Idea thereof retained by all the true primitive Bishops or Doctors, which is all one with the notion of a laborious Pastor of a Congregation. Ibid. This is confirmed out of the Council of Sardica and others of these times, where Dr. Maurice and Dr. Beverige their sly and perverse dealing is discovered. 20 The subjecting of one Pastor or Church to another finally resolved into a Romish slavery. 213 Every Disepnser of the Word and Sacraments is a true Bishop. 214 That in the least Village and meanest Countrie-places, where there was a Con∣gregation, there was a true Bishop largely evinced: where Dr. Maurice his exceptions is obviated. Ibid. All Bishops equal among themselves; hence their Hierarchy is overthrown. 216 Their Romish argument from the pretendedly uninterupted succession of Diocesan Bishops enervated. 217 The argument drawn from the lists of Bishops in Rome and such great Cities satisfied; First, From the positions already demonstrated, which are further confirmed: Secondly, From the confessed uncertainty of these lists: Thirdly, From this that in Rome there was at once a plurality of Peter's pre∣tended successors: Fourthly, From this that Peter was never at Rome, which is largely demonstrated: Fifthly, from the evident falsity of the lists of the Bishops of Jerusalem. 218 That the government of the prime primitive Church was truly Presbyterian made out from a cloud of most unsuspected Authors, 225 A prostasy gradually turned into a Papal Tyranny 230 The Ancients kept fast the Foundations of Christianity, but strayed exceedingly in superstitious additions, 231 The Hierarchicks embraceing diverse novell Enormities desert the Primitive Church: where Heylen's preversion of the Ancients is discovered: Matthew 20, 25, &c. vindicated. and D. M's Romanism and Judaism detected. 223 The Bishop of Aiace his Christian Discourse unchristianly eluded and slighted by the Trent-Hierarchicks. 239
ERRATA. pag. lin. read 2 7 r. this 4 23 r. thereto is sufficient. 7 1 r. palpably. 8 10 r. Jac. 14 1 r. the feares of the. 26 33 dele comma. 32 penult. r 158. Ibid ibid r 163. Ibid. ult. r 53. 37 25 dele (y) 59 10 dele as 69 21 r hope of their. 80 25 r is injoyn'd. 82 32 r life. 84 1 r Act. 85 13 r their. 87 ult. r disaprov'd. 92 15 r liked. 104 33 r from. 125 7 r leanes. 129 6 r Apostles. 137 13 r breaking on bread. 140 30 r whereon. 150 28 r Apostles. 168 21 r expositures: 175 24 r other Pastors. 178 5 r in. 184 12 dele that. 185 18 r Apostolical. 186 28 r were. 188 27 adde it. 197 26 dele it. 202 18 r from. 207 1 r our. 214 6 r or. Ibid. 7 r of. 216 ult. r are. 217 20 adde acknowledged. Ibid. 31 r them. Ibid. pen. r de cornu. 219 20. r breaks. 223 1 Babylon, and is called a Persian i. e. a Parthian City, and the Metropolis. 237 16 r allowable. 239 28 r would ADDENDA pag. 71. lin. 21. But (saith Heylen, Cosmographie pag. 332.) beeing once settled in an orderly and con∣stant Hierarchy, they held the same untill the Reformation began by Knox: when he & his Associats approving the Genevian Plat-form, took the advantage of the Minority of King James the sixt, to introduce Presbyterian Discipline and suppress the Bishops. pag. 96. lin. 9. What was the mind of the Waldenses & Hussites (saith Voetius speaking of the Op∣posers of Prelacy, Polit. Eccles. part. 2. pag. 833.) is evident from their most accurat History written by Joh. Paulus Perrinus, which is not extant save in their vul∣gar Tongues.
Nazianzeni Querela et Votum Justum. OR, The Fundamentals of the HIERARCHY examined and disproved. Part I. Which briefly handles the prime Arguments for the Hierarchy, as also some of its Concomitants and Qualities. Section I. The Scope of the ensuing Treatise. THE purpose of our present Discourse is not directly to handle that much tossed Debate; if an Office in the Church for species or kind superiour to that of dispensing the Word and Sacraments hath any footing or warrant in the Word of God? Neither will this be judged necessary by any who call to mind that many Treatises disproving
the divine right of Episcopacy, as Altare Damascenum, and Rectius Instruendum, have had so good success that, for ought I know, they stand intirely without any shadow of an Answer. Yea the most learned that ever pleaded for the Lawfulness of Episcopacy, will not blame us, though we yeeld no Scripture-ground to it, but only consider it in it self as a thing indifferent; of which mind, among the Ancients, were, not only those who denyed not the exercise of his Office to be Lawfull, as Hierome; but also the very Bishops themselves, as Au∣gustine, all of them founding this Office, not upon Jus Dominicum, the Law of God in the Scriptures; but Ecclesiasticam consuetudinem, the pra∣ctice of the Church. Add hereto that both Fathers and Councils equally in Opinion and Practice, stuck no less to the lawfulness of Patriarchat, than that of simple Episcopacy; and yet I believe few among real Protestants will either assert the Divine Right of this Office of Patriarchat, i. e. that it had any Warrant for it in the Word of God; or yet that those Fathers and Councils so believed. Which present Consideration furnisheth us with another Argument sufficient to evince that the ancient Chrch founded this Office only upon Custom; and, as they thought, Chri∣stian Prudence, and not at all upon the Books of the Old and New Te∣stament. §. 2. Neither do the most Learned of the Modern Episcopals in the least swerve from this Opinion; amongst whom I reckon D. Forbes, who,Iren. lib. 2. Caput 11. having, for a while with the greatest tenderness and fear, handled this Matter, propones at length the Question, If Episcopacy be of Divine Right? And yet declares himself highly difficultated what to Answer; for absolutly deny it, he will not: and positively assert it he dares not: he therefore confounds it with a Synodical Moderatour∣ship, and then fairly tells us that it is of Divine: Right; because of the gene∣ral Scripture-Precepts of Church-Order and Decency. And indeed he car∣ries himself all along in this Matter with so much nice Caution, Ambi∣guity and Fear, that he evinces the desperation of the Episcopal Cause, to which so learned a Man could afford no better Defence, than really to destroy what he pretends to vindicat. Neither is the most Learned Bishop Vsser of another mind, who has reduced it to a meer shadow, and nonentity.
AndSynop. pap. conti. 5. Quest. 3. Part 2. Willet, though he says that a difference is needfull for Church-Policy, yet affirms, that this cannot be proved by the Word of God, and that in the Apostles times a Bishop and Presbyter were neither in Name nor Office distinguished. And he at large answers all Bellarmine's Arguments to the Contrary. See the Appendix to the second part of the forecited Question. Of this same Judgement is their applauded HookerPreface to his Ecclesiastical Policy▪ p. 2. 19. and 20. viz. that there is no ground for their Hierarchy in the word of God; while he declares himself against all particular Forms of Church-government, and acknowledges that nothing for Diocesan Prelacy can be brought therefrom. The necessity of Policy (saith heP. 131.) and regimen in all Churches may be held without holding any one certain Form to be necessary in them all. And the general Principles are such as do not particularly prescribe any one, but sundry Forms of Discipline may be equally consonant unto the ge∣neral Axioms of Scripture. It hath been told them that Matters of Faith, and in general, Matters necessarie unto Salvation are of a different Nature from Ceremonies, Order, and the kind of Church-Government, that the one are necessar to be expresly contained in the Word of God, or else manifestly col∣lected out of the same; the other not so, that it is necessarie not to receive the one unless there be something in Scripture for them, the other free if nothing be alledged against them. And the Learned D. Stilling fleet is at no smal pains to cashier and expunge, among the rest of peculiar Forms of Go∣vernment. This Diocesan Prelacy out of Scriptural-Articles; and not only acknowledges, but also,In Iren. musters not a few Arguments, where∣by to Prove that it hath no Ground in Holy Scripture. And, Dr. Morton,Apologiae Cathol. lib. 1. p. 118. 119. 120. Though a zealous Defender of Episcopa∣cy: Asserts that Hierome made not the Difference between Bishop and Pres∣biter of Divine Institution; he assnts to Medina the Jesuite, and asserts, that there was no Difference in the matter of Episcopacy betwixt Hierome and Aerius: He averres further that not only the Protestants, but also all the pri∣mitive Doctors were of Hierome's mind And finally he concludes, that according to the Harmonious Consent of all Men in the Apostolick Age, there was no Difference between Bishop and Pesbyter, but was afterward introduced for the removal of Schism. And Jewel Bishop of Sarisburie (a Man for Piety, and Ability, Second, I am sure, to few that ever filled an Episco∣pal Chair) most expresly asserts the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter
Here (saithDefence of the Apology of the Church of England. pag. 121. he) Mr. Harding findeth great fault, for that I have translated these words, ejusdem Sacerdotii, of the same Bishoprick, and not, as he would have it, of one Priesthood. God wott a very simple Quar∣rel. Let him take, whether he listeth best: if either-other of these words shall serve his turn. Erasmus saith, id temporis idem erat Episcopus, Sacerdos, & Presbyter: these three Names, viz. Bishop, Priest. and Presbyter at that time were all one. Andpage 248. but what meant Mr. Harding here to come in with the Difference between Priests, or Presbyters and Bishops? Thinketh he, that Priests, and Bishops hold only by Tradition? Or is it so horrible an Heresie, as he maketh it, to say, that by the Scriptures of God, a Bishop, and a Priest are all one? Or knoweth he, how far, and unto whom, he reacheth the Name of an Heretick? Verily Chrysostom saith, Inter Episcopum, & Presbyterum interest ferme nihil; between a Bishop, and a Priest, (which is all one with Presbyter) in a manner there is no difference. St. Hierome saith, some∣what in a rougher sort, Audio Quendam &c. I hear say there is one become so Peevish, that he setteth Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bi∣shops: whereas the Apostle plainly teacheth us that Priests, and Bishops be all one. Thus far Jewel. The Bishops and Priests (saith the famous Bishop CranmerStillingfleet Iren. pag. 392.) were at one time, and were not two things, but both one Office in the beginning of Christ's Religion. And, In the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a Bishop or a Priest, needeth no Consecration by the Scripture; for Election or Appointing thereto sufficient. In the same MS. (saith Dr. StillingfleetIren. pag. 393.) it appears, that the Bishop of St. Asaph, Therleby, Redman, and Cox, were all of the same Opinion with the Arch-Bishop, that at first Bishops and Presbyters were the same; and the two latter expresly cite the Opinion of Jerome with Approbati∣on. Thus we see by the Testimony chiefly of him who was Instrumental in Our Reformation, that he owned not Episcopacy as a distinct Order from Pres∣bytry but only as a prudent Constitution of the Civil Magistrat, for the better governing in the Church. And having proved that Whitgift, and with him the whole Body of the English Episcopal Divines were of the same Judgement, thus concludes;pag. 395. By which Principles the Di∣vine Right of Episcopacy as founded upon Apostolical Practice, is quite sub∣verted and destroyed.
Now judge if Dr. SandersoneEpiscopacy not prejudicial to regal Power. Page 13, 14, 15. spoke not without the allowance, ye acontrary to the express Mind of his Brethren, when he says that the Difference among the Advocats for Episcopacy is only Verbal, and that all of them, even those who yeeld that it is not of Divine Right, no less than the rest, assert that it is founded on the Example and Institution of Christ or his Apostles. §. 3. This Discourse therefore shall weigh the Advantages alledged to flow from Episcopacy, that it may appear if it have such Effects as they Promise; As also inquire if the Hurt and Dammage does not pre∣ponderat all the Good they can pretend to be linked to their Hierarchy. Neither shall we neglect to examine, if what the most Learned of that Perswasion bring from Ecclesiastick Antiquity, be subservient to their Cause. Section II. The Aphorism No Bishop No King discuss'd. A Chief Argument whereby they would prove the necessity of Pre∣lacy they bring from the great Support which they say it affords to Monarchy. Hence with them No Bishop No King is an axioma∣tick Aphorism, which cannot be readily granted, seeing, to name no more, the charges the Hierarchy stood the King and Kingdom made a dear Bargain. Much was spent in their stated Revenues, but more by their clandestine Exactions, and other sinistrous means of draining the Country, and places of their pretended Jurisdictions, throw which there are Incorporations that, even at this day, groan under the Debts they then contracted: And yet more by sustaining Standing-forces to be Janizaries to the Prelates and their Complices, and persecute the sin∣cerer part of Protestants, for else there was then no use of such num∣bers. Yet their Maxime may be thus far granted, that Prelacy may much contribute to the introduction of a Despotick and Arbitrary Go∣vernment: And indeed the great Power they usurped, and manifold Influences they had over both Cities and Country, either to wheedle or menace them to elect such Members of Parliament as pleased them; and
to Cajole or awe these Parliament-men to speak in their own Dialect: And the being of a good number of them prime Lords of the Articles, whereby they had either the mediat or immediat Flection of the rest, made them well nigh able to effect no less: Which kind of Govern∣ment no Wise and Paternal Prince will desire. § 2. Moreover that Princes have no great reason to be fond of them is apparent from their great unfitness to manage Politick and State-Affairs. There are two Ways whereby one may be fitted for being a States∣man; either when Natural induements are extraordinary, which I doubt if many of our Prelats could affirm of themselves: Or else that of Education and continued Industry whereby to be fitted for State-imploy∣ments; but so far were they from any thing of this, that during their greener years, they had quite other Studies and Imployments, being designed for the Ministry; and so were obliged to prosecute hard the Study of Divinity, which, I am sure, will give any Man his handsfull of Work, who makes earnest of it. From this they are taken to feed some Flock, which, at least, will give them no less exercise. Now, how these Men can be fit for ma∣naging State-affairs, or, how they can be well kept from falling into Solecisms therein, whose skill is so small, is not very discernable. But though they were never so well fore-armed for such high State-imploy∣ments, how find they leisure to exercise them? Is not the Ruling, and Governing so many Ministers and Churches, which they alledge them∣selves to be entrusted with, a Work heavy enough to exercise, if not to bruise any one Man? Or, where have they found Warrant to relin∣quish the Ministry, and turn themselves to Offices of State when offer∣ed, or to undertake both together? Do they not believe that either of them is heavy enough? Know they not that not only the Apostle, but also the ancient Canons, and, to name no others, these which (though not truly) are called the Canons of the Apostles, most clearly condemn this their Practice? Let neither (say they (a)) Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon taken upon him any secular Business; otherways let him be cast out off his Office: Hence we may learn,Canon 6. . if it be out of Conscience that these Men plead for Antiqui∣ty,
when they palpable contemn and trample what themselves count the most venerable Precepts thereof. Moreover it's observable how they, so far as their Interest led them, still studied the ruine of those to whom they owed their Being, as Bishops. Thus the Roman Prelats studied the Ruine of both the Eastern and Western Emperours: Thus the Bishops of Scotland brought no small Vexation to both King and Nobility, in the Reign of Alexander the III. And so Becket of Canter∣ury, and his Faction handled Henry the II of England. But worse did their Successours treat Richard the II, whom, in his Absence, they de∣prived of his Kingdom. It's vain to repone that these were Papists; seeing the ambition of Prelats is well enough known of whatever Name they be: Yea such also have been the Practices of Prelats who acknow∣ledged no Pope, as divers of the Greek Patriarks, who helped not a little to Dethrone their Emperour. And the English Bishops (as Sir Francis Knols complains in a Letter to Secretary Cicil) encroached not a little upon the Priviledges of the Crown, kept Courts in their own Name, and still give out, that the Complex of their Office, i. e. the civil part of it, as well as the other, without any Distinction, was not from the King but from Jesus Christ. Which Encroachments are real∣ly Imperium in Imperio. On which account, this their usurped Power, as being dangerous, and of a Romish Original, was abolished in the first Parliament, of Ed∣ward the VI. The Substance of what Dr. Sanderson either insinuats or more clearly expresseth in Answer hereto, is, that this was a Corruption in Edward 's Reformation: And that some other Courts in England, as well as these of the Bishops are not kept in the King's Name. But sure, it's not very credible that this was a Corruption seeing nothing else, since Ed∣ward's Days, hath been done, during the succeeding Reigns, for that Church's further Reformation; but 'tis an odd Paradox if we consider the Author, for it was Mary who Abolished this Act of Edward, and restored their Power when she brought back the rest of Popery: And though other Courts, as he says, be not kept in the King's Name, yet reason teacheth, and former experience proves, how dangerous it was to give Ecclesiasticks ought that looks like an Absolute power, and worldly Grandure, whereby, like the Pope, they may, by his Artifi∣ces arrive, at length, to a real Independency. And indeed B. Laud
made large steps towards it, who, as Roger Coke relates,Detection of the Court and State of England. Vol. 1. Page 361. copt with the King himself, and maugre both his Will and Authority must visit Col∣ledges not as his Commissioner, but by his own Metropolitan right, and plum∣ed (thus saith the Author) in his own Feathers, all black and white, with∣out one borrowed from Caesar whereby the more he assumes to himself the less he leaves to the King, he now soars higher. And notable here is Dr. Sanderson's disingenuity, who always gives out that the Marian Act, which he still compares with, yea prefers to that of Edward, was never repealed by any succeeding Parliament. But we are informed by the same R. Coke (d) that by the 1. Tac. 25. the Marian Act was repealed and so that of Edward revived. And now to see him, who pretends to be a Minister of the Gospel (whose Office is only Ministerial and spiritual, exercised only in spiritual things, with∣out reaching Men's Bodies, inflicting only Rebukes, and such verbal punishments) to see such I say keeping Courts altogether Civil, and in∣flicting corporal mulcts and Punishments after the manner of Worldly Potentats, but especially when all this is done in their own Name, would really make the indifferent Beholder averre that such imitated, to the Life, his Romish Holiness, and believed much better his Doctrine of his receiving both spiritual and temporal Sword, than that of our Savi∣our, whereby he prohited his Apostles and their Successours all such earthly Grandure and despotick Power, as resembles the Lordship and Dominion of worldly Princes. §. 3. But their Maxime not only intimats that Prelacy well accord∣eth with Mouarchy; but also, that any other Form of Church-govern∣ment is destructive thereof. Which how they will evince I know not: How they can shew that Presbytrie, with which I am only here concern∣ed, is destructive of, or in the least inconsistent with Monarchy I cannot perceive. They can, I am sure, neither deduce their Inference from the Practice of Presbyterians, nor the Principles of Presbytrie: Not from the first, for though they load them, as if they had been the Cause, of many Civil Broyls and Calamities, and especially of these ensuing the Year 38. We may justly, yea with the allowance of the Hierarchie's greatest Favourers, reject the Charge, and send it home to the Prelats, who, by their attempting to introduce into the Church a Mass of Romish Superstitions, and their Pride and Tyranny exercised on all
sorts, were become unsupportable to both Nobility and People. B. Laud, Montegue and such Papaturients were then earnestly labour∣ing the reintroduction of a Mass of Romish Leaven into England, though there were but too much there already which had never been cast ut. Take one Instance or two in the words of R. Coke a high Church-of-Eng∣land-man, and no Lover of Presbyterians, I'm sure. The Bishops (saith heVol. 1. Pag. 361.) of the Province of Canterbury in their own Names, enjoin the removal of the Communion-table in the Paroch Churches & Vniversities, from the bo∣dy of the Church or Chancel to the east of the Chancel, & cause Rails to be set a∣bout the Table, and refuse to administer the Sacrament to such as shall not come up to the Rails, & receive it Kneeling: that the book of Sports, on Sundays, be read in Churches, and enjoin Adoration. I do not find that Adoration was ever enjoin∣ed before, nor any of the forenamed Injunctions in any Canon of the Church. Our Bishops were of the same mettal with these Innovatours in England, and their most docile Schollars: Laud therefore and his Faction apprehending that we would make but a small resistance against them to whom England was likely to yeeld, prepared for us all her Cup with some other additional Drugs more Romish, than what was obtruded on the English. Witness the Form in the Administration of the Sacrament which (as R. CokePag. 368. acknowledges) was the same in the Mass. But seeing, the knowledge of the state we were in, when the Nation entred into a Covenant, and opposed that Stream of Romish Abomina∣tions, contributes not a little to repell their fierce charges of Rebellion and Sedition; the Reader will pardon me though at some length I tran∣scribe a Passage from one who is beyond suspicion of being partial in favours of Presbytrie, Covenant, or ought of that nature: I mean Dr. BurnetMemoires of the D. of Hamiltoun. Pag. 29. 30. The Bishops (saith he) therefore were cherished by him (the King viz.) with all imaginable expressions of kindness and confidence; but they lost all their Esteem with the People, and that upon divers Accounts. The People of Scotland had drunk in a deep prejudice against every thing that sa∣voured of Popery. This the Bishops judged was too high, and therefore took all means possible to lessen it, both in Sermons and Discourses, mollifying their O∣pinions and commending their Persons, not without some reflections on the Refor∣mers. But this was so far from gaining their Design, that it abated nothing of the Zeal was against Popery, but very much hightned the rage against them∣selves, as favouring it too much.
There were also subtile Questions started some Years before in Holland a∣bout Predestination and Grace; and Arminius his Opinion, as it was condemn∣ed in a Synod at Dort, so was generally ill reported of in all reformed Churches, and no-where worse than in Scotland: but most of the Bishops, and their Ad∣herents, undertook openly and zealously the Defence of these Tenets. Likewise the Scotish Ministers and People had ever a great respect to the Lord's-day, and generally the Morality of it is reckoned an Article of Faith among them: but the Bishops not only undertook to beat down this Opinion, but by their Pra∣ctices expressed their neglect of that Day; and after all this they declared them∣selves avowed Zealots for the Liturgy and Ceremonies of England, which were held by the Zealous of Scotland all one with Popery. Vpon these Accounts it was, that they lost all their Esteem with the People. Neither stood they in bet∣ter Terms with the Nobility, who at that time were as considerable as ever Scot∣land saw them; and so proved both more sensible of Injuries, and more capable of resenting them. They were offended with them, because they seemed to have more interest with the King than themselves had, so that Favours were mainly distributed by their Recommendation; they were also upon all Affairs, nine of of them were Privy Counsellers, divers of them were of the Exehequer, Spots∣wood Arch-Bishop of S. Andrews, was made Chancellour, and Maxwell Bishop of Ross was fair for the Treasury, and engaged in a high rivalry with the Earl of Traquair, then Treasourer, which tended not a little to help foreward their Ruine. And besides this, they began to pretend highly to the Titles and Impropriations, and had gotten one Learnmonth a Minister presented Abbot of Lindoris, and seemed confident to get that state of Abbots, with all the Revenue and Power belonging to it, again restored into the hands of Churchmen; designing also, that according to the first Institution of the Colledge of Justice, the half of them should be Churchmen. This could not but touch many of the No∣bility in the quick, who were too large sharers in the Patrimony of the Church, not to be very seusible of it. They were no less hatefull to the Ministry, because of their Pride, which was cried out upon as unsupportable. Great Complaints were also generally made qf Simoniacal Pactions with their Servants, which was imputed to the Masters, as if it had been for their advantage, at least by their allowance. They also exacted a new Oath of Intrants, (besides what was in the Act of Parliament for obedience to their ordinary) in which they were obliged to obey the Articles of Perth, and submit to the Liturgy and Canons. They were also dayly making Inroads upon their Juris∣diction,
of which the Ministers were very sensible; and universally their great rigour against any that favoured of Puritanism, together with their medling in all Secular-affairs, and relinquishing their Dio∣ceses to wait on the Court and Council, made them the Object of all Men's fury. But that which heightned all to a Crisis was, their advising the King to introduce some Innovations in the Church by his own Authority; things had prospered so ill in general Assemblies, that they thought of these no more. And in the Parliament 1633. that small addition to the prerogative, that the King might appoint what habits he pleased to the Clergy, met with vigorous opposition, not∣withstanding the King seemed much concerned for it; those who op∣posed it being sharply taken up, and much neglected by his Majesty, which stuck deep in their Hearts, the Bishops bearing all the blame of it. At this time a Liturgy was drawn for Scotland, or rather the English reprinted with that Title, save that it had some Alterations which rendred it more invidious and less satisfactory; and after long consulting about it and another Book of Canons, they were at length agreed to, that the one should be the Form of the Scotish-worship, and the other the model of their Government, which did totally vary from their former Practices and Constitutions: and as if all things had con∣spired to carry on their Ruine, the Bishops not satisfied with the Ge∣neral High-commission-court, produced Warrants from the King for setting up such Commissions in their several Diocesses, in which with other Assessors, Ministers, and Gentlemen, all of their own Nomina∣tion, they might punish Offenders. That was put in practice only by the Bishop of Galloway, who though he was a pious and learned Man, yet was fiery and passionate, and went so roundly to work, that it was cryed out upon as a Yoke and Bondage which the Nation was not able to bear. And after all this the King (advised by the Bishops) com∣manded the Service-book to be received through Scotland, and to be read according to the New Book at Edinburgh on Easter-day in the year 1637. Thus Dr. Burnet, of which kind much more might be taken from his, and the Writings of other Adversaries themselves, and yet far more from these of the Disinterested. And now judge under how wofull a Burden we then groaned, and if it was not high time for the Nation to curb such Tyranny over Bodies and Consciences, and stemm the tide of these
hatefull Corruptions, which not softly and by a stelth, but by violence, like a mighty torrent, were bearing all before them, and at once ready to sweep away both Religion and Property: Should they not by sit∣ting still and quietly yeelding both Sacred and Civil Rights, have prov∣ed in the highest degree treacherous to their God, Countrey and Poste∣rity? And seeing the Prelats were either the Authors, or great Promo∣ters of all this Mischief. and the Office it self asserted only upon human-right, and so as a thing indifferent, by its ablest Advocats; and by the King himselfNalson's Collections Vol. 1. Page 247. yeelded to be contrary to the constitution of the Church of Scotland; And, finally, by the body of the Nation held to be unlaw∣full, Tyrannical and Antichristian: Were they not then highly obliged, not only, to cashire the Officers, but also to abolish the Office it self? In the mean while, though their Supplications were both most humble and reasonable, yet so had B. Laud and his Faction mislead and abused the King's Majesty, who otherwise was both Vertuous and Laudable, that the Suppliants were at first answered with terrible Menaces, then with dilatory and ambiguous Speeches, which were seconded with earnest Preparations for a most destructive War, and vengeance on the supposed Delinquents. Nor was ever ought granted but by inches as the urgency of the Courts Affairs compelled them, resolving in the mean while only to gain time, and practise such Artifices untill strength being recovered, the Suppliants, either broken among themselves, or lul∣led into security, might be overwhelmed at unawars, and with the more ease sacrificed to the fury of the Canterburians. As for the black and criminal Actions imputed, during these Times, to the Covenanters (i. e. to the body of the Nation, seeing not only the Bulk of the Com∣monalty, and Gentry, but also the Nobility well nigh to a man, save the Papists, as is acknowledged on all hands, joined in opposing these E∣normities) as I shall ever most frankly condemn them when the charge is proved, and doubt not (which falls out in the best of Actions) but that divers who joined them might drive sinistrous Ends; so I averre that all the impartial will distinguish between Scelus and Error, and ascribe any Escapes or Solecims, any way chargeable on others, not to their want of Conscience and Loyalty, but at worst to their want of fore-sight: to which byass the odd dealings of the Court, and their want of Experience of these with whom they after∣ward
joined, doubtless contributed not a little to incline them. They were not ignorant that King James who (as Dr. BurnetMemoires Page 29. intimats) opposed Presbytry, not out of Conscience, but Policy, rarely minded to keep what he promised; and, at every innovation he introduc'd, a∣verr'd that it should be the last, while he only designed to make it a pre∣parative for more. And indeed, to name no others, King James his pre∣varicating, temporizing, promising, and consenting to what he ne∣ver mean'd to stand longer than untill by force, he should be able to undoe them, is not altogether conceal'd even by his own SpotswoodHist. Page 447, 453. himself, though rarely, I acknowledge, guilty of so much ingenuity. Neither made he any bones to obtrude on this Kingdom inquisition∣like High-commission-courts, without any LawMemoires Page 47. & alibi or Acts of Parlia∣ment. These his steps were troaden by his Successour, who, being Prepos∣sessed by the Canterburians, with all imaginable severity, urged and in∣creased these lawless Innovations, and yet stuck not to averre that he took Arms only to surpress Rebellion, and not to impose NoveltiesMemoires Page 60.. And that all Concessions then given were only to gain time, till sufficient strength to overwhelm this Kingdom, might be recovered, is not only colligible from the more impartial Accounts of these Times, but also from Nalson himself. The King (saith heCollections Vol. 1. Page 245.) was prevail'd with, by this reason offered by Traquair to sign the following Instructions. That his Majesty notwithstanding whatever the Parliament could do, might, whenever he was in a better Capacity, introduce Episcopacy, because the Bishops being by all the Laws of Scotland, one of the three Estates of Parliament, no Act that passed without them would be of force, much less an Act for their Abolition, especial∣ly they not appearing or consenting to it, but protesting against it. Now, as the same Nalson relates, In these Instructions the King allows his Commissi∣oner to cousent in his Name to the abolishing of Episcopacy when it should be enacted by the General Assembly. And now judge what strange Policy this was, which left the King at Liberty to null all Acts of Parlia∣ment wherein Bishops had not a Vote, even tho' himself had ratified the Abolition of Episcopacy, and added never so positive a Sanction to these Acts made without Bishops, which presuppos'd his Ratification of their Exclusion from voting in Parliament. Now I say, such strange
dealings as these, and thereupon the dreadfull Effects of the Court's fu∣ry, so soon as it could gather strength to exercise them, might promp Men to an extream sheiness of believing any of its Promises, and incline them to a closser Conjunction with these of whose Arts they had less Ex∣perience. And doubtless when they made the League with the Eng∣lish Parliament, they were far from believing that some of them drove such Ends as afterwards appeared, and far from foreseeing (as certain∣ly were many of the then English Parliament) the dismal Alterations which ensued; otherwise certainly they had never join'd with the Eng∣lish or done ought of that kind. And indeed, as to their second entry into England, Dr. BurnetMemoires Page 235, 236. ingenuously demonstrats that it was well nigh impossible for them at that time to do otherways. Moreover that the Crime of Selling his Majesty is falsly imputed to the State or Church of this Nation, and that they abhorr'd and detested so wicked a Parricide as was committed on his Royal Person, may be attested even by the greatest of Royalists themselves; whereof, their Reception of, and standing for King Charles the II, and that in opposition to Antimo∣narchicks, untill they together with him were broken by the prevail∣ing Enemy, is a sufficient evidence. And as I shall not defend the separate actings of some call'd the Asso∣ciats, so I say that every just Estimator of these Affairs will, after seri∣ous reflection, be ready, at least, to excuse and pity them; seeing they not only had fresh memory of the scarce paralell'd dealing of the pre∣ceeding Reign, but also perceived evident Specimens of a strange Ge∣nius in the Successor; whence they might collect how sad and terrible things might be feared from him, should he be permitted to give the reins of Affairs to the Popish and other Incendiaries, whom even at that time he was observed most to favour; and if his subsequent Actions have not given these too much to say for themselves, I leave to the judge∣ment of the unbyass'd. However things be, seeing these were but a handfull never approv'd by the body of the Nation, or the most part of Presbyterians therein, their doings cannot in the least infringe the instance. Another instance is that of the Presbyterians their assisting and preserving of King James the VI in his Minority. But now put case many foul and unjustifiable things might be object∣ed, and these their Actions accompanied with many Circumstances and
Concomitants not to be defended; yet how levels this at the core of the Controversie? Jam dic Posthume de tribus capellis? Let them either speak to the purpose, or acknowledge their extravagancies: It's evident, and we prove, yea even from their own most approved Writers, that then, Liberty, Religion, and all morality was struck at and well nigh over∣whelmed; the Body of the Nation jointly oppos'd themselves, that they might stop the Torrent. Now the Question is, if this was Lawfull and well done? and with this they rarely dar medle, or if they do, it must be on presupposition of pure passive obedience, without any ex∣ception, and of other such Hypotheses as not only equally level at the Reformation of most of the Churches from Popery, but also transform regular Monarchy into an absolute Tyranny, ruine all Subjects, and at length prove really destructive of what they pretend to advance: either I say they must use these or the like Hypotheses, and so give what is well nigh nothing to the purpose, or else adduce what is wholly forraign thereto, and only load our stout and worthy Opposers of that Mass of Romish Superstition, Irreligion, and Prophanity, with most heavy Ac∣cusations, as false and perfidious, acting from bad and base Motives, u∣sing unworthy Methods, driving sinistrous Ends, and thus only endea∣vour to bespatre and blacken their Adversaries, not to handle the Con∣troversie: And this minds me of what I have observ'd in some of the Popish Historians, and others of their Declaimers against our first Re∣formers, for their bad cause permitting them to speak little or nothing directly to the Purpose, and their Malice allowing them as little to be silent; they spend most of their Harangues in decrying and reproaching all who were active in that Reformation as guilty of many foul personal Blemishes, acting nothing sincerely but out of base Principles, and to as ill Designs: and amongst other things is chiefly objected the Crime of Rebellion, whereon the Romanists most commonly expatiat: and some of them add much about Conspiracies between these Rèformers and the Turk against the Catholicks as if He had been at the bottom of most was then done: just as our Adversaries make Cardinal Richlieu, and the French, the Authors and chief Promoters of our opposing Laud's Popish Innovations: surely the former is less ridiculous and carries more colour of possibility than the latter. In the mean while it will make their Calumnies of less Credit with all true Protestants, that they load Knox and the rest of our first Reformers with no less black detra∣ction
and slander, than they do these of the 38, accusing and condem∣ning them of an anarchick and ungovernable Temper, hatred against all Kings, Faction and Rebellion: and on this false pretence they breath out their malice and bitterness against them, and that no less fiercely than they do against the Opposers of the Canterburian Incendi∣aries. And thus much of the Practice of Presbyterians. Neither have they any more reason to alledge the second, that the Principles of Presbytry are contrary to Monarchy, none of them yeeld∣ing any such Inference. Their peculiar Hypothesis wherein they op∣pose Prelacy is, that no Pastor ought to usurp a Dominion or Superiority over his Brethren: And how this Principle can induce any to at∣tempt the eversion of Monarchy, is not easily conjectured. They have yet another Principle, that whosoever is call'd to the Mi∣nistry ought not to intangle himself in any Civil Affairs, but to lay out himself wholly for the Souls of Men, and to this end be instant in season and out of sea∣son: Which is consonant enough to the former, but opposite to the Principles of Prelats; who assert that Civil and Ecclesiastick Offices are compatible, and may be lodged in the same Subject: and according∣ly they grasp and inhance whatsoever Places of State they can come by, both of higher and lower degree. Now, whether that Government which is only Ministerial, not, if they hold to their Principles, con∣cern'd with Politicks, or Civil Government, but only with the Souls of Men, for the Edification of whom all their Studies are directed; or that which is pompous and despotick, allowing Church-men to climb unto the highest Places of State, be most opposite to Monarchy, let any Man judge. And although the Prelats acknowledge dependance upon their Prince, they but only do what the Popes did, who for a long time acknowledged their dependance upon the Emperour, and sought their Election or the Confirmation thereof from him, untill by little and little they got to stand upon their own Legs to, almost, the overthrow and ruine of their Soveraign and Benefactor. Now Prelacy and Popery being really one and the same Government, Princes ought to fear no less Mischief from the one than from the other.
Section III. Their Argument taken from Order, weighed. ANother Achillean Argument they bring from the Nature of Order, which, they say, is wholly inconsistent with Parity. Hence one of their Coryphaei brandishing it, to the end he might compleat the Demon∣stration, cited Aristotle himself for the Definition of Order, which (saith he) is secundum quem aliquid altero prius aut posterius dicitur. For that unhappy word simul would have spoil'd the whole Business, and therefore must be left out. And certain it is that none of them can im∣prove this Argument any more than he has done, seeing, according to the express Definition of Order, a Parity is no less consistent therewith than Superioty and Inferiority. §. 2. Moreover if this Topick do them any service, it shal, at length, establish a Pope over them all; seeing a Parity of superior Officers, as Bishops or Arch-bishops, is no less Cyclopick and Monstrous (for with these names they calumniat Presbytry) than a Parity of Pastors. Yea by this their Argument it is manifest how they reproach most of the re∣formed Churches, as if there were nothing there but a Babylonish Con∣fusion; and the Apostles themselves, none of whom, I think, took the Oath of Canonical Obedience to another. Moreover, whosoever de∣nies a Parity in a plurality of Governours (tho' the chiefest in a Society) as if 'twere unwarranted by Example, and tending to Confusion, discov∣ers either his Ignorance, or what is worse; seeing it is well known that at the same time there was a plurality of Kings in Sparta, of or Princes in Athens, and of Consuls in Rome; during which Govern∣ments there was, I am sure, as little Disorder as when they were in the Hands of one single Man. So much is really affirmed by their own learned SutliviusDe pontif. Rom, lib. 1. cap. 8. Praeterea exercitus non semper unum habet ducem, &c. who brings store of such Examples, and irre∣fragably evinces our Purpose: so true it is that none can smartly op∣pose the Pope's Crown, but must eâdem operâ (were he, as indeed Sut∣livius is, the greatest Friend to Prelats) ruffle also their Mytres.
Section IV. The Plea for Prelacy, drawn from Unity, discuss'd. NO less fiercely do they argue that Episcopacy is altogether neces∣sary on the account of Vnity; Without which (say they) there can be nothing but Schism and Dtvision; and therefore the Ancient Church sustain'd it. But altho' this might have deceiv'd some of the Ancients, whose ends were good (though this mean fell out ineffectual, yea un∣happy whereby to obtain them) yet it is strange that any now, if at all they reflect on past times, can place any confidence in such Church-po∣licy, in order to procure Peace and Unity: seeing it is of all things most undeniable, that, notwithstanding hereof, the primitive Church was opprest and rent with innumerable Schisms, hatch'd and sustain'd by Bishops, in opposition to Bishops; no less, at least, than by Presby∣ters, in opposition to Presbyters. Yea it is certain that these, whom they contend to be Diocesans, were either the Inventers, or, at least, the main Propagators and Abettors thereof. Were not Victor of Rome, and Polycrates of Ephesus, the Authors of that great Schism and Controver∣sie anent the Celebration of Easter? Were not Stephen Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage Authors of another Schism about Rebaptizing of the lapsed? Was not Paulus Bishop of Samosata, Author of that non-such Schism and Heresie of the Samosatenians? Did not the mighty Schism of the Donatists fall out because Sicilianus Competitor with Do∣natus was preferr'd? And, when the Heresie of the Bishop of Samosata was varnish'd by a Presbyter Arrius, how was it hugg'd and propagat∣ed by the bulk of the Oriental Bishops? Was not Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople, the Author of that most damnable Heresie known by his Name? Again Nestorius, Bishop of that same City, gave both Being and Name to another Schism no less dangerous than the former. Time would fail me to reckon up Berillus, Bostrensis, Nepos an Egytian Bi∣shop, Fidus in Africk, Photinus of Syrmium, with many others. And in short, few Heresies or Schisms sprang up in these Times, but they had
either Bishops for their Authors, or else for their great Abettors; with∣out whose influence, they were likely shortly to have starved: or else they were raised through the Pride and Competition of men aspiring to the Episcopal Dignity▪ which, to name no others, is clear in the Instance of Donatus. Yea that all the blackest Schisms and most pestilent Heresies had Bishops for their Authors, SutliviusDe pontif. Rom. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Nulla enim in Ecclesia Dei graviora excitata sunt Schismata, nec Hereses exorta sunt ab ullo tetriores quam ab Episcopis. expresly affirms. But take one Instance further, in respect of which the rest are but Grasshopers, in the Person of the Romish Bishop, or Bishops; who have been the great Authors and Fomenters of the most damnable Heresies, and mighty Schisms, that the Christian World hath hitherto seen. Cer∣tainly, had the Church contented Herself with the Apostolick Parity we plead for, the Man of Sin could not have mounted the Throne of Ini∣quity; on which, for many Ages, he hath continued to the most pesti∣ferous Infection and distracting Division of the Church, that ever Satan did excogitat, or Man behold. §. 2. Moreover, suppose they could with the greatest plausibility conclude the inconsistancy of Unity and Parity, they were yet to be ne∣glected; it being certain that, in the choisest Assembly the World ever saw, both of 'em were harmoniously lodged; and that there are Chri∣stian Churches enjoying no less Harmony without Diocesans, than those who have 'em. Section V. The Argument Prelatists bring from Antiquity, canvass'd. THeir next Plea is from Antiquity: but for us it may be enough to say from the Beginning it was not so. Thus Christ answer'd the Pharisees: thus the Christians answer'd the Heathens alledging the An∣tiquity of Gentilism. They can give few or no Proofs for their Propo∣sition from the first, and best part of the second Century: They pretend
indeed to the Epistles of Ignatius, which, to say the best, are in divers places spurious, carrying Self-contradictions, vain Boastings and Flat∣tery all along; but of this more afterward. Other Catalogues and Memorials of the Bishops of the ancientest Times, were written long after, when Prelacy had got a higher a∣scendant, and the Mystery of Iniquity was more palpably working: therefore these Authors spoke according to, and in the Style of their own times, and not in the Style of the times wherein these Pastors liv∣ed. And here I say nothing, but what is vouch'd by Dr. Stilling fleetIren. Part 2. Chap. 6.. And, amongst many others, these his words are most observable: for having taken notice that Eusebius makes it a most hard Matter to know who succeeded the Apostles in the Churches they planted, adds, say you so? is it so hard a Matter to find, out who succeeded the Apostles in the Churches planted by them, unless it be mention'd the Writings of Paul? What becomes then of our unquestionable Line of Succession of the Bishops of several Churches, and the large Diagrams made of the Apostolick Churches with every one's Name set down in his Order, as if the Writer had been Clarenceaulx to the Apostles themselves? Is it come to this at last that we having nothing certain but what we have in Scriptures? And must then the Tradition of the Church be our Rule to interpret Scriptures by? An excellent way to find out the Truth doubtless, to bend the Rule to the croocked stick, &c. Again it's certain that, for divers Centuries, Bishops were nothing like what they are now, either in ex∣ercising Civil Power, or Jurisdiction over other Pastors, or yet in the largeness of Dioceses; so that the Term Bishop in respect of the two is little better than an equivocal. It's certain also that the ancient Church wanted not her own Blemishes: which was well perceived by her Do∣ctors, who still look'd on the Word of God only as the Rule of Faith and Manners, on which they never founded the Episcopal Superiority. Hence this their Argument carries nothing of Cogency.
Section VI. The Instance of Aërius condemn'd by Epiphanius, prov'd to be unserviceable to our Antagonists. TO Illustrat and Corroborat this their Argument from Antiquity, they adduce the Instance of Aërius; who was for this his Judge∣ment of Presbytry, as well as for Arrianism, condemn'd and counted Heretick by Epiphanius. But it is certain that Epiphanius censur'd Aëri∣us, not only for his being Anti-episcopal, and, as he believ'd, because Arrian, but also for his rejecting of Lents, set and Anniversary Fasts, and for denial of Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead. Now either purer An∣tiquity join'd with Epiphanius in asserting of the necessity of Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, and other such Fopperies; or they did not; and if they join'd with him therein, then our Prelatists, if they be Pro∣testants, are concern'd to reflect better of how little weight their Argu∣ment from the Ancients, pressing their unwarrantable Additions, can be unto them: But if they say that sounder Antiquity consented not to Epiphanius, while he urged Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, and such Anti-scriptural Fictions, we return that neither did the choicest of the Ancients agree with him in his Plea for Prelacy. The Judgement of Hierom is so well known herein, that the Bi∣shop of SpalatoDe Repub. Ecclesiasticâ. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Numb. 46. Sunt qui Hieronymum in rectam sententiam vel invitum velint trahere—neque in hoc aut excusari satis potest, aut &c. acknowledges that Hierom can by no means, yea not byforce be reconcil'd to their Cause. Hierome's Judgement (saith SaraviaDe diversis gradibus ministrorum Evangelii. Cap. 23. Dico privatam fuisse Hieronymi opinionem, consentaneam cum Aërio &c.) was private; all one with that of Aërius, and con∣trary to the Word of GOD, wherefore we shall examine his Arguments. And on this account he is much offended with Hierome accusing him of Vanity,Ibid. 27. Self-contradictionExam. tract. de tri∣plici Episcopatû. Page 25., and PrevaricationIbid. Page 34.;
And Alphonsus de CastroContra Hereses fol. 103. B. Sed revera fallitur Thomas Waldensis quo∣niam in toto illo decursu pst verba proximè citata nihil aliud conatur Hieronymus quam ut ostendat ex Divina Institutione non esse differentiam inter Presbyterum & Episcopum—Et fol. 104. D. Nec etiam mirari quisquam debet quod Beatus Hieronymus Vir alio∣qui doctrissimus sic deceptus fuerit, &c. sharply reproveth Thomas Waldensis a∣nother Papist, who had intended to pervert the Testimonies, which are commonly alledg'd for Presbytry out of Hierome: There De Castro hav∣ing prov'd, out of divers places of Hierome, that he was truly for the Scriptural and Apostolick Idenity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter, concludes, against Waldensis, that of necessity there must be another way taken to Answer the Passages alledg'd out of Hierome for Presbytry: And at length flatly opposes himself to Hierome in this Matter, and saith, that we ought rather to believe the Decrees of Popes and Councils, than the Doctrine of Hie∣rome, though both very Holy and Learn'd. And Medina, another Champion of the Hierarchy, cited by Bellar∣mine, asserts the same of Hierome, saying, He was of the same Judge∣ment with Aërius in this Matter. BellarmineDe Cler. Cap. 15. Michaël Medi∣na—affirmat sanstum Hieronymum idem omnino cum Aërianis sensisse, neque solum Hieronymum in ea Heresi fuisse, sed etiam Ambrofium, Augustinum, Sedulium, Prima∣sium, Chrysostomum, Theodoretum, OEcumenium, & Theophilactum, atque ita (in∣quit Medina) isti Viri aliqui Sanctissimi & Sacrarum Scripturarum consultissimi, quorum tamen sententiam, prius in Aërio, deinde in Waldensibus, postremo in Johanne Vvick∣lefo, damnavit Fcclesia. Et infra. Ergo in Hieronymo & Gracis illis Patribus &c. is very displeas'd with his Brother for his Ingenuity, and therefore attempts to bring Hierome over to the Episcopal Party; but instead of performing this Task, he only fruitlesly endeavours to set Hierome at variance with him∣self. The like success had another of the same Fraternity, who, like Bel∣larmine, attempted to draw Hierome to his Faction, Bayly the Jesuit:Catechism. tract. 2. Quest. 23. And yet with these, the most disingenous of the whole fry of Loyolites, some called Protestants stick not warmly to join themselves, and plead for a Patrociny to their Cause from Hierome. §. 3. Yea not only was Hierome of the same Judgement anent Episco∣pacy with Aërius, but also, as even the Jesuite Medina acknowledges, the most of the Greek and Latine primitive Doctors, and in special Ambrosius, Augustinus, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostomus, Theodore∣tus, Oecumenius, Theophilactus. This their Opinion (saith Medina) was
first condemned in Aërius, then in the Waldenses, and lastly in Wicklef, but this Doctrine was either dissembled or tolerated by the Church in them for the Honour that was had to them, while on the other hand it was always condemn'd in these Men as Heretical, because in many other things they swerv'd from the Church. Many Papists and other Prelatists cannot away with this Me∣dina's free dealing, and use many shifts to refute him, and draw these Fathers to their Party. But to use the Words of RivetCath. Orth. Tom. 1. Page 286., Whosoe∣ver shall consider their Answers collested by Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. lib. 6. annot. 319, 323, 324. they shall presently perceive that all their Distinctions are most pitifull Elusions, and that indeed all these Fathers were no less Presby∣terian than Aërius, although they accommodat themselves to the Custom then received; least for a Matter not contrary to the Foundations of Religion they should have broken the Vnity of the Church. What do our Opposits here∣in, but espouse what the Romanists, in whom any ingenuity remains, have long since disowned? §. 4. But tho' Epiphanius were the mouth of all Antiquity, and the only fit Judge in this Controversie, the Triumph of our Adversaries should be very small: for Aërius to Prove the Idenity of the two, hav∣ing adduced a parallel of many particulars, EpiphaniusHeresi 55. five 75. . denieth nothing of these to belong to Presbyters, except only Imposition of Hands; he yeelds therefore that both of them equally have Power to Baptize, to occu∣py the Chair, and finally to perform all Divine Worship. Our Antagonists therefore offering to vouch the Prelacy they plead for, by the Authori∣ty of Epiphanius, promise much more then they can perform; for what, pray, is this Power of Imposition of Hands, or Ordination, compar∣ed with what they covet, and pretend to support by Epiphanius, his Au∣thority, I mean the, both great and many Differences between Bishop and Presbyter. §. 5. In the mean while Epiphanius his unjust dealing towards Aërius, is most palpable, for he sticks not to give out, that Aërius his Judgement of the Identity of Bishop & Presbyter, was look'd on by the whole Church as an intolerable Heresie condemned by the Word of God, when yet the quite contrary is so plain in the Writings of the Ancients down from the very Apostles, that even Epiphanius himself could not be ignorant there∣of. Neither are his Deductions from Scripture more solid than his Al∣legation
of the Suffrages of the Catholick Church, is true: all he brings from Scripture being 1 Tim. 5. 1. and 19. but he so grossy abuses these Scriptures that even SpalatensisDe repub. eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. himself, and the ablest Patrons of Prelacy are ashamed of these Inferences. But Epiphanius had less ex∣posed himself, had he, as he did in the Matter of Lents, set Fasts, Pray∣er and Sacrifice for the Dead, and other such his dear and beloved Do∣ctrines, pretended only to Tradition; and so the Lettice should have been fitted for the Lips, and also his miserable weakness have been less apparent. §. 6. And though in the last place, to render Presbytry more odious, they still upbraid us with the Arrianism of Aërius; we need be little concern'd therewith, seeing we have the greatest Opposers of Arrians, intirely Aërians (to speak in the stile of our Opposits) in the matter of Presbytry, as we have already shewed. But I must here add, that it is upon no good Ground believed that ever Aërius was Arrian: all the Schisms and Divisions, though but very small, among the Arrians them∣selves are diligently described by the Historians of these times, as Ruf∣finus, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Theodorus Lector, Philostrgius, and others; but none of these or any others mention a word of the Schism of Aërius, which if we believe Epiphanius, was a Schism among the Ar∣rians themselves: for he tells us that Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Pon∣tus, from whom Aërius made the separation, was a down-right Arrian, and persisted therein till his Death. Add hereto that Augustine and others, who, in their Catalogues of He∣reticks mention Aërius, still in their Preambles, intimat that their Au∣thor is Epiphanius. I name Augustine on the vulgar supposition that he is the Author of that tract de Heresibus, which yet is very doubtfull, see∣ing it's altogether improbable that he ever heard off, & far less read Epi∣phanius his books  It's altogether unprobable that they were then translated, and it's certain that Augustine was utterly unable to understand them in the Original. Moreover, we have in that Tra∣ctat Relations of the Nestorian and Eutichian Heresies, not broached till after Augustine's Death. Which Relations, altho' some alledge to have been added by another to the rest, which they think to be really Augustines, yet seeing they are no less then the rest handed down under his Name (tho' they now stand there as an Appendix, for in the end of
the Pelagian Heresie which is the last before the Appendix, he promises more) make a good proof that it's not easie to discern the genuine part of that Tractat from the Spurious. However this be from what is said, the matter of Aërius resolves into this Issue, that we have only the report thereof from Basilius, and Epiphanius. §. 7. But that discourse of Basilius, , in which Aërius is mention'd, is suspected & well nigh condemn'd by Eras∣mus Epistola ejus dedicatiora translationi suae praefixa. And to confirm what he asserts, Robert Cock, in his Censure of the Fathers, adds divers Reasons, as I am inform'd by Rivet,Critic. Patrum Page 330. for I have not perus'd Cock himself; neither need I, seeing in all that Tractat there is not the least mention of Aërius. The ground of somes mistake was, that instead of Aëtius, who indeed was a most noted and pernicious Arrian, by the escape of the Printer, or some other accident, the word Aërius had crept into Erasmus his Translation thereof: But in the Ori∣ginal, printed at Paris Anno MDXVIII, there is Aëtius, not A∣ërius. They have (saith he. cap. 2. .cap.2. ) a certain old Quibble from Aëtius the head of his Heresie. And indeed Basil could never have term'd Aërius, or any thing said by him, ancient, seeing he was scarcely so old as Ba∣sil himself, As for Epiphanius, if we consider the Passion wherewith he manages the Debate with Aërius, and his great credulity of whatever might favour his own Cause, and his many Mistakes in Historical Mat∣ters, he deserves little Credit in this Matter. A mighty Tide of Passi∣on, which both blinds Mens eyes, and opens their Ears to false Re∣ports, visibly appears in Epiphanius his whole conduct of the Dispute with Aërius: and that he was most credulous, believing the most light and groundless Reports, and in matters of Fact, of all men most fre∣quently fell into Mistakes, is attested, not only by Melchor Canus, and Baron, in many places of his Annals, among the Papists; but also by the learnedest of the Protestants, as Casaubon,Vir maximus Epiphanius, sed, quem res arguit ipsa, levibus auditiunculis, nescio un∣de acceptis, facilè nimis aliquando fidem habuisse. whose words are: Epiphanius was a great Man, but, as is very evident, he did most easily be∣lieve every most silly and groundless Report. To which also the learned Ri∣vet assenteth.
§. 8. One Instance whereof appears in his Relation of the Donatists, whom, either out of misinformation, or some other weakness, he ac∣cuses also of Arrianism, and tells usHaeresi 39. vel 59. — that they agreed with Arrius in Doctrine, and that one Refutation would serve for both. §. 9. AugustineEpistola 50. ad Bonifacium. indeed speaks as if some of them believed the Son to be less than the Father: But, as appears from the same Author, Ibidem. they erred rather in expression than reality; for he presently ab∣solves them from the Charge, and informs us, that between the Church and them, there was no Question concerning this Matter. And else∣where, Tom. 6. Haeresi 69. he imputes this dangerous Expression to Donatus their Leader, who had used it in some of his Writings, but tells us with all that his Party follow him not herein. Neither (saith Augustine) shall ye readily find one among them all who knows that Donatus had any such Opinion. And OptatusLib. 3. Page 101. plainly declares, that in the great Foundations of Chri∣stianity, there was no difference between the Orthodox and Donatists. And in∣deed it is acknowledg'd by all, except Epiphanius, that the Donatists were only guilty of Schism, not of Heresie. §. 10. But Aërius (they may object) his Arrianism is sufficiently at∣tested by what is recorded of Eustathius his Friend and Bishop: and in∣deed BasilEpist. 74. accuses Eustathius of Arrianism, but for ought I remem∣ber the Historians of these times differ from Basil. §. 11. They accuse Eustathius of Levity, Deceit, Macedonianism, or the denial of the Holy Ghost's Divinity, a most damnable Heresie, yet different from Arrianism. And herein also they represent him ra∣ther variable and unfixed, than intirely wedded to this Heresie. He once subscrib'd to the Orthodox Doctrine, and was approv'd as such by Liberius the Bishop of Rome, then Orthodox, and other Catholick Christians. But they write that he relapsed. In the mean while, when he was most for the Macedonians, he said as he would not call the Holy-Ghost God, so he durst not call him a Creature; hence, he may rather be counted among these who were most dangerously shaken, than a down-right Macedonian; and may for all is said of his Opinions plead for some Charity from all that well consider, the most dismal and dan∣gerous Age wherein he lived.
§. 12. But let him be an Arrian blacker than Arrius himself, it will be hard thence to draw any Conclusion concerning Aërius. For First, Basil, in the forecited place, tells us, that Eustathius was so cunning, as to perswade the ablest of these times that he was Ortho∣dox; and why might he not then put a Cheat on his own Presbytry. Secondly, Eustathius, as is related, was much given to Covetousness, and altho' Epiphanius carri'd out with Passion, for his Innovations justifies and praises him, that he may reach a harder Blow to Aërius: yet this his Avarice was one of the Grounds wherefore Aërius, (as he profes∣seth) deserted Eustathius: and this I think is no less to be believ'd, than ought else we have from Epiphanius, uncharitably at least, wresting both his Words and Actions. And it is not improbable that he, who had the Conscience to dislike Eustathius for his Vices, might do no less on the account of his Errors. Thirdly, Aërius was priviledg'd by God with, both, eyes to per∣ceive, and courage to oppose the unwarranted Festivals, superstitious Fasts, Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, and other such then growing Dottages, notwithstanding that they were so kindly imbrac'd by most Christians. Now I believe that hardly an Instance can be adduc'd, of any who set himself in Opposition to the whole World, by condemning such growing Corruptions, and attempting at least to stop the beginnings of Anti-christianism, and yet fell into this damnable Heresie wherewith they brand Aërius. I hope therefore, that henceforth all true Prote∣stants shall inlarge their Charity, and be more backward to join with Romanists in bespattering the memory of him who did amongst the first declare his Detestation of the leaven of Romanism. §. 13. Had any thing written by Aërius, come unstain'd to our hands, I doubt not but we had got a far other account of his Creed and Doctrine: but the Zeal of these Innovatours prompted them to make all Opposers of their Fopperies grand Hereticks, and fasly stigmatize Truth's Witnesses with what really deserved that name, and then over∣whelm'd them with Calumnies; and gave their Writings to the Flames for a Repository. This was the Fate of Vigilantius, Claudius Taurinen∣sis, and others, of whose Writings nothing, except some mangl'd and deprav'd scrapes found in the bitter Invectives of their most partial and disingenous Adversaries, remains.
§. 13. The Aërians are also remembred by PhilastriusHaeresi 25. Aërii ab Aërio quodam sic appellati sunt, qui astinentiis va∣cant &c. They are so named (saith he) from Aërius, they give themselves to abstinences, and live mostly in Pamphilia, they are also calld Encratites, i. e. Abstinents. They possess nothing; They abhore Meats which God with his Blessing hath bestow'd on Mankind: They condemn moreover lawfull Marriage, alledg∣ing that it's not of God's Institution. Thus Philastrius. §. 14. But to me it is not probable that any who deni'd, and despis'd all their Lent-seasons, Xerophagies, wherein nothing was eaten but dry Bread, and such rigorous Fasts and restraints, were ever addicted to En∣cratitick abstinences, whereby all use of Wine, Flesh, and other such De∣licacies was probihited. Secondly, Epiphanius makes the Encratits and Aërians quite contrary Sects to one another, who sustained quite contrary Doctrines and Pra∣ctices: for according to himHaeresi 27. sive 47. . the former ate no living Creature— nor drank Wine. Which is also Attested by EusebiusHist. Eccles. Lib. 4. Cap. 29.  &c., and Irenaeus. Lib. 1. Cap 30. The latter Epiphanius,Haeresi 55. sive 75. . according to his custom of turning all the Aërians their Practices into Crimes, will have to be excessive Gor∣mandizers, and but to liberal to themselves in both Flesh and Wine: so far was he from joining with Philastrius in ascribing Encratitism to the Aërians. Thirdly, Another of the Heresies of these Encratites, was their reject∣ing much of the New Testament, and in particular the Epistles of Paul Eusebius Eccles. Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 29.  &c.. But so far were the Aërians therefrom, that they foundedEpiphanius Haeresi 55. sive 75. . the Doctrine, for which they are so much reproach'd by Epiphanius, viz. that of the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, on these very Epistles of Paul citing 1 Tm. 3. 4. & 14. And the like places of Paul for Proofs of their Doctrine, which afterward was done by Hierome, and after him by the stream of Interpreters of these Places, and others that handled that Subject, and at this day by the Body of the Reformed Churches.
From all which is evident the falsehood of what Philastrius alledges, and that the Aërians were far from being guilty of Encratitism or such Crimes, but they must needs first suffer the persecution of tongues as a preamble and preparative to make them a Prey more obnoxious to the violent hands of these who are beginning to dote on the Romish Super∣stition. §. 15. And so it fell out. For EpiphaniusIbidem . himself tells us, that the Aërians were banish'd from Churches, Lands, Villages, and Cities, and that often times they lodg'd only in the open Air, all covered with Snow, and were oblig'd to seek shelter in the Woods and Rocks. Now what was the cause of this so violent hatred and hot Persecution? Was it their being guilty of Arrianism? sure not: For if we believe Epiphanius they were a branch of the Arrians, and, as he insinuats, liv'd among them. But suppose they did not, we find no such Persecution of the Arrians on the account of their Faith in these times, but only their Exclusion from the publick Churches. They being permitted in the mean while to keep their Con∣venticles in privat Houses, even at the very Gates of the greatest Cities. Add hereto (which we trust we have evinc'd) that Aërius never Arri∣aniz'd, and so they could not persecute him, and his Followers upon this account. From all that is now said, 'tis clear, that we most seek another spring of this violent Hate and Persecution. And this I think may easily be reach'd and perceiv'd to be nothing else but the passionat Zeal, the World, declining more and more after Anti-christian Super∣stition, had for their set Lent-seasons, their Fasts of their own making, Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, their despotick Hierarchy, and other such preparatives of the Man of Sin's appearance, all which were op∣pos'd by Aërius, and his Followers with more Zeal than they were by any others in the World at that time, and so had presently War made u∣pon them by such as minded nothing more than worshipping the Rising-Sun of Unrighteousness. And indeed to me the whole strain of Epiphani∣us his Discourse clearly intimats, that not Arrianism but the opposing of these Dotages was the Ground of all this Hatred and Spight that was pour'd upon Aërius and his Adherents.
§. 16. And now I have done with Philastrius: only I must observe, for which I mainly adduc'd him, that in him there's no mention of A∣ërius his Arrianism, which, tho' a negative Testimony, yet exceeding∣ly weakens that we have from Epiphanius, Philastrius being a Bishop, a Man of Credit, and of no less Antiquity than the other. In which Sen∣timent, I am confirmed from Rabanus MaurusDe instit. cler. Lib. 2. Cap. 58. Aëriani ab Aërio quodam nuncupa∣ti sunt, hi offerre sacrificium pr defunctis spernunt. Bishop of Mentz, who only informs us, that the Heresie of Aërius consisted in despi∣sing Sacrifices for the Dead. From all which to me it's more than pro∣bable, that there's no ground to believe that ever Aërius Arrianiz'd. Section VII. No Diocesan Bishops in several Ancient Churches. THo' their Argument brought from Antiquity, be already satisfi'd, we shall yet give some Instances of Churches, which, for several Centuries, were really without Diocesan Bishops. St. Patrick, the I∣rish Apostle, is commonly said to have ordain'd several hundreds of Bi∣shops in Ireland, who, I'm sure, could not be Diocesans. Dr. Mau∣rice, Defence of Diocesan Episcopacy. Page 153. being displeas'd with this Instance, rejects Nennius, the Au∣thor from whom we have the account of St. Patrick's ordaining 365 Bishops, as fabulous. But it's not in their accounts of the numbers of Bishops, but of the Deeds and Miracles wrought by Bishops, and o∣thers of their Saints, that the fabulousness of the Writers of these times is commonly to be observ'd. He next quarrels with the common reading of that Author, alledg∣ing that He speaks only of the Bishops in France and Britain, in communion with St. Patrick, not of his Irish Bishops. But, I think, we may, in such critical Learning give Bishop Vsher the Preference, whoOf the Religion of the Irish. Page 59. neither judg'd this Book fabulous, nor its common reading to be suspected.
And this account of the great number of Ancient Irish Bishops, is strong∣ly confirm'd by what ClarksonPrimitive Episcopacy. Page 40. cites out of Bernard and Baron, shew∣ing that there were well nigh as many Bishops as Churches. This the Doctor passes over in silence, which was scarce fair enough dealling. Neither can the Doctor's ordinary salvo, viz. that the Practice was not generally approv'd, nor of primitive Constitution, here serve them; for whatso∣ever differ'd from the Roman Model, was presently made a Novelty. And tho' Bernard and Lanfranc dislike the Practice of having so many Bishops, yet they adventure not to instance any time wherein the Irish had been rul'd by a few Diocesans. And lastly, the Authors most re∣gardable herein, inform us that this Practice of having so many Bishops had place even in St. Patrick's time, and meer infancy of the Irish Church. §. 2. Most visible footsteps of this also appear in the African Church, during the time of Cyprian; for in that Council of Carthage, where he presided, there was no smal number of Bishops conveen'd, tho' doubt∣less there were many moe Bishops in Africk, who could not be all Dio∣cesans, seeing few then were Christians in Africk, save a small part of the Roman Colonies only. Yea the hamlets and villages, these Bishops had for their Jurisdictions, are so obscure, that the learn'd Pamelius is at a stand where to place them. And, long after, in the time of the Vandalick Persecution, as Victor Vticensis relates,Lib. 1. Vnde factum est ut post obitum Carthaginis Episcopi Zeugitanae, & procensulari Provinciae, Episcopos interdice∣ret ordinarios quorum erat numerus 164. there were in the Zeugitan or proconsular Province alone 164 Bishops: others reckon moe. Now this was but a small part of what the Romans possess'd in Africk, and few, beside the Roman Colonies, were at that time Christian; for the Moors, or old Africans, who, beside what they had in the Cities, possess'd almost the whole Country, are by the same Victor without ex∣ception, call'd Gentiles; and many of the Romans themselves had not yet imbrac'd Christianity. Now subduce, from that small number of the Zeugitan Province who were Christians, the many Arrians, and other Hereticks, and Schismaticks, whom these Bishops did not reckon as a part of their Flocks, and surely there shall scare be found so many as to make up above 164 Parishes. Dr. Maurice tells usPage 164. that all the African Bishops in Cyprian's time, could not have suppli'd the Dioceses of one Province, in the V or VI Century. Which, if true, is a strong Con∣firmation
of what we plead for, viz. that they then were nothing less than Diocesans: seeing as is now evident, there were, even in the fifth Century, but a very small number of Christians in Africk, compar'd with the rest of the Inhabitans. And in Cyprian's time, it may well be judg'd that there were some hundreds of Bishops in the Roman Africk. But in such Cases, not the extent of Bounds, but number of Souls is to be considered. Wherefore he should be a wild Reasoner, that should conclude from Africa's having a dozen, or such a number of Bishops, or Pastors, for surely there were but few at the entry of Christianity, that there needed be no more afterward, and so make that number the Standard to discern how many Bishops, by primitive Right, were to be plac'd in all Africa. And this is a Kin to what he saysPage 185. elsewhere, that tho' there were Bishops in small Towns, this was not the primitive State of the Church; it may be indeed; nor yet, at the first entry of the Gospel, were there Bishops in most part of the great Towns: but was this for fear of Multiplicati∣on of Dioceses? no surely; but these few were all could be then gotten. The substance of his Answer here is, that Africa was most large, fertile, popolous. The first of which is readily granted, but the second not so easily, much of these Regions being more fertile of sand and Serpents than of Corn and Wine: and this in part discredits the third; seeing so much as was barren, is not to be suppos'd Popolous; wherefore it's surprising to find him making the Old Roman Africk more Popolous than France is now. HePage 165. supposes that Africk had but 500 Bishops, and yet might have 40000 villages. But I answer, that if the villages were considerable, and had Christian Inhabitants, for otherways this is no∣thing to this purpose, then had Africk 40000 Bishops: for H. Thorn∣dick Right of Churches, review Page 153. acknowledges that Bishops in Africk were so plentifull, that every good village must needs be the Seat of an Episcopal Church. Which words of H. Thorndick are cited by Clarkson but dissembl'd by the Doctor. In the mean while, I can find nothing which can shake what I have said above, or overturn, as for example, what I have noted from Victor's words, and oblige me to lessen my substraction. Add to what is said the words of Dr. Burnet. In St. Augustin's time (saith heConferences. Page 348.) it appears from the journals of a Conference he had with the Donatists, that there were about
five hundred Bishopricks in a small tract of ground. But we need not cross Seas in pursuit of ancient Churches free of Diocesans, seeing our Coun∣try Scotland affords us so luculent a proof of our Assertion. The words of Prosper Aquitanicus, in his Chronicle annex'd to that of Eusebius and Hie∣rome, are most clear and cogent. Palladius (saith heAd Scotos in Christum credentes ordinatur à Papa Caelestino, Palladius & primus Episcopus mittitur.) is ordain'd by Pope Coelestine for the Scots that had already believ'd in Christ, and is sent to them to be their first Bishop. Never was a passage of any Historian more universally believ'd, than this of Prosper, which BedaEdit. Lovan. Fol. 15., and a MS. Chronicle of Scotland in the Library of Glasgow, yea the whole stream of Historians repeat and approve: but none more amply and plainly, than Cardinal BaronAnn. 429. numb. IV. Primum verò eam gentem à Coelestino Papa Episcopum habuisse Palladium omnes con∣sentiunt., whose words are, All Men agree that this Nation (viz. Scotland) had Palladius their first Bishop from Pope Coele∣stine. And againIbid. Ex his autem habes quibus redarguas asserentes Sedulium Christia∣num Poëtam quem tantopere Gelasius laudat habuisse praeceptorem Hildebertum Scotorum Archi-episcopum: Etenim cum ipse Sedulius ad Theodosii Imperatoris tempora referatur quo modo usus esse potuit Hildeberto Scotorum Archi-episcopo Paerceptore, si nullus adhuc ordina∣tus erat in Scotia Archi-episcopus & Palladius absque controversia primus dicatur ejus Gen∣tis Antistes. thus you are instructed how to refuse these who alledge that Sedulius the Christian Poet, whom Pope Gelasius so much extolls, had for his Master, Hildebert the Arch-bishop of the Scots: for, seeing even Sedulius himself lav'd in the time of Theodosius the Emperor, how could he have had, for his Master, Hildebert the Arch-bishop of the Scots, seeing there was no Arch-bishop yet ordain'd in Scotland, and Palladius is without debate affirm'd to have been the first Bishop of that Nation. This is yet more plainly express'd by the most learn'd Antiquaries of our Country: all of them agree in this, that before Palladius, the Church was rul'd and guided without any Diocesan Bishops. For, as Fordun hath itLib. 3. Cap. 8. Ante cujus (Palladii sc.) adventum habebant Sco∣ti Fidei Doctores, ac Sacramentorum Ministratores, Presbyteros solummodo vel Monachos, ritum sequentes Ecclesiae primitiva. before the coming of Palladius the Scots, following the Custom of the primitive Church, had Teachers of the Faith and Dispensers of the Sacraments, who were only Presbyters or Monks. And Iohannes MajorDe gestis Scotorum. Lib. 2. Per Sacerdotes & Monachos, sine Episcopis Scoti in fide erudiebantur. saith, the Scots were instructed in the Faith by Priests and Monks without Bishops. And He∣ctor
BoethiusFol. 132. Erat Palladius primus omnium qui apud Scotos sacrum egere Ma∣gistratum, à summo Pontifice Episcopus creatus: quum antea Populi suffragiis &c., Palladius was the first of all who exercis'd any Hierarchi∣cal Power among the Scots, being ordain'd their Bishop by the Pope, whereas before, their Priests were, by the suffrages of the People, chosen out of the Monks and Culdees. Add hereto the known Testimony of Buchanan; and of Sir Thomas Craig, To pass over (saith heScotland's soveraignty asserted. Page 134.) that most silly' Fable of the three Archflamins, and the twenty eight Flamins; it's plain that there was no Bi∣shop in Britain before Palladius, who is by the English themselves call'd the Bishop of the Scots; or if either the Brittons or English have any, let them name them, and at what time they flourish'd. §. 3. Yea so clear is this Truth, that the most learn'd of our Adver∣saries have found no better way to elude, when they cannot clide it, than, as Torniellus in another case said of Bellarmine, to endeavour the penetra∣ting of a most firm wall, and cast the History about fourty of our ancient Scotish Kings, as a forg'd legend. Among these is Loyd Bishop of St. A∣saph: but both he and Dr. Stillingfleet are nervously refuted by the learn'd Sir George Mkenzie Advocat; and that their main purpose and under∣taking was utterly desperat, he makes soon appear. And tho' (saith he) this Author could prove, that we were not settl'd here, before the year 503 yet that could not answer the Argument. (viz. that is brought against Epis∣copacy from the Scotish primitive Church-government for the Culdees might have been settl'd before that time. And thus, in a few syllables, he demonstrats that the Bishop, as to his ultimat design, had only his la∣bour for his cost. But Sir George being too sagacious not to foresee, that, from the mutual strugglings between himself and the Bishop, any man might easily conclude, that Presbytry was the primitive Government of the Church of Scotland: and having been one of the prime Instruments to put in execution the prelatical Fury, judg'd himself concern'd, in credit, to say somewhat in favours of Episcopacy, and attempt the stop∣ing of such an Inference. Wherefore, to this purpose, in a Letter to the Earl of Perth, prefix'd to the defence of the Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland, He makes several assayes: The first whereof is, That this is one of the meanest Arguments, that ever were us'd by a Pres∣bytrian:— And that it is a weak Argument, (saith he) appears from this, that I have met with very few Laicks in all our Countrey, who had heard of it; nor with one, even of these few who had valu'd it. But be it so that
the Argument seem mean, we gain notwithstanding a most sufficient Argumentum ad hominem, seeing our ablest Adversaries value it so much; yea, Sir George himself clearly acknowledges this, while he saith, and what can the Presbyterians think of their other Arguments, which they value much? since this, which they valu'd so little, is thought of such force by a learn'd Bishop, as to deserve a whole book, the cutting off of 44 Kings, and the of∣fending a Nation of Friends. But it's nothing tho' the Laicks had nei∣ther valu'd nor heard it, seeing, as himself grants, Blondel, with whom join the rest of the Presbyterian Writers, urg'd it. Hence appears, that this Argument is, by both Parties, judg'd to be of great force and con∣sequence: for the solution whereof, the Advocat brings nothing save what is altogether unworthy of any ingenous man. As for example, since (saith he) it cannot be deni'd, but that these who ordain'd our Presbyters were Bishops; it necessarly follows, that Episcopacy was settl'd in the Christian Church before we had Presbyters or Culdees. Wherein, as to the soluti∣on of our Argument, which was the scope of his Letter, he only begs the Question, and gives us what is impertinent thereto, and contradicts, moreover, these our Historians, whose credit he so excellently vindi∣cats, seeing, as we heard, they plainly tell us, that our ancient Anti-di∣ocesan practice was the very custom of the primitive Church. And, when our Historians say that the Abbots of Icolm-kill had Jurisdiction over all the Bishops of the Province, that is to be understood, as Beda observes, more inusitato; after an unusual manner. And yet he compares this practice of the Abbot to that of a King who makes one a Bishop, and to the practice of a Mother who makes her Son a Church-man: now if it be any strange or surprising thing for a King, by his Congé d'eslire, to make one a Bishop, or for a Mother to educate her Son in order to be a Church-man, and procure some place for him, let any man judge. And, later Historians (saith the Advocat) meeting with these ambigous words in our Annals De∣signatus, Electus, Ordinatus, were, by a mistake, induc'd to appropriat these words to the formal Ceremony of Ordination and Imposition of hands. As if a∣ny man in his wit could take these words to mean any other thing than Ordination, providing they be, as they are in our Annals, spoken of one Church-man in relation to another. Moreover, he knew suffici∣ently that the best Records of our Country expresly say, that our Church was rul'd by Presbyters without Bishops, and so leave not the least room for tergiversation. Bede is one of these Authors who creat them so
much vexation; for speaking of Icolm-kill, the Isle (saith heLib. 3. Cap. 4. Habere autem solet ipsa Insula Rectorem semper Abbatem Presbyterum, cujus Juri & omnis Provincia & ipsi etiam Episcopi ordine inusitato de∣beant esse subjecti, juxta exemplum primi Doctoris illius qui non Episcopus, sed Presbyter extitit.) still uses to have for its Rector an Abbot, who is a Presbyter to whose Jurisdiction the whole Province and even the Bishops themselves, after an unusual manner ought to be subject according to the example of their first Teacher, who was no Bishop but a Presbyter. Hence it's clear, that even in Bede's time, Bishops were but of smal note here, and their power much less than in other Churches. They are therefore much pain'd with Bede's words, and chiefly St. A∣saph, who, amongst other odd things he excogitats, tells us, that the Superiority this Presbyter had over the Bishops, was only in respect of the royal∣ty of the Isle which the King gave the Abbot. As if ever Bede, or any man else could have mark'd such a Superiority as strange and unusual, it be∣ing nothing but what every Prince or Lord of any place still practises; who, altho' he subject himself to a Bishop in Spirituals, yet in respect of Temporals and the Royalty, uses to retain the Superiority. But, which 'utterly spoils the Bishop's comment, BedeIbid. Vnde & praefatam Insulam ab eis in possessimem Monasterii faciendi accepit. Neque enim magna est, sed quasi Familiarum quinque &c. tells that all Columbanus got, was the possession of a little Isle, able to sustain about five Fa∣milies, for building of a Monastry, without the least mention of his be∣ing invested with the Royalty thereof, or any other Island: and yet to him were all the Bishops of the whole Province (all the Bishops of Scot∣land, saith the Saxon Chronicle, cited by the Bishop himself) subjected, so that this pretended Royalty of Columban over the Island, becomes a vain dream, & tho' 'twere real could do him no kindness, the whole Pro∣uince being certainly a far other thing than any such Island; wherefore the Superiority this Presbyter had over these Bishops, must needs have been in Ecclesiastick affairs; and this was really remarkable and unusu∣al. But of this enough; for, whosoever believes that the errand of this most ancient Preacher and Propagator of Christ's Kingdom, was to win an earthly Kingdom to himself, and that the King shar'd with him his Soveraignity and Realm, may as soon swallow the whole legend of Con∣stantine's Donation to Sylvester. But to return to the Advocat, as, in the things that he touches, he wholly prevaricats, so he never handles our main Argument, which is taken from what is related of our Churches practice, preceeding the
coming of Palladius. He only refers to Spotswood who saysHist. Pag. 7. Bu∣chanan is of opinion, that before Palladius his coming there was no Bishop in this Church;—what warrant he had to write so, I know not, except he did build upon that which Joannes Major saith, speaking of the same Palladi∣us; —The Scots (he says) were instructed in the Christian Faith by Priests and Monks, without any Bishops. But from the instruction of the Scots in the Faith to conclude, that the Church after it was gathered had no other form of Government, will not stand with any reason. For be it as they speak, that by the Travels of fome pious Monks the Scots were first converted unto Christ; it cannot be said that the Church was ruled by Monks, seeing long after these times it was not permitted to Monks to meddle with matters of the Church, nor were they reckon'd among the Clergy. But it's strange how he can alledge Buchanan to be supported by no Authors, except Major, for Palladius his being Scotland's first Bishop: he could not but know, that not only Major, but also Fordun, Bede, with many others within the Isle; Pro∣sper, Bergumensis, and, among the later Historians, the Magdebur∣genses, Baron, with many other Transmarines, assert it. And this last affirms that none can deny it. § 4. It's true, Spotswood saysHist. Page. 4. that Boeth out of ancient Annals reports that these Priests were wont for their better Government to elect some one of their number, by common suffrage, to be Chief and Principal among them, without whose knowledge and consent nothing was done in any matter of importance; and that the person so elected was called Scotorum Episcopus, a Scots Bishop, or a Bishop of Scotland. But they reap little advantage here, for in Boeth's words (y) there is no mention, as the Bishop with∣out book affirms, whether these Annals were ancient or modern. But whatever they be Hector gives ground to believe that he had Annals de∣claring the contrary, as appears by his words above cited, where he ho∣mologated that common sentiment of Christians, and told us that Palla∣dius was our first Bishop, and that none before him had any Hierarchical Power in Scotland. To alledge therefore Boethius as espousing their cause here, is ony to set him at variance with all Christians, and by the ears with himself. But grant it were as Spotswood says, yet there should no small dammage accreu to their Cause, seeing, on supposition hereof, it fol∣lows, that the Episcopal Ordination was altogether wanting in the primi∣tive Church of Scotland; it not being supposeable that this one man could
Ordain all the Pastors in Scotland, yea, that even this their great Bishop had no other Ordination himself, but what he receiv'd from Presbyters. §. 5. The Bishop's following words, from the instruction of the Scots in the Faith &c. are altogether void of reason. For it's granted that af∣ter the coming of Palladius (which is the time whereunto he must refer the gathering of the Church) she then indeed began to have another Go∣vernment, and never man yet pleaded, that, because the Church of Scotland was not govern'd by Bishops before Palladius, therefore 'twas not really govern'd by them after his coming; which is the Inference the Bishop's words seem to deny. But I believe there is more in them, for they are abstruse: and judge their meaning to be, that tho' we had no Bishops before Palladius, yet this can be no ground to conclude that we ought to have none afterward, our Church being then rude and in her infant state. The Advocat is of the same mind, saying, that before Palladius his time our Church was constituenda or unsettl'd. But who can believe it? For, first, it's generally suppos'd that Palladius came to free this Church from Pelagianism, and not to establish Church-govern∣ment. Secondly, Is't credible that the Church of Scotland, after so long a con∣tinuation and flourishing of Christianity, had been, rather than any other Churches, without any certain form of Government? This is certainly a thing unparalellable, even according to our Adversaries, who tell us that every Church very soon after its beginning had its Diocesan Bi∣shops, and so a certain form of Government. Thirdly, Yea altho' many other Churches had been without all Go∣vernment for such a tract of time, there is ground to believe that Scotland could not; they lying most of this time under the persecuting Sword, whereas we read of no persecution in our Church, even while our Kings were Pagan; and our King Donald the I, the first crown'd Head in the World that ever subject'd it self to Jesus Christ, very much encourag'd the Christians, and was seconded herein by severals of his Successors. And altho' some of 'em were vitious, and their Reigns short, or vex'd with Wars, yet such trouble never struck directly against Christianity, like the fury of the Pagans throngh the rest of the World: and others were both excellent Men, and had longer and peaceable Reigns, as Findochus, and Cratilinthus, but especially Fincormachus, an excellent man and a great promoter of Religion, and therefore, as is most pre∣sumable, was a great Instrument under God, for the settlement of our Church-affairs.
Add to all this, Fourthly, That the terrible Storm of Persecution through the Roman World, drove then from the Brittons, and other places, no small number of excellent Men to Scotland, who doubtless did no small service to God therein, and especially in the time of Fincorma∣chus, when, as all observe, a great many fled hither who were famous both for Life and Doctrine, yea long before this even in the time of Ter∣tullian, our Church was well known to much of the Christian World, as appears from his clear Testimony. The places of Britain (saith heContra Judaeos. Cap. 7. Loca Britannorum Romanis inaccessa, Christo ta∣men subdita.) to which the Romans could not yet pass, are notwithstanding subject to Christ. And if any have called Scotland barbarous, or not well reform'd before the coming of Palladius, Sir George learn'dly refutes them; and names severals, and among them even Stannihurst, otherways an enemy to our Nation, who have done it: and he well observes, that the reason why some speak of us as then not well enough reform'd, was because of our want of a∣greement with the Church of Rome. §. 6. As to the last part of the Bishop's discourse, saying, that it was not permitted to Monks to meddle with the matters of the Church &c. And wherein he is seconded by St. Asaph, who falls foul on Presbyterians on this account, as if they were darkners of all Church History &c. They should know, that as our Historians call'd these Monks, they also call'd them Priests, sometimes Presbyters, or Bishops, or Doctors, and frequent∣ly Culdees. Our people (saith BoethLib. 6. Fol. 95. v. 40. Coeperi & nostri eo tempre Christi dogma acuratissimè amplexari Monachorum quorundam ductu & adhortatione qui quia sedulo pr∣dicationi vacarent, essentque frequentes in oratione, ab incolis Cultores Dei sunt appellati: invaluit id nomen apud vulgus in tantum ut Sacerdotes omnes ad nostra pene tempora vulg Culdaei; i. e. Cultores Dei, sine discrimine vocitarentur.) also began most seriously at that time to embrace the Doctrine of Christ, by the guidance, and exhortation of some Monks; who, because they were most diligent in Preaching, and frequent in Prayer, were call'd by the Inhabitants, Worshippers of God: which name took such deep root with the common People, that all the Priests, even to our time, were commonly without difference call'd Culdees, i. e. Worshippers of God: Elsewhere this Author call'd these Teachers and Guides indifferently Priests, Monks, and Culdees. Thus also speaks the best of our Histo∣rians, some of whom we have heard calling them Presbyters, and Admi∣strators of the Sacraments. Hence 'tis clear, that when they call them Monks, the word is not to be taken in the later Popish sense, for a Lay∣hermite;
for these our primitive Pastors were only call'd Monks, by reason of their strictness of life, and frequent retirement to Devotion, when the publick work of the Ministry did permit it, and perhaps also divers of them abstain'd from Marriage, that they might keep themselves free from the World, and its care, without urging this on others, as was the practice of the famous Paphnutius in the council of Nice: From all which I conclude, that before the coming of Palladius, we had a settl'd Church without the least umbrage of their Hierarchy. §. 7. I add, that long after that, it had but very slender footing here; seeing, according to Spotswood, they had no distinct Titles or Dioceses, whose wordsHist. Page. 4. are, neither had our Bishops auy other Title (then that of Scotorum Episcopi, or Scotish Bishops) whereby they were distinguish'd, be∣fore the days of Malcomb the III, who first divided the Country into Dioceses, appointing to every Bishop the limits &c. Yea, after most strict search,Book 1. for a long time posterior to Palladius, he can scarce find the least footsteps of Episcopacy. And again, long it was after the distinction of Dioceses, before they were admitted to any civil Places or Votes in Parliament, Hence nothing is more certain than that, for many Ages, the Church of Scotland knew nothing of their Hierarchy: the first Rudiments where∣of were bronght from Rome, which was sent packing thither again, when we renounc'd our obedience to Anti-christ. §. 8. Take but one other particular, and I take leave of the Advo∣cat: he's much displeas'd with St. Asph terming him a Caresser of Fana∣ticks, for affirming that in consequence of this our Argument taken from the confess'd Practice of our primitive Church, we might reasonably con∣clude, that when we covenanted against Episcopacy, we had only us'd our own right; and thrown out that which was a confess'd Innovation; in order to the restoring of that, which was our primitive Government. A notable and never to be forgotten Concession of so learn'd an Adversary as is this Bishop. Let's hear what the Advocat returns him. It will not follow (saith he) that because our Church in its infancy and necessity was without Bishops for some years; therefore it was reasonable for Subjects, to enter into a solemn League and Covenant, without, and against the Consent ef their Monarch; and to ex∣tirpat Episcopacy settl'd then by Law, and by an Old Prescription of 1200 years at least. But this most unfair Representation of our Arguments an∣tecedent is, I trust, now sufficiently discover'd: wherefore, I have no∣thing
to do here with it, not yet am oblig'd to evince the consequence he denies, seeing 'tis not to be accounted ours but his own, who made the antecedent. Of the Grounds why the Nation entred into a Covenant, I also discours'd already. In the mean while, I can't but take notice of his settling Episcopacy by Prescription; a Romish Argument, which, whatever it may do in Law, has no place here. His Prescription, I'm sure, essentially differs from that of Tertullian against the Heresies of his time, seeing he liv'd in a very early Age, when especially, if ever, Pre∣scription could have place in the Church, and the Doctrines which he defended were generally and uninterruptedly held by the Pastors, even from the Apostles times, and more ancient than the Heresies, against which he prescribes, whereas in the present case all things are clean con∣trary. For, as the Advocat himself here supposes, the original of Sco∣tish Episcopacy is several Ages posterior to that of the Apostles; so that if the Argument could militat for either Party, it serv'd well the Church of Scotland against Prelacy, and not at all e contra. But tho' things had been quite otherwise, there had been no fear of harm from their Pre∣scriptions; seeing, as Vincentius Lerinensis admonishesCap. 39. Caeterum dilatatae & inveteratae Haereses nequaquam &c. In refutation of inveterat Errors, we must recurr to the sole authority of the Scriptures. And Optatus Milevit. plainly asserts that Christ's Testament abundantly suffices to determine all, and every particular Controversie among Christians. Thus we see how pleasant a spectacle these two Champions afford us; the Bi∣shop forms the Major Proposition, and asserts, on supposition of the Antiquity of our Royal Line, and veracity of our Historians, that our Church acted with reason enough, and was only recovering her own Right, when she cashier'd Prelacy. The Advocat, in attempting to disprove this the Bishop's Proposition, has only giv'n such prevarications and elusions, as most strongly confirm all the dis-interested of the truth thereof. As for the Minor Proposition, that our ancient Royal Line is not forg'd but real, and our historical Monuments most true and credible, the Advo∣cat himself, to the conviction of all the unbyass'd, in both his Books, makes appear. It remains therefore as a conclusion of undoubted veri∣ty that our Church was acting most rationally, and only recovering her own Right, when at any time she expell'd Prelacy, together with all its Innovations.
§. 9. There is yet another Advocat of the Party, whose look is more stout than his Fellows. We shall try if his reason be answerable to his confidence. I mean A M. D. D. (I shall design him D. M.) The Author of a late Book call'd, An Enquiry into the New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians in Scotland. Who,Page 227. Et sequentibus. in opposition to the Defender of the Vindication of the Church Scotland, handles the same Argument at large, and supposes, as a main Ground of his Dis∣course, that his Antagonist denies, that there is any force in Argumento negativo. To require (saith D. M.) that a matter of Fact be attested by com∣petent Witnesses is, in the language of our Author to raze the Foundation of all History. He spends therefore about 14 pages, to prove that a negative Argument in some Cases may have place. But vainly, seeing the Author of the Vindication does not once insinuatDefence of the Vindication of the Church of Scotland. Page 36. that a negative Argument can in no Cases be us'd, or that to require competent Witnesses in a matter of Fact, is to raze the Foundation of all History. Yea he believ'd that there were Witnesses so competent for his Assertion, that no Argu∣ment, whither negative, or of whatsoever kind else, shall ever be able to darken their Testimony, and that we have as good ground for our an∣cient Church, her being without Bishops, as for any other part of our Nations Antiquities. And indeed the Argument the Apologist, whom D. M. would vindicat, us'd, levels at all parts of our ancient History, no less then at the thing under debate. The Argument was, There were none that lived near that age that wrote the History of it, and the Monks who wrote any thing were extreamly ignorant. Now this, if it do any thing to the Author's purpose, equally shakes and overthrows all parts of our ancient History, seeing with the like force and success it may be brought against any of 'em. Justly therefore repones the Defender of the Vin∣dication, that this is at one blow to raze the Foundation of the History of our Nation, and that of most others: and to make them all to be Fools, who have enquired into these Antiquities that concern our Nation, and others: such as Fordon, Major, Beda, Usher &c. whereto, all, D. M. rejoins, is, that many collateral proofs may be brought from the Roman Historians, that the Scots inhabited that part of Britain, long before the imaginary period of his Presbyterian Church.—And the manner of reckoning the Scotish Gene∣alogies at their Marriages, their Births, and other remarkable Solemnities,
was an infallible conveyance of true, constant and perpetual Traditions. Their Bards whose Science it was to repeat those Genealogies upon solemn Occasions, & to celebrat their greatest Atchievements in verse, could not add one to the number of their Kings, but upon the Death of his Predecessor. But in all his Discourse, there is wrapt up a concession of all the Defender of the Vindication charg'd on the Apologist; seeing he evidently intimats, that unless it be assertin'd some other way, nothing in any of our Countries Historians merits any credit. And to confirm this, I except, (saith he) against all the three, (viz. Fordon, Major and Boethius) that none of 'em, could be a competent Wit∣ness in Affairs of that nature at so great a distance from their own time, unless they had named the Authors and Records upon whose Testimony their Relation was founded. As to his mentioning of collateral Proofs &c. it is a meer Sham; seeing, if once we yeeld with him, that no credit is due to any of our Monuments now extant, except what is confirm'd by some exo∣tick Records, how sorry an account have we of any of our Antiquities of whatsoever kind? which forraign Testimonies notwithstanding may, if compar'd with our Writers, give light to our Histories. I'm sure moreover, notwithstanding of whatsoever old Traditions, or Bard's verses are mention'd, all or surely most of these now being lost, or, tho' extant, mostly unintelligible, our Royal Line could ne∣ver be asserted without ascribing to our Writers, both the reach and in∣tegrity of able and faithfull Historians. And yet D. M. is not afraid to compare his Apologist negative Argument to another of Eusebius lib. 3. Where (saith D. M.) by this very Argument, he overthrows the authority of several Books that some would impose upon the Church, meerly because they were not duely attested, and none ef the Ancients brought any Testimonies from them. But Eusebius saw and perus'd these Ancients, who either direct∣ly or occasionally mention'd all the Canonical Books, and so justly their silence overthrew the Authority of the Spurious, and baffl'd the credit of their Imposers: but has D. M. or his Apologist, seen or perus'd all the Monuments from which our Historians took their materials, and which were lost long before either of them were born? Can they from these Records, tho' they would fain do't, rub shame upon all the Histo∣rians of our Countrey, as a creu of lying Forgers? seeing then, that this is impoible to be done, and that, as the Advocat has solidly made out, they were men of sufficient Candor and Reputation; seeing they us'd many ancient Reeords now lost, and were of sufficient Discretion and
Knowledge to distinguish genuine from fictitious, seeing they relate what we plead for with no less unanimity and concord than they do any thing else, and either profess, or sufficiently enough intimat, that they brought all their Composours from ancient Records, seeing that their Judgement is confirm'd by unsuspected Forerunners both ancient and modern, yea and suffrages of all mankind, who had ever any occasion to speak of this matter, seeing what they relate is so far from being fa∣bulous, that our ancient Church-government they mention is sufficient∣ly attested and acknowledg'd by the fiercest of our Adversaries to be truly Apostolick, and seeing, lastly, as we have heard, Prelacy, for a long time after Palladius, was of far less bulk and power in Scotland, than in other Churches; the Apologists negative Argument has just as much consanguinity with that of Eusebius, as is between a down-right Paralo∣gism, and a solid Deduction: yea I averr moreover, that considering Prelacy was then at its Ela in Scotland, and none of our Historians at least before Buchanan were Presbyterian, nor could reap any Advantage by disobliging the Prelats, any one of their Testimonies alone might give sufficient ground to believe that what they said was well founded on good and ancient Records. §. 10. But after a long, and, as himself truly says, needless digres∣sion, he comes to examine our Testimonies, and will have Boethius to contradict the rest, alledging that his meaning is not, that Palladius was the first Bishop, but only the first sent from Rome, but of Boethius already. Here D. M. falls foul on Blondel as a corrupter of Boethius, because he said as out of him that the Presbyters elected and ordain'd their Bishop. There is nothing (saith D. M.) said by Boethius, but that the Bishops were elected from among both the Priests and Monks. And true it is there is no more said in the words D. M. cites, but 'tis as true that elsewhereFol. 95. Pontificem inter se communi suffragio deligebant &c. Boethius expresly says, that the Pastors, Priests or Culdees themselves by common suffrage elected this Pontificem or Prefect. Add hereto, that, if Bo∣ethius have said ought inadvertantly or obscurely, he is to be correct'd or explain'd by the harmonious and most express Testimonies of Fordun, Major, Buchanan, Craig, and other such most learn'd of our Antiqua∣ries, all of whom are, beyond scruple, most positive for what we affirm. §. 11. Next he assaults Prosper's Testimony, alledging that, accor∣ding to Baron, Palladius was not sent to the Scots in Britain, Baronius
(saith D. M.) never thought that Palladius was sent by Pope Coelestine to the Scoto-Britanni, but rather to the Irish. And, whatever the Testimony of Prosper be, Spondanus and Baronius leave the Vindicator, for they under∣stood Prosper's words of Palladius his mission to Ireland, and not to that part of Britain, which is now call'd Scotland. To prove this his Assertion he ad∣duces, but, which was his wisdom, untranslated, these words of Ba∣ronAnn. 431. Numb. 191. Perductum quoque fuisse ad Hiberniam Insulam, sed citò morte subduectum ex hac vita migrasse, ex Probo qui res gestas S. Patricii scripsit dictum est superius, Hibernorum quidem conversionem Deus S. Patricio reservavit.; that he (viz. Palladius) was brought also into the Isle of Ireland, but was soon taken away by Death, is related by Probus, who wrote the Deeds of St. Patrick. Egregiously reason'd! Probus saith that Palladi∣us went once into Ireland; therefore Baron thought the words of Pros∣per not at all to be understood of his coming into Scotland. Surely this Author may be allow'd a chief place in their next Book of Sports for the Sabbath. Yea these words, that he was brought also &c. seem clearly to hold forth that he was sent to another place beside, out of which he came into Ireland, and what place this was, the immediatly preceeding words evinceIbid. Hoc eodem anno sub iisdem Consulibus Sanctus Prosper missum ait Palladium ordina∣tum primum Episcopum ad Scotos: perductum quoque fuisse ad Hiberniam &c. the same year and in the time of the same Consuls St. Prosper saith that Palladius was sent to the Scots, being ordain'd the first Bishop. That he (continues Cardinal Baron) was brought also into the Isle of Ireland &c. Where 'tis most evident that Baron distinguishes the Scots, to whom Prosper saith Palladius was sent, from the Inhabitants of Ireland. But, to cut off all further debate of this matter, the Cardinal clearly demon∣strats what we plead for, while he expresly says,Numb. 4.—Magno honore prosequentes ejus Reliquias in Mernia Scotiae Provincia collecatas. that they highly ho∣nour Palladius his Relicts which are buri'd in the Mernes, a Province of Scot∣land. And the Cardinal continuing his Discourse of the same Scots, whose first Bishop, in his Judgement Prosper makes Palladius to have beenNumb. 5. Porro eandem Ecclesiam nobilissimam hoc nostro saculo Deus tentati permi∣sit, ut Christianae constantiae praeclarissimum specimen ederet, cum inter alios Martyres habere etiam meruit (quod nulla hactenus Christiana Gens habuit) ipsam Reginam, Catholica Fidei eximium Decus & ornamentum diutissimâ consessione in carcere ante probatam, nobili∣ori coronâ Martyrii auctam., saith that their late Queen (viz. Mary) was the Glory of the Catho∣lick Faith, and a Martyr: but I insist not on a matter so evident, the Advocat hath learn'dly made it out, and prevented all such attempts of D. M. and the like Enemies of our Countrey.
§. 12. He having thus abus'd Baron, prepares next for the deprava∣tion of Prosper himself, telling us, that all that can be inferr'd is, that Pal∣ladius was the first Bishop of the Roman mission. But Prosper's words are clear and without any such limitation. Palladius (saith he) is ordain'd by Pope Coelestine for the Scots that had already believed in Christ, and is sent to them to be their first Bishop. Behold our very Assertion, and why we should yeeld it, and in lieu thereof imbrace its contrary, I am yet to learn. He adds, that as soon as the Pope aspired to his unlimited and univer∣sal Supremacy, there were several Bishops sent to other Churches, already con∣stituted, not to introduce Episcopacy, which was the Government of the universal Church, but rather a subjection to, and uniformity with the Roman See. But tho' all this were as true as some of it is false, it's nothing to the purpose, except he find good Authors, wherein a Bishop sent to a People, who not only were Christians, but also govern'd by Bishops before he came, is called without restriction their first Bishop. And Boethius (continues D. M.) understood the History of Palladi∣us in this sense, Which tho' 'twere yeelded, stands him in little stead, seeing all the Historians & Antiquaries of our Countrey, and, as we have heard from Card. Baron, with whom joins our learn'd Advocat, all men every-where else understand Prosper in the sense we plead for; believing that there was no Bishop in Scotland before Palladius. But 'twill not satisfie D. M. to wrest Prosper's words, except he al∣so at once overthrow his whole Chronicle, telling us, that it is not thought by the learned to be the genuine Work of Prosper. All he brings for this, is a conjecture of Petrus Pithoeus, fancying that the Chronicle ascrib'd to Prosper, & appended to that of Eusebius & Hierome, is of a different stile from that of a confus'd fragment, which he took for a part of the true Prosper's Chronicle, & wherein there is nothing concerning Palladius. But why the meer conjecture of one man should be enough to discredit that Chronicle so universally ascrib'd to Prosper, I leave to the Judgment of the learned. VossiusDe historicis latinis. Page 229. indeed mentions this fragment, but if it be preferable to the vulgar Copy, determines not: neither, for ought I know, did ever any save, D. M. embrace this faint Conjecture of Pithoeus, and indeed there must be brought incomparably better Arguments before that confus'd fragment either be preferr'd to, or vye with the universal∣ly receiv'd Copy, immemorially, under Prosper's name, affixed to Hierome's
Chronicle. Moreover, seeing this Schred is most disordered, and the words now under debate most universally believ'd to have been written by Prosper, 'tis highly probable, on supposition that this fragment is a part of the true consular Chronicle, that it once contain'd that passage, tho', throw mutilation, and either negligent or malicious transcribing, it hath now lost it: however the matter be, we are at no loss; for never was there a sentence more unanimouly ascrib'd to any Author than this con∣cerning Palladius is to Prosper, and is by all, both ancient and modern acknowledg'dVide Usserii Brit. Eccles. Antiquates. Page 799.: so that all their endeavours to prove this passage supposititious, and that it belongs not to Prosper, or some else of equall Antiquity, and Authority, are the last efforts of meer desperation, And indeed had they not in defiance of the whole Christian World and Truth it self, resolv'd per fas aut nefas to maintain that there was ne∣ver a Church without Diocesan Bishops before the time of Calvine and Beza, they had never adventur'd their skulls on what is so hard, firmly bottom'd, and so universally believed. Have we not already heard ful∣ly, how the most knowing and zealous for Prelacy while they sustain'd the truth of our Countrey Histories, and yet labour'd to disprove what we now plead for, gave only, in favours of their latter Assertion, triffles so empty, and prevarications so apparent, that 'tis most presumable they believ'd nothing of what they said, & how the most learn'd of the Epis∣copal Perswasion acknowledg'd the truth of our Assertion, on suppositi∣on that any credit is to be given to our Historians, with whom also joins the learn'd Dr StillingfleetIrenicum Part 2. Ch. 7., So (saith he) if we may believe the great Antiquaries of the Church of Scotland, that Church was governed by their Cul∣dei as they called their Presbyters without any Bishop over them for a long time. He gives also instances of other ancient Churches without Diocesan Bi∣shops. §. 13. It had been more manly therefore and honest for D. M. to have at least attempted a refutation of Dr. Stillingfleet, than to have dar'd his Adversaries to bring but one example of Churches without Diocesan Bishops, seeing he knew there were store already giv'n even by Episco∣pals, no less than Presbyterians, which hitherto stand unanswered. Let them also chaw their cude on that famous and well known Distinction of a first and second primitive Church acknowledged by Semeca and others,
even Popish Divines, notic'd by VsherAntiq. Brit. Eccles. Page 809. and embrac'd by Stilling∣fleet Iren. Part 2. Ch. 6., in the former whereof Diocesan Episcopacy was not yet come in fashion, nor was any such thing as a Difference, either in Name or Of∣fice, between Bishops, and Priests or preaching Presbyters, then in Being. From all which judge with what brow D. M compares the account of our ancient Church-government to a supposed Fiction of the King of China, and his Presbyterian Lady. And by this dealling of D. M. I am put in mind of another piece of his Art, whoPage 39, & 40. averres that all brought by Salmasius and Blondel to prove that Hierome was for the Scriptural and Apostolick Identity of of Bishop & Presbyter, and whatsoever is said by them, for Presbytry is refuted by D. Pearson in his Vindicae Ignatianae. I must not (saith D. M.) transcribe the acurat and unanswerable Dissertations of several learned Men, who have sufficiently exposed the Writings of Blondel and Salmasius on this head, particularly the incomparable Bishop of Chester (vind▪ St. Ignat.) But no where did ever Dr. Pearson ingage with these Authors on this subject, nor does he any such thing, only he has some few excursions which touch not the marrow of the Controversie, and therefore is nothing to D. M's purpose, whether the advantage be yeelded to Salmasius and Blondel or to Dr. Pearson. He abuses also some passages of Hierome to prove him self-repugnant, but all such depravations had been by Iunius and others against the Papists, and by Stillingfleet in his Irenicum clearly discover'd, & the places unanswerably vindicated, even before he wrote his Vindi∣ciae, which their vindications of Hierome, as also many other defences of the same Author brought by Salmasius and Blondel, he scarce once ad∣ventures to handle. But he has vindicated Ignatius, they will say, and this is enough. But suppose that he had as really evinced these Epistles to be the genuine Work of Ignatius, as he's groundlesly pretended to have don't, yet so far is their inference from being good, that as we shall hear, the quite contrary follows, viz. that in the Ignatian age, Bi∣shops were all one with the Pastors of single Congregations. Hence it appears that this was one of D. M's pious Frauds to skarr his vulgar Reader (for others he could not hope to catch thereby) from the New Doctrine of Presbytry.
Section VIII. Prelacy opposite to the Principles of our Reformers. I Said, when we renounc'd our Obedience to Anti-christ, we sent, a∣mongst the rest of the Romish leaven, Prelacy packing thither: which, tho' we had no more Arguments, our Confession of Faith com∣pil'd by our Reformers clearly evinces. We detest (say they) Anti∣christ's worldly Monarchy with his wicked Hierarchy. Of which Hierar∣chy, as is acknowledg'd by the Council of TrentDe Sacramento ordinis. Can. 6., & BellarmineDe Clerici—Cap. 11., the Bishops make a principal part. And the Episcopal Office with its distinction, belong solely to their Hierarchy, otherwise, they confess, there's no Difference between Bishop and Presbyter. At them therefore these words of the Confession must especially level. And his sub∣tility, who would save the Prelats from this blow, by seeking the foun∣dation of a distinction where 'tis not; as if by the word Wicked, the Con∣fession pointed at another Hierarchy which is Pious, must be reckon'd, by all the disinterested, to nigh of kin to his pericranium, who, to save a∣nother part of Romanism, made a fair distinction between Lawfull and Vnlawfull Idolatry. I say, it can be no otherwise here; for, to speak truth, their Hierarchy is nothing, save the Corruption of Church-go∣vernment, and pride of her Governours, rais'd by certain stories, and tending towards the Papacy, as its highest pinacle, whereof both name and notion owe their Original to one, who indeed was not the Father of lies, yet in lying came so near him, as readily any copy to its Original. I mean the false Areopagite, whose whole Book may really be term'd a fardel of Fictions. Moreover, this Confession was compil'd in the year 1581. when Prelacy had been unanimously by the whole Assembly, in the preceeding year cast out of the Church. And for many succeeding Assemblies, their Declaration of their dislike and hatred of Prelacy, and approbation of this Confession, went hand in hand, with whom then in
both of these, the King's Majesty join'd. For the Assembly at Glasgow 1581. consisting for the most part, of such as voted, and were present in the Assembly at Dundie, in the preceeding year when Prelacy had in termi∣nis been renounc'd and ejected, declares that they meaned wholly to condemn the whole estate of Bishops, as they are now in Scotland,—and that this was the meaning of the Assembly at that time. The King's Commissioner pre∣sented to this Assembly the Confession of Faith, subscribed by the King, and his houshold, not long before, together with a plot of the Presbytries to be erected, which is registrat in the Books of the Assembly, with a Letter to be directed from his Majesty to the Noble-men, and Gentle-men of the Country, for the erecti∣on of the Presbytries, consisting of Pastors, and Elders, and dissolution of Prela∣cies, and with an offer to set forward the Policy untill 'twere establish'd by Par∣liament. The King's Letter subscribed by his hand, to the Noble-men, and Gentle-men, was read in open audience of the whole Assembly. This Assem∣bly ordain'd also that the Confession of Faith be subscribed, as being true, Christian, and faithfull. And in the Assembly 1595. amongst other things of the same tendency, it was cleared that Episcopacy was condemn'd in these words of the Confession His Wicked Hierarchy. See store of irrefra∣gable proofs of this our Assertion in the Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow, 1638. Sess. 16. §. 2. They only bewray their ignorance, if not worse, while they give out, that our Church, in her first Reformation, had Bishops (as the word is now taken) under the name of Superintendents. For tho' this were true, all they shall gain hereby, would only be the fastening of a self-contradiction on Mr. Knox, and the rest of these most honour∣able Instruments of our Freedom from Mystical Babylon: our Adversa∣ries acknowledging that Mr. Knox, and his Fellow-labourers in the Church-policy, did exactly follow the Genevan Model, which these men use to make the Original of Presbytry: It's confess'd alsoFuller, lives of the Divines. that John Knox refus'd a Bishoprick in England on this account, that it had Quid commune cum Antichristo. Whereby, tho' nothing else could be brought, 'tis clear as the Sun, that Knox (I may say the same of most of his Fel∣low-labourers in the Reformation) was intirely averse from their Hie∣rarchick Domination. §. 3. Wherefore the Author of a late Book call'd The Fundamental Charter of Presbytry examin'd and disprov'd, quite skips over these Eviden∣ces
of Knox's being Antiprelatick; notwithstanding that the only design of the far greater part of his Book, was directly to prove these out Re∣formers, and Knox in special, to have been of the prelatical Perswasion, However, let's hear the chief of the Answers he gives to such other Proofs hereof, as he adventures to engage with.Pag. 24. Et sequentibus. §. 4. The first is a passage of Knox's letter to the Assembly, viz. Vn∣faithfull, and Traitors to the Flock, shall ye be before the Lord Jesus if that with your consent, directly or indirectly, ye suffer unworthy men to be thrust in within the Ministry of the Kirk under wat pretence that ever it be, Remember the Judge before whom ye must make an account, and resist that Tyranny as ye would avoid Hell-fire. To which our Author answers denying that Knox by Tyranny here means Episcopacy, and saith, that 'tis impossible to make more of the Letter, than that Knox deem'd it a pernicious and tyrannical thing, for any Person whatsoever to thrust unworthy Men into the Ministry of the Church. Which Answer evanishes, so soon as we shall understand the occasion of Knox's Letter. Some powerfull Courtiers had then sacri∣legiously invaded a great part of the Churches Revenues; and were greedily grasping the remainder, to the great grief of all good Men, and detriment of the Church, which both in her Assemblies, and otherways, vehemently urged that these Revenues should be imploy'd on sustenta∣tion of Ministers, many of whom, being unprovided, were ready to starve; and on maintaining of Schools, relieving the Poor, and other such pious Uses. These Courtiers therefore, to free themselves of such unacceptable Monitors, and secure them of what they had gotten, plot the reduction of a kind of Diocesan Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other such Popish Orders, with whom they were to make a sacrilegious Com∣pact, and to give these titular Church-men some small pittance of the Revenues, the rest being possessed, in their name, by these Courtiers. Now at the very time of the writing of Knox's Letter, this was in agita∣tion, and a design laid to practise upon some of the Assembly, as short∣ly thereafter at the Meeting in Leith appear'd, at which, and elsewhere in these times, there were not wanting among the Ministers, who, mov∣ed with hope of Domination over their Brethren, and some small aug∣mentation of Rent, made no bones of such simoniacal Pactions or (to use the express words of the Confessions of their best Friends) such durt and vile Bargains.Fund. Charter. Pag 26. Spotswood. Hist. Pag. 316.
And now judge what Knox mean'd by his Exhortation to keep out unworthy Men, and resist Tyranny: And 'tis most presumable that SpotswoodHist. Page 257, 258. sufficiently saw, that Knox's Letter goares Prelacy, otherwise he had not mangl'd the same, and wholly omitted all menti∣on of Tyranny. §. 5. And that this Knox's Letter levell'd at the Bishops then about to be introduc'd, is further evident from his refusal to inaugurat John Douglas Bishop of St. Andrews, his denouncing an Anathema to the Giver and Receiver of the Bishoprick, and his open professing his dislike of the whole Order. At this our Author takes exception, saying, The certain Manu∣script from which Calderwood says he had this relation, is uncertain. But he should have look'd into Petrie, whoCentury 16. Page 371. names the Author William Scot, that eminent Minister at Couper. Now, that 'tis like enough that Knox, who was then at St. Andrews, said so, and express'd suitable resentments of the durty Bargain between Morton and Douglas, who by a simoniacal Paction, got into the See, is by our Author expresly acknowledg'd. And indeed, if we consider the indignity of the Crime, and the Lyon-like boldness of Mr. Knox against such Vices, 'tis altogether incredible, but that he vented his resentments with a Wit∣ness, and to the noticing of all thinking Men then present: yet all this is skipp'd over by Spotswood, For he knew well enough, that this Relati∣on should have shew'd how little kindness Knox bore to their Hierarchy. Moreover, which is most noticeable in this matter, these who then favour'd Prelacy, being generally such simoniacal Pedlers, were so far from writing the several Actions and Church-transactions of these times, that they made it their care to suppress and destroy the publick Monu∣ments of the Church. Witness B. AdamsoneCald. Hist. Page 261.: one of the Arti∣cles of whose Confession, to which, as is acknowledg'd by Spotswood Hist. Page 385., he subscrib'd, was, that not without his special allowance, some leaves of the Books of the Assemblies were rent out, and such things as made against the Bishops their estate, were destroyed in Falkland, before the Books were de∣liver'd to the King's Majesty. Which considerations, suffice to prove the truth of that historical Relation. He alledges next, that tho' we had reason to believe, that Knox said and did so, yet it follows not that he was for the Divine Right of Parity. Add∣ing,
That 'tis like enough Knox said so—for dreadfull Invasions were made upon the Patrimony of the Church. But this Invasion was so linked with the introduction of Prelacy, that they had both common Friends and Enemies, so that Knox declaring against either, must be judg'd e∣qually averse from both. And indeed the introduction of Prelacy, was consequentially this very destruction and consumption of the Churches Goods, against which Knox inveigh'd. Or dare he say, that it had sa∣tisfi'd him, if they had been consum'd in sustaining the Luxury and Grandour of Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, whom the Court was about then to introduce, providing only these Church Revenues, had been kept from the secular Nobility. Moreover, 'tis evident, to whosoever reads Knox's words, that the Invasion of the Church-patrimony, was far from being the sole Ground of the dislike he shew'd to Episcopacy. The Matter in short is, when John Douglas was made Tulchan Bishop of St. Andrews, Mr. Knox refused to Ordain him, denouncing Anathemaes to the Giver, and to the Receiver: and when John Rutherford Provest of the old Colledge had said, that Mr. John Knox's repining, had proceeded from male∣contentment, the next Lora's-day, John Knox said in Sermon, I have refus'd greater Bishoprick than ever 'twas, and might have had it with the favour of greater Men than he hath this, but I did, and do repine for discharge of my Conscience, that the Church of Scotland be not subject to that Order. This last Clause, viz. that the Church of Scotland be not subject to that Order, he adventures not once to mention, which yet is a reason of Knox's re∣pining, and so gives the meaning of his whole Discourse. And seeing 'tis of equal credit with his foregoing words, being not only with the rest taken by Petrie, out of that Historical Relation, but related also by CalderwoodMs. Hist. Vol. 2, Page 340. fully scatters all his fogg, and clearly determines the present Question, somewhat else he hath here, but of small moment. As, Knox, when Douglas, who was already Rector of the Vniversity, and Pro∣vest of the old Colledge was made Bishop, regrated, that so many Offices were laid on an old Man, which scarcely twenty of the best Gifts were able to bear. Thence he Infers, that Knox's resentment of Douglas his advance, was not from any Perswasion, he had of the unlawfulness of Prelacy. As if Knox might not assert the unlawfulness of Prelacy, and yet say so much for a a Superpondium to his other Grievances. And to shew, even on Supposi∣tion, as they pretended, of the allowableness of Episcopacy, how little
sence of Duty or Conscience was in either Givers or Receivers. §. 6. There was at this time (saith M. D. Hume.History of the Houses of Douglass and Angus. Page 320., no small Contest and Debate, betwixt the Court and the Church, about Bishops and Prelats, concerning their Office and Jurisdiction. The Ministers laboured to have them quite abolished and taken away, and the Court thought that form of Government to be agreeable, and compatible with a Monarchical Estate, and more conform to the Rules of Policy, and Civil Government of a Kingdom. Besides, the Courtiers had tasted the sweetness of their Rents and Revenues, putting in titular Bishops, who were only their Receivers, and had a certain Pension or Stipend, for discharging and executing the Ecclesiastical part of their Office, but the main profit was taken up by Courtiers for their own use. Where∣fore they laboured to retain at least these shadows of Bishops, for let∣ting of leases, and such other things, which they thought were not good in Law otherways. There was none more forward to keep them up than the Earl of Morton; for he had gone Ambassadour to England on his own privat Charges, and to recompence his great Expenses in that Journey, the Bishoprick of St. Andrews, being then vacant, was conferr'd upon him. He put in Mr. John Douglass (who was Provost of the New Colledge in St. Andrews) to bear the Name of Bishop, and to gather the Rents (till such time as the Solemnity of Inaugurati∣on could be obtain'd) for which he was countable to him. This he did immediatly after he came home out of England. Now he will have him to sit in Parliament, and to vote there as Arch-bishop. The Superintendent of Fyfe, did inhibit him to sit there, or to Vote under pain of Excommunication; Morton commanded him to do it, un∣der pain of Treason and Rebellion. The Petition giv'n in to the Par∣liament, desiring a competent Provision for the maintaince of Preach∣ers, in which they complained of the wrong done unto them by the Courtiers, who intercepted their means, was cast over the Bare, and re∣jected, and by the most common report, Morton was the first cause thereof. Afterward Morton in a Meeting of some Delegats, and Com∣missioners of the Church at Leith, by the Superintendent Dune's means, used the matter so, that he obtain'd their Consent to have his Bishop admitted, and install'd. Wherefore, the third of February, he caus'd affix a schedul on the Church door of St Andrews, wherein he
charged the Ministers to conveen, and admit him to the Place, which they did accordingly, but not without great Opposition. For Mr. Patrick Adamson (then a Preacher, but afterward Arch-bishop there himself) in a Sermon which he preached against the Order and Office of Bishops, said, there were three sorts of Bishops: 1. The Lords Bishop (to wit Christ's) and such was every Pastor. 2. My Lord Bishop, that is, such as Bishop as is a Lord, who sits, and Votes in Parliament, and exercises Jurisdiction over his Brethren. 3. And the third sort was, (my Lord's Bishop) that is, one whom some Lord or Nobleman at Court did put into the place to be his Receiver, to gather the Rents, and let Leases for his Lordship's behoofe, but had neither the Means nor Power of a Bishop. This last sort he called a Tulchan Bi∣shop, because as the Tulchan (which is a Calves skin stuff'd with straw) is set up to make the Cow give down her milk; so are such Bishops set up, that their Lords by them may milk the Bishopricks. Likewise Mr. Knox preached against it the tenth of February, and in both their hear∣ings (Morton's, and his Arch-bishop) to their Faces pronunced, A∣thathema danti, Anathema accipienti. AndPage 333. We shewed before, how in matters of Church-govern∣ment, he ever inclined (as the most politique Course) to the state of Bishops. The Name was yet retained by Custom, the Rents were lifted also by them (as we have said) more for other Mens use and pro∣fit, than their own. They had also place and vote in Parliament after the old manner, and he would gladly have had them to have keeped their Power and Jurisdiction over their Brethren. Master John Dou∣glass being dead, he fill'd the place by putting in Mr. Patrick Adam∣son his domestick Chaplain, who then followed that Course, tho be∣fore he had preach'd against it. Many were displeas'd herewith, all the Ministers (especially they of the greatest Authority) and all Men of E∣states that were best affected to Religion. (And which he cites out of an English Historian Francis Botevill)Page 354. As touching his (viz. Morton's) setting up and maintaining the estate of Bishops (whereof there had en∣sued great debate and contention betwixt him and the Ministry) he said, it did not proceed of an ill mind, of any malice, or contempt of them, or their Callings, but meerly out of want of better knowledge, thinking that Form of Government to be most conform to the Rules of
Policy, and to be fittest for the times. That if he had then known bet∣ter, he would have done otherways. AndPage 358. He (viz. Morton) was also calm—this appeared in his carriage toward Mr. Knox, who had used him roughly, and rebuk'd him sharply for divers things, but especial∣ly for his labouring to set up and maintain the estate of Bishops. Hence 'tis most manifest how, not only Knox, but also the whole bo∣dy of our Church disliked and hated the very first bud, and likeness of Prelacy: and how by meer force and fraud of the voracious Court-po∣liticians upon the dishonesty of some, but the unwariness and faintness of many moe of the Ministry. These monstrous Tulchans, for all men even our present Prelatists are ashamed of them, got that minot's har∣bour in Scotland. §. 7. Our Author Answers, for he insists long on this matter,Page 192. That the Question is not now, how this was done, but if it was done? For if it was done, it is an Argument that the Clergy then thought little on the iudispensi∣bility of Parity. Just as if what any man either by Fraud or Force is made seemingly to yeeld to▪ were to be taken for his true and genuine Senti∣ments: I thought this kind of reasoning had been peculiar to a Spanish Inquisitor or French Converter. Or that they were bad Men (continues he) a hard construction: For then Hierome of Prague who was forc'd, and so many of the choice Fathers of the Council of Arminum, who were trick'd to admit, in appearance, something contrary to their true Senti∣ments; shall all be bad men? That the Ministers at this Convention at Leith dealt most unwarily, and some of 'em also with too little integri∣ty, is beyond scruple: But that all of 'em, or most of 'em were poor covetous Rogues &c. neither Petrie nor any of his Perswasion ever affirmed. He adds that the Courts Arguments for the Leith-establiment were mainly Politick; for they turn'd not Theologues to perswade Episcopacy's Divine Insti∣tution from Scripture &c. Well then, there was little true Piety, no con∣sulting of Conscience or the Word of God in the Matter: And if some of the Ministry, as he says, were taken with these politick and state Rea∣sons, they in so far fell from their own Principle viz.1 Book of disc. head 1. That in the Books of the Old and New Testament, all things necessary for the instruction of the Church, and to make the Man of God perfect, are contain'd and sufficiently express'd. But the Clergy (saith he) had found that the new Scheme of the first Book of Discipline had done much hurt to the Church. As if the old
Popish Scheme, under which the Churches goods, by God's Law desti∣nated for the promoval of piety and learning, and sustaining of the poor, were consum'd and debauch'd, in upholding the grandour and luxury of a spurious ecclesiastick Nobility, could have been really more profit∣able to the Church than that of the Book of Discipline, on of the prime designs whereof was the bestowing of the Church Revenues for these their true uses, to which God's Law had appointed them. Or as if Pa∣stors, Schools, and Poor can in no place be provided for, where the Romish Church-policy is wanting. But, The six Commissioners (saith he) that treated with the State at Leith were sensible Men, and far from being Parity-men. Just so far from being Pa∣rity-men, that most of 'em, in an Assembly 1580. July 12. deliberately found and declared Episcopacy unlawfull in it self.Calderwood's Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 597. He intimats, that the Courts motive for the Leith-establishment could not be their desire to possess the Churches Patrimony. An untruth, as we have now seen, too bare fac'd to need more refutation. His proof hereof is of the same stamp, viz. Had the Clergy fall'n so suddenly from their constant claim to the Churches Revenues? did that which moved them to be so earnest for this meeting with the State miraculously slip out of their minds. Seeing not the Church, but the Court-politicians, as is evident, with desire to circum∣veen her, chiefly procur'd that meeting, and if these Delegates were ei∣ther the only or first men, who by sinistrous Artifices fell into a bad Compact, then let him exclaim with admiration of this matter: what follows is yet odder, viz. Was it not as easy for the Court to have possessed them∣selves of a Bishoprick, an Abbacy, a Priory &c. when there were no Bishops—as when there were. For he's to be pitied if he be ignorant that the Courtiers having no Law-title thereto, had no hope save under covert of their own Creatours, these titular Bishops, of any peaceable and se∣cure possession of the Churches Revenues. But an undoubted Assembly [saith he] own'd the Leith convention as an Assembly, and its Authority as the Authority of an Assembly—and for several years after that establishment at Leith, beside which there was no o∣ther fond for owning them for Bishops, Bishops were present, and as such were ob∣liged to sit and vote in general Assemblies—and many Acts of subsequent As∣semblies put this matter beyond all probability of ever being controverted as the Assembly in August 1574. which petitioneth the Regent, that Stipends be gran∣ted
to Superintendents in all time coming, in all Countries destitute thereof, whe∣ther it be where there is no Bishop, or where there are Bishops, who cannot dis∣charge their Office as the Bishop of St. Andrews and Glasgow. And that his Grace would provide qualified Persons for vacant Bishopricks. But this, tho' it be his prime Argument, is soon removed, our Church knew that divers Ministers and others had been allur'd, or aw'd to that agreement: She knew that 'twas only made for the InterimSee Spotswood Hist. Page 260. and for the Interim only did she tolerate it, with a full resolution to have a more perfect Or∣der. Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 354 And as for the words, In all time coming, there's not a syllabe of them in the Act he citesSee Page 457. Nor indeed any where else of all the Acts of these Assemblies. She knew also that during that Interim, 'twas im∣possible to get, that which had been the Revenues of Popish Bishops & other Church Rents out of the Regent and other Courtiers their hands. In the mean while the vast number of unplanted Churches, weakness of the Ministry in divers parts, and unsettlement, even unto that time, of the Churches Affairs, allow'd for a space the continuance of Evangeli∣stick Superintendents or Commissioners, who were to be in almost per∣petual motion and travels, and therefore needed much larger maintain∣ance then did fixed Pastors; which large maintainance the Church, be∣ing thus strip'd of her Patrimony, could not afford to the number that was needfull. On these and such Grounds, the Church indulged to that Convention the name of an Assembly, tolerated in these Tulchans the name of Bishops: And, seeing they had got more Rent then was giv'n to ordi∣nary Ministers, allowed them to exercise the Labour and Travel of Su∣perintendents or Commissioners: And thus the Church made the best she might of that their unlawfull Bargain. And tho',See our Author Pages 207, 208. which he al∣so objects, some Assemblies allow Bishops to conveen and proceed against de∣linquents, command Ministers by their Letters to admonish concerning persons to be excommunicated, it helps him nothing, seeing the very Acts he cites give no less power to Superintendents, yea to Commissioners, whom yet the Church used, even after she had declared Episcopacy unlawfull in it self. So far is our Churches tolerating for a space these Tulchans from being any Argument, that she believ'd not the Divine Right of Pa∣rity. But how appears't (saith he) that our Church receiv'd the Leith Ar∣ticles only for an Interim out of a dislike to Episcopacy:—And there
were other things in the Articles which required amendment. But sure these Articles were without any exception receiv'd and tolerated only for the Interim, and how well these Court-bishops were liked, is already made manifest, and our Churches subseqnent actings declare, which never rested, but still wrestled against the storms of both Power and Policy, untill they were sent packing. 'Tis true, as he says, the Church met with Opposition; but that this was only from these titular Bishops, and Rent-gatherers to the Courtiers, supported with all the might, Wit and Artifice of an awfull gripping, politick Regent, and no few other potentand subtile Courtiers driving their own ends, as has already ap∣peared, and is most evident from the best accounts now extant of these Affairs, and this is the undoubted Cause, why the six Collocutors at the Assembly in August 1575. think it not expedient presently to answer direct∣ly to the Question of the Function of Bishops. But he who stilleth the noise of the Seas & the noise of their waves, having restrain'd these impetuous Tempests, how cordially did our Church proceed to the utter extirpa∣tion of Prelacy? Forsamekle (they are the words of the Assembly hol∣den at Dundee, Anno 1580. July 12. Sess. 4.Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 597.) as the Office of a Bi∣shop, as it is now used and commonly taken within this Realme, hath no sure warrant, authority, or good ground out of the Book, and Scriptures of God, but brought in by the folly and corruption of mens invention, to the great over∣throw of the true Kirk of God, the whole Assembly of the Kirk in one voice, after liberty given to all Men to reason in the matter, none opponing themself in defence of the said pretended Office, findeth and declareth the samine pretended Office, used and termed as is above said, unlawfull in the self, as having neither fun∣dament, ground nor warrant in the word of God &c. And in all this, our Church, as she clearly here expresses, did nothing save what she was oblig'd to do by her own Principle in the first Book of Discipline, which affirms that all thing necessary for the instruction of the Church is contain'd in the Books of the Old and New Testament. And that whatsoever is without express com∣mandment of God's Word, is to be repress'd as damnable to Salvation. Our Reformers therefore, except our Adversaries say, (which even impu∣dence, it self dare not say), that they believ'd the Hierarchy to be foun∣ded on the express command of God's Word, were bound by this their Prin∣ciple to oppose it as a manifest corruption, and according to this Prin∣ciple, whensoever Prelacy, by force of the secular arm, and fraud of ser∣pentine
policy, and, as one well words it, by terrors and allurements, cros∣ses and commodities, banishment and benefices (for by other means it could never be admitted) overwhelm'd this Land, and discover'd the Hypo∣crisie or Gallio-like Disposition of many; all the true Lovers of our Re∣formation still then had, in greater or lesser measure, as their love was to this truly Protestant, yea truly Catholick and Christian Principle of our Reformers, their Feasts turned into Mourning, their Songs into Lamentation, their Tears for Meat, and their Harps hang'd on the Wil∣lows. And now suppose that our Reformers, in that unstable conditi∣on of our Church, and very first rudiments of Protestancy had in some of their Doings or Saying afforded some colour or appearance, either for the scruples of the curious, or the quirks and cavils of the captious, does not, pray, this most unanimous, most clear, and every way most unexceptionable Act of our most full and free Generall Assembly, that consisted for the far greater part of the very same Men, who were the Ac∣tors and Promoters of our first Reformation, most fully open our Re∣mormers their minds, shew their ultimat tendency and scope, and fi∣nally, for ever determine the present Controversie. §. 8. He hath more to say of John Knox, I return therefore to attend him. His next PleaPage 28. Et sequentibus. is with Calderwood about Beza's Letter to Knox, where he denies that Beza wrote being inform'd by Knox of the Courts intention to bring in Bishops, and adds, that if any thing of Knox's Sentiments can be collected from Beza's Letter, it seems rather he was for Pre∣lacy than for Presbytry: For Beza (saith he) seems clearly to import, that Knox needed to be caution'd against Prelacy. Beza's Words are.Epist. 79. Sed & istud mi Knoxe—sicut Episcopi Papatum pepereunt. ita psendespiscopos—(Papatus reliqui∣as) Epicureismum terras invecturos &c. But I would have you, my dear Knox, and the other Brethren, to Remember that which is before your eyes: that as Bishops brought foorth the Papacy: so false Bishops the relicts of Popery, shall bring in Epicurism to the World: They that desire the Churches good and safety, let them take heed of this Pest, and seeing ye have put that Plague to flight timously, I heartily pray you, that Ye never admit it again, albeit it seem plausible, with the pretence or colour of keeping uni∣ly, which pretence deceiv'd the ancient Fathers, yea even many of the best of 'em. Where Beza without giving any proof thereof, clearly supposes as a thing believed by Knox no less than by himself, that the Bishops whom
some were then labouring to introduce into Scotland were false Bishops, the relicts of Popery, which had already been once driv'n out of Scot∣land, and on this supposition, as any Orators use to do from Principles common to themselves, and these to whom they are speaking, he admonish'd him and the rest to beware of this Plague. Certain it is then, if we believe Beza, that he knew, if by a Letter from Knox, or o∣therwise concerns not the matter in hand, that Knox judg'd the Bishops then to be introduc'd to be no others than were the Popish Bishops, whom Knox and his fellow Reformers had lately expuls'd Scotland, and both sorts of Bishops to be equally false and Anti-christian. And now consider this Letter of Beza written near the same time with that of Knox to the Assembly, and the disinterested shall soon perceive that the former explains the latter, and sufficiently shews what Knox meant by the Tyranny mention'd therein. Moreover, whosoever finds so much against Episcopacy in Beza, even tho' it had been spoken by him with∣out any relation or respect to Knox, and remembers how universal and firm Concord was between these excellent Persons, Qui duo corporibus mentibus unus erant, will easily conclude that Knox bore but small kindness to Prelacy. §. 9. He comes next to prove, Knox was not for Parity. Had he been (saith he) so perswaded, how seasonable had it been for him to have spo∣ken out so mnch, when he was brought before King Edward's Council? The Question was then put to him, whether he thought that no Christian might serve in the Ecclesiastical Ministration, according to the Rites and Laws of the Realm of England?—Yet he answer'd nothing, but that no Minister in England had Authority to separate the Lepers from the whole, which was a chief part of his Office. Plainly founding all the unlawfulness of being a Pastor of the Church of England, not only the unlawfulness of the Hierarchy which he spoke not one word about, but on the Kings retaining—the chief Power of Ec∣clesiastical Discipline. As if Knox had judg'd nothing in the Church of England unlawfull but the King's retaining the Ecclesiastical Disci∣pline in his own hand; which all Men, even Episcopals no less than Presbyterians, know to be an arch and palpable untruth. Does not (as for example) our Assembly Anno 1566. in a Letter to the English Bi∣shops and Pastors, being moved thereto by John Knox, if SpotswoodHist. Pages 198, 199. speak truth, expresly, among many other things to this purpose, say
If Surplice, Corner-cap, and Tippet have been the badges of Idolaters, in the very act of their Idolatry, what have the Preachers of Christian Liberty, and the Rebukers of Superstition, to do with the dregs of that Roman Beast? yea, what is he that ought not to fear either to take in his hand or fore-head the Print & Mark of that odious Beast? &c. See store to this purpose in Heylin's History of the Presbyterians: whereby 'tis most evident, that this Author endeavour'd nothing more earnestly than to perswade the World that Knox was a self-repugnant Idiot. It sufficed if before that celebrious Assembly he answer'd to the Que∣stion, and gave some one reason that shewed he could not comply with them, tho' he declar'd not all the grounds of his dislike of their Practice. As to the matter of Francfort, which this Author mentions, drawing from it the like Consequences, there was no Bishop there, nor any mention of the necessity thereof, but only a buse made by some super∣stitious Bigots for their Popish Ceremonies or Fooleries, as Calvin calls them, and so there was no occasion of venting himself in this matter, and tho' there had, he sufficiently declar'd his mind while publickly in a Ser∣mon, he alledgedCald. Page 3. that nothing ought to be thrust upon any Congregati∣on without the warrant of the Word of God. Yea, if we may believe Le StrangeHoly Cheat. Pages 31, 32. Knox and his Associats sufficiently discover'd themselves to be of the Consistorian or Presbyterian Perswasion. § 10. He adds that Knox in his Appellation &c. plainly supposes the lawfulness of the Episcopal Office. I deny't. But all alongst throw it (saith he) Knox appeals to a lawfull general Council, snch a Council as the most an∣cient Laws and Canons approve, and who knows not that the most ancient Laws and Canons made Bishops the chief, if not the only Members of such Councils. Knox says, if the Popish Clergy his Adversaries are for it, he's content that matters in Controversie between him and them be determin'd by the Testimony and Authority of Doctors and Councils, three things being granted him, whereof these are two. 1. That the most ancient Councils nearest to the primitive Church in which the learned and godly Fathers examined all Matters by God's Word, may be holden of most Authority. 2. That no Determinations of Councils or Men be admitted against the plain verity of God's Word, nor against the De∣terminations of the four chief Councils. Would Knox if he had been Presby∣terian have agreed so frankly to have stood by the Determination of these four chief Councils? Could he have expected they would have favoured the Divine
Right of Presbyterian Parity? Will any scotish Presbyterian now adays stand to the Decision of these four chief Councils? But all our Author here infers is by Knox prevented and cut off, while, in the first place, he requires, that no Determinations of Councils nor Men be admitted against the plain Verity, i. e.First Book of Discipline head first. without the expressed command∣ment of God's Word. We chearfully appeal in the present Controversie, and provoke our Adversaries to this Rule, which most of 'em I have hitherto met with, expresly acknowledge to contain nothing in their favours. Secondly, The Actions of the first four Councils were of two sorts, Creeds viz. and Canons. Now, as John Knox and all the Presbyterians in cordial subscribing to the former, viz. The Symbols of these Councils, are confessedly not behind any part of the Christian World: so part of the latter sort, I mean the Canons, are rejected by Episcopals no less than by Presbyterians. As for example, the ConstantinopolitanCan. 7. . Council appoints that reduced Hereticks and Schismaticks must be anointed on the Fore-head, Eyes, Nose, Mouth and Ears. And in the Council of Chal∣cedon Can. 14. . 'tis permitted only of all the Church-men to the Lectors and Can∣tors to Marry. Yea that none of the Clergy after that manner should Marry, was statuted by the Council of Nice.Sozomen Lib. 1. Cap. 23. . And they were also to have separated from their Wives the Church-men, who were in Wedlock already, had they not been restrani'd by the grave admonition and solide reason of Paph∣nutius.Socrates. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. ,—, &c. Now, 'tis true indeed Presbyterians admit not of these Decrees. But dare they say that Knox imbrac'd them? Or, do our present Adversa∣ries themselves receive them? Knox therefore spoke of the Symbols: Our Author introduces him, and gives out as if he had spoken of their Canons, to the end he may deceive the vulgar Reader; for none that look into the Councils can be obnoxious to this his Fraud.
The same conclusion, viz. That Knox supposes the innocency and lawful∣ness of the Episcopal Office, he would deduce from Knox's following words. You may in a peaceable manner, without Sedition, withhold the fruits and profits which your false Bishops and Clergy most unjustly receive of you, untill such time as they shall faithfully do their Charge and Duties, which is to preach unto you Christ Jesus truly; rightly to mi∣nister the Sacraments according to his Institution; and so to watch for your Souls as is commanded by Christ &c. But might not Knox, had he been there, giv'n the like admonition to the Romans concerning their Bishop and Clergy? should he thereby have suppos'd the Lawfulness and Innocency of the Papacy and Power the Romanists gave to the Pope. Secondly, Does not Knox admonish the People concerning the rest of the Clergy wherein there was comprehended the Abbots, Priors, and all the rest of the Romish rout, no less then concerning the Bishops? Did therefore Knox suppose the Innocency and Lawfulness of all these Offices? Thirdly, Knox utterly baffles all our Author's Sophistry, and sufficient∣ly preserves himself from his abuses and depravations, while he places the Office of all true Bishops in truly preaching of Christ Jesus, rightly mini∣string the Sacraments and watching for Souls: Which I hope is equally the Office and Duty of all Christ's Ministers. So true is it, we observ'd from Beza's Letter, that Knox look'd on all Lordly Diocesan Prelats as false Bishops. And all they pretend to, beside what is common to eve∣ry Pastor under whatsoever Name or Profession they go, as unwarrant∣able and unjust. But (saith our Author) Knox's great Work in his Admonition to the Professors of England, was to enumerat at the Causes, which in God's righ∣teous Judgement brought Queen Maries Persecution on them: But he quite forgot to name the Sin of Prelacy as one; Ergo &c. And did he enumerat and reckon up all things he judg'd to be Errors or Sins wherefore God was pleading with the English, and had sent among them that Persecution? The truth is the main design of that Admoniti∣on is not to give an accurat enumeration of the Causes of the Persecuti∣on, but to give comfort to the Faithfull under it. But abstracting what Knox thought to be the Causes of that Persecution, and what not, our Au∣thor must sustain that Knox reckon'd up whatsoever he judg'd to be Sins
and Abuses in that Church, otherwise he does nothing. But dare he say, that Knox there did so? Spoke he ever a word of the Tippet, Corner-cap, and Surplice, there being Badges of Idolaters, and Marks of the odious Beast? Hath he one syllable of Christmas, Feasts and such holy Days,Spotsw. Hist. 153. 174. which he also judged superstitious and sinfull? Or of the Faults of their Service-book about which, as all Men know, fell out the Controversie at Francfort? or the depriving Ministers of Power to separate the Lepers from the whole? at which our Author grants Knox to have been offen∣ded. But Knox calls Cranmer that reverend Father in God; Ergo. Bellè. As if forsooth Knox might not use a Phrase of the common stile of the times, but he must be presently concluded a propugner of the Hierar∣chy. Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 143. Was not at the Assembly in Edinburgh March 1570. where∣of John Knox was a Member, one of the Heads of Adam Bishop of Ork∣nay's Accusation, which by the Assembly he was desir'd to redress, that he stileth himself with Roman Titles, as Reverend Father in God, which pertaineth to no Ministers of Christ Jesus, nor is giv'n them in Scriptures? John Knox (continues our Author) said, the false Religion of Maho∣met is more ancient than Papistry, yea Mahomet had established his Alcoran before any Pope of Rome was crown'd with a triple Crown &c. Can any Man think (subjoins our Author) John Knox was so very unlearn'd as to imagine Episcopacy was not much Older than Mahomet? Or knowing it to be Older, that yet he could have been so ridiculous, as to have thought it a relict of Popery, which he himself affirm'd to be Younger than Mahometism? But, was Knox so very unlearn'd, as not to know, that divers Popish Errors and Dotages had generally ob∣tain'd and got good footing before the time of Mahomet? Do not these who know any thing, know so much? Have we not heard how he re∣jected, as unwarrantable and unlawfull, Christmas, Feasts, and such holy Days? Will our Author acknowledge they obtain'd not before the rise of Mahomet, or the Pope's triple Mitre? I think he will not. Have we not seen how, good space before these times, other Innovations as unction of Poenitents, and Caelibacy of Church-men were coming in fashi∣on, and countenanc'd by the most famous Councils. Knox had been unlearn'd indeed, if he had not known so much; he spoke therefore on∣ly
of the maturity and more open appearance of the Man of Sin, and as he expresses, of his coming to his triple Crown; and meant not at all that before Mahomet's time, no Popish Doctrines were generally broach'd and imbrac'd: yet so our Author (otherwise he's quite beside his purpose) makes him to speak; then which nothing more false and injurious to Mr. Knox, can be express'd. Hitherto, we have been intertain'd with Sophistry so silly, and Pa∣ralogisms so palpable, that 'twere unjustice done to this Gentle-man's Intellectuals, not to believe that he sufficiently discern'd the Fallacies. But he promiseth to make a mends for the future; as yet, he has only brought up his Rorarios and Velites, but now the case is quite alter'd. Ecce ferunt Troes ferrumque Ignesque Jovemque! § 11. He has yet more to say; yes, more with a Witness! Knox says, in his Exhoatation to England, Let no man be charg'd in preaching of Jesus Christ above that a man may do; I mean that your Bishopricks be so divided that of every one as they are now for the most part, may be ten, and so in every City and great Town, there may be plac'd a godly learn∣ed Man, with so many join'd with him for Preaching and Instruction as shall be thought sufficient for the bounds committed to their Charge. But the Reader, impartially weighing what we have adduced, must yeeld, that 'tis impossible, either from this, or any other place, to make Knox a Prelatist, except we involve him in manifest self-repugnancy, which there is no necessity to do for any thing here said: For tho' Knox, considering how the English were wedded to something of a hierarchick Splendor, had indulged them in a good deal thereof: it had been only a parallel Action to that of his Friend Calvin, whoVide Epist. 206. Coxo & gregalibus suis. tho' suffici∣ently Anti-ceremonial, yeelds, notwithstanding, for a time, and for Peace's sake, to that Nation, some of their Ceremonies which he calls tolerable Fooleries, unprofitable Triffles &c. Yet I have met with none, who on this score has taxed Calvin of Self-contradiction. But this ex abundanti; for they cannot from these Knox's words conclude, that he favoured so much as the least grain of the substance of Prelacy: of each of their Bishopricks he makes ten, which I think will bring his Lord∣ship comparatively consider'd, to a very narrow compass. But to shew that he put a definit number for an indefinit, he gives not only to every City, but to every great Town a Bishop: Now, of Cities and Mercat-towns
in England, which, there, are not inconsiderable, there are odds of 600,Heylin's Cosmography. Page 305. But that none may justly cavill, let's make a large abatement of the number where they may be smaller; and yet, I'm sure, so many remain as there should be ordinary Presbytries in England, providing it were so divided. Moreover, the great End and Work of this Bishop Knox makes to be the preaching of the Gospel, and instructing of the People; of his Dominion and Power over the Clergy not a syllable; yea, he gives not to him alone the Charge of the Flock, 'tis their Charge, the Charge of the rest, no less than the Bishop; they are join'd with him, not his Curats under him: And we have heard him already making the Office of a Bishop nothing else but what is common to all Pastors: And, if his Doctrine and Practice in Scotland may be allow'd as an Explication of his Exhortation to England, this Bishop was subject to the Admonition and Correction of the Presbytry, wherein he was Bishop. Nothing therefore can necessarily be drawn from Knox's words, ex∣cept that this Bishop was to have (if Temporary or continued, I dis∣pute not, for it touches not the present Question) a meer presidency of Order or Moderator-ship; nothing of Dominion or Power to Knox's Bishop. Nothing therefore of imparity amongst Pastors can from the words in hand with any good consequence be deduced. Lastly, whatever 'twas, it appears clear from these words, that he al∣low'd this only for a time, during the rarity of Preachers. § 12. But hear somewhat more of the same Exhortation. Touch∣ing the Reformation of Religion (saith hePage 108. Et sequentibus.) ye must at once so purge and expell all dregs of Papistry, Superstition and Idolatry, that thou, O England, must judge and hold execrable and accursed, what∣soever God hath not sanctifi'd to thee by his blessed Word, or by the Action of our Master Jesus Christ. The glistering beauty of vain Ce∣remonies, the heaps of things pertaining nothing to Edification, by whomsoever they were invented, justifi'd or maintain'd, ought at once to be removed, and so troden under the obedience of God's Word, that continually this sentence should be present in thy Heart, and ready in thy Mouth, not that which appeareth in thine own Eye shalt thou do &c. Deut. 12.—Let not then the King and his proceedings, whatsoever they be, not agreeable to the Lord's Holy Word, be a
snare to thy Conscience.—Let God's blessed Word alone be the Rule and Line to measure his Majestie's Religion. What it commandeth, let it be obeyed, & what it commandeth not, let that be execrable, because it hath not the sanctification of God's Word, under what Title or Name soever it be published. Halt no longer on both parts. Let not these Voices prevail in your Parliament, This to our Judgement is good and godly, this the People cannot well bear, this repugneth not to God's Word. And, But let his holy and blessed Ordinances by Christ Jesus commanded to his Kirk, be within thy limits and bounds so sure, and established, that if Prince, King, or Emperour would en∣terprize to change or disannull the same, that he be the reputed Ene∣my of God.—Which horrible Crimes if ye will avoid in time com∣ing, then must ye (I mean the Princes, Rulers, and People of the Re∣alm) by solemn Covenant renew the Oath betwixt God and you.— That benefice upon benefice be heaped upon no Man, but that a suffi∣ent Charge with a competent Stipend be assigned to the Work-men; for O how horrible was that confusion that one Man should be permit∣ted to have two, three, four, five, six, or seven Benefices, who scarce∣ly in the year did so often preach; yea, that a Man should have the Charge of them, whose faces he never saw.—For the great Do∣minions and Charge of your proud Prelats (impossible by one Man to be discharged) are no part of Christ's true Ministry, but are the main∣tainance of the Tyranny first invented, and yet retain'd by the Roman Antichrist. That diligent heed be taken, that such to whom the Of∣fice of preaching is committed, discharge and do their Duties: for it is not; nor will not be the chanting nor mummelling over of certain Psalters, the reading of Chapters for matines & evening Song, or of ho∣milies only (be they never so godly) that can feed the Souls of hun∣gry Sheep.—What efficacy the living voice hath above the naked letter which is read, the hungry and thirsty do feel to their comfort. But the other maketh for Mr. Parson's purpose, who, retaining in his hand a number of Benefices, and appointed such in his place as are al∣together destitute of the Gift of Preaching; but let all such Belly-gods be whipp'd out of God's Holy Temple. Let none that be appointed to labour in Christ's Vineyard be intangl'd with Civil Affairs—ex∣cept it be when the Civil Magistratand the Minister of the Word as∣semble together for Execution of Discipline, which is a thing easie to
be done without withdrawing any Person from his Charge, if that which was before express'd be observed: For as touching their yearly coming to Parliament for matters of Religion, it shall be superfluous & vian, if God's true Religion be once so established that after, it never be called in controversie. And as touching Execution of Discipline that must be done in every City and Shire, where the Magistrats and Ministers are join'd together without any respect of Persons. So that the Ministers, albeit they lake the glorious Title of Lords, and the Di∣velish Pomp which before appear'd in proud Prelats, yet must they be so stout, and so bold in God's Cause, that if the King would usurp any o∣ther Authority in God's Religion than becometh a Member in Christ's Body, that first he be admonished according to God's Word &c. Read pray, the rest of this Exhortation, and you shall find that never was light more opposite to darkness, than Knox is to their Ceremonies and Hierarchy, and, in a word, their whole way whatsoever they con∣tend for in opposition to the Church of Scotland. Now suppose, which yet he is far from doing, that Knox allow'd them some umbrage of im∣parity, should they not, notwithstanding, providing they closed with what he saith here and elsewhere, really relinquish what they call the Church-of-England's way, and come over unto us? Yea, were they according to Knox's Exhortation stript of the hope their exorbitant Gain, Ease, and Grandour, &c: they should soon also send packing their Plea for Imparity, this being a meer shrowd, and pretext to cover these Enormities from which Knox so warmly dehorts, and whieh with less colour of modesty can be sustain'd. Add hereto, that seeing Knox so zealously requires express and posi∣tive Warrant in the Word of God for every thing in the Worship, Go∣vernment and Discipline of the Church; and seeing hitherto none hath darred to averr, that he was for the Divine Right of Prelacy, yea even our Author himself adventures not plainly to assert so much, but only labours to make Knox to account it Lawfull and Innocent, and to speak nothing against it, it must undeniably follow, that he was for a Divine Right of Parity. §. 13. Did not Knox (continues our Author) write and bear the Letter sent by the Superintendents, Ministers and Commissioners of the Church with∣in the Realm of Scotland, to their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors in Eng∣land, Anno 1566? Did not he in that same Title of that same Letter acknow∣ledge,
that these Brethren, Bishops and Pastors of England had renounc'd the Roman Antichrist, and professed the Lord Jesus in sincerity? And doth not the Letter all alongst allow of the Episcopal Power and Authority of these Eng∣lish Bishops? But, had never a Protestant to do with an Abbot, Prior, or some other such Popish Officers, whose Offices he did not allow? Might he not therefore speak or write to him in such Terms without which he should either not have been understood, or his Letter, or his Discourse been altogether uneffectual? Altho' then it could be prov'd, they had given Bishops the distinguishing Titles they assume, by no good Logick could it be inferr'd that they accounted the Office, as it is distinguish'd from any other Pastor, Lawfull: which yet can never be prov'd, nor any thing concluded from the Letter, save that they took Bishop and Pastor for synonymous Terms. Moreover, 'twill no more follow, that they count Episcopacy Law∣full, than that they esteem so of the Surplice, Corner-cap and Tippet, which yet in the same Letter, they make the Marks of the odious Beast. They there indeed acknowledge the English to have renounc'd the Ro∣man Antichrist, but so as notwithstanding to have retain'd divers of his Abominations, whereof they name none, but only the most notorious of these which the then present English Controversies gave occasion to mention. The rest of his Discourse on this Head leans on this, that our Super∣intendents were really Diocesan Bishops, of whom more anon. And well may I deny't, were there no more than the Doctrine and Practice of John Knox, who, as our Author grants, compil'd the first Book of Discipline, wherein the Appointment and Duties of Superintendents are set down. §. 14. And indeed that Knox was truly Presbyterian, is so manifest, that untill now, when Men have broke the bonds of all modesty, and abandon'd themselves to averr every thing to be as they would have it, was in neither hand call'd in question, but Enemies no less than Friends, either more indirectly or more plainly acknowledg'd it. This was the Policy (saithHist. Page 174. Spotswood) desired to be ratifi'd. It had been formed by John Knox, partly in imitation of the Reformed Churches of Germany, part∣ly of that which he had seen in Geneva &c. Nothing then from England, which flatly contradicts our Author, who, throw no small part of his Book, pretends to prove that all was taken especially from England.
Now, what was the Government of the reformed Churches of Germany and Geneva, I think few are ignorant. And elsewhere,Hist. Pag. 266. Many good Men (saith Spotswood) have disliked some of Knox's Opinions, as touching the Anthority of Princes, and the Form of Government which he la∣boured to have established in the Church. The Prelat indeed here, as his custom is, delivers the Truth as sparingly, as may be; yet not so, but both Presbyterians can perceive, and Hierarchicks must confess what is wrapt up in this forced Confession: And while he endeavours yet more to obscure it, by impertinently adding, that Knox was alwayes urging the Obedience of Ministers to their Superintendents, he only hereby shews, that he was loath the World should know, that he had been forc'd to Confess that Knox was really a Presbyterian. But their own dearest Friends and Brethren gave Testimony against them. Knox (say theySee L'estrange holy Cheat. Page 31.) was of the Consistorian stamp. These sc. Gilby, Goodman and Whittingham led the dance in England, Knox in Scotland, and at this day our Presbyterians do but write after their Copy, professing the same Principles, pretending the same Scruples, and beyond doubt proposing the same end.Pag. 133. Let me be understood likewise by Presbyterians to intend these of the Scotish Race, to whom we are beholden for our Discipline. That Faction first advanc'd it self by popular Tumult and Rebellion, Knox learned the Trick of it at Geneva, and brought it into Scotland. I forbear to cite others: see in lieu of many Heylin's History of the Presbyterians, who is most ample to this purpose. I only Note how various Methods have been us'd to destroy our Re∣formed Religion: The Papists, when the Divine Light of the Gospel began to break throw their Babilonish Foggs, to other means for extin∣guishing thereof, added that of lying, reproaching and bespattering most odiously our first Reformers, endeavouring to ridicul and expose, together with their Doctrine, their Discipline also, and Government, which they saw like to obtain amongst most of the reformed, and which sometimes in scorn they named after Geneva; but they were open and profess'd Enemies, and so the Net was laid in sight of the Bird: A new Squadron must be added who, under the name of Protestant, may bet∣ter manage the Romish Design, Tuta frequensque Via est per amici fallere nomen. These in the mean while with open mouth proclaim'd this Truth, that Knox, and the rest of our first Reformers in Scotland, were, no less than
Calvin, Beza, and such transmarine Propagators of the Gospel, truly Presbyterian, and, as they scornfully spoke, fiery Zelots of te new holy Genevan Discipline: And on this very account threw upon them all the Iniquity, Aspersion and Infamy their black Art could invent, or the spi∣rit of Lies and Malice suggest. Yet with all good Men and true Prote∣stants they effected nothing, save to bring themselves into just suspicion of being masked Romanists: some of 'em therefore of late, find it there interest to alter their Method, & to forbear somewhat to utter their won∣ted Calumnies, and Malice against the persons of our Reformers (for as for speaking any good of 'em, we shall most rarely find them do it, or if ever, 'tis done with so much coldness and lameness, and with such mixtures of detraction, that they appear content that the Reader believe them not, and resolved to pull back with the one hand, what they were compell'd to give with the other) and in the mean while, averr with an unparallel'd confidence, that these our Reformers were never for the Genevan way, (as they call it) were never for Parity of Pastors or Pres∣byterian Government; that so they may the more securely follow the steps of the former, and vent their splene at both Government and Dis∣cipline, and yet be less obnoxious to suspicion of driving Rome's inter∣est. But 'tis to be hop'd they shall not speed well, seeing herein, they only endeavour to darken the Sun, to contradict what's known and be∣liev'd all Europe-over: And loudly, finally, to give the lie to their own dearest Friends. §. 15. Now to their second Objection, which is from the Superinten∣dents, which, together with whatever else they advance from this Ar∣gument, we, having thus evinc'd that Knox, whose Judgement is con∣fessedly of such moment in the present Case, was truly Anti-prelatick, might without just blame have neglected, it melts quite away, if we re∣member that this practice was only a temporary expedient, during the unsettl'd condition of the Church. The Objection dwindles also to nothing on this account, that tho' our Reformers had design'd the per∣petual use of Superintendents, yet these toto coelo, as they say, differ'd from Diocesan Prelats, so that, notwithstanding hereof, the Govern∣ment was really Presbyterian, or without ought that can be call'd Im∣parity. The former of these our Answers is plainly set down in the first Book of DisciplineHead 5. If the Ministers (say our Reformers) whom
God hath endowed with his singular Graces amongst us should be appointed to se∣veral places there to make their continual residence, that then the greatest part of the Realm should be destitute of all Doctrine: which should not only be the occa∣sion of great murmur, but also be dangerous to the Salvation of many. And therefore we have thought it a thing most expedient at this time, that from the whole number of Godly and learned Men, now presently in this Realme, be Selected ten or twelve (for in so many Provinces we have divided the whole) to whom Charge and Commandment should be given to Plant and Erect Kirks, to set, order, and appoint Ministers, as the former Order prescribes, to the Countries that shall be appointed to their care where none are now. This was but too plain, and therefore is much curtail'd by Spotswood; Hist. Page 158. as our Author, who dwells long on this Objection from Superin¦tendents Pages 143, & sequentes., cannot deny. He therefore takes a new Way, and thus glosses the Passage. If I mistake not (saith he) the true gloss of this Period will amount to no more than this, that because there were then so few Men qualifi'd for the Office of Superintendency, tho' ten or twelve were, by far, too small a number for the whole Kingdom, yet, at that time, they thought it expedient to establish no more: and tho', when the Church should be sufficiently provided with Ministers, it would be highly reasonable, that the Superintendents should have Places appointed them, for their continual residence; yet, in that jun∣cture, 'twas necessary that they should be constantly travelling throw their districts, to Preach, and Plant Churches &c. To establish his gloss he says, the Compilers of the first Book of Discipline, viz. Mr. J. Winrame, John Spotswood, J, Willock, J. Douglas, J. Row and J. Knox, were still of prelatical Principles. But tho' this were as true as 'tis false, the quite contrary would rather follow, viz. that they had resolv'd to change afterward the Superintendents for Diocesan Bishops: To prove they were Prelatists, he says, three of them were Superintendents, beg∣ging the Question, as if Superintendent and Bishop were one and the same. But Douglas died Arch-bishop of St. Andrews. But is't strange that he, who, in favours of a Tulchan Bishoprick, had a stomach able to deject Simoniacal Pactions and durty Bargains, made no bones of sacrifi∣cing his former Principles to his interest? But Spotswood was a con∣stant Enemy to Parity, as appears from his Son's account of him. But his Son says not so much: Moreover, which quite spoils our Author's Cause,
he makesPage 174. without naming any other, John Knox the Author of that Book of Policy, yea he averrsPage 344. that in his Father's Judgement, the Old Policy was undoubtedly the better than the New. John Row de∣fended the lawfulness of Episcopacy at the Conference appointed by the General Assembly 1575. But J. Row, no less then the other Collocutors, in their Report to that Assembly, tho', for the iniquity of the time, not in so many words, yet really condemn'd Prelacy,Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 489. and was also a Mem∣ber of that Assembly, which with one voice—found and declar'd the Office unlawfull in it self.Ibid. Page 595. Et seq. Judge then of his confidence, who yet ad∣ventures hence to conclude that he was a Prelatist. He adds out of Knox, that Superintendents and Overseers were nominated, that all things in the Church might be carried with Order and well, which reason for establishing Superintendents (saith our Author) will continue to hold so long as the Church continues. But let him once prove that Knox speaks of the constant and ordinary Church regimen and guidance, and not of the settling and ordering of a Church little more then in fieri, and as yet not all sufficiently constitute, otherwise we have a meer Paralogism. At the Admission of Spotswood (continues he) John Knox asserted the necessity of Superintendents and Overseers, as well as Ministers the necessity I say, & not the bare expediency in the juncture. The words areKnox Hist. 289. first was made a Ser∣mon, in the which these Heads were handled: first the necessity of Ministers and Superintendents or Overseers &c. We have indeed here the necessity of Superintendents mention'd, but that it arose above an expediency, we do not hence learn: That Knox asserted the necessity of Superintendents as well as Ministers, or an equal necessity of the one and the other, can by no means be inferr'd: Yea, who can, with our Author, believe that tho' any People had aboundance of sufficient and lawfully ordain'd Mini∣sters, yet, in Knox's Judgement, if Superintendents were wanting, such a People could no more be counted a Church, than if they had no Mini∣ster at all? He brings also some Expressions out of the first Book of Discpiline, as, After the Church shall be established, and three years are past, no Man shall be called to the Office of a Superintendent, who hath not two years given a Proof of his faithfull Labours in the Ministry of some Church. Such passages indeed suppose some continuance of Superintendents tho' no perpetuity. For
our Reformers could never think that within three years or thereabout, the Church should be fully established, & few or no Churches to be plan∣ted; unto which full settlement, the forecited passage of the Book of Policy allows the use of Superintendents. This Book of Discipline (saith our Author) supposeth that Superintendents and Colledges were to be of equal continuance, for the Superintendent was still to be at the choosing and installment of Principalls and Rectors &c. But this his Argument, he himself overthrows. The Assembly (saith he) May 27. 1561. addresseth to the Council, that special and certain Provision might be made for the maintainance of the Superintendents, Ministers, Exhorters and Readers &c. Now, who sees not, that this Address speaks after the same manner concerning all these, so that, using our Author's way of arguing, we should inferr, that our Reformers thought the Exhorter (which confessedly was a kind of Function purely temporary) was no less to be perpetual than the Superintendent, yea, or the Minister. And the Assembly at Edinburgh December 25. 1565.Cald. Ms. Hist▪ Vol. 2. Page 5. appointed Mr. Knox to pen a comfortable Letter in their Name to encourage Ministers, Exhorters and Readers to continue in their Vocation &c. From these and the like Acts he may as well conclude the equal duration of Exhorters and Ministers, as he inferrs from the Book of Policy, the equal duration of Superinten∣dents and Colledges. He would next prove, from the account of the Election and Admissi∣on of Superintendents, prefix'd to the old Psalms, that, according to our Reformers, this was an Office distinct from that of other Pastors, of Divine In∣stitution, and so perpetual. The Order and Form (saith he) for admitting a Superintendent and a Minister, was all one, and there was nothing in it im∣porting the one Office to be temporary, more than the other. But therefore, there's nothing elsewhere importing so much, is a clear non sequitur. In the mean while, from what he grants, 'tis plain that the Superintendent wanted the very specific difference of a Diocesan Bishop, wherefore tho' they us'd this Phrase, The Office to which God call'd him, and this Questi∣on to the People, Will ye not acknowledge this your Brother for the Minister of Christ Jesus? your Overseer and Pastor? Will ye not maintain and comfort him—against all such as wickedly would rebell against God and his Holy Or∣dinance. And that Petition, Send unto this our Brother, whom, in thy name, we have charged with the chief care of thy Church within the bounds of
L. &c. They can thereby mean no other Office, no other Ordinance of God, and, for kind, no other Charge, than what's giv'n to every par∣ticular Pastor. For we find mention'd the chief2 Cor. 11. 5. of the Apostles in Labour viz and Care, who yet were all equal. Neither is it strange that they thus set apart him who was, for the time, found needfull in these dark times and places, to plant and erect Churches, preach perpe∣tually where there were none, and in a word, in several things compleat∣ly to imitate the ancient Evangelist. Thus Paul and Barnabas were se∣parated with a solemnity of Fasting, Prayer and Imposition of Hands Acts 13. 3. compared with 14. 26. And yet the Work or Office for which they were separated, was neither new nor perpetual. §. 17. Having overthrown the Reasons of his Gloss, it must yeeld to the Text, expresly telling us, they were erected only for that time, and that for the paucity of Ministers endowed with singular Graces. But this reason (says he) is nought. For suppose we 20, 30, 40 Men in the Kingdom qualifi'd for the Office of the Ministry; could not these have divided the Kingdom into a proportionable number of large Parishes? And, still, as more Men turn'd qualifi'd, could they not have lessen'd these greater Parishes? But he with whom our ReformersSee his Pages 242. & sequentes. were all most contemptible Idiots, and more especially in Church-policy, needs not wonder tho' they had fall'n into a much greater Solecism. But he forgets, that many in these most dark times were made Ministers, who yet needed the Assistance and Di∣rection of the better qualifi'd for a while in Church-policy, and matters of such importance, till they should be able to go hand in hand with them, and that the main end of Superintendents was the perpetual Tra∣velling, Preaching and Instructing where there were no Pastors and plan∣ting of Churches. As well (continues he) as our Presbyterian Brethren now unite Presbytries. A strange mistake, as if, where Presbytries are u∣nited, any Minister took for his proper Charge a multitude of Parishes. He here insinuats, that in the Superintendents there was established a Prelacy: But the present Question is only about the sentiments of our Reform∣ers: and that they never thought the use of Superintendents croffed the Doctrine of Parity, is most clear, were there no more, from their using Superintendent-commissioners, even after they had declar'd Episcopa∣cy unlawfull in it self. But all this their jangle is the fruit of meer pre∣judice
or worse, for none near these times look'd on Superintendency as perpetual. Not the Court Party, seeing they endeavour'd to change Superintendents for Tulchan Bishops: not the rest of the Church, who, as the necessity of them decreased, suffer'd them to wear out. And after that, in an unanimous Assembly, they had ordain'd that the whole Church should be divided in a competent number of Presbytries, declar'd that Superintendents were no longer expedient. And good ground had they, even from that very Book of Policy so to do: for, if the whole tenor of that Head of Superintendents, appointing them almost con∣stantly to Travel, to Preach thrice a week at least, and beside that to ex∣amine the Life &c. of the Ministers, the Orders of the Kirks, the man∣ners of the People, care how the Poor be provided, how the Youth be instructed, admonish, where it's needfull, by good Counsel, compose Differences, note and delate to the Kirk hainous Crimes, and all this, because of the paucity of qualifi'd Ministers; evidently proclaims not, that this Superintendent was a kind of Evangelist, expedient only at that juncture of the re-entry of the Gospel into Scotland, I appeal to the can∣did Judgement of the impartial. Moreover, if 'twere otherwise, why should they not as punctually have described his Duties after the time of his perpetual Travels, his Preaching thrice a week, and other such vast Labours were ended (for he grants these were to indure but for a time) after which he insinuats, that the Superintendents were to remain quiet in their chief Towns, but no word in all the account we have of them of such distinctions of times, of such perpetual rest, not a word therefore of their perpetuity. Lastly; which he wisely, i. e. sutably to his purpose, omitted, for, like the Council ask'd at Abel, it ends the matter; see this Head of Superinten∣dents. Because (say they) we have appointed a larger Stipend to them that shall be Superintendents, than to the rest of the Ministers, we have thought good to signifie to your Honours such Reasons as moved us to make difference betwixt Preachers at this time. Now, pray, may not he that runs, read here that, had it not been for some forcing Circumstances and Exigencies of the then present time, they had made no difference at all between one Minister and another. And then after a few lines they laid down their Reasons in the very words, the sense whereof is now under Debate; If the Ministers &c. §. 18. In the mean while, we need not be much concern'd whether
these Superintendents were to be temporary or perpetual, there being no∣thing therein that made any real difference between the Church-govern∣ment which was then, and that which is now. And indeed, these vast Tra∣vels and Pains in preaching thrice a week &c. are sure enough Tokens that the Superintendent could not be much distinguish'd from an ordinary Pastor, save in these extraordinary Labours, and was far from the Epis∣copal Eminency, and Grandour, seeing he was so far from the Episco∣pal ease and idleness, without which the former but rarely obtains. This, and other such Proofs of the vast difference between the Super∣intendents and their Diocesans, and of the likeness between the Govern∣ment under the Reformers and that which is now, our Author slides o∣ver with rallry saying, it may be as well told them, that Bishops wore black Hats and silk, Superintendents blew Bonets and tartan; as if most constant and hard labour in the Gospel, were no more valuable for distinguishing one Minister from another, than highland Plydes and blew Bonnets. He meets you with the like Drollery, if you mind him, that the Superin∣tendents had no Metrapolitan and Episcopal Consecration or Ordinati∣on, but it's risus sardonius. And his Questions, (What is this to Parity or Imparity amongst the Governours of the Church? Do these differences distinguish between Bishops and Superintendents as to preheminence of Power?) flow from deep dissimulation of the mortal Wound giv'n to his Cause, seeing with∣out Episcopal Ordination, which was never requir'd to a Superinten∣dent (For Knox, as for example, who with our Author was only a Presbyter, ordain'd or admitted, as they then spoke, Spotswood Super∣intendent) there can be no Episcopal Power, no, not so much as the very essentials of a Bishop. These Superintendents were also without any Civil Places, power or emoluments that way, which make up the far greater part of the Episcopal greatness, and still subject and account∣able to the General Assemblies. And there was reason for it (saith our Author) supposing that General As∣semblies as then constituted, were sit to be supream Judicatories of the National Church, For there was no reason that Superintendents should have been Popes. Then surely either were our Prelats, Popes, or most vehemently covet∣ted a papal Power, seeing above all things they fear'd, abhorr'd and stu∣di'd the ruine of these our General Assemblies. And no wonder if they did so, and that our Author intimats his dislike of these our Assemblies. For if this one thing, viz. the subjection of the Superintendents to these
Assemblies, as they were then constituted, be duely weigh'd, it's fair to et them on the very same levell with their Brethren. For, give him never so great a Power in the Province where he superintended, and let him use it as he pleased, yet neither can the Imparity be counted con∣siderable, not the harm he could do very hurtfull, for within half a year at most (for there was a General Assembly twice, at least, every year) they had a prospect of a General Assembly to right their wrong, where∣in every Pastor was to have no less Power than any Superintendent, and no less capable to sit judge and censure the Superintendent, than the Superintendent was on the other hand, to exerce the like Power over him; yea, any Minister in the Assembly, & such sometimes as were none, was as fair to be chosen Moderator as any Superintendent. By the fre∣quency of these Assemblies, it came to pass, that few or no matters of importance were determin'd in the inferiour Synods, but came thither for their final Decision. Wherefore, if we narrowly look on these times, we shall find that the Superintendents were rather appointed as Observers and Delators of Matters to the Assembly, than any proper Judges thereof, save when a special command was giv'n him to cognosce on such and such particular Matters. He was frequently also charged with execution of the Assemblies Determinations, all which was com∣mon to him with other Commissioners to whom the Assembly gave the like Charge, and sent them not rarely to these very Provinces where there were Superintendents with equal Power and Authority to that of the Superintendent. Sometimes they ordain'd Causes to be handled by the Superintendent with the assistance of these Commissioners, some∣times by the Commissioner with the assistance of the Superintendents, which Commissioners were sometimes Ministers of another Province, and sometimes of that Province wherein was the Superintendent, with whom they were join'd with equal Power & Authority. From all which 'tis evident, how much they are taken with the humor of cavilling, who dare to ascribe to the Superintendents any real Superiority or Power over other Pastors, or any thing repugnant to a compleat Parity. But there is yet more: even in his own Synod, he could do nothing contrary to the Majority, for he was to act nothing without the Synods Consent, neither could he impede ought done by the Majority, for he had no negative vote.See 1. Book of Discipline. Head 5. Of the Election of Superintendents. Yea, he was made subject to the Tryal and
Censures of the Synod of the very province where he superintended. And here our Author is compell'd to acknowledge that there was a con∣siderable difference between Superintendents and Bishops: and indeed 'twas considerable with a witness, and so considerable that it really sets them on even ground with each Pastor of the word. He adds, that this was a great wrong, and error in the Constitution; and on this ocasion has a long invectivepag. 160, et sequentib. against our Reformers, & in speciall Knox, counting them Children, Idiots, Ungovernable, and of bad Principles, and spares not to flegg at all Scots men or Scotch mettal, as he speaks. But this is but a kicking against the pricks. He knows all this helps him nothing, nor is to the present Question, which is not de jure but de facto, what our Re∣formers freely and joyntly did? Not, on what grounds they did so? He next retorts, that according to the book of Discipline, the Elders are allow'd to admonish, correct, and, with the consent of the Church and Super∣intendent, depose their Minister. But, First, tho our Reformers had spoken just alike of the Elders and Ministers as they did of the Synod and Superintendent, their words will not bear the like inference: the power they give to the Elders could certainly be a spurr to the Ministers, and yet they might be sure the few Elders of one parish would never make so bold with their Minister, as the whole Synod might with their Superintendent. Secondly, There is no such allowance giv'n to the Elders concerning their Minister as to the Synod over their Superintendent: the former much act only with the consent of the Kirk and Superintendent, but no∣thing of this injoyn'd to the latter. Yea our Author himself will have the power of Deposition to be a prerogative of the Superintendent, and no doubt he or the Commissioner did, in the Churches name, execute her sentence. To Depose therefore here, and that with allowance of the whole context of that 8 head of Discipline, which he cites, is no∣thing else than to delate to the Church, and Superintendent the crimes of the Minister, and in their own sphere assist them in that action. He adds, he hath no where found that de facto the Superintendent was judged by his own Synod. And it may be so: for litle do we find of any thing was then done by provincial synods, every thing of moment being left to the General Assemblies, which were then most frequent. Such a Con∣stitution (adds he) inferrs no such thing as Parity among Church-Offices
Those who maintain that the King is inferior to his Subjects in their Collection, are not yet so extravagant as to say, he is not Superior to every one of them in their Distribution. But where Superiors or Equalls can be gotten, the Men of this Principle will freely yeeld, that none, who are Inferiours in the Distribution ought to judge the Actions of their Superiours, providing other Judges can be had, who, in this Case cann't, there being but one King only in a Kingdom: Hence they, believing that none may live lawless, think the King's Actions are cognoscible by these who are his Inferiours, but altering their capacity in the Collection. But is it so in the Case of the Superintendent, whereof there were severals, & not one only, as there is one commonly King in a Kingdom? Seeing then he was to be judged by the Synod, notwithstanding, that there were o∣ther Superintendents in the Church; 'tis evident, they counted every Brother in the Ministry his equal. §. 19. But the Superintendents (saith our AuthorPage 120.) had a stock of prerogatives above other Pastors. But be it so: yet notwithstanding here∣of, if we suppose, which I trust at the narrowest search shall appear, the truth of what we have now adduc'd, and the self consistency of the act∣ings of our Reformers, whom he would fain set at variance with them∣selves, whatsoever Prerogatives he has really brought, can never prove that the Superintendent had any Dominion over other Pastors, or that they acted not in a true and real Parity; so that, from what is now said, these his pretended Disparities are prevented and remov'd. For ex∣ample, he tells us, that Superintendents had a larger district, were no∣minated by the Council, elected by the Nobility and Gentry; 'twas not so with the Paroch Ministers. But the Commissioners had no less districts, and were appointed by the General Assembly, which I'm sure is of no less weight in the case than the Councils Nomination, even tho' the Gentlemens Election be added thereto, and yet, who in his Wit will take him for any other Officer than is every Parish-minister, or fall in∣to the rovery of our Author, whoPage 37. calls these Commissioners tem∣porary Bishops. Paroch-ministers, by the first Book of Discipline head 8, were deposeable by the Superintendent, and the Elders of their Parishes. The Superintendent was to be Judged by the Ministers and Elders of the whole Province. But the fraud is palpable, the words of the Book of Discipline are, that if a Mi∣nister
be worthy of Deposition, the Elders of his Parish may, with consent of the Kirk and Superintendent, depose him. Where you see the Kirk or Minister and Elders of the Province are no less interested in the Deposition of a Minister than in the judging of a Superintendent. He suppress'd there∣fore all mention of the Kirk, which even Spotswood, whom he cites,Pag. 168. expresses: to the end he might make his Reader believe no Minister, save the Superintendent only, had any power in Deposition of Ministers. But privat Ministers (saith he) were to be admitted by their Superinten∣dents, but the Superintendents by the Superintendents next adjacent, and the Su∣perintendents had the Power of Ordination. The first Book of Discipline and several Acts of the Assemblies. But, had only the Superintendents the Power of Ordination? yea, not only was there no plurality of Su∣perintendents present at the Action, but also John Knox, who was no Su∣perintendent, ordain'd or admitted Spotswood Superintendent of L. yea, every particular Minister, when commissionated by the Assembly, had no less Power of Ordination or any other thing whatsoever, than is ei∣ther in the Book of Discipline or any where else giv'n to the Superinten∣dent. Neither might any one particular Minister while he was a Com∣missioner, more than the Superintendent, be translated from one district to another without the Counsel of the whole Church or Assembly; nei∣ther were there meaner Qualifications requisite in any Commissioner. And I think Knox, who was never a Superintendent, was in these not inferiour to any of 'em. But he had a living five times so much as another Minister. But then I'm sure, he had five times as much to do with it, being perpetually to Travell, Preach and Exhort far and wide &c: but, if this Rule had been keep'd, our Bishops had got five times less than any other Minister, for rarely did they any such Duty, either at home or abroad. In the mean while, The Power of Riches, and the baseness of Poverty, maketh not a Bi∣shop either higher or lower.Hieronymus Euagrio. But Superintendents (saith he) were constant Members of General Assem∣blies, had Power to Visit, and to try the like &c. of the Ministers of all the Churches of the Diocess, and were to try those who stood Candidates for the Mini∣stry, had Power of granting Collations on Presentations. But, whatsoever he had of these, belong'd also to every particular Pastor when commissionated by the General Assembly: but, tho' the Superintendent or Commission∣er
is only nam'd in such Cases, as in trial of the Candidats, granting Col∣lations, Deposition of Ministers &c. He is to be understood as the Mo∣derator, and mouth of the Synod where he Superintended, for Exam∣ple, the Assembly in the case of transportation, chargeth the Ministers to obey the Voice and Commandment of their Superintendent, and yet by the very same Act,Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 1. Page. 789. none can be translated without the Consent of the most part of the Elders and Ministers of Kirks conveen'd in the Synodal Assembly; and yet from this very Act, he adventnres to conclude the Canonical Obe∣dience of Pastors to their Superintendents. But, he had Power to nominal Ministers to be Members of the General Assembly. For, Assembly 1562. 'twas ordain'd, that no Minister leave his Flock for coming to the Assembly, except he have Complaints to make, or be complain'd off, or at least, be warn'd thereto by the Superintendent. And the L. Glamis in a Letter to Mr. Beza, saith,Apud Saraviam exam. tract. de Episcopatuum triplici genere. Quest. 2. Pag. 91. Post reformatam Religionem, consuetudine receptum est, ut Episcopi, & ex Ministris, Pastoribus, & Senioribus, tot, quot iidem Episcopi jusserint, unum in lucum conveniant &c. that, after the Refor∣mation it fell out by custom, that the Bishops and so many of the Ministers, Pa∣stors and Elders as the Bishops appointed—came to the General Assem∣bly. But touching what he alledges as said by the L. Glamis, I can find it no where, save in the Works of Saravia; and Beza's Answer to Gla∣mis his second Question, wherein these words are found, neither meets with, nor presupposes any such Clause. But be it that L. Glamis said so, what will they hence infer? he says indeed, that this came to pass af∣ter the Reformation, but how long 'twas after the Reformation, before this was practis'd, he says not. 'Twas (saith he) receiv'd by Custom: by no Decree of the Church then, or Acts of the Assembly. And lastly, he speaks of Bishops, not of Superintendents. And I never find that any about these times gave Superintendents the name of Bishops; and so this makes nothing for our Author's purpose. Wherefore, if ever L. Glamis had any such Expression, whereof I much doubt, in my mind, he mean'd it of the Tulchans, who, for some space after the Leith-convention made some steps toward such a Superiority; otherwise, all the accounts we have of these times, and, in special, the Acts of our Assemblies demon∣strat, that there was no such Power or Priviledge giv'n to any then in Scotland: yea, so much our Author himself presently proves, and over∣turns
this his own Argument by citing another out of the Assembly July 1563, (1568, he should have said)Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Pag. 87. Spots. Pag. 219. viz. Anent the Order hereafter to be used in General Assemblies—They all voted and concluded as follow∣eth, viz. that if the Order already received, pleases not, by reason of the plura∣lity of Voices, it be reformed in this manner. First, that none have place to Vote, except Superintendents, Commissioners appointed for visiting the Kirks, and Ministers brought with them, presented as Persons able to reason, and having knowledge to judge: with the aforenamed shall be joined Commissioners of Burghs and Shires, together with Commissioners of Vniversities. Secondly. Ministers and Commissioners shall be Chosen at the Synodal-convention of the Diocess, by the Consent of the rest of the Mini∣sters and Gentlemen, that shall conveen at the said Synodal-convention &c. From this Act 'tis clear, that the former in 1562. has only been men∣tion'd, never concluded; or, at least, cass'd and repeal'd by some in∣tervenient Assembly, otherways, there had been no place or ground for the Act of 1568. which presupposes, that ev'n these, that were not at all thus Chosen at the Synod, were free to come and Vote at the Assem∣bly. So far was this liberty from being put in the Superintendent or Commissioner's Power. And indeed from this Act, 'tis most evident, and 'tis left on Record also, by the Vindicatour of Philadelphus, that be∣fore the time of this Act, all Ministers who pleased, were free to Vote at the Assemblies, & yet, with our Author, Petrie must be a mixer of lies for saying so much. But Calderwood (saith our Author) leaves out intire∣ly these words, brought with them, i. e. with the Superintendents and Commissioners of Kirks, presented as Persons able to reason, and having know∣ledge to judge, whereby the Power of Superintendents and Commissioners for visiting of Kirks is quite stiffled, and the whole sense of the Act perverted. For what sense is it I pray, to say, that the Ministers were Chosen by Consent of the rest of the Ministers, when you tell not who was to choose, or who they were to whose choice or nomination the rest of the Ministers were to give that Consent, But to stiffle the Power he pleads for to Superintendents was a Work im∣possible, either to Calderwood, or any man else, the very Act it self most irrefragbly shewing, they could have none, save such as is in any meer Moderator of our Synods or Presbytries. For, be it, which yet the Assembly expresses not, that the Superintendents were to nominate Mi∣nisters for the Assembly, yet they could do no more, but only as the Sy∣nod
by their Votes assented or choosed the nominated Persons, whom if the Synod or its major part rejected, these could not go to the Assem∣bly, yet some behov'd to go, and consequently the Superintendent or Commissioner was to make a new Lite, and name again; and if these did not yet please, another Lite, and so on, untill the Synod was satisfi'd, and choosed some Persons or other according to their pleasure, for the Assembly. This much is undeniably contain'd in the Act, and I'm sure, no Moderator of any Synod or Presbytry injoyes any less Power, provid∣ing it deserve the name. Seeing then Brought with them, cannot possi∣bly mean any peculiar Power, I see not wherein Calderwood by ommit∣ting them can be culpable. Neither, can he be accused of nonsense, seing 'tis sufficiently intelligible and plain how these Ministers and Com∣missioners could be chosen by the consent of the rest of his Brethren, the Ministers and Gentle-men, members of the Synod, who, by joynt and mutual consent, chused them after the Superintendent or Commissi∣oners nominating or liting, which, by a fraud too palpable, he con∣founds with Election. And here it's observable in how much torment and perplexity this so clear an Act involves all of 'em. Spotswood, ad∣duc'd it in his latine Pamphlet, but is so soundly chastis'd by the Vindi∣cator of Philadelphus, that our Author finds not a syllable to say in his de∣fence. He pretends also to relate it in his HistoryPage 219., but with an essential Depravation, for he leaves out these words, Ministers and Com∣missirners of Shires shall be chosen at the Synodal Convention of the Diocy, with consent of the rest of the Ministers and Gentlemen that shall conveen at the said Synodal Convention. For, he saw it quite spoil'd his Cause, and really left the Superintendent no Power, but what was equally in any of the rest, and foists into the Text these such Ministers as the Superintendents should chuse in their Diocesan Synods. Neither can our Author be blame∣less in suppressing the following words. Commissioners of Burghs shall be appointed by the Council and Kirk of their own Towns, none shall be admit∣ted without sufficient Commission in write. And least this should turn to perpe∣tual Election of a few and certain Persons, it is concluded, Ministers and o∣ther Commissioners be changed from Assembly to Assembly. Whereby ap∣pears the Churches great care, that neither Superintendent nor any other might have ought like an Episcopal Power, and that all fit Persons might have equal priviledge of Voting at the Assemblies. There yet
remain many of his pretended Disparities, but, are no more significative of eminency or superiour Office, no less communicable to the rest of the Ministers when Commissioners than were the former, as will be evident to any, who reads the Acts of the Assemblies, among which, he reckons the Superintendent's modifying to Ministers their Stipends, as if, because Judas had the Bagg, and bare what was put therein, he had been Bishop over the rest of the Apostles. In the mean while, the Superintendents could do nothing of this, but only as Moderator of the provincial Synod. Another Deduction of no better metall is,Pages 138, 139. that the Laird of Dun, Superintendent of Angus, not as such, but by vertue of a particular Com∣mission giv'n by the Assembly to him and others join'd with him, depos∣ed a Regent of Aberdeen, a place intirely without the bounds of his Su∣perintendency; therefore Superintendents as such, had a Power Para∣mount and Episcopal. And was not such an arguer a man of sense? I pass the rest of his thirty Disparities not without admiration, that such a fertile brain could not invent one other, for one and thirty used to car∣ry the Game. Add to all this, that tho' some that had been Popish Bishops in Scot∣land and imbrac'd the Gospel, as Mr. Gordon of Galloway a man of no con∣temptible Gifts, were by our Reformers allow'd, without any new Ad∣mission, to dispence the Word aud Sacraments; yet, they were never allow'd to exercise what they counted their Episcopal Function, or look∣ed on as Bishops of these Dioceses: yea Mr. Gordon, tho' he earnestly sought for it, could never be admitted to Superintend in Galloway, which is a clear Demonstration, that our Reformers looked on the Episcopal preheminence as a meer Popish Corruption, otherways, why did not Mr. Gordon, verbi causâ, remain in the Power and Character he had en∣joyed while Romanist. It's most clear also from all the accounts we have of the Tulchan Bi∣shops, that all men of all parties look'd on a Bishop, as a thing altogether diverse from a Superintendent. §. 20. And now at length hear him yeelding the whole Plea,Pages 167, 168. There was (saith he) a Principle had, then, got too much footing among some Protestant Divines, viz. That the best way to reform a Church, was, to recede as far from the Papists as they could; to have nothing in common with them, but the essentials; the necessary and indispensable Articles and Parts of Christian
Religion; whatever was, in its Nature indifferent, and not positively and expres∣ly commanded in the Scriptures, if it was in fashion in the Popish Churches, was therefore to be laid aside, and avoided as a Corruption; as having been abused, and made subservient to Superstition and Idolatry. This Principle John Knox was fond of, and maintain'd zealously; and the rest of our reforming Preachers were much acted by his influences. In pursu∣ance of this Principle, therefore, when they compil'd the first Book of Discipline, they would not Reform the old Polity, and purge it of such Corruptions as had crept into it, keeping still by the main draughts and lineaments of it;—But they laid it quite aside, and in stead thereof hammer'd out a new Scheme, keep∣ing at as great a distance from the old one, as they could, and as the essentials of Po∣lity would allow them; establishing no such thing, however, as Parity, as I have fully proven. And no wonder; for as Imparity has, obviously, more of Or∣der, beauty and usefulness in its aspect, so it had never so much as by dreaming, entred their tboughts, that it was a limb of Antichrist, or a relict of Popery. But was not Episcopacy in fashion in the Popish Churches? And, dare he, yea or any mortal say, that ever our Reformers believed it to be an indispensible part of the Christian Religion positively and expresly comman∣ded in the Scriptures: Do not therefore his saying establishing however no such thing as Parity &c and the rest of his Discourse mutually give the lie, and flee in the face of one another. And indeed, he here at once overthrows whatsoever he said on this Subject: and now for ever to si∣lence all reasonable men, and stop them from such desperat adventures as this of our Authors, take the following Argument. Whatsoever our Reformers believed to be without the express and positive Testimony of the Scriptures, that they believed to be a damna∣ble Corruption in Religion, and as such to be avoided. This the major is put beyond scruple, by what we have brought from the first Book of Discipline, Knox, and the Confessions of our Author: Now I subjoin. But they believed, that Episcopacy was altogether without any ex∣press or positive Testimony, yea, or any Warrant or Ground from the Word of God, the Books of the Old and New Testament; Ergo &c. The minor is no less evident from what is already adduc'd: and moreo∣ver, from the latter Helvetian Confession, which was all (save the al∣lowance of the remembrance of some Holy Days, which they expresly disprov'd) approv'd and subscribed by our whole General Assembly at
Edinburgh, December 25. 1566.Cald. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 24. For, in that Confession (mark it, pray, carefully, and by no means forget, that our Church and Re∣formers, who approv'd and subscrib'd this Confession, firmly believ'd that, whatsoever is without the express Commandment of God's Word, is dam∣nable to Man's Salvation.) they sayFol. 52. Data est autem omnibus in Ecclesia Ministris una & aequalis potestas sive functio. Certè ab initio, Episco∣pi vel Presbyteri Ecclesiam communi opera gubernaverunt: nullus alteri se praetulit—Sic legitur secisse in Actis Apostolorum S. Petrus, qui tamen ideo nec aliis fuit praepositus, nec potestate majore caeteris praeditus.—Ideoque nemo jure prohibuerit ad veterem Ec∣clesiae Dei constitutionem redire, & illam prae humana consuetudine recipere. There's giv'n to all Ministers in the Church, one and the same Power or Function: And indeed, in the be∣ginning, Bishops and Presbyters ruled the Church in common, none preferr'd himself to another, or usurped any more honourable Power or Dominion to him∣self over his fellow Bishops. But according to the words of the Lord, who will be first among you, let him be your Servant, they persevered in Humility, and helped one another by their mutual Duties, in Defending and Governing the Church. In the meantime for preserving Order, some one of the Ministers, did call the Assembly, and proposed these things that were to be consulted in the Meet∣ing; He did also receive the Opinions of others; and finally, according to his Power, he took care that no confusion should arise, so S. Peter is said to have done in the Acts of the Apostles, who notwithstanding was never set over the rest, nor indu'd with greater power and honour, but the beginning took its rise from Vnity, that the Church might be declared to be one. And having related Hierome's Doctrine of the Idenity of Bishop & Presbyier thus they conclude. Therefore none may lawfully hinder to return to the ancient Con∣stitution of the Church of God, and embrace it before human Custome. Thus far the Authors of that most famous Confession, who both in the Title page, and after the Preface expresly assert, that our Church of Scotland together with the Churches of Poland, Hungary, Geneve, Neocome, Myllhusium, and Wiend approved and subscribed this their Confession. From all which it's easie to gather and perceive, with how black a our first Reformers and whole primitive Church Protestant bran∣ded Prelacy or Imparity amongst Pastors.
Section IX. The Forraign reform'd Churches truly Presbyerian. BUT let's hear the Judgement of the rest of the Reformers, and Re∣form'd transmarine Churches. Gerard, a famous Lutheran divine, Loc. com. Tom. 6. Col. 260. altho', for Orders sake, he admit of some kind of Episcopacy, which really he makes as good as nothing above a Moderator-ship, yet even for that umbrage allows nothing but humane Institution, and will acknowledge no distinction by Divine Right between Bishop and Presbyter. The Papists (saith heCol. 261. Atqui superiorem illam jurisdictionis pote∣statem jure Divino Episcopis competentem Pontificii in eo vel maximè ponunt, quod Episco∣pus possit ordinare Ministros, Presbyteri vero minimè, &c.) especially place that superiour Power of Jurisdi∣ction which they make to agree to Bishops in this, that the Bishops can Ordain Ministers but the Presbyters cannot. And all along this Question he strong∣ly proves that, during the Apostolick age there was no such thing as a distincti∣on between a Bishop and a preaching Presbyter: and enervats all the Argu∣ments that both Romanists and other Prelatists commonly bring to the contrary. But, we need not insist on the Testimonies of particular Men: we have the joint suffrages of the body of Lutheran Divines, Luther himself being the mouth to the rest, in the Articles of SmalcaldApud Osiandrum. E∣pitom. Hist. Eccles. parte. 1. Page 299. Art. Smalkald. de Episcoporum jurisdictio∣ne. Liquet autem confessione omnium, etiam Adversariorum nostrorum, hanc potestatem (E∣vangelium docendi viz. peccata remittendi &c.) communem esse omnibus,—Hic docet Hieronymus, distinctos graedus Episcoporum &c. tantum humana authoritate constitutos es∣se—quia autem jure Divino uullum est discrimen inter Episcopum &c.. It's clear (say they) even from the Confession of our Adversaries, that this Power, to wit of preaching, dispensing the Sacraments, Excommunication and Absolution, is common to all that are set over the Churches, whither they be called Pastors, Presbyters or Bishops: Wherefore Hierome plainly affirms, that there is no difference between Bishop and Presbyter, but that every Pastor was a Bishop.—Here Hierome teaches, that the distinction of degrees be∣tween a Bishop and a Presbyter or Pastor, was only appointed by humane Au∣thority.
And the matter it self (continues Luther and his Associats) de∣clares no less, for, on both Bishop and Presbyter is laid the same Duty and the same Injunction. And only Ordination in after times made the difference between Bishop and Pastor.—And by Divine Right there is no difference between Bishop and Pastor. § 2. As for Calvin, his judgement in this matter was altogether con∣form to his practice, which by the very Adversaries themselves is made the very Patern of Presbytry, for heInstit. 4. Cap. 3. Sect. 8. & alibi. asserts the Idenity of Bishop, Presbyter, Pastor, and Minister: and this Idenity of Bishop and Pres∣byter, he founds on Titus 1. and 5. compared with the 7, as Hierome had done long before him, and Presbyterians do now. And when he de∣scends to after times succeeding these of the Apostles, he tells us,Cap. 4. Neque tamen sic honore & dignitate superior erat Eiscopus ut dominium in collegas haberet sed quas partes habet Consul in Senatu—Atque id ipsum pro temporum necessiate fuisse humano consensu inductum fatentur ipsi veteres. that then the Bishop had no Dominion over his Collegues sc. the Presbyters, but was among them, what the Consul was in the Senat, and his Office was to pro∣pone Matters, enquire the Votes, preside in Admonition, and moderat the Action, and put in Execution what was decreed by the whole Consistory: All which ex∣ceeded little or nothing the Office of a Moderator. And that even this (saith he) was introduced through the necessity of the time by humane con∣sent is acknowledged by the Ancients themselves. But I shall not insist in cit∣ing Calvine nor Beza, who, every where is full sufficiently to our pur∣pose, both of 'em being aboundantly vindicated, and evinc'd to be Presbyterian in a singular tractat by the most judicious Author of Recti∣us Instruendum, from the attempts of one who pretended to be Mathe∣matico-Theologus, but was in reality Sophistico-Micrologus. And were there any doubt concerning these, as indeed there's none, their Practice and that of the Church wherein they liv'd, our very Adversaries being Jud∣ges, sufficiently discuss it, and prove them to be truly Presbyterian: and to them subscribes the stream of transmarine Writers, Systematicks, Controvertists, and Commentators. As for Example, the famous and learn'd MusculusLoc. Com. Page 246. Tertio eosdem esse Presbyte∣ros quosque & Episcopos & Pastores, ex eo patet quod Act. 20. legimus ad hunc modum &c.—unde videas Apostolorum tempore in Ecclesia Christi eosdem fuisse Presbyteros, Pastores & Episcopos. asserts and proves from Acts 20. Philip. 1. and the like Texts, which we now use, that Bishop, Pastor and Presbyter are all one
and the same, and that in one Church there were at one time conjunctly many Bi∣shops. Of the same mind are all the Systematick Divines, yea even Tilen himself while Orthodox. We judge (saith heSyntag. part. alt. Page. 544. Quod ex horum Pastorum seu Presbyter∣rum collegio, unus reliquis esset praepositus & Episcopi cognomento ornatus singulariter ab hu∣mano ortum instituto, nona divino pracepto, existimamus, non solum cum Hieronymo verum etiam cum Lombardo, Gratiano, Card. Cusano & aliis.) not only with Hierome, but also with Lombard, Gratian, Card. Cusan and others, that the preferring one out of the Colledge of Pastors to the rest, and giving him the name of Bishop was a humane Invention. This Author indeed alter'd his mind concerning Church Government when he pelagianiz'd, for then he turns altogether (tho' to his cost) a Hectorer of the Zelots of the Ge∣nevan Discipline. Time would fail me in collecting Testimonies of this kind, seeing, there were ever few, I may say none, save a small hand∣full in Britain, who have not asserted that, during the Apostolick age, there was no such thing, as any distinction between Bishop and Pastor or preaching Presbyter: and that among these there was an intire equali∣ty. To these we may add the Testimonies of the most and famousest of the reformed Churches in their Confessions, whereof we have seen not a few already, while we related the Testimony of the Helvetian Confes∣sion, together with the approbations thereof: no less illustrious and pregnant is the Testimony of the French Consession: We believe (say theyArt. 30. Credimus om∣nes veros Pastores ubicunque locorum collocati fuerint eadem & aequali inter se potestate esse∣praeditos.) that all true Pastors where ever they be, are endu'd with equal and the same power, under that one Head Christ the Chief and Vniver∣sal Bishop. To the same purpose also speaks the Dutch Confession: We believe (say theyCredimus veram hanc Ecclesiam debere regi &c.) that this true Church ought to be governed by that spi∣ritual Policy, so that there be in it Pastors or Ministers that may purely dis∣pense the Word and Sacraments, that there be also Elders and Deacons &c. §. 3. The harmonius and Catholick Testimony of all the reformed Churches are to some like pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides, and therefore, most various and hetrogeneous means are used to render it unserviceable. And amongst other things, we are told, that many forraign Divines and Churches have a great likeing for their Diocesan Way, and Zanchius (say theyPrideaux apud Maresium exam. prim. 4. Questionum Theolog. Pag. 63. pro Calvinistis &c.) counts all its Opposers Schismaticks.
But Maresius answersPage 66. Quamquam non ut dominus &c. that Zanchius never allow'd of a Lord Bi∣shop, but only of such a one who is like a Rector of a Colledge, whose Power I'm sure, is little or nothing above that of a Moderator. Maresius adds Pag 65. Nullum novi Zanchii tractatum de &c. that he can find in no place of Zanchius, the words Prideaux had alledg'd. And lastly, as Maresius tells usPage 66. Profitetur se non posse nostrorum zelum non amare qui ideo illa nomina (Episcoporum & Archi-episcoporum) oderunt &c., Zanchius professes that he cannot but love the zeal of such as hate the names of Bishop and Arch-Bishop, fearing least with these Names the ancient Ambition and Tyranny together with the de∣struction of the Churches should return. Prideaux also alledges that Calvin writing to the King of Poland, advises him to establish Bishops and Arch-bi∣shops. But has the same return from MaresiusPage 67. Nec Calvinus ut somniat doctissimus Episcop. &c., viz. that this is the Bishop's own Dream, and that there is no such thing to be found in Calvin. This dealing is not very laudable. Neither are Means wanting to procure Advocats from Abroad; oneSpanhemius F. con∣tra Vander Waeyen. whereof brings many things either to defend or excuse the Hierarchy, and to shew that it's not ill link'd abroad, and amongst other things saith,Parte speciali. Page 149. that notwithstanding of what is in the Helveti∣an Confession, its Authors condemn not the Liberty of other Churches as they manifest in their Preface, protesting, that in all this Confession they agreed with the Church of England. But this Author cann't be ignorant, that seeing, according to that Confession, Christ gave equal Power to all Pastors, and according to what is alledg'd to be the Judgement of the present Church of England, he did the quite contrary. Their Preface can by no means prove, that they allow of the Sentiments and Practice of the present English Church, except he would have the Preface to con∣tradict the Confession. But all this he says is only to darken an evident Truth; the meaning of the Preface being, that between the Helvetians and the English there was no such fundamental Difference as prohibited mutual Charity one to another which many have given, and may give to these, who, as they judge, retain'd many Errors, tho' not Fundamen∣tal. The same Author,Pages 129, 130, 131. 132, & alibi. objects, that many Churches, and amongst others, that of the Helvetians, have either Bishops over their Pastors, or, which is really the same, Superintendents. But to instance in the Helvetians, they in their Confession saying that, Christ gave a like Power to all Pastors &c.
and therefrom concluding, that none may hinder to return to Christ's primitive Institution, make most apparent that they intended no continuation of any Superiority amongst Pastors, and consequently of no Bistops, or, their equivalent, Superintendents: but all this work he makes, is dicis gratia for the fashion only: for if in Helvetia or else where, there be a∣ny umbrage of Bishops or Superintendents, it's really an Obtrusion and Erastian Usurpation; and this we may learn from himself, freely ac∣knowledging, Nomothesia istic Ecclesiastica penes supremum Magistratum. that the chief legislative Power in the Church matters, is in the hands of the supream Magistrat. Otherways he confesses, thatPag. 131, 132. Haud me equidem fugit &c. the choisest of Writers, and amongst others, Hoornbeck, make the Disci∣pline of the Scots, French, Dutch, and Helvetian Churches to be one and the same. Moreover, he sufficiently answers himself while,Page 130. Sed ut quod est dicam longissi∣mo inter utrosque discrimine. Priorem siquidem mera est ordinis & honoris, null jurisdicti∣onis vel potestatis proprie dictae, praerogativa. he ex∣presly grants, that between the Superintendents or Bishops through Germa∣ny, and these of England, there is an infinit difference, and that these in Ger∣many have only a simple prerogative of Order, but not at all of any Jurisdiction, or any thing that can be properly term'd Power. Thus he. And I'm sure, that any Paeses of an Assembly hath no less Superiority than he here a∣scribes to these transmarine Superintendents or Bishops: and indeed, shortly to give an account of this Author, besides, as we have now seen, he is oblig'd to pull back with the one hand, what he had bestow'd on the Hierarchicks with the other; his whole Discourse leans upon this Supposition, that there is no certain Form of Church Government left by Christ in his Word: on this depend his Glosses upon the passages we produced of the French and Dutch Confessions. Vide inter alia part. spec. a pag. 171 ad pag. 189, where he all along presupposes and incul∣cats, that, tho' according to the Authors of the Confessions, Christ gave equal Power, &c. to all Pastors, yet in their Judgement if the Church will, she may alter this kind of Government, and change that Equality which Christ gave, for an Inequality, and give some Pastors a Power over the rest. Which, if it be not a Contradiction to these Confessions, in stead of an Explication, it looks as like it is one Crow can be like another. For, who can believe, but that if the Authors of these Confessions had believ'd an indifferency of Equality or Inequality of Pastors, they had either intimated so much,
or been altogether silent thereof, neither of which they did, but gave to the World solemnly as the Confession of their Belief, that Christ gave to to all Pastors equal and the same power: and yet, if we believe this In∣terpreter, this that Christ gave may, according to the Authors of that Confession be relinquish'd when Men will, and Inequality, it's quite contrary introduced in the place thereof. Is not this too like the dealing of the Romanists, who, when they are compell'd to acknowledge that the Apostles gave the Cup to the People, yet pretend that they may de∣prive them of what Christ and his Apostles gave them? Divers indeed have said, that Church Government was among the Adiaphora, and things indifferent. But these were more wary then to say (as he would have the Authors of these Confessions to say) that Christ gave equal, and the same Power to all Pastors, yea, such used not to grant that Christ gave either Equality or Inequality of Power, but left all to the Churches management. Moreover, as he does us no dammage, so, I'm sure, he does the present Hierarchicks as little service; for, if this Hypothesis, that no kind of Church Government is juris divini, stand, then the jus divinum of Episco∣pacy is lost, and therefore I'm sure, they shall give him as little thanks as we. 'Tis also observable, that when ever the Authors of these Con∣fessions, or other Divines of their Perswasion said, that Communion with Churches of a different Government was not to be broken, or any thing of that kind; he presently inferrs that they judg'd any other form no less agreeable to the word of God than their own. And here I cann't but take nottice of what I have met with some∣where in M. Claude's historical defence of the Reformation (for, at present, I have not the book) viz. that Diocesan Episcopacy is no less condem∣nable than Pilgrimages, Purgatories, or some such Romish dotages which he there names, and how averse he was from Diocesan Episcopacy, is observed by the Prefacer to the English Translation: and yet, if we be∣lieve some, he gave large Testimonies of his great affection to the Dio∣cesan cause. And this brings to mind another Artifice; for when any Protestant Divines, considering the great Power of Popish Bishops, and vehement∣ly desiring Peace for the free Preaching and Propagation of the Gos∣pel, strain'd their Judgement, and seem'd at any time to do or say some∣what that appear'd to comply with Episcopacy, our Prelatists anone
Infer, that such Divines were great Lovers of their Hierarchy. Thus, for Example, they abuse the Words and Actions of Melancton; but they should remember that sometimes, driving the same Design, some of these Divines seem'd no less to comply with the Papacy it self, as ap∣pear'd at the pressing of the Interim. The same end drove Melancton, when, in a Conference at Ausburg, as Osiander relatesEpitom. Hist. Eccles. Part. 1. Cent. 16. Lib. 2. Cap. 15. Videtur au∣tem Melancton in causa fuisse, ut Episcopis aliquid Jurisdictionis concederetur: speravit e∣nim, si &c., he seem'd to yeeld somewhat of Jurisdiction to Bishops; for be hop'd that, if Jurisdiction were granted them, they would not so much oppose the Gospel. But Philip con∣sider'd not, (continues Osiander) that the Fox may change his hair, not his Temper. MelanctonOsiand. Epit. Hist. Eccles. Cent. 16. Part. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 37. De pontifice autem statuo. Si Evangelium admirteret, posse ei propter Pacem &c. granted also to the Pope, provided he would admit the Gospel, a superiority over other Bishops, founded only on humane right, and yeelded for procuring of the Peace of Christendom. Thus Melancton, through his extream desire of Peace, forc'd his own Judgement, for, with Luther and the rest, he subscribes the Smalkaldick Articles, where∣in, as we have heard, the Scriptural Idenity of Bishop and Presbyter is most clearly asserted. But, what ever they say to perswade us, that these or other such Di∣vines favour them, we are little oblig'd to believe it, for they believe it not themselves: and these of our Adversaries that speak out their mind freely, tell us, that all the transmarine reformed Churches are really Presby∣terian: It were too much I'm sure, to transcribe what D. Heylin says of this, for he freely grants it, and then through a whole large Folio, as such bespatters with the blackest of Railings and Calumnies, every one of the reformed Churches in particular. No less positive is Howell,Fam. Letters. Vol. 3. Page 395. who makes Calvin the first Broacher of the Presbyterian Religion, And a little after, Thus (saith he) Gene∣va Lake swallowed up the Episcopal See, and Church Lands were made secu∣lar, which was the white they levell'd at. This Geneva Bird flew thence io France and hatch'd the Huguenots, which make about the tenth part of that People; it took wing also to Bohemia and Germany high and loe, as the Pala∣tinate, the land of Hesse, and the confederat Provinces of the States of Hol∣land.
Yea BellarmineDe Clericis cap. 14.—et nostris temporibus Lutherani & Calvin∣istae &c., being to write against Presbytry, lays down in the entry as undeniable that 'tis the common doctrine of both Calvinists and Lutherans. §. 5. To these may be added all such as were valiant for the truths of God, and stoutly oppos'd themselves to Antichrist, before Luther, as the Waldenses and Albigenses, of whom Alphonsus de Castrofol. 102. hunc eundem errorem post multos annos ab Inferis suscit arunt Waldenses, dicentes nullum esse inter Sacerdotes discrimen. relates, that they deny'd any difference between Bishop and Presbyter, and herein differ'd no∣thing from Aërius. This same may be learn'd from ThuanHist. part. 1. lib. 5. Quibus respondent, qui hodie in Anglia puriorem doctrinam praese ferunt., who compares them with the English Non-conformists. So far from truth was D M. whenpag. 239. he says, that these only declaimed against the corrupt Manners of the Church of Rome, but never declaim'd against the subordina∣tion of one Priest unto another. This same doctrine held Wicklef and his followers, denying that there is any difference between Bishop and PresbyterAlphonsus de Castro fol 102.. The Walden∣ses and Wicklef were in this, as in the rest of their Articles, follow'd by J. Huss and his Adherents, who also asserted, that there ought to be no difference between Bishop and Presbyter or among PriestsAenaeas Sylvius de Bohemorum origine et gestis cap. 53. dogmata sunt—inter Sacerdotes nullum discrimen esse &c.. Yea so Ca∣tholick and universall hath this doctrine, of the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, still been, that it hath all along, by the Romanists, been just∣ly reck'n'd a prime doctrine of Romes Opposerssee the history of the Council of Trent pages 596, 605, 606, 607.. Nor shall yow readily find one before Luther, for of such I now speak, of Truth's Wit∣nesses who condemn'd not all distinction between Bishop and Presbyter. §. 6. And even in England it self after the Reformation, the famous∣est Bishops and lights of that Church, as Hooper, Latimer, and others, could not, without great difficulty and reluctancy, admitt the exercing of the Episcopal Office, the using of their Priestly vestments &c: to be in any sense lawfull: so far were they from believing a Divine Right of Diocesan Episcopacy. But, as Voëtius observesPolit. Eccles. part. 2. pag. 833. the use of it was excus'd rather than defended. The first, or at least the Standard-bearer among the first, that either in England, or any where else in the reform'd World, had the brow to
assert its Divine Right, appear'd in the latter part of Queen Elizabeths Reign: neither was he a Native of Britain, but a Flemming, I mean Hadrian Saravia once a Pastor in the reform'd Netherlands, but, as Ma∣resius witnessesExam. Theol. Quatuor Quaest. Insignium. Quaest. 1. pag. 68. Sraviam vero suis Belgium orthodoxum non annumerat, utpote &c., reject'd by them, as being an Enemy to both their Church and State. Neither was he better look'd on, as himself ac∣knowledges Epist. dedicat. ad Episcopos Anglicanos praefixâ libris de gradibus Ministrorum, et alibi pluries., by the rest of the reform'd Churches abroad. And I think every true Protestant will yeeld that they had reason so to do, seeing he dares makeDe gradib. Ministrorum cap 24. et alibi. not only Bishops, but also Arch-Bishops, Me∣tropolitans, yea and Patriarchs to be of Divine Right. And over all these he places the Bishop of Rome, as the Supream in Order and Honour. He contends moreover, that one Man may be lawfully enough both a Bishop and a Civil Magistrat, and exerce one of these Offices by himself, and another by his Substitutes.De honore Praesulibus et Presby∣teris debito. cap. 19. The vast Rents of Prelates, the external Pomp of Honours, Titles, and train like that of the greatest secular Nobles, a∣gree well enough with the simplicity of a Gospel-Ministry. They may lawful∣ly enough in their Grandor and multitude of Servants imitat the greatest Earls and Dukes. All this is sufficiently warranted by Christ while he chus'd twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples. If you tell him that Christ riding to Je∣rusalem had no train of Servants, no Noble-men attending him, adorn'd with golden Chains, and riding on trapped Horses, he answers, that Christ did so throw the necessity of that time, least he had been suspected as affect∣ing an earthly Kingdom, and that his want of such Splendor, was the fault of Herod and such Princes as knew him not. This Argument (continues Sara∣via) that they make against the Popish Prelats and ours, is frivolous, for it's deduc'd from the Deeds of the Infidels, and hath no place among Christians. Tho' Cap. 29. Bishops have Bands of arm'd Men to guard 'em, and Noble-men adorn'd with golden Chains constantly to Page and attend them; this ought to offend no Body. And whatsoever he says for covering this Scandal that such su∣perlative Grandour, Pomp and Vanity give to every sober Beholder, his Reader shall find to be nothing else save what's commonly brought to palliat the Offence which the World so justly takes at the Luciferian Pride and Arrogance of the great Antichrist: yea even long after that time, notwithstanding of all the endeavours of Saravia and his Compli∣ces,
so great a Stranger was this Doctrine even there, that T. HollandSpanhem. part. spec. pag. 221. Quisc. Laudum pro gradu dispu∣tantem asserentemque Episcoporum ordinem esse divini ac necessarii juris, publica ignominia notavit., the King's Professor at Oxford branded Laud with publick infamy for asserting the divine right of Episcopacy. Section X. Some of the manifold inconveniences and noxious Quali∣ties of Prelacy briefly mention'd. I Might, in the next place, enlarge on its Concomitants and Qualities: a few whereof I shall only name. One of these was a direfull Spirit of Persecution, which still rag'd during the Prelatical Government, the sad effects whereof, through no small part of this Kingdom, on both Bo∣dies and Consciences of the best part of Protestants therein, and that for their refusal of the very things which many of the Urgers acknow∣ledg'd to be altogether indifferent, are but too well known. §. 2. Another of its Qualities, little better than the former, is their Schismatical Practice and Principles; as for instance, at the last return of Prelats, the Church of Scotland, whatsoever Differences might have been therein, yet was but one, and not Altar against Altar: did they not then become the Authors of a compleat National Schism, while they broke the whole Church into Parties, to the end (only) they might establish such things as many of themselves acknowledg'd to be indiffe∣rent? Again, their re-entry into Scotland was so far from being Legal, that it wanted the very colour of all Order & Law: for no General Assem∣bly of whatsoever kind introduc'd them. Seeing then this Church has, ever since her return from Rome, held General and National Assemblies for her supream Judicatory, and Prelats were extruded by full Natio∣nal Assemblies, they ought, for their re-entry without the like Authori∣ty, to be accounted, by all true Members of the Church of Scotland, manifest Violators of all her Laws and Authority. And while they up∣braid
us with the Crime of Separation, are exactly like these, who, hav∣ing overturn'd all fundamental Laws of a Society, and ruin'd all both Officers and Members cleaving thereto, should moreover reproach them, upon this very account, that they would not subscribe to the o∣verthrow of their fundamental Laws and Constitution. But marvel not tho' they made so wide a Breach here; for they give but too much ground to judge, that they have separated themselves from the Body of the reform'd Churches; as appears, amongst other things, in their Doctrine and Practice of Re-ordaining all who come over unto them from these Churches. Some indeed would perswade us, that they hold this but as a small Ceremony; but yet it's such an one, as, for ought I can learn, they will never quite with, notwithstanding of all the Scan∣dals giv'n or taken thereby. And the most earnest Asserters of Episco∣pacy have their Episcopal Ordination in such esteem, that they account none true Ministers without it; and so look on most of the Reform'd Churches as being without all true Ministers, & consequently without ei∣ther true Preaching or true Sacraments. And is not this too like a Dona∣tistick Schism? And is it strange then that our Church did still, with great∣est care and vigor, tho' on this account only, oppose Prelacy and Pre∣latists, they being generally leaven'd with such dangerous Principles? And here observe that all the Heats and Debates that were in our Church since her Reformation from Popery, owe their Original, either more directly, to Prelacy, while she strove to keep or drive it out of Scot∣land: or more indirectly, while some (if on good ground or otherwise, I determine not) greatly feared that some Persons or Practices would prove introductive thereof; and therefore, against the mind of others, sought to have them laid aside. And thus Prelacy, whither present or absent, hath still been the bane of this Church. And there's little doubt, but that they were so wise, in their Generation, as both to kindle and blow at the fire of any Division that happen'd. §. 3. And, as they give but too evident signs of their separating from the Body of the reform'd Churches, so, in too many things they but too nigh approach the Romanists. Their Government and Hierarchick Scale is one and the same, save one roundle, with that of Rome. All their Arguments they bring, either from Scripture or Antiquity, are learn'd from Bellarmine and such Romanists, and admit no less improvement for the evincing a papal Authority, than the Episcopals have made there∣of
for the establishing of their prelatical Power. The Romanists af∣firm, that the Apostles and Evangelists were Prelats of particular Dio∣cesses, and that a power properly Apostolick still remains in the Church. In these and other such Positions too many of our Episcopal Men are ready to follow them. But leaving the Apostolick times, descend to the subsequent Ages call'd Antiquity, there, they're Pylades and Orestes, mutual Supporters of one another, and have, in arguing from this Fountain so great a resemblace, that you shall scarce know with whither of the two ye are dealing. Neither, as we have already touch'd, in the Topicks they pretend to draw from Reason, as that of Order and the like, is there between them any less Consanguinity. §. 4. The Practice also of our Prelats both former and latter bore no small resemblance to that of the Romanists, while they affected so earn∣estly a secular Grandour, and the sullying the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, with a mass of Superstition and Romish Ceremonies. The affection of too many of that Party to Rome was also visible in their earn∣estness to get and keep a zealous Papist upon the Throne, and in their melancholick and Pannick-fears at any appearance of our Relief from Slavery and imminent danger of Popery. And lastly, in their exces∣sive Joy when any hope of our Delivery seem to have been crush'd and blasted. All this was most legible in their Practice at the appearance of the Duke of Monmouth and the Earl of Argyle, and the failing of their Designs. They were no less gall'd and vex'd at the most noble and happy Design of his present Majesty, praying, in the chief Churches of this Kingdom, that he, might be sunk as a Stone in the mighty Waters. And after his entry that, as his Army came in one way, it might be scatter'd seven ways. §. 5. Add to all this, their either more indirect, or down-right ca∣lumniating and maligning of the reform'd Churches and first Reform∣ers, placing them in the same Category with Papists. Take for in∣stance the frontispicial Lines of Nalson's Collections, Like Bifrons Janus next does court your eye Rome and Geneva in Epitome, They squint two ways in the main Point agree. And indeed this is but their kindest dealing. Neither do they then speak as they think; for their Love and Charity is by many degrees greater toward the Romanists, than to the reform'd Churches. They
will admit none of the latter to a pastoral Office if they refuse Re-Ordi∣nation; but kindly receive a Romish Priest without it. Of the most learn'd and godly Protestant Dissenters from them, they speak most contemptuouslyDr. Pearson. prooem. ad vind. St. Ignat. terming them Arch-schismaticks. But the Jesu∣it Bellarmine, and Baron the Popish grand Legendarie, they with greatest deference call most eminent Cardinals. Yea even in the chief Churches of this Kingdom, they repeated their invectives against our first Refor∣mers and Reformation, and in some Churches thereof, they were not asham'd to say, that our Reformation was Deformation: Knox deserved knocks. On the other hand, not a few of 'em all along shew'd no little warmth of affection to Papists, intitulating them to the same God, and Heaven with themselves, and asserting their neighbourhood and con¦junction to be infinitely more eligible than that of these whom they-call'd Phanaticks, as appears, for instance, in a printed Sermon of Mr Mcqueen. And HeylinHist. of the Presby∣terians. Page 0. says, that the Genevan Discipline was be∣gotten in Rebellion, born in Sedition, and nursed up by Faction. And indeed this Author is an Enemy so open and implacable to all the reform'd Churches, that Strada, Gretser, Becan, Campian, or the like most fiery and venemous Loyolites could scarce, with all their impudent slanders and infernal rage, out-do, yea or equal him. With such stuff most of his Works, and especially his History of the Presbyterians, are wholly cramm'd. Yea, he doubts notHist. Quinquart. Pages 5, 6. to call both Luther and Calvin Ma∣niches, i. e. such as hold two infinite Beings, or two Gods. Others of the Faction, as Dodwell, are ready to pronounce all, who dislike Dio∣cesan Episcopacy, guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. But the World hath now seen, that the most fiery of such Zelots at length threw off the Mask, and profess'd themselves Romanists: as for instance L' Estrange or else, which their own Dr. BurnetPreface to the second Vol. of his Hist of the Reformation. observes of Heylin, one would think they had been secretly set on by these of the Church of Rome. And so, they were, in their profession of Protestancy, hatefull Hypocrites, that they might the more easily bespatter and gore the protestant Religion through the sides of Presbytry. Others of 'em are yet more down-right Atheists, who, if they hear the wrath of God, and Hells torments de∣nounc'd against impenitent Sinners, will tell youHowel. Fam. Lett. Pages 471, 472. that such a Doct∣ctrine
came from a Winter-Preacher, so that if a Schytian or Groenlander, who are habituated to such extream cold, had heard him, they would have thought he preach'd of Paradice. And some call the Doctrine of Com∣munion with God and Faith in Jesus Christ, fine Fables and Stories. Be∣hold the Men who make it their chief Work to adore the Hierarchy, and inveigh against Presbytry: which brings to mind the saying of Tertul∣lian, Apolog. Cap. 5. that Christianity must needs be some excellent thing, seeing only Ne∣ro and such Monsters were its prime Persecuters. Some there are also (as their own EdwardsOf the stile of the Scriptures. Page 34. et seq. relates) even of their Reverend Divines, who turn all the Mosaick History concerning Adam and Eve, the Serpent, Pa∣radice, eating the forbidden Fruit, and all the passages relating to them, in∣to Parable, yea into Ridicule; saying that Moses only so talked in comply∣ance with the blockish, and thick skull'd Israelites, but not a syllable of truth is in all that he saith. This is very strange language (subjoins Edwards) from a Reverend Divine, who thereby destroyes the whole system of Theology, and of Christianity it self. And yet, for such black and hainous Crimes we cann't hear that they undergoe the least degree of Censure. In my Judgement, (saith Edwards) if there be no publick Censure pass'd upon such a daring At∣tempt as this, by a Member of our Church, Athiests will have just ground to laugh at our Discipline. And here in Scotland, all along during their Reign, how closely did they connive at such Irreligion, as also, at all the growth and progress then made by the active Spirit of Popery: and in stead of being providers against such Pests, some of our Prelats at Court prov'd Mediators in their behalf, saying, that there was less to be fear'd from Pa∣pists than from Phanaticks. And in answer to some imputing gross Enor∣mities to the Church of Rome, said, that such things were only to be ascrib'd to the Court of Rome, not to the Church of Rome. Add hereto the great love of not a few of 'em to the Pelagian, Jesuitick or Arminian Doctrines, Hypotheses clean contrary to the belief of all the reform'd Churches; and more especially to that of the Church of Scotland. They pretend notwithstanding, as if the establishing of Prelacy were the debarring of Popery. Episcopacy (sayBurnet's Confer. Page 323. they) was so far from being judg'd a step to it, that the ruine of the Episcopal Authority over Presbyters, and the grant∣ing them exemptions from the jurisdiction of their Ordinary, was the greatest ad∣vance the Roman Bishop ever made in his tyrannical Vsurpation over Churches.
I need not here tell so known a matter, as is that of the exemption of the Re∣gulars, who being subject to their own Superiours and Generals, and by them to the Pope, were sent through the World in swarms; and with great shows of Pi∣ety, Devotion, and Poverty, carried away all the esteem, and following from the secular Clergy; who were indeed become too secular, and these were the Popes Agents and Emissaries, who brought the World to receive the Mark of the Beast, and wonder at her. For before that time, the Popes found more dif∣ficulty to carry on their Pretensions, both from secular Princes and Bishops: but these Regulars being warranted to Preach and Administer the Sacraments with∣out the Bishops licence, or being subject and accountable to him; as they brought the Bishops under great contempt, so they were the Popes chief Confidents in all their treasonable Plots against the Princes of Europe. And when at the Coun∣cil of Trent, the Bishops of Spain being weary of the insolencies of the Regu∣lars, and of the Papal Yoke, design'd to get free from it. The great Mean they proposed, was to get Episcopacy declared to be of Divine Right, which would have struck out both the one and the other. But the Papal Party fore-saw this well, and opposed it with all the Artifice imaginable: and Lainez the Je∣suit, did at large discourse against it; and they carried it so, that it was not per∣mitted to be declared of Divine Right. And by this, judge if it be likely that the Papacy owes its rise to Episcopacy. The emptiness of which discourse is apparent. For, First, The tendency and nature of Prelacy, and the Topicks where∣on they Found it, aiming no less at one Head over all, then at one Pre∣lat over a few Churches, make evident, that he touches not the Argu∣ment in hand, only giving out that some time by one accident or other, the humbling, and depression of the Prelats prov'd the Popes exaltation. Secondly, Strange, I'm sure, and most demonstrative must the Rea∣sons be that make null clear Matters of Fact, or perswade Men that such things have never been; and 'tis undeniable that the Councils and other Caballs, which from time to time rais'd the Pope gradually to his pre∣sent hight, were all consisting of, or manag'd by Bishops; and if any hapen'd to spurn at his rising, the Pope got still far more then a plurali∣ty to crush them: and indeed 'twas impossible the Pope should have risen by any other means, the whole sway of Church Affairs and guidance thereof being then in the hands of Bishops: wherefore if the Pope was rais'd to despotick Soveraignity, whereby he might absolutely dispense of Church Affairs, and trample at pleasure on the fairest mitres, they
only are to be blamed, having themselves advanc'd him to this transcen∣dental Preheminency. Thirdly, Neither are the Bishops less guilty of this the Popes exalta∣tion, upon the account of their profound sloth and negligence: the Author well observes, that they were become too secular, and indeed they were so immers'd in Luxury and Ambition, that providing they might wallow in their Lusts, and obtain from the Pope a Domination over o∣ther Churches, they little valued any thing else. Fourthly, But 'tis yet more admirable how he can alledge, that the Regulars brought the World to receive the Mark of the Beast: as if the Bi∣shops (for this he must intimat or he says nothing) had been innocent; he's too learn'd not to know that gross Papal Darkness had over-spread the World ere ever any such Exemptions were giv'n, or the Regulars distinguished from Seculars. 'Tis true indeed that the swarms of Friers were amongst the most pestiferous Locusts, the World hath been peste∣red withall, but, to lay all or the greatest share of this Guilt of exalting the Pope, on their shoulders, is a shrewd evidence of partiality; nothing being more notour, then that as the Bishops were the main Assistants and Supporters in every Innovation he decreed, so they with the greatest care, rigour and fury press'd them on both Clergy and People. Fifthly, That the wicked fraternities in the several Orders of Regu∣lars, were the Popes Agents in contriving, and sometimes effecting the ruine of Kings and Princes, is but too well known and evident enough; yet that the Prelats were no less guilty, and far more efficacious herein, is no less deniable. Were there no Bishops supporting the Pope in his War against the Emperour Barbarossa? Did not a crew of the same Cat∣tel join him in Dethroning Henry the IV? And at a word, where did e∣ver the Pope make his impresses, but he was strengthn'd by their arm and support. Sixthly, But tho' Episcopacy at the Council of Trent had been declar'd of Divine Right, what great relief had this been, either from the Papal Yoak, or insolencies of the Regulars; it might perhaps for the time have procur'd some more Honour to the Bishops for the Pope's Italians of o∣ther Orders: but might not the Pope notwithstanding, by his bound∣less Authority and Supremacy he pretends over all Bishops, have conti∣nued to gall and oppress their Order, and also send, especially where the negligence of Prelats invited him, his Missionaries through the
World, yea thus the Pope's power paramount had not once been touch'd at that Council, or hurt by such a Declaration. Was his infallibility e∣ver there question'd by the Bishops? Did they at all endeavour the re∣moval of the unsupportable Burdens and Slavery the Church groan'd under? And should it not have been a great benefite to the Church, or diminishing the Pope's power, tho' his Holiness had pleased to declare the Divine Right of their Office? Seventhly, But whatever it was the Bishops aim'd at in the Council of Trent, I'm not much concern'd; only I would gladly know, how from this their Action it follows that Bishops had never been the Men, or E∣piscopacy one of the means whereby the Papacy had been brought into the World; which is the Author's Inference, and is just as one should reason thus: some of Alexander's Macedonian Souldiers, vex'd with his tyranny and insolence, and his preferring of Strangers, attempted his down-throw: (the like may be said of some of the Souldiers of Julius Caesar, Galba, Didius Julianus, Maximinus and others) therefore they had not contributed to the raising and absolute Supremacy of these Prin∣ces. And should not such an one be reckon'd an admirable Logician? And yet this Inference should be far more pardonable than the former; in so much as the thing the Bishops aim'd at against the Papacy, if it can be call'd any thing, came infinitely short of what these Conspirators at∣tempted upon the powers they deem'd unsupportable. And by this, judge if the most earnest efforts of their chiefest Authors make it in the least improbable, that the Papacy owes its rise to Episco∣pacy: and if such pitifull paralogisms proclaim not, that they can real∣ly find nothing wherewith to cover Prelacy from the heavy; but just imputation of being the certain introductive of Popery. §. 6. This odd reasoning of the Doctor minds me of another of his of his Essayes, or Retorsions which is of Kin to this Argumentation. May not one (saith hePage 321.) that quarrells a standing Ministry, argue on the same Grounds, a Ministers Authority over the People, gave the rise to the Authority Bishops pretend over Ministers, and so the Minister will be concluded the first step of the Beast's Throne? But this retorsion, being once handl'd, shall hurt us no more, then what we have already removed; for take a Gospel Ministry unconfounded with a papal Hierarchy, and then there is not the least colour or pretext for any Man's ascribing to it
the first rise of Popery, the parity we plead for among Pastors of Flocks secures a Gospel-Ministry from any force or appearance of reason in any such assault: whereas (on which I'm not now to dwell) the Topicks establishing Prelacy, tend no less to assert a Papacy. But again the be∣lief of a Gospel-Ministry as a thing altogether necessary for the Being of a Church, is so well and so universally rooted in the hearts of all Chri∣stians, that they, compar'd with the rest, have scarce amounted to a handfull who had the holdness to deny it; and so there's little hazard to be fear'd from these few contemptible Objectors: and tho' there seem'd to be, and the Objection should appear never so pungent, yet it could be really of no weight against so necessary and indispensible an Ordinance. Whereas on the other hand, there's so little necessity of Prelacy, that the far greatest and best part of its Abettors, and in these the Author himself (as in due time shall appear) grants, that 'tis no different Order from Presbytry, has no footing in the Word of God, and in a word to the overthrow of his Principles, confounds a Prelat with a parochial Pastor. Another grand, but just prejudice against the Hierarchy, is the loose∣ness and prophanity most frequently cleaving thereto: how prophane and scandalous they and theirs were, during former Prelacy, has already appear'd: of the latter the matter is no less evident; for at such a height & growth during their Government, yea under their wings did propha∣nity, abusing of God's blessed Name, and such gross immoralities arrive, that to abstain from such vices and follow piety, was a Crime well nigh able to make a Man pass for a Whig and Phanatick, and what hazard did enshew these Sir-names, none is ignorant. All this and much more was not only evident to the body of this Kingdom, but was also notic'd a∣broad: and, amongst others, by their Friend R. Coke. Yea his Ma∣jesty, whom Divine Mercy sent for our Relief, well knew't, and accor∣dingly, in his Declaration for Scotland, has, amongst many others, this most memorable Sentence. Although (saith He) the Dissenters have just cause of distrust when they call to mind how some hundreds of their Ministers were driven out of their Churches without either Accusation or Citation: the filling of many of whose Places with Ignorant and Scandalous Persons hath been one great occasion of all those Miseries which that Country for a long time hath groaned under. They may pretend that such Enormities were only accidental to Prelacy, which may fall out under any Government: but none
versant in Church Story is ignorant how much mischief and scandal this Hierarchy hath cast upon Christianity. Let them read Socrates and o∣ther Records of these more ancient times, and they shall find that the Prelats, tho' but beginning to appear, and by far, not so degenerat from the simplicity of the Gospel as afterward by their swelling tympa∣ny, and aspiring to Domination, induc'd the People to commit the most lewd and vile Pranks readily imaginable, to the doolfull scandalizing of Jew and Gentile, and their utter abominating of Christianity it self: as is clear from the miserable Havock, Destruction and Slaughter, the contrary Factions of Bishops in the Plea for the Episcopal See be∣tween Damasus and Vrsinus prompted the People to commit, from the most scandalous Pranks of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, the most un∣humane and barbarous concomitants and consequents of the Deposition of Chrysostome with many other such open Impieties, all caus'd and oc∣casion'd by the Prelatick pride and insolency, which publick and most scandalous Enormities, had the Christian World retain'd the truly Pri∣mitive and Apostolick Parity we plead for, could never have hapned: for had the Superiority, Riches, and Grandour, the very aples of these most unchristian Contentions, been wanting, and had every Pastor been kept at the earnest labour of Teaching, Exhorting, and Catechising a particular Flock or Congregation, with only such a competent Stipend as suffic'd to secure him from the contempt of Poverty, not to feed Lux∣ury, Grandour and such like Vices, there had been no occasion of such lamentable Broyls. This was observ'd by Nazianzen, who himself was Bishop of Constantinople, and therefore he earnestly wish'dOrat. 28. that there had been no primacy of Place, no Prelacy, no Prerogative, no Superiour or Infe∣riour Degrees of Pastors. The marrow of Saravia's AnswerDef. tract. De diversis gradibus Ministrorum Evangelii. Cp. 23. to this most cogent place of Nazianzen, is that he finds no fault with the Order of Degrees themselves but with Men, and with the times wherein the ambition of the Arrians troubl'd the Church. The common and blunt shift of the Ro∣manists whereby to palliat the unlawfullness of their Papacy, and a real and clear contradiction of Nazianzen's plain words. And was not after∣ward the Papal and Prelatical pride, and affectation of secular rule the prime source of the unspeakable Evils that reign'd all along before the Reformation, and yet continue in the Papacy? Is not that Kingdom
where Prelacy is of most account fill'd with the most idle, naughty, and profain Clergy-men that are to be found, at least, in the Protestant World? And how can it be otherwise, seeing things or Offices retain∣ing litle or nothing of what did primitively constitute them, produce quite contrary effects to these design'd by the Authors thereof? But nothing is more plain, than that the simplicity of the Gospel-Ministry is alter'd into a secular Grandour, more by far, resembling the Princes of the Gentiles, than the Apostles of our Meek and Lowly Jesus, who came not to be ministred to, but to Minister. Now the best of things once dege∣nerat become most noxious; what can therefore be expected from such but that they should suit their Government and Policy, change the Spi∣rit of a Gospel-Ministry for that of Pomp and Secularity, grow intirely Carnal, and so become the source of Prophanity in stead of Holiness?
Part II. Wherein the Epistles of Ignatius are more particularly consider'd, and the Plea of the Hierarchicks therefrom, examin'd. Section I. Of the Author and his Work. IT is evident and clear to the more thinking and in∣genuous part of the Christian World, how Rome's Advocats, while they Agent her Cause from the truly Canonical Writings of the Apostles and Pro∣phets, after some few struglings, sorry evasions and feeble resistance, are compell'd to give back, and, in reality, abandon their Posts: but were they permitted to use Apocryphal Writings, which, they say are Ancient enough, and written not long after the Holy Scriptures; were not these also pull'd out of their hands by demonstrating the spuriousness thereof; they should perhaps make a greater appearance, and keep the fields somewhat longer. The same also is the fate of other Hierarchicks pleading the Cause of Episcopacy: for while they manage it from Scripture-grounds, you may perceive them to make so wide and incoherent Deductions, so slender and pitifull Defences, so wild and unbottom'd Distinctions, as loudly
proclaim that, except they procure Auxuliaries from some other where, they must also defert their Cause, and leave the Field to their Adversa∣ries. But let them descend somewhat lower to Ecclesiastick Antiquities, we shall find their confidence stronger: for they then bring a multitude of great Names, as so many arm'd Champions marshell'd in Rank and Order. Among these there be some, wherewith, as with so many E∣lephants, they threaten to make vast lanes among their Adversaries: but there's no great cause of terror; for if they be but boldly confron∣ted we shall then find them either, like these Elephants Ctesias and Dio∣dore fable to have been us'd by their fictitious Semiramis, deceitfull Ima∣ges and hobgoblings to strike a vain fear in their Enemies: or like the African Elephants in Polybius, which, in stead of destroying the ad∣verse Party, frequently turn'd back, dissipated and overthrew these who brought them to the Battel. The greatest of these, and whom they with most confidence produce, is their Epistolick Ignatius, who is to them as one of the Hee-goats and Rams before the Flock, of whom they boast as if nothing should stand before him. It shall not therefore be amiss if (as we promis'd) we look more narrowly into this their bold Assertion, and examine if their Grounds be equal to their Confidence. §. 2. Ignatius, as EusebiusHist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 36. relates, was a Bishop or Pastor of Antioch, and being brought to Rome in the time of Trajan the Emperour, glori∣ously laid down his Life for the Cause of Christianity. He is said to have written in his Journey to Rome, several Epistles, viz. To the Smyr∣neans, to Polycarp, to the Ephesians, to the Magnesians, to the Phila∣delphians, to the Trallians and Romans, all which are either mention'd or cited by Eusebius. There are other Epistles also by Writers of a much later date, ascribed to Ignatius; but in the first seven only do our Adversaries place the weight of their Cause; and therefore with them alone we shall be concerned. §. 3. Of these Epistles in the former Century, first in Latine and then in Greek, appeared at the first but two or three only; afterward they amounted to fifteen, all which they Father'd upon Ignatius: these were greedily hugg'd by the Romanists; and reason they had so to do, most of these Epistles being fraughted with stuff that savour'd of the Ro∣mish Innovations, and proclaim'd them several Centuries posteriour to Ignatius his Age, and accordingly these Editions were scarce born while
they were condemn'd and stigmatiz'd by the most learn'd of the Re∣form'd viz. Calvin, the Magdeburgick Centuriators, and afterwards by Whittaker, Perkins, Scultet, Rivet, and others, as the issue of a quite other Parent than him of whom they boasted. §. 4. Notwithstanding hereof the Advocats for Prelacy, such as Whitgift, Bilson, Dounam, Heylyn, Taylor and the rest of the Party, lean'd on these Epistles as firm propes of their Caufe, giving severals of 'em the Epithets of Learned and Pious without the least exception. Thus, for a long time, were these Epistles condemn'd by many, yet applauded by a few. §. 5. But at length the most learn'd and famous Dr. Vshher lighted on two Latine Manuscripts, much differing from the former Editions, and containing many passages cited by the Ancients, that were wanting in the former. And soon after Isaacus Vossius produc'd a Greek Coppy out of the Duke of Tuscanie's Library, in many things agreeing with Vsher's Manuscripts. These Coppies bred a wonderfull confidence in the minds of the Episcopal Party: after which every one of them gave his loud , and therewith pleas'd themselves, as if the Controver∣sie concerning Prelacy had been already determin'd by a Divine Oracle. But in the mean while, and by this very Action of imbracing and extol∣ling this new Edition, as the only genuine Coppy of Ignatius. They publish'd to the World that they had all along (while in conjunction with Romanists and in opposition to Protestants they so passionatly pro∣pugn'd the former Editions) either been lamentably shallow in their knowledge of Ecclesiastick Antiquity, notwithstanding their great boast thereof, as if all Men beside were Dwerfs herein: or, which is little better, exceedingly partial in favours of their Cause and Interest. How∣ever, maugre all such Impeachments, they alter their Judgements as they see fit, reject what they had but the other day warmly hugg'd, and applaud their new Ignatius. §. 6. Yet also they were their alone herein: for the most learn'd, and these of the reform'd Churches who were most able to give Judge∣ment concerning such Controversies, as Blondel, Salmasius and others continu'd in their former Sentiment, believing that these new Copies did as really ly under just suspicion as the Old. After divers Re-encoun∣ters amongst learn'd Men concerning these Epistles, Dallaeus a learn'd French Minister wrote more largely and directly to evince them spuri∣ous,
but was oppos'd by Dr. Beverige, and D. Pearson who wrote his Vindiciae Ignatianae, a large and laborious Work, to prove that these Epi∣stles were the genuine product of Ignatius, in which his Party triumphed not a little, apprehending that this Matter was decided; so as there was no more Dispute or Opposition to be feared. But 'twas not long till Daill's Defence was undertaken by Monsieur L'arroque another learn'd Pastor of the French Church: and being again oppos'd by Pearson and Beverge, wrote a second time concerning the same Subject. §. 7. But such Arts were us'd as suppress'd and stiffl'd the Work of this learn'd Author: of which Book L'arroque's Son, in his Life, pre∣fix'd to his Adversaria Sacra gives us this account,Typis mandavit Observationes in Ignatianas Pearsonii vindicias nec non in Beverigii Annotationes—cui responsum pains, quodque prae manibus ferme absolutum ha∣bemus, Autor noster, instantibus quibusdam Amicis, alio subito divertit. Sed autem &c. He publish'd his Observations on Pearson's vindiciae Ignatianae, and Beverige's Annotati∣ons, which came to the light by this occasion: John Daille being departed this Life, two great Englishmen who had procur'd to themselves a perpetual Fame, of whom the one lately deceas'd, had the Name of the Bishop of Chester, the other was adorn'd with the Title of Dr. but deserv'd a greater Dignity, explod∣ed what Daille had written concerning Ignatius his Epistles. But L'arroque in favours of his deceas'd Friend, undertook the Patrociny of this Hero; and except Fame be altogether false, has fortunatly defended his Judgement. These Observations were again assaulted by the famous Beverige, to whom our Au∣thor preparing an Answer, which we have by us, almost perfected, thro' the Importunity of some Friends was suddenly turn'd another way. This he did the more willingly, both because he had done enough in favours of his dead Friend, and also that he might make it appear, that seeing while he was yet fresh, he sounded a retreat, he had unwillingly entred the Lists with the English Pro∣testants. Thus he, and who these Friends were, we are inform'd by ano∣ther Author, a Man of the Episcopal Perswasion, and therefore may the better be believ'd in this Matter, viz. Jos. Walker Translator of L'arroque's History of the Eucharist, who, describing the Life of L'arroque, which he prefixes to his Translation, tells us, that at the request of some Persons fa∣vouring Episcopacy, he did not finish this his second Piece. From these Authors it's sufficiently evident, that the issue of this Debate concern∣ing Ignatius his Epistles, was neither advantagious nor honourable to the Favourers of Episcopacy; seeing by such doings they acknowledg'd their Adversary so formidable that, except by powerfull Sollicitations
and charms the Storm were diverted, nothing less than the utter ruine of their Cause was to be feared. Now, by these their dealings so dis∣honest both first and last, judge if such Men don't at once bewray ex∣tream want of candour and diffidence in their Cause. And this much was meet here to be premis'd in favours of many, who may have been um∣bled at the great Name of Ignatius, and yet altogether Strangers to the thoughts of the more learn'd, and ingenuous concerning the Epistles that bear his Name. §. 8. In this Ignatius the Patrons of the Hierarchy wonderfully please themselves, and triumphPearson. Prooem. ad vind. Ignat. Cap. 1. In ea autem tract and a magni pon∣deris merito habita esse Sancti Ignatii Viri Apostolici, & Martyris Autorias, &c. Bur∣net's Conferences. Page 314. as if from thence Prelacy receiv'd a most sufficient support and proof, well nigh infallible, of its divine In∣stitution, and that if these Epistles be his, Presbytrie's undone. For, if we believe them, Ignatius is for  or genuinness of these Epistles a∣bove the smallest suspicion of Forgery, for Antiquity and Vicinity to the Apostles, above possibility of being mistaken: and finally, for clear∣ness in the Episcopal Cause, above doubt or scruple. Now seeing, so far as I know, little or nothing of this Subject is yet in English, and the ears of many who know no other Tongue, are perpetually beaten & deaf∣ned with a mighty noise, as if all the lofty Titles and Honours of Prela∣cy were adopted by a genuine and Apostolick Ignatius; it shall nei∣ther be improfitable nor unacceptable, if with a convenient brevity we ouerthrow the principal Pillars of so proud a Structure; and render the Weapons, in the estimat of our Adversaries so keen and weighty, com∣pleatly unserviceable to their Cause. §. 9. I therefore with no less confidence deny what they so boldly affirm. I deny that the Epistles ascribed to Ignatius, whether of the el∣der or later Editions, are throughly genuine, and so free of Forgeries, that no chaff hath been thrown into, and hudl'd amongst the grains of Wheat that may remain therein. I deny that the Antiquity of the true Ignatius was able to secure him from all Lapses and Mistakes; or that in his time some Churches might not be itching after several No∣velties. I deny finally that he is so clear and positive in the Matter of Episcopacy, as to denude Presbyterians of all rational Defence, should they acquiesce in his Judgement, and herein join with their Adversa∣ries,
who still appeal to Ignatius his Bar. But I shall not rest in Denials, but shall turn them to so many contrary Positions, and demonstrat each of 'em in particular. Section II. The first Hypothesis viz that Ignatius is interpolated. MY first Assertion therefore is that the Epistles ascrib'd to Ignati∣us, whether of the Elder or Later Editions, are not throughly genuine, nor so free of Forgeries, that no Chaff hath been thrown into and hudl'd amongst the grains of Wheat that may remain therein. As the Writings pretended to come nearest in time to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, carry notwithstanding evident Characters of a quite other time and Parent than these whereto they are falsly ascrib'd; so al∣so the Pieces that pretend greatest proximity to these of these New Testa∣ment, afford no less just ground of suspicion. Of this kind are Barna∣bas, Hermas and others, all which are generally either shroudly suspect∣ed as meer Forgeries, or at least as not being without manifest corrup∣tion and interpolation. Yea Clemens Romanus, who, doubtless, is by far the most choice and virgin Monument of Antiquity, has nothwith∣standing fall'n into the like adulterous hands as the story of the Daugh∣ters of Danaus and Dirce there recounted among the Christian Sufferers, makes manifest. And herein Divine Providence is to be ador'd, and extoll'd. For had such Writings as plead for the first place after these of either Old or New Testament, not under-ly'n such impeachments, the great proximity thereof to the Prophetick and Apostolick Writ∣ings, had certainly allur'd many to take these for Canonical; whereas now they serve, in some measure, for a rampier and hedge about the Holy Scriptures: and by the manifest corruption of the Apocryphal Writings, we are taught to distinguish betwixt divine and humane Let∣ters: wherefore it should be a Paradox and a Wonder, had Ignatius e∣scap'd all such infectious Touches. But there's no ground for such ad∣miration.
For, that Ignatius, whither of the Elder or Later Edition, is not throughly genuine, and so free of Forgery and Interpolation, a few Examples shall make evident. §. 2. For in his Epistle to the Smyrneans, he thus discourseth them. &c. All of you follow after the Bishop as Jesus Christ follows the Father, and the Presbytry as the Apostles. Reverence the Deacons as the Commandment of God. Let no Man without the Bishop do any of these things that ought to be done in the Church. Let that Worship or Thanks be accounted lawfull, which is either perform'd by the Bishop himself or permitted by him. Wheresoever the Bishop appears, let there also the Multitude be present; even as where Christ is, there is also the Catholick Church. Without the Bishop it's neither lawfull to Baptize nor Celebrate the Lord's Supper or Love-feasts: but, whatsoever he approves is acceptable to God. And again in his Epistles to Po∣lycarp. &c. Attend to the Bishop as God doth to you; my Soul for such as obey the Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons, and with such let me have my Por∣tion in God. And in his Epistle to the Ephesians. &c. I write not to you as if I were of any account. For altho' I be bound in the Name of Christ, yet I am not perfect in Christ Jesus. For now I begin to learn and speak to you as my Teachers And again in the same Epistle. &c. If I in so short a time have had such familiarity with your Bishop, not Humane I say, but Spiritual, how much more do I pronounce you blessed being join'd together as the Church to Jesus Christ, as Christ to the Father; so that all things are in a harmonis V∣nity. Let none be deceiv'd, whosoever is not within the Altar, is deprived of the Bread of God. For if the Prayers of one or two be of much weight, how much more these put up by the Bishop and the whole Church. Whosoever there∣fore cometh not into the same place, he is proud and hath condemn'd himself; for it's written God resisteth the Proud. Let us make hast therefore not to resist the Bishop, to the end, that we may obey God. And the more silent any Man perceive the Bishop, let him fear him the more: for whomsoever the Lord of the House sends to Govern it, we ought to receive him as him that sends him. Let us manifest that we ought to receive the Bishop as the Lord. And again in the same Epistle, thus. &c. I know who I am. and to whom I write, I'm condemn'd, ye live in Peace, I'm in danger, ye sure; ye are a Passage to these
who are slain in the Lord: The Condisciples of Paul, sanctifi'd, and made Mar∣tyrs, worthy, blessed, under whose footsteps let me be found when I enjoy God. And to the Magnesians &c. Because I was found worthy to see you in your Bishop Damas, and your worthy Presbyters Bassus and Apollonius, and my Fellow servant the Deacon Sotion whom let me enjoy, because he's subject to the Bishop as to the Grace of God, and to the Presbyters as to the Law of Christ. And again, &c. Study to do all things in the Concord of God, the Bishop pre∣siding in the Place of God, the Presbyters in the Place of the Confession of the A∣postles, and my most sweet Deacons having committed to their Charge the Ser∣vice of Christ. And within a few lines. &c. Therefore as the Lord did no∣thing without the Father, being one with him, neither by himself nor by his A∣postles; so do ye nothing without the Bishop and Presbyters. And to the Phi∣ladelphians. &c. So many as belong to God in Christ Jesus, these remain with the Bishop. And in the same Epistle.. &c. I cryed in the midst of the Con∣gregration; I spoke with a loud voice, take heed to the Bishop, the Presby∣try, and the Deacons. Some-body thought that I spoke these things foresee∣ing a Division: but he in whom I am bound bears me witness that I had this knowledge from no Man, bnt the spirit preached, saying, without the Bi∣shop see ye do nothing. And in his Epistle to the Trallesians.. Whom I Salute in fullness, and an Apostolick Character. And again. &c. For when ye are subject to the Bishop, ye seem not to Walk according to Men, but according to Jesus Christ. And in an other place of the same Epistle, &c. And in like manner, let all Men reverence the Deacons as the command of Je∣sus Christ; and the Bishop as Jesus Christ, who is the Son of the Father, and the Presbytry as the Council of God and Senat of the Apostles, without which there is not a Church, and thus I counsel you to esteem of them, for I have got∣ten an Example of your Charity, and retain the same with me, in your Bishop, whose very composition is a great deal of Discipline, and his mansuetude Power, whom I believe the very wicked reverence. And afterward in the same Epi∣stle. . Can I not write unto you Heavenly Things? But I sear that I
should thereby endammage you being but Children, and forgive me, least not be∣ing able to comprehend them, you be strangl'd. For I am not bound in every respect, but can be able to know things Heavenly, the Orders of Angels, their Constitutions, Principalities, things visible and things invisible. And again, &c. Thus shall it be unto you if ye be not Proud, and remain unseparable from God, the Bishop and Apostolick Orders. And again in the same Epistle. &c. Farewell in Christ Jesus, if ye be subject to the Bishop, as to the command of God, and in like manner to the Presbytry. But I'm weary, and did never translate more of any Author with less delight, or pleasure; not because I'm in the least gravell'd by what is here said concerning Bishops, altho' the whole strength, of what the E∣piscopals deduce from Ignatius, be wrapt up in these Passages, yea I'm perswaded, that from these very Places the Hierarchy's wounded un∣der the fifth Rib. But because the most part of what we have quoted, as also no small part of what is behind, is altogether insulfe, putide, and more tasteless than the white of an Egg: and the Reader may easily per∣ceive by these Examples that the Spirit and genius of this Author is quite different from what can be looked for in Ignatius a prime Mar∣tyr of the primitive Church. In all these Epistles 'tis clear as the Noon-sun, that a head-strong Passion, and a furious Zeal of enslaving all Chri∣stians under an illimited and blind Obedience to all Church-men, as so many Romish Holinesses did intirely possess, and reign in the Author of these Epistles. The Apostle indeed sometimes admonishes the Chur∣ches of the Duties and Esteem, Christians should pay to Church-Offi∣cers; but withall uses but rarely to handle that Subject, and with the brevity and modesty that became him, ascribing to them only the Titles of Watch-men, and Labourers, Bishops or Pastors and the like, which best became the simplicity of the Gospel; whereas on the other hand, the pretended Ignatius so far swerves from this humble and Apostolick strain, that none, tho' they search the Writings of the most corrupt A∣ges, shall be able to find any that in exaltation of the Clergy, and de∣pressing and subjecting of the Laity out did him. How secure should Basilides and Martial, two Spanish laps'd Bishops, have been, had their Flocks believed this Ignatian Doctrine, who having consulted Cyprian Tom. 1. Ep. 68. If they might not desert these and chuse new Bishops, were by him resolved
in the affirmative, and admonish'd to chuse other Pastors: but had they be∣liev'd this pretended Ignatius, it had been with them the blackest im∣piety to have separated from their Bishop, or attempted so to do on whatsoever account. The Apostles frequently both to Pastors and Churches inculcat the di∣ligent perusal and understanding of the Holy Scriptures as a special Du∣ty, that by them as a sure Rule all Mens Doctrines and Injunctions (without any exception) may be tryed: but in liew hereof, this their Ignatius has only Mens Persons in admiration, perpetually deafening his Hearers, or at least wearying his Readers with Injunctions of abso∣lute and blind Obedience, as if all and every one of his Bishops Dictats were to be receiv'd without the least Examination, a Priviledge that e∣ven Christ and his Apostles (tho' they might have done it) never as∣sumed to themselues; but still remitted their Hearers to the Scriptures for the tryal thereof: this cann't but in the estimat of all the judicious, be a Fault altogether unworthy of the True Ignatius. I hope that all ho∣nest Men shall give more Charity to this choice Martyr, than to believe that he's guilty of so gross Idolatry (for I can call it no better) and fantastick and impious doting on the person of any Man whatsoever: in which unworthy Work this Author (I will not say Ignatius) spends no smal part of these Epistles. Therefore, altho' the asserting of all there∣in to be genuine, be so far from assisting our Adversaries, that their Cause is, by the very Passages they alledge for its confirmation, mortally woun∣ded; I can never perswade my self, but they have fall'n into the wick∣ed hands of Forgers who, tainted with the common Vice of the Ages subsequent to that of Ignatius, foisted in a great many Passages wherein nothing but the illimited Power of all Church-men is depredicated, and the blind Obedience of the Laity is enjoin'd and commended. I'm confirmed in my sentiment by Ignatius his Epistle to the Romans, who certainly had as truly a Bishop as the Smyrneans, Magnesians, or any other saluted by Ignatius; but of the Roman Bishop or of the Honour and Obedience due to him in all this Epistle we find not a syllable. Certainly had this servile Obedience to the Clergy been such a fundamental Arti∣cle of the Christian Religion, as all along through these other six Epi∣stles he makes it, he had not failed to have inform'd the Romans there∣of, seeing nothing (I believe) can be alledg'd to exime the Romans, more than other Churches, from paying such Honour to their Clergy.
'Tis vain to repone that he was then on his Journey to Rome, and was shortly to see that Church, and might on this account forbear: seeing they may after this manner of arguing prove the whole Epistle spurious, or at least superfluous; this Duty of Obedience to Church-men, if we believe these six Epistles being so necessary a part of the Christian Religi∣on, that 'tis never to be forgotten, but at all times with the greatest zeal and fervency to be inculcated. §. 3. Yet in defence of all these most dangerous Injunctions of his Ignatius, Dr. Pearson saithVind. Ignat. Part. 2. Page 220. That there could be no fitter remedy against Heresies then that the Churches should adhere to the Pastors whom Ignatius knew to be Orthodox. But such an adherence as these Epistles every where command, is so far from being a Remedy against Heresies and Schisms, that, as the sad instance of the Romanists witness, it has been the great∣est Augmentation, and the most deadly humour in all the Disease. But why did he not acquaint the Romans with this Remedy? Did he suspect their Bishop as unsound? Or thought he that every Roman Christian was above danger and infallible? And indeed the scarce paralellable extolling of Church-men through all the former six Epistles, & the per∣petual silence thereof in that to the Romans, loudly proclaim, that either they were write by different Authors, or else, that they have undergone no few Additions and Corruptions, which his Epistle to the Romans had escaped, seeing, I think they will scarce adventure to say that the Epi∣stle to the Romans sometime had in it such Injunctions of Obedience to the Roman Clergy, which by some chance or other were afterward ob∣literate. §. 4. Again, what can we make of that proud boasting in his Epistle to the Trallesians, as if he had been the only Muster-Master to the Angels. But Pearson tells usVind. Ignat. Part. 2 Pages 140, 141. Quasi vero Christiano Viro, & quidem Episcopo, & ab Apostolis edocto nulla su∣percelestium scientia competeret &c. That it's not strange tho' Ignatius a Bishop who had long conversed with the Apostles, could write something concerning Heavenly Things which are so often mention'd by the Apostles: and he stiffly denies, in opposition to Daille, That such knowledge is not giv'n to Mortals; and per∣haps (saith Pearson) we know not well what Ignatius mean'd, when he wrote these things concerning Angels, and yet who will say but that he knew them him∣self? And then he acknowledges that Ignatius discourses of his Know|
not giv'n to any Mortal, seeing for the proof hereof it's enough to re∣pone the words of Elephas, to which of the Saints wilt thou turn thee? Sure∣ly not to Paul, seeing it can never be made evident that he either taught others, or ascribed to himself the knowledge of these Ignatian (or ra∣ther Pseudo-Ignatian) Mysteries. Altho' therefore we know not the meaning of these his words, we shall (I believe) incurr little hazard thereby; and if he knew them himself I shall not debate. Certainly if we judge of the Author by his Work, we shall have little ground to appre∣hend that his Judgement was of the greatest reach, for, remove a very few flowers, this so much celebrated Garden shall be nothing but a den of weeds: neither can better be expected, where any intrude into the things they have not seen, as the Author of this Passage appears to have done; boasting of that wherein neither the Pen-men of the Holy Scriptures, nor the primitive Christians profess'd themselves to be skillfull: for al∣tho' the Ancients acknowledged that there were, or might be such Dig∣nities & Distinctions among Angels, yet who before the Impostour that borrowed the name of the Areopagite, adventured to profess their acquaintance with the particulars thereof? But most of all I admire that he for his purpose alledges Irenaeus, as if the Mysteries of God were no∣thing else but a convertible term with the Politicks or Tacticks of An∣gels. With how much more reason may we understand the Mysteries mention'd by Irenaeus, to be these magnifi'd by the Apostle 1 Tim. 3. 16. which without Controversie are equaly great and proffitable. Lastly, as to Chrysostome, he cites no where, wherfore I cann't so easi∣ly make a judgement concerning him; otherwise 'tseems he may be un∣derstood of a greater measure of knowledge of the Mysteries frequently spoken off by the Apostle. And withall I observe that Dr. Pearson still insinuates and intimates as if Ignatius and other primitive Christians re∣ceiv'd from the Apostles other mysterious Doctrines not to be commit∣ted to writing, different from what is comprehended in the holy Scrip∣tures; wherein, notwithstanding the whole Counsel of God is deli∣vered, which Opinion is much fitter for a Jewish Cabalist or Romish Traditionary than a Protestant Doctor. §. 4. M. Du PinBibl. Patrum. Vol. 1. Page 42. imbraces and only contracts Pearson's Answer saying that the knowledge of the Orders, Offices and Stations of Angels might be affirmed by an ancient Bishop, all Christians knew Heavenly Things: And
Ignatius says nothing of Angels but what had been said by St. Paul. But here∣in he palpably contradicts himself, and affirms what he had before de∣ni'd; forPage 33. to prove the Forgery of these Books that bear the Areopa∣gites name Du Pin gives us this Argument: He (viz. the Author of these Books) distinguishes the several Orders of Angels and observes their difference, things that were unknown to the ancient Writers, and concerning which they were not sollicitous to be informed, as S. Irenaeus assures us, in lib. 2. ch. 55. He opposes also Dr. Pearson, who, as we have heard, deduced from this same Irenaeus a quite contrary Doctrine. §. 5. Thus far I had proceeded secure of any other Controversie concerning this Passage, when I was surpris'd to find Dr. WakeHis genuine Epistles of Apostolick Fathers Page 149. the Englisher of these Epistles make Ignatius, together with his language, change his Doctrine, and speak quite contrary to what he had delivered either in Greek or Latine: for thus he Englishes the now controverted words of Ignatius. For even I my self, altho' I am in bonds, yet am not there∣fore able to understand Heavenly Things, as the description of the Places of the Angels, and the several Companies of them, under their respective Princes, the things visible and invisible, but in these things I am yet a Learner. But this Version is by no means to be imbrac'd. For first the old Greek Copy commonly said to be spurious, uses indeed to add to, and dilate what is comprehended in the New Edition, yet not so as to contradict it; and therefore may serve for an Interpreter, were there any thing dubious herein: but this Old Copy is positive in favours of the received sense, and after an enumeration of the Particulars whereof Ignatius professes the knowledge, concludes all with  when, or altho' I know so much; and thus the Old Copy is understood by all Interpreters, as the Old Latine of Vairlenius which is printed at Antwerp 1566, and by the Author of another Version, or at least an emendation of the Old, print∣ed amongst the Orthodoxographa Patrum at Basile 1569, and by Videlius, and for ought I can learn, by whosoever interpreted or revised these Epi∣stles. Secondly, The Cantabrigian or Vsserian Copy, the Authority whereof is little inferiour to the Florentine Original, is no less positive for us a∣gainst this New Interpreter; For (saith he) I am not bound in every re∣spect, but am able to know Heavenly Things &c. And having enumerated the Particulars, concludes with a praeter hoc beside or notwithstanding of
this: importing that some greater measure of that knowledge was, notwithstanding of the vast measure he had receiv'd, yet to be sought for. Thirdly, All Men in their Disputes and other Discourses about Ignati∣us, have thus understood the Passage now under Debate. If the ascrib∣ing of such knowledge to himself could agree to the genuine Ignatius they disputed much; but that the now disputed Passage really ascribes, and not denies to Ignatius the knowledge of these Heavenly Things, all except this Interpreter unanimously acknowledge. And this certainly was the mind of Isaacus Vossius who, otherways being a zealous Patron of the Florentine Copy, had in his Notes doubtless taken notice of such a common mistake, and observ'd the contrariety between the Cantabrigi∣an and Florentine Editions. And Spanhemius F.Introduct. ad Chron. et Hist. Sac. Pag. 127. always supposes the sense we plead for of these words of Ignatius, and on this ground, notwithstanding what Dr. Pearson had said, shroudly suspects these Epi∣stles as forg'd. And Daille, yea & even Dr. Pearson, his most learn'd and vigilant Adversary, always supposed as uncontrovertible, the sense we now plead for. Fourthly, And reason they had so to do, seeing otherways both sense and the self consistency of this Passage is lost; he had but just now ar∣rogat to himself such a knowledge of Heavenly Things, the very de∣claration whereof should be enough to overwhelm and strangle the Church of the Trallesians, and then as a reason or declaration of his great Knowledge, and to shew how far 'twas out of their reach, advances the Passage now in hand, whereas this Clause concerning his Bands is only introduc'd to shew the consistency between outward Troubles and spiri∣tual Furniture. Excellently therefore and most conform to the Greek, is it rendred in the Cantabrigian Copy, non secundum quodcunque ligatus sum, I am not bound in every respect. But were this New Version admitted, Ignatius, while he ascribes so great a knowledge of Heavenly Things to himself, and presently afterward denies that he knew Heavenly Things, should, in esteem of all disinterested, compleat a Contradiction; where∣as, according to the Cantabrigian and our Version of the Passage, the sense runs natively without the least appearance of any roughness. Lastly, I do not remember that  any where is to be rendred al∣tho', (which is the mind of this Interpreter) I shall not say that foresee∣ing
this Passage if truly translated would prove the dead Flee and make the rest both ill savoured and justly suspected, he willfully perverted it: I should rather charitably think that out of ignorance, a far more par∣donable weakness, he fell into such an Error. §. 6. And now to proceed, I impeach not these Epistles, of their frequent mention of Bishops and their Superiority over Presbyters, as if herein they savoured a Diocesan Prelacy; nay I'm so far from this, that I'm perswaded from the self same places, that according to this Author a Bishop and a parochial Pastor are reciprocated; and therefore the Do∣ctrine of our Adversaries is overthrown by the very places from which they labour to establish it. The Grounds on which I accuse these Epi∣stles are, the Author (not to mention self Contradictions) his affect∣ed Humility, hatefull deifing of all Church-men, most unworthy and parasitick flattering of whomsoever he salutes, and, which is the end of all, his endeavouring to perswade Christians, that an Autocratorick Power is to be ascrib'd, and blind Obedience to be pay'd to all Church∣men, as to so many absolute and unerring Deities. And lastly his au∣dacious boasting of his Knowledge of these things wherewith, for ought we can learn either from Scripture or any Author of Credit, no meer Man hath been hitherto acquainted. And these Grounds, were there no others, may suffice at least to evince the Interpolation of the Epistles. §. 7. And how this came to pass is not hard to conceive if we reflect upon the genius of subsequent Ages; the uncontrolled Power and super∣lative Veneration of Church-men, the special Fore-runner and introdu∣ctive of Antichrist, together with other parts of Superstition, took special rooting in the third and fourth Centuries. Now, as the Church like a choice Garden nourish'd many prime and usefull Plants; she had also most pestilentious and noisome Weeds, Monsters which you can scarcely name, and not the transported with indignation. These, the better to promote such Impieties, Father'd the brats of their own Brains on some choice Dr, by whose warmth they might be cherish'd and sup∣ported. Such Men not only forg'd or (at best) polluted these Epistles, but also attributed more of the like stuff to Ignatius, some whereof are mention'd by Daille and Dr. Pearson, and others omitted by them, are remembred by Socrates,Lib. 6. Cap. 8. , &c. who tells us that the beginning of the Anti∣phones
was reported to have come from Ignatius, which they said he had re∣vealed to him by Queers of Angels that use to descend and sing the Praises of the holy Trinity. Add to all, which shakes the very foundation of their Plea, the incredibleness of Ignatius his Journey to Rome, whether he is said, after his Condemnation at Antioch, to have been sent by Trajan, that he might be thrown to wild Beasts, on the truth of which these Epistles leaned, still insinuating and presupposing it: But why should Trajan be at pains to have sent him guarded thither? Certainly not for an intertain∣ment to the People as the pretended Acts of Ignatius affirm. They had store of Christians of all sizes at Rome with the spectacle of whose Suf∣ferings they might dayly be cloy'd, neither, as some answer, because he was a famous Christian and Bishop, at whose death the Roman Chri∣stians might be terrifi'd, seeing the Emperour might conclude from Ig∣natius his great resolution and boldness which himself had perceived that he would much animat them. But the perpetual Practice of these times frees us from further debate herein: I can never find that the Ro∣mans brought Christians from Asia or such remote places to be executed at Rome, but still to the nearest seats of Justice, as is clear in Polycarp and other most famous Bishops or Pastors. And truly (saith Dr. Stilling∣fleet Iren. Page 298. the story of Ignatius (as much as it's defended with his Epistles) doth not seem to be any of the most probable. For wherefore should Ignatius of all others be brought to Rome to suffer, when the Proconsuls and the Praesides provinciarum did every where in time of Persecution execute their Power in punishing of Christians at their own Tribunals, without sending them so long a Journey to Rome to be martyr'd there? And how came Ignatius to make so many and such strange Excursions as he did by the Story, if the Souldiers that were his Guard wers so cruel to him, as he complains they were? Now all these uncertain and fabulous Narrations as to Persons then arising from want of suffi∣cient Records made at those times, make it more evident, how incompetent a Judge Antiquity is to the certainty of things done in Apostolical times. And now from what is said, jude if D. M.Page 160. had any good ground to query, whether there's any good and solid Argument brought by the Presbyterians against the Authority of St. Ignatius his Epistles, that is not al∣ready sufficiently answered.
Section III. The second Hypothesis, viz. that the Antiquity of the trne Ignatius could not secure him from all Lapses or Escapes in Doctrine or serve to Prove that there was no Declen∣sion in his time. MY second Assertion is, that the Antiquity even of the true Ignati∣us was not able to secure him from all Lapses and Mistakes, and that in his time some Churches not only might; but actually were itch∣ing after several Novelties. Which Assertion, if once demonstrated, renders Ignatius of little or no use to our Antagonists: their Inference is, that, if Ignatius spoke positively in favours of Episcopacy, and lived in a closs vicinity to the Apostles, then there's no doubt but the Apostles e∣stablished such a Government: which consequence, like the Aples of Sodom, resolves anon into smoake, our Assertion being prov'd; which I now come to demonstrate. The Apostles of our Lord had not chang'd their earthly Tabernacle, for that which is not made with hands; when, to their inexpressible sorrow, they beheld not only particular Persons, but even the greater part of some Churches, they themselves had either planted or watered, in stead of Grapes, to bring forth will Grapes, and in place of being the Repositories of the precious Truths of the Gospel, become nests and cages of the most abominable Errors. Other Chur∣ches there were that holding fast the Foundation of the Apostolick Do∣ctrine, but raising thereupon a structure of the stubble and hay of either Judaism or Paganism (in one of which all of them had been educated) had well nigh made up an Edifice of most Hetrogeneous Materials. Hence it is that the Apostle is at such pains to Correct them in their A∣buses of the Sacrament, in their Superstition concerning Meat and Drink, and their unwarrantable observation of Times, that wanted all Divine Sanction. §. 2. But these infallible Guides being at length possessed of their Master's Joy, Affairs grew yet worse: for then the grand Enemy of the
Church did in greater abundance; and with more security sow his tares. Hence it was that not only those, who are justly branded for Arch-He∣reticks, and Schismaticks; but even those who persisted Orthodox in the main Principles of Christianity were drawn into, neither few nor in∣considerable Mistakes. §. 3. I'm sure Papias Bishop of Hierapolis was a Man, both in respect of his Antiquity and Authority, among the primitive Christians, little inferiour to Ignatius: 'twas he notwithstanding who either greedily imbrac'd, or first of all hatch'd the gross Fancy of the Saints their cor∣poral Kingdom for a thousand years after the Resurrection. Moreo∣ver (saith EusebiusLib. 3. Cap. 39.  &c. speaking of Papias) the same Writer alledges something as from unwritten Tradition, viz. some strange Parables and Do∣ctrines of our Saviour, and some other fabulous things; and, amongst the rest, he saith that after the Resurrection, there shall be a thousand years, wherein Christ shall reign on Earth bodily. But to me he seems through misunderstan∣ding of the Apostle's Discourse, to have taken what was spoken mysteriously, in a quite other sense from its true meaning. For he was os a very weak Judgement; as his Writings sufficiently declare. He was notwithstanding the Author of this Opinion to the most part of the following Ecclesiastical Writers, for they look'd only to his Antiquity as Irenaeus, and whosoever else favoured his Opini∣on. We see here a Man of no little Antiquity and Repute drawing the greatest Lights of the Church, and consequently the rest of the Christi∣ans to a Doctrine destitute of all countenance from the Word of God. §. 4. Another Conceit no less Ancient but more wild, was that of the Angels their carnal Knowledge of Women. This was hugg'd by Justin MartyrApolog. ad Senatum.  &c. who lived in the same Century with, yea, and not many years after Ignatius. The Angels (saith he) transgressing their Order, by carnal Copulation with Women, fell from their primitive State, aud begot Children who are now called Devils. He was follow'd notwithstanding by Irenaeus & Athenagoras, the most famous Writers of their Age; as also the stream of these that flourished in the succeeding Centuries, Irenaeus also with a great many others held, that the beatifick Vision is not enjoy'd untill the day of Judgement. Now beyond peradventure such Lead∣ers
as these, had the most part of the Churches at that time for their Fel∣lows and Followers in these Opinions. §. 5. And seeing both such Pillars, and the rest that lean'd on them were ready to swerve in Matters of Speculation, or Opinion, they were no less capable of straying in things belonging to Practice; for there's no more security promised to the Church from the one than the other. Neither did the closs Vicinity to the times of the Apostles, preserve the Churches from evident Lapses of this nature. Was not the mixing of the Sacramental Wine with water, a matter of Practice, and altogether destitute of warrand from Scripture, in which we hear of nothing but the Fruit of the Vine drunken by Communicants. And yet Justin MartyrApolog. ad Antoninum pium.  &c. informs us that the mixing of the Sacramental Wine with wa∣ter was the Practice of his time. §. 6. Another Instance of the most early Declension of the primitive Church in Matters of the same kind, viz. the external Rites, and Eccle∣siastick Ceremonies, was their observation of Easter; concerning which the Controversies first arose between PolycarpEuseb. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 4. Cap. 14. . &c. Et Lib. 5. Cap. 23. . &c., and the Churches of the East on the one hand, and Anicetus and the western Churches on the other. Polycarp alledg'd John the Evangelist, whose Disciple he had been, for the Author of his Opinion: but Anicetus and the Romans pre∣tended the Authority of Peter and Paul for the quite contrary Doctrine. I have oftentimes much admir'd how either of these Parties, if we consider either Sincerity, or Vicinity to the Apostles, were liable to a∣ny Mistake of this kind; I believe scarce any Man now living shall be able to give any rational account of the Cause thereof; yet that one of them was mistaken, and that the Apostles did not keep up a perpetual observation of contrary Practices one to another, is to me, and to as many as truly acknowledge the Scriptures, among the things of high∣est certainty; and if either of them strayed, if sufficiently serves our turn, and is an ocular Demonstration that not only the clearest Lights, and nearest to the Apostles might relinguish some part of the Apostolick Purity, and fall into Rites and Customes never countenanced by the A∣postles; but also be accompanied by no small part of the Church there∣in.
§. 7. Yea I dare avouch and sustain, that both Parties equally swer∣ved from the Truth, seeing both of them had equal Means to have in∣form'd themselves, and were alike nigh to the Apostles; so that many were certainly alive of both Parties who had been conversant with them: hence there's no reason to believe either of the Parties, that ever the Apostle enjoined or allowed the observation of Anniversary, weekly or monthly times either in the same time with, or so near to the Judaical, (and then buried) Ceremonies; excepting the Sabbath only, the obser∣vation whereof had been expresly enjoin'd in a clear and Moral Precept. Neither, in this Assertion, shall we remain alone, but be supported by the suffrages, of the choicest of the Ancients. No less Irenaeus in Eusebius in∣timats, while he tells us,Euseb. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 24.  &c. that this Difference did not arise first in his Age but long before in the time of their Fore-fathers, who (as is probable) being negli∣gent in their Government, delivered to their Posterity a Custome, which had on∣ly crept in thro' Simplicity and gnorance. And Socrates, a grave and solid Author, averrsSocrates Lib. 5. Cap. 22. , &c. that, neither more Ancient nor Later who inclined to fol∣low these Jewish Rites, had any cause to raise so great Contention. And that the keeping of Easter and such Holy Days were altogether Legal, the observati∣on whereof is not at all injoin'd in the Gospel: for (continues Socrates) they did not consider that, after the Jewish Religion was changed into that of the Chr∣stians, the strick observation of Moses Law, and the shaddows of future things were wholly abolished, which by a most sure proof may be thus evinced. For by no Law of Christ is it granted to Christians to observe Jewish Customes; yea the Apostle did expresly forbid it, not only rejecting Circumcision; but admonishing moreover that about Feast Days there should be no Contention, wherefore in writ∣ing to the Galatians he thus speaks, tell me ye who desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? And after he had discoursed a little concern∣ing these Matters, he shews the Jews to be under Bondage, but that those who had followed Christ Jesus were called unto Liberty: he Exhorts furthermore that Days, Months or Years, in no ways be observed. Moreover, writing to the Collossians, he clearly asserts that such observations are but a meer Shaddow. Wherefore, saith the Apostle, let no Man judge you in Meat or Drink, or in respect of an Holy Day, of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shaddow of things to come. But in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
confirming the same matter he thus speaks. For the Priesthood being chang∣ed, there is also a necessity of the change of the Law: surely the Apostles and the Evangelists did never impose a Yoak upon these that became obedient to the Doctrine of Faith, but Easter and other days were left to the choise and e∣quity of those who in such days had received the Benefits: wherefore, seeing Men love Holy Days, because they bring them some respite of their Labours, divers Men in divers places following their particular Inclinations, did, accord∣ing to certain Custome, celebrate the memory of our Saviour's Passions: for nei∣ther our Saviour, nor his Apostles did by any Law ordain that it should be ob∣served; neither did the Gospels nor the Apostles threaten us with a Mulct, Pu∣nishment, or Curse, as the Law of Moses was wont to do to the Jews. This and much more are we taught by Socrates; from all which it's most clear that in this Dispute concerning the Celebration of Easter, both Parties were equally culpable, as building upon a false Suppositi∣on, viz. that Christ and his Apostles had appointed some of these Days anniversarily to be kept, which yet never came into their mind And here 'tis most observable how, even in these ost early times they heap'd Falshood upon Falshood and supported one Forgery with another: the Fable of Peter's being at Rome and conjuring of Simon Magus there, was even then beginning to obtain; whereof the Romans made their Advan∣tage, and began to ascribe to him some Head-ship over the rest; and then averred that he had appointed them, not only to celebrate Easter, but also had determin'd the particular day of its Celebration, and in∣join'd them to keep it on the fifteenth and not on the fourteenth day of the Moneth as did the Eastern Churches: Now that they might be e∣ven with the Romans, and meet with them after their own Fashion and arts, the Asians invented the like Legends of the Apostle John, who, as they alledged, died at Ephesus and enjoyn'd them to keep Easter, but by no means on the fifteenth but on the fourteenth day of the Moneth, and the better to set off the Fable, Polycrates of Ephesus, in his Letter to Victor, harangues in the Praises of John, that thereby he might prefer him to Peter, and sticks not to assert that John was a Priest, and wore a High-Priests Golden Crown or Breast-plateEuseb. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 24. . And yet, as is ac∣knowledged, John was not at all of the Priestly Race, far less was he the High-priest, to whom only of all the Priests, such a Crown
was peculiar. Therefore ValesiusIn notis ad Eusebii locum. imagines that the first Christian Priests, as he speaks, wore such a Crown for a Sign of Honour in imitation of the Jews. As if the Christians of these times had ever dream'd of re∣taining the very marrow of Judaisme which was then abolished by the coming of Christ the substance. But this Antichristian dottage being so gross to be dejested by any real Protestant, the learned Le Moyn Varia sacra. Vol. 2. Page 30. says that Polycrates spoke metaphorically of John's supereminent Know∣ledge and Gifts. But if this be true, with how great caution are these Ancients to be read, without which we shall be led into the belief of the greatest falshhoods. In the mean while I see no ground for this gloss in Polycrates his words, either as they are related by Eusebius or by Hie∣rome and Rufine. And EpiphaniusHaeresi 29. Nazararum  &c. gives another such golden Crown to James, which is no less true than that he was Diocesan Bishop of Jerusalem. The same saith a Ms. Author, cited by ValesiusUbi supra. Quem qui∣dem B. Marcum juxta ritum carnalis Sacrificii pontificalis apicis petalum &c. of Mark the Evan∣gelist, viz. that Mark was of the Priestly Race, and according to the Cu∣stome of the carnal Sacrifice, carried publickly a Golden Crown as the Badge of his Priestly Dignity. There is indeed nothing more certian than that the primitive Doctors who are ordinarly known by the name of Ortho∣dox Fathers, stuck with a due preciseness to the great and capital Do∣ctrines of the Christian Religion, without any swerving therefrom: but it's no less demonstrable, as we have now made evident, that the same Leaders, and these next the Apostles of greatest Antiquity, in many other things strayed exceedingly from the true Apostolick Sim∣plicity. §. 8. Nothing was more frequent to them than, relying upon their Vicinity to the Apostles, to neglect a more accurate search of the Scrip∣tures, relate things otherways than they were transacted, alledge the Apostles for Practices to which they never gave Patrociny, which, be∣side what we have said already, may be sufficiently vouch'd from the Relation of Hegesippus in EusebiusEu∣seb. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. . The Administration (saith he) was undertaken by James the Lord's Brother (together with the rest of the Apo∣stles) who from the time of Christ even unto our Age is sirnamed Just, for there
were many others of that Name beside, but as for him he was sanctifi'd from the Womb, neither did he ever drink Wine or strong Drink, and did altogether ab∣stain from the Flesh of any living Creature, neither ever came there a Razour on his Head, nor did he ever use to anoint or wash, and he only of all Men had free liberty to enter into the innermost Sanctuary of the Temple; for he was not wont to wear a woollen but a linnen Garment: he used to enter alone into the Temple, and with bended knees to pray for the People. And in the sequel of this discourse he tells us, that in the Martyrdome of this James, he was both thrown from the pinacle of the Temple, and also beaten to Death with a Fuller's Club: a certain Priest one of the Sons of Rechab mention'd in Jeremiah, exhorting the People to milder Counsels, and that all this was done in a tumultuous way, without the least appearance of any judicial Process against this Martyr. But this Relation of Hegesippus is not only contrare the Holy Scripture, where we are assured that the High-Priest (alone) entred into the Holy of Holies, and that the Rechabites were not of the Priestly Race, and to Josephus who informs usAnt. judaie. Lib. 20. Cap. 8. ▪ that James being sisted before the High-Priest's Council, and by a kind of judicial Process condemn'd, was stoned to Death: but also a most insulfe Rapsody, savouring more of a Legendary than a primitive Doctor. Yet the Author thereof lived contemporary with Justin Martyr, a few years only below the Apostles. §. 9. But of this enough, and indeed with me it had been highly Sacrilegious to have said so much, but buried in a perpetual silence the Escapes of these whose memory is otherways to me more precious than the ashes of Mausolus to his Artemisia; and in fragrancy far surpassing the choicest of Oriental Spices; did not the injustice and importunity of these who prefer the Escapes, yea and Extravagancies of Men, and the blemishes of these great Lights, yet but terrene Lights, to the un∣spotted Beams of the Father of all Lights, compell me hereto. And herein I'm a true Son of the primitive Church, whose Doctors have taught me, that when the Dictats of God and these of Men, whosoever they be, interfer, and thro' humane Corruption are set in Competi∣tion, I ought to hold to the first; and in comparison herewith, despise the latter. §. 10. Add hereto, that seeing Antichristianism the Mystery of Ini∣quity
was working even in the Apostles days, seeing this Defection was mysteriously promoted, and seeing, as experience hath proved, it ar∣rived at its hight, and Antichrist was brought to his Throne by the ex∣orbitant elevation of Clergy-men, it's much less to be wondred at, if the most frequent Escapes and Lapses of the Primitive, and otherways Orthodox, Fathers chanced to be of this nature, and tend to the establish∣ing an unwarrantable Supremacy and Dignity, which only these, who were of such Repute in the Church were capable to effect. And in all this I have said nothing but what has been asserted by the most approved Divines especially in their Writings against the Romanists. Yea the most judicious & learned Bishop VsherDe Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione et statu. Page 19. Etsi e∣nim qui proximè Apostolis successerunt, Pietate cum primis & Sanctitate excelluisse negari non potest: certum tamen est, neque eorum qui praecesserunt, virtutem assecutos, neque ita sim∣plicem, ut Magistri eorum, orationem consecutos esse, quemadmodum rectè à Nicephoro no∣tatum est. is of the same mind: Altho' (saith he) it be undeniable that the first Successors of the Apostles excell'd in Piety and Holiness, it's certain notwithstanding that they neither attained to the Vertue nor simplicity of Doctrine that wee in their Ancestors and Teachers as is well observed by Nicephorus. And now judge if D. M's. Romish Querie, whether the Ecclesiastical Government could be changed from Parity to Prela∣cy (as is pretended) in those early Ages of the Church, especially since some Apostles and several Apostolical Men surviv'd the Period, sixt by some Pres∣byterians, (but no Presbyterian did ever yeeld that this Change was made during the Life of any of the Apostles) for the beginning of this (pre∣tended) Change; and if the Change was in it self impossible, then Prelacy must needs be acknowledged Apostolical. I therefore turn my Assertion in∣to a Conclusion, and from what is said with confidence Inferr, that the Antiquity even of the true Ignatius was not able to secure him from all Lapses and Mistakes, and that in his time some Churches, not only might, but actually were itching after several Novelties.
Section IV. The third Hypothesis; that there is no real Disagreement, but a true Concord betwixt the Doctrine of Ignatius and that of the present Presbyterians. I Now come to the third Hypothesis, and assert that Ignatius is not so clear and positive in the Matter of Episcopacy, as to denude Presby∣terians of all rational Defence, should they acquiesce in his Judgement, and therein join with their Antagonists who still appeal to his Determi∣nation. For all he speaks of Presbyters as distinguished from Bishops may well be mean'd of these who are call'd Ruling Elders, and that there was such an Office in the primitive Church is made evident by what is com∣monly brought from Origen, Tertullian, Optatus, the African Code, and Augustine, frequently distinguishing them from preaching Presbyters. And Purpurius expresly terms them Ecclesiasticos Viros, Ecclesiastick Men: In vain therefore object Petavius and others that these were only Church-Wardens not properly Ecclesiasticks. And indeed the Ancients not on∣ly tell us there was such an Office, but also plainly assert that, through pride and haughtiness of the Church Doctors, this Custom was abolish∣ed, as Ambrose, or rather Hilary sufficiently witnesses. The Synagogue (saith heCom. In. Ep. prior. ad Tim. Cap. 5. Vnde & Synagoga & postea Ecclesia seniores habuit quorum sine Consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsoleverit, nescio, nisi forte Doctorum desidia, aut magis superbia dum soli volunt aliquid vi∣deri.) and afterward the Church, had Elders, without whose Coun∣sel nothing was to be done in the Church; which, by what negligence was abolish∣ed, I know not, except perchance it were through the sloth, or rather the pride of the Church-Doctors, while they desired to carry all the esteem their alone. §. 2. Doctor Field tells usField on the Church. Book 5. Cap. 26. That these were not Lay-Elders. Nei∣ther, as they themselves well know, do we so term them: but did as the Ancients reckon them among the Ecclesiasticks. And we assert, that these very Lay-Elders (as he calls them) are under∣stood
by Hilary. For first, this Practice of the Christian Church is by Hilary deduced from the Synagogue, wherein there were Elders distinct from the Doctors or Pastors. Secondly, He attributes to the Elders, as their Office, only the Power of Consulting and Deciding, as being As∣sessors to the Doctors in the management of Church-Affairs, without intimating ought of their Power to dispense the Word and Sacraments. Thirdly, He expresly distinguishes them from all Doctors or Teachers of the Church, and therefore excludes them from all Power of Preaching, or Administration of the Sacraments. But Doctor Field saith that, Am∣brose by the name of Teachers, whose sloth and pride he condemneth in this place, might fitly understand the Bishop, seeing none but Bishops have Power to preach in their own Right, and others but only by Permission from them. But this Answer supposes that the time was when Bishop, Teacher and Doctor, were reciprocal Terms, and that whoever had the Charge of never so small a Flock was the Bishop thereof: for who can believe, that ever any receiv'd the Charge of a Flock, to whom he was only to preach, and dispense the Sacraments as a Journey-man to another? Lastly, When Hilary speaks in the preterit Tense that the Church had such, tells that their Office consisted in being Assessors to the Teachers, and says that the use of these was laid aside, he clearly intimats that the Elders he speaks of, were well nigh abolished, and then scarce in Being Which by no means can be said of the preaching Presbyters. For let Bishops be not only as proud as Dr. Field would have them, but even as Lucifer him∣self, yet most certain it is that long after Hilarie's time, the Bishops in all weighty Affairs used, at least, to consult the Presbyters, and that both then and still afterward, preaching Presbyters were existent. But herein I will not inlarge. See their Glosses of both Scriptures & Fathers, whereby we vouch this Matter removed, to name no others, by Dido∣clavius Alt▪ Dam. Page 917. & sequentes., to which I find nothing replyed. This clear Proof that there were in the primitive Church other Elders, distinct from those preaching Presbyters, who in the time of the Apostles, not much distant from that of Ignatius, were dignifi'd with the name of Bishop, furnish∣eth us with an Answer sufficient alone to solve whatsoever they can de∣duce from these Epistles. Their only Argument is that Ignatius distin∣guishes between Bishop and Presbyter, why then by Bishop may we not understand a Pastor of one Congregation, and under the name of Presby∣ter a Ruling Elder? They can only repone that Ignatius mentions but
one Bishop of any City he wrote to, which yet required more than one Pastor. But one Man may be called the Bishop or Pastor of such a place, altho' he be placed in a Colledge; where a Plurality equally participats of the pastoral Charge and Honour: and that this Answer may please them the better, I shall give them Ignatius for my Patron herein; who, writing to the Romans, expresly termeth himself &c. Bishop of Syria, to whose Charge, even our Adversaries being Judges, Antioch (only) one City thereof, was committed. 'Tis moreover certain and granted by our Adversaries, that there was even in one City frequently a Plura∣lity of Bishops. But tho' 'twere yeelded that neither Scripture nor Antiquity favour these Ruling Elders, and therefore that these Ignatian Presbyters must be something else, we are yet where we were. §. 3. Our inquiry is after a Diocesan Bishop, we're sent to Ignatius to find him, but all, after the strickest search, we meet with, is only a Bishop or Pastor of one single Congregation as these ensuing Places proclaim. Let none (saith heEp. ad Smyrnae∣os. — &c. do any of these things that ought to be practised in the Church without the Bishop, let that Worship be counted Lawfull that is per∣formed by him; or which he (at least) has permitted, wheresoever the Bi∣shop is, there let also the Multitude be present, even as where Christ is, there is also the Church: it is not lawfull either to Baptize or Celebrate the Lord's Supper without the Bishop, but whatsoever he alloweth, that is acceptahle to God, that whatsoever is done may be established. From which Passage it's evident that Ignatius supposes and allowes one of these Bishops to each particular Flock or Congregation; without whose Presence the Word and Sacraments were not to be dispensed: and altho' he adds that in some Case his Allowance or Approbation did warrant the practising thereof; yet I'm sure none can Infer any thing therefrom except that at some rare times, when the Bishop happen'd to be absent from his par∣ticular Flock (which uses to fall out to every particular Pastor) a∣nother approved by him might, untill his return to his Congregation, discharge his Office. And againAd Polycarpum—. Let there be (saith he) frequent Gatherings of your selves together or Congregations. Inquire thou (speaking to Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna) or seek after every Man by his Name, neglect
neither servants nor hand-maids. From whence it's clear, that this Ignati∣an Bshop was particularly to be acquainted with, and have particular Inspection of every one who was under his Charge; which I'm sure cannot be easily performed by a Diocesan Bishop; but is proper only to a Pastor of a particular Congregation: or who can forbear to conclude as much from another Passage of the same Author, where he saithAd Ephesios.  &c. Whosoever is not within the Altar is deprived of the Bread of God, for if the Prayers of one or two have so much efficacy, of how much weight must these be that are put up by the Bishop and the whole Church. Sure I am, the genius and ayr of this Passage, proclaims Ignatius speaking of such a Bishop or Pastor, as is under a Tye reciprocal between him and one particular Flock or Congregation. And againIbidem.  &c. In obedience to the Bishop, break-Bread, which is the Medicine of Immortality. Neither is he a greater Friend to Diocesan Prelacy, while he admonisheth the Church of Phila∣delphia in these wordsAd Philadelphicos.  &c. Children of the Light and of the Truth, fly Divisi∣ons and Corrupt Doctrines, and wherever the Pastor (viz. the Bishop) is, thither you as Sheep follow him. And againIbidem.  &c. One Flesh of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, and one Cup in the Vnion of his Blood, one Altar and one Bishop. Add to all this, that Ignatius every where in these Epistles, speaks to, and of the Bishop; as a correlative of, and with respect unto the Peo∣ple or Flock, and not Presbyters or inferiour Pastors, as the proper Object of his Episcopal Office. Seeing then all the Pastors of any Church he writes to, might equally be term'd Bishop or Pastor of such a place; seeing whatsoever he saith to or of Bishops, hath a particular re∣ference to the Flock or People; and seeing, finally, so many things spoken by Ignatius of these Bishops, can agree only to Congregational Pastors; I conclude, that by these Ignatian Bishops, not Diocesan Pre∣lats, but Pastors of particular Flocks, not only may but of necessity must be understood. And it's further observable that Preaching, Visiting of particular Persons and the rest of the Pastoral Work is either injoin'd un∣to, or clearly intimated to belong to the Bishop only, but nothing to the Presbyters, save sitting in Council with him. Now if our Oppo∣sites insist on their contrary Argument from the largeness of the Cities, and from this that Ignatius still speaks but of one Bishop therein, and
hence conclude that he must be Diocesan; the result of all must be a sharper Conflict between Ignatius and himself, and so a fuller proof of the spuriousness of these Epistles, it being evident from what is adduc'd that this Bishop was only a Pastor of a single Congregation, yea so evi∣dent that it hath puzl'd the learn'dest of our Opposites. §. 4. Of this mind is Joseph Mede.Proof for Churches in the second Century. Pages 28, 29. For speaking of these Ig∣natian Epistles, It should seem (saith he) that in these first times before Dioceses were divided into those lesser and subordinate Churches, we now call Parishes, and Presbyters assigned to them) they had not only one Altar in one Church, or Dominicum, but one Altar to a Church, taking Church for the Company or Corporation of the Faithfull, united under one Bishop or Pastor; and that was in the City and Place where the Bishop had his See and Residence: like as the Jews had but one Altar and one Temple for the whole Nation united under one High-Priest. And yet, as the Jews had their Synagogues, so perhaps might they have more Oratories than one, tho' their Altar were but one; there namely where the Bishop was. On Sunday (saith Justin Martyr) all that live in Towns or in the Country meet together in one Place; namely, as he there tells us, to celebrate and participate the Holy Eucharist. Why was this, but because they had not many places to celebrate in? And unless this were so, whence came it else that a schismatical Bishop was said to set up another Altar; and that a Bishop and an Altar are made Correlatives? See St. Cyprian Ep. 40. 72. 73. Et de unitate Ecclesiae. And thus perhaps is Ignatius also to be understood in that forequoted Passage of his,  &c. Where 'tis clear that Mr. Mede well perceived the thing we now plead for in Ig∣natius, viz. that this Bishop was only the Pastor of a single Flock. In∣deed fear to offend his Friends, or something else, made him say so little as he could, and something that he ought not to have said while he would parallel this Altar with that of the Jews: yet he's express enough that all subject to the Bishop met in one place for Participation of the Sa∣craments, and consequently for hearing of the Word; and moreover really acknowledgeth that Dioceses then were only what Parishes are now, and if so, tho' they had other Oratories 'tis nothing to the pur∣pose of our Opposits, which yet his (perhaps) proves him afraid to assert. For he knew well enough, that, seeing, as he grants, all under his Charge took their Communion with the Bishop at his Church, which, as every one knows, was then Celebrated (at least) every Lord's day,
any other Oratories for publick Worship had been altogether unneces∣sary; with which superfluities the Church in these early and tempestu∣ous days was not at all acquainted. In vain therefore Dr. Maurice, Defence of Diocesan Episcopacy. Pag. 37. and 38. that he may at once abuse both Mede and Ignatius, tells us that Altar in the primitive sense signified not only the Communion Table but the whole Place where the Chair of the Bishop and the Seats of the Presbyters were placed: and in this sense there was but one Altar in one Diocess, as there is now but one Consistory, as is clear from Ignatius and Usher. And to be in one Altar, which is Ignatius his Phrase is only to be in Communion with the Bishop. And this Dr. Maurice would have to be Mede's meaning thereof. But the falshood of this is not only evident from Ignatius, who all along (as we have seen) reciprocats his Bishop with the Pastor of a particular Flock, but also from Mede's express words, as we have already ob∣served from them. I pass as scarce good sense Dr. Maurice his say∣ing that Altar not only signified the Communion Table, but the whole place of the Bishop's Chair &c. The Dispute not being what place or thing in a Church, Altar signifi'd, but if thereby in Ignatius one or more places for publick Worship be meaned: yea this my sense of Ignatius, Doctor WakeGenu∣ine Epistles of the Apostolick Fathers. Pages 183, 184. seems to grant, while he says, speaking of these Ignatian times, that none officiated but either the Bishop himself or he who was appointed or allow'd by him, and that they had in every such Place of their Assembling, one Table, or Altar at which they performed this Service. We have heard al∣ready Mede rightly observing out of Ignatius, that the Altar or Com∣munion Table was (only) at the Bishop's Residence, and where he offici∣ated. And we see from Dr. Wake that in every place of solemn Wor∣ship they had an Altar or Communion Table. The Conclusion then is, which we also already heard Mede acknowledging, that there were then no fewer Bishops than Places of publick Worship, which is the Truth, and what we conclude from Ignatius. And to these add the words of one who is neither unskillfull in these Matters, nor yet Partial in favours of Presbytry. In the beginning (saith heDr. Burnet on the 1. and 2. of the Apost. can. Page 51.) the Bishops whole Charge was called , and by the strain of Ignatius his Epistles, especially that to Smyrna, it would appear, that there was but one Church, at least but one Place, where there was one Altar and Communi∣on in each of these Parishes, for he saith, there was one Bishop, one Church and one
Altar. And now judge of the symphony of this Assertion, with the Principles of the Author, or how he could averrConfer. Page 314. that if these Epi∣stles be Genuine the Cause of Presbytry will be undone. But of all things most strange and unaccountable is Dr. Pearson's Conduct in the Dispute, who with indefatigable pains and vast learning wrote his Defence of Ignatius to the end (as he pretends) he might well nigh infallibly establish a Diocesan Bishop; and yet has proved so far from hitting the white at which he ultimately levell'd, that on supposition of the sufficiency of his Vindiciae, he most sufficiently demonstrats the Identity of Bishop and pa∣rochial Pastor during the time of Ignatius, and thus inavoidably ruines what he most earnestly intended to repair. And now behold the vast Fabrick and Engine wherewith they threaten the utter Ruine of Presby∣try turning upon and shattering to pieces their Dio cesan Hierarchy. —Nec enim Lex justior ulla, Quam necis Artifices arte perire sua. Section V. The Objections they pretend to bring from Scripture against the Doctrine now deduc'd from Ignatius, removed. ANd indeed Ignatius is encompast with so thick a Cloud of Witnes∣ses, who, not only deny all support to, but give most evident Depo∣sitions against the Diocesan Prelat, that his Testimony in favours thereof should be a firm demonstration of the Bastardy of these Epistles. The time of the Apostles was not far above that of Ignatius. Now, if we consult these, we shall not only find our Adversaries destitute of their Suffrages, but also overwhelm'd with their plain Testimonies against the Hierarchy. 'Tis true they alledge several things out of the Apostolick Writings, for establishing their Cause; as that Timothy and Titus, as also the An∣gels of the Asiatick Caeurches were Diocesan Bishops. The grounds where∣in tey establish the Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, are, that they are en∣joined to Ordain Elders which in after Ages was the peculiar Province of Dioce∣san
Bishops; and that in the Postscrpts of these Epistles they are both called Bi∣shops But their later Topick is by the profound silence of the ancient Commentaries and many other tokens of Forgery and Novelty so baffl'd that Prelacy's present Agents, and amongst others D. M, are so wise as to suppress it. And yet D. M.Pages 106. 107. adventures to conclude Timothy his being made Bishop of Ephesus from Acts 20. 3, 4, 5. (which In∣ference few, I think, beside the Author can gather) compared with 1 Tim. 1. 3. I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus—that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other Doctrine. From which even tho' it be compared with the other Scripture, any Man in his Wit would much rather, with Chrysostome, inferr the very contrary, and conclude that Ti∣mothy's stay at Ephesus was only temporary, to expede the Business there mention'd but not to fix therein. But, saith hePage 108. 1 Tim. 3. 14. 15. These things I write unto thee &c. plainly insinuat his particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus. But the many Scriptures informing us of Timothy's almost perpetual absence from Ephesus; perswade that there was no such Relation, neither does this place in the least insinuat it, but only that Timothy if not sent for was to stay till Paul's return, wherefore he begs the Question whilePage 107. he tells us that after he was in a particular manner established Bishop of the Church of Ephesus he might wait upon Paul. Moreover this was an odd Attendance that scarce ever suffer'd Timothy to stay with his Flock, and this shift, too like that of the Roma∣nists, who, in Answer to the Argument from Scripture-silence against Peter's being Bishop of Rome, tell us that he was frequently abroad. But here we have not only Scripture-silence but Scripture Testimony, shewing Timothy's almost perpetual absence from Ephesus. He essays alsoPage 108. to bring Timothy's Episcopal Power and particular Relation to Ephesus from 1 Tim. 5. 9. 1 Tim. 2. 1. and 1 Tim. 5. 21. And that this was not temporary or transient, but successive and perpetual, he would provePages 109. from 1 Tim. 6. 13. 20. and 2 Tim. 2. 2. and adds that his Adversaries grant that the Power he pleads for to Bishops was exercised by Ti∣mothy. But as for the particular Relation he speaks of, he should have proved it, seeing he knows it will not be granted, except he bring more than the bare recitall of the places from which his fancy collects it, and without such a particular Relation the Power Timothy exercised, be what
it will, makes nothing for his purpose: seeing it might be lodged in him alone as an Evangelist, and thus most of his postulataPages 109, 110. prove useless. Yet I will handle them particularly, of which the first two are, that the Power which Timothy exercised was in it self lawfull, and that he practised it in Ephesus. And 'tis true none denies it, but what then, untill he first prove Timothy's particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus. The third and fourth are, that it was committed to him alone, and not to a Colledge of Presbyters acting among themselves in Parity. And that there's no mention of any spiritual Power lodged in a Colledge of Presbyters to which Timothy was accountable. But Willet, an approved Divine of the Church of Eng∣land, shall answer for us; Neither (saith heSyn. pap. contr. 5. Quest. 3.) can it be gathered by these words of the Apostle, lay Hands suddenly upon no Man &c. That Timothy had this sole Power in himself, for the Apostle would not give that to him which he did not take to himself, who associated unto him the rest of the Pres∣bytry in Ordaining of Timothy. I add that there's no less mention of a spiritual Power in a Colledge of Presbyters &c. than of Timothy's being fix∣ed Bishop of Ephesus. Hence his 5. postulatum (viz. That the great and most eminent Branches of the Episcopal Power were lodged in Timothy's Person, the ordination of such as were admitted unto the sacred Function, the care of Widows, the Censuring of Elders, and his autoritative preventing of Heresies) becomes unserviceable. His VI is, that this Authority was not in it self of temporary duration, transient, or extraordinary, but such as the constant Necessities of the Church do make necessary in all Ages; for he was commanded to commit it un∣to faithfull Men, such as should be able to teach others, and if there be nothing in it extraordinary, why do they say that in the discharging of an ordinary trust, there was need of an extraordinary Officer. But First he corrupts the Apostles words 2 Tim. 2. 2. substituting (it) in stead of (them) that thereby he may force the Text to speak of a Pow∣er equal to that of Timothy, which was to be derived unto succeeding Teachers, when yet it plainly speaks of the Transmission of the Do∣ctrine or things Timothy had heard, and others were to teach; but no∣thing of an equality of Timothy's Power to be derived in solidum to every subsequent Bishop or Teacher. Now except this be proved, D. M. saith nothing. Yea HammondIn locum. expresly contradicts him, Appoint them (saith he) as Bishops under thee. Moreover, Christ committed the things Paul here speaks of to his Apostles; yet
will D. M. say their Power was equall to Christ's? Secondly, In this his last postulatum there appears a strange kind of rea∣soning viz. the Things or Actions wherein Timothy and Titus were em∣ployed, are perpetual and ordinary; therefore they were not extraor∣dinary Officers: just as if one would Reason: It's ordinary for a skillfull Physitian to relieve a Febricitant; therefore our Saviour relieving Pe∣ter's Wife's Mother, was no extraordinary Physitian. For their Me∣thod and Way of performing these Actions was extraordinary and tem∣porary, they having no special Power over, or Relation to, any one particular Congregation; but such a Power and Relation as equally were extended over all the places whither they were sent. Moreover others of their Actions, and these which were properly Evangelistick, were extraordinary: such as that of Planting the first Christian Chur∣ches. Lastly, I appeal to all Protestants, if his ascribing to every Bishop a Power of authorative preventing of Heresies (i. e. a Power of making Ca∣nons that lean only on the Bishop's own Will, and which he's not ob∣lig'd to prove from Scripture, otherwise every Minister of Christ hath a Power and Authority, by publick preaching and reasoning from the Word of God, to prevent and overthrow Heresies: and so D. M. speaks not to the purpose) hath not a rank savour of what is no bet∣ter than the grossest of Popery. The Romanists give such an authori∣tative Power to one Pope, but from a perswasion of his Infallibility: this Author will have it unto every single Bishop, tho', as yet, he has not adventured to ascribe to each of 'em such a Priviledge, and to explain, if need were, what he means by this authoritative preventing of Heresies. §. 2. Look but on page 95 et seq. and you shall see him make eve∣ry Bishop an Apostle in the strickest sense, and priviledg'd with no less Power over the Church-Officers and People in his Diocess than an Apo∣stle ever had or could exercise: viz. a Power to Govern the Churches, to give Rules and Directions, to inflict Censures, to communicat his Authority to others, to hear Complaints, to decide Controversies—to Confer the Holy Ghost—viz. the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that must needs attend the au∣thoritative Ministry of holy Things; and therefore that the Office of an Apostle is altogether ordinary and permanent. The Apostolical Office (saith he) be∣ing essentially no other than this, the ordinary Necessities of the Church require that it should continue till the second coming of our Saviour. But the extraordi∣nary
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, the Power of Miracles, of Languages—were only extriasick Advantages,—and not peculiar to the Apostles. And to affirm otherwayes; and say that the proper Apostolick Office is now ceased, he makes proper to Presbyterians and Socinians. But so far is he from speaking Truth here, that the ceasing of the proper Apostolick Office and Power is asserted by the Body of Protestants, even Episco∣pal no less than Presbyterian, in opposition to the Jesuites his Masters, who, as he doth to his Diocesan Bishop, arrogate an Apostolick Office and Power to their Pope. Spanhem F.Dissert. 3. Numb. 25. Etseq. a fervent Apologist of the Hierarchicks, assigns many Characters of the Apostolate as an ex∣traordinary Calling either immediat or equivalent thereto, Infallibility of Doctrine, transcendent Efficacy and energy in Preaching, admirable success therein, the Gift of Tongues, and of working Miracles: all which things, altho' some of 'em might have been in some measure in others, were (saith he) in a more Divine and Eminent manner in the Apostles. And he affirms that every one who was endued with a true and proper Apostolick Power, had, and could give such visible Proofs and ocular Demonstrations thereof: and then con∣cludes against the Pope; thus,Numb. 37. Eat nunc de rupe turpeia Pontifex, & cum Apostolis loquatur Linguis Sp. S. exlo visibiliter arcessat, virtu∣tes similes edat, magnalia eadem obsignet, ac venerabimur in eo Apostolatus Apicem! let the Pope now descend from the Capi∣tol, let him, as did the Apostles, declare that he has the Gift of Tongues Di∣vinely infused, let him bring visibly the Gifts of the Holy Ghost from Heav'n, let him work like the Apostles such illustrious Miracles, and then we shall yeeld that he has Apostolick Authority: and so shall we to the Diocesans when they adduce these Proofs of their Apostleship. He assertsNumb. 34. that they're much deceiv'd who would bring the Apostles down to the Order of particular Bishops; and demonstrats against Hammond, that they were not at all call'd Apostles on the account that they were Bishops, & consequently that A∣postle and Bishop are quite different things.Numb. 17. In short the very Sum and Substance of Spanhemius his Disputation is nothing save an Approbation and Confirmation of that common Sentiment of Protestants express'd by BezaIn Epist. ad Ephesios. Cap. 4. ver. 11. Constitutis ergo his hoc quoque munus necessario fuit sublatum: itaque tyrannica hodie vox est in Ecclesia sese Apostolum ex Successione profiteri. The Churches (saith he) being once constitute, this Office of the Apostle-ship was of necessity taken away: he is a Tyranne therefore who does now profess himself an Apostle in the Church by Succession. And by
this one Observation, viz. that whereever the proper Apostolick Pow∣er was, they could give ocular and undeniable Proofs and Demonstrati∣ons thereof, the Protestants for ever silence and baffle the Jesuites and their Progeny D. M. and such Companions ascribing a Power pro∣perly Apostolick to their Roman Antichrist and their Diocesan Prelats, and fully remove all thier Quibbles on this Theme, as Dr. Scot's Quirk, the Substance whereof is, there's no mention in Scripture of the taking away of this Apostolick Office; and therefore it yet remains. But I forgot that for the permanency of a Power properly Apostolick D. M. cites Mat. 28. 20. And lo I am with you alway, even unto the end of the World. As if, not to mention Protestants,Vide, inter alios, Marloratum in locum. even the more ingenuous Ro∣manists, as Lyra, did not understand this place, of Christ's assistance given to all Doctors of the Church without any Discrimination. Moreo∣ver all his Exceptions and pretended Instances to the contrary are im∣pertinent, and severals of 'em false in matter of Fact, as for Example, nor is it necessary (saith D. M.) to make up an Apostle that he be immediatly call'd to the Apostolate by our Saviour; for Matthias—was not immediat∣ly ordain'd by our Saviour, but by the Apostles. But SpanhemiusNumb. 27. De Mat∣thia sorte, id est divina voce, qualiter in distributione terrae, in segregatione Hirci &c. tells these Jesuites that the Lot that fell upon Matthias was really the voice of God, no less than was that of the Division of Canaan, of the Scape-goat &c. And in∣deed, as I said, that the Office and Power properly Apostolick is long since ceas'd, is the common Doctine of Protestants; as CalvineVide Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.. None (saith SadeelEt nemo sane, nisi plane sit , Apostola∣tum confuderit.—dico igitur immediate eligi & vocari a Deo ad praedicandum Evangeli∣um, esse essentiale Ministerio Apostolatus. against Turrian the Jesuite) but he who is an Ig∣noramus in Divinity will confound an Apostle with a Bishop—I assert therefore that God's immediat calling and choosing to preach the Gospel is essenti∣al to the Office of an Apostle. But these, say you, were Presbyterians. I deny't not; however, they were then pleading the common Cause of Protestants, and were never opposed herein by any save down-fight Pa∣pists only, till that now we have to do with real Jesuites, who yet mask themselves, and will not acknowledge the name. In the mean while I do not think they'll say Spanhemius Fil. is a Presbyterian, nor yet Nilus' Bi∣shop of Thessalonica who saithDe primatu Papae. Lib. 2. Pag. 30, 31. . the Pope is not an Apostle, the Apostles
did not ordain other Apostles, but only Doctors and Teachers. Of this mind is also WilletPage 145.. Bellarmine [saith WhitakerDe pontif. Romano. Page 61. Qua igitur in re—in Apostolatu videtur dicere Bellarminus—At Apostolicam potestatem nemo habere potest, nisi qui verè ac proriè Apostolus est &c.) seems to say the Pope succeeds Peter in his Apostle-ship—but none can have Apostolick Power but he who is properly and truly an Apostle; for the Power and Office of an Apostle constitute an Apostle. But that the Pope is neither truly nor properly an Apostle is prov'd by these Arguments whereby Paul proves his Apostle-ship, as, that he was not call'd by Men &c. Gal. 1. 1, and 12. and Ephes. 3. 3. and 5. 1 Cor. 9. 1. Altho' (saith SutliviusDe pontif. Rom. Pages 175, 176. Quare etiam olim Episcopi R. Petro successerint in Doctrina, & externa Cathedra, non ta∣men in Apostolatu, etsi successerunt, at posteriores Pontifices nec &c,) the ancient Bishop of Rome succeeded Peter in Doctrine and the Chair, yet they succeeded him not in his Apostle-ship, but the latter Bishops in neither &c. And LightfootVol. 1. Page 787. a renown'd Divine of the Church of England, proves that the Apostle-ship was an Order for ever unimitable in the Church. The Apo∣stles (saith the same AuthorPage 745.) could not ordain as Apostle by Imposi∣tion of Hands, as they could ordain Elders; but they are forced to use a Divine Lot, which was as the immediate Hand of Christ imposed on him that was to be ordained: that Opinion took little notice of this circumstance, that hath placed Bishops in the Place of the Apostles, by a common and successive Ordination. Dr. Barrow, whose Works are publish'd by Bishop Tillotson, and there∣fore are to be lookt on as his, is copious on this Subject. Apostles also (saith heOf the Pope's Supremacy. Page 78.) did Govern in an absolute manner, according to Discretion, as being guided by infallible assistance, to the which they might on occasion ap∣peal, and affirm, it hath seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us.—Neither did the Apostles pretend to communicat it. They did indeed ap∣point standing Pastors and Teachers in each Church; they did assume fellow La∣bourers or Assistents in the Work of Preaching and Governance; but they did not constitute Apostles, equal to themselves in Authority, Priviledges or Gifts, for who knoweth not (saith St. Austine) that Principate of Apostle-ship to be preferr'd before any Episcopacy? And the Bishops (saith Bellarmine) have no part of the true Apostolical Authority. And now judge of the Spirit of these Men, who are glad most falsly to brand these famous Bishops, and others the most eminent Doctors of that Perswasion as being guilty of the most abominable Crime of Socinianism, providing they can there∣by
bespatter and make odious the Presbyterians. Judge also of D. M's QueryPage 158. whether the Apostolical Power, as to it's permanent, ne∣cessary, and essential Branches, was not in its nature Perpetual and Successive; and by them transmitted in solidum, as they receiv'd it from our blessed Saviour to single Successors in particular Sees, and not to a Colledge of Presbytsrs in the modern Notion? As to the last part of his Query and his Presbyters in the modern Notion, I know none such if 't be not these of the Hierarchicks their half Ministers, for which there is no ground in Scripture. And accordingly it's certain that the Apostles left the managing of the Church to neither Bishops nor Presbyters in his sense, both of them be∣ing Chimera's but to Colledges of Bishops who are also Presbyters, both being one in Scripture & during the Apostolick age. But tho' we should grant them all the Query seeks, supposing, which all the Ancients af∣firm, the equality of all Bishops who, at the beginning, were reciproca∣ted with Congregations, he's yet but where he was, and has really done nothing for the establishing of his Hierarchy. Judge lastly, of that doughty Argument of the PapistsAlphonsus de Castro adversus haereses. Fol. 102. Bellarm. de Clericis. Cap. 14. and our Hierarchicks for Prela∣cy: to wit, that Bishops succeed to the Apostles and Presbyters to the 70 Dis∣ciples: which has been generally reckon'd, by Protestants, among Rome's dotages, and as such refuted in their Popish Controversies; and, to name no others, by IuniusTom. 2. Col. 1209. and WilletSynops. papism. Page 236. who answers that not only Bishops, but all faithfull Pastors are the Apostles Successors: and that, even according to the Pope's Decrees, not Bishop, but Priests, succeed the Apostles; and Deacons, not Presbyters, succeed the 70 Disciples. And now, to go on with D. M. and his Fellows, all their cavilling to make Timothy and Titus Hierarchick Bishops, is but the product of a late Po∣pish Dream. For the Fathers, when they so called them, or the Apo∣stles, mean'd not of Bishops in this sense. §. 3. Wherefore WilletIbidem. Answers that it is most like Timothy had the Place and Calling of an Evangelist: and that the Calling of Evangelists and Bishops which were Pastors was diverse. This Answer which so approv'd a Divine of the Church of England gave the Papists, D. M.Page 111. calls a ridiculous subterfuge. For (saith he) the Work of an Evangelist has no∣thing in it opposite to, or inconsistent with, the Dignity of a Bishop &c. A most
disingenuous tergiversation and sliding from the Office of the opponent or probant to that of the defendent, seeing this was one of his special Scripture-Arguments whereby to establish his Hierarchy; and it's sure that if Timothy and Titus might do what they did under another Notion and Capacity than that of a Diocesan Prelate, his Argument goes to wrack. As does also his perversion of 2 Tim. 4 5. for he insinuats that from Timothy's being injoined to do the Work of an Evangelist, it will no more follow that he deserved the Name than Daniel's saying Ch. 8. 27. that he did the King's Work, will prove him a King. But had he ever considered the rest of the Epistle, the context of the place, and the Sig∣nification and Notation of the Word Evangelist, he had clearly seen that the Apostle so adapts this Work of an Evangelist to Timothy, that the Name and Character properly belongs unto him. He addsPage 112. That any who now convert Jews or Pagans are as properly Evangelists as any so called in the primitive Church; and thus insinuats that Evangelists, such as Timothy and Titus, were no extraordinary Officers, which, except a few Novelists wedded to their Fancies, is condemned by all Men. §. 4. And that there was such a Function by which some in the days of the Apostles were raised far above the rank of ordinar Pastors or Do∣ctors, and placed in the very next degree to the Apostles themselves, whose Office was mostly ambulatory, going from Church to Church in the exercise thereof, is in part intimated by Sedulius and Theodoret and others upon Ephes. 4. 11. but more fully by EusebiusLib. 3. Cap. 37. ———— &c. who informs us that even after the Death of the Apostles divers remained who were in a far higher rank than the rest of their Successors, who being (saith he) the admirable and divine Disciples of so great Men built up the Churches the Apostles had founded, promoving the preaching of the Gospel, and sowing Seed of the Kingdom of Heaven far and wide thro' the whole World: for many of these Disciples that were yet liv∣ing, whose Minds the Divine Word had inflammed with a vehement desire of Wisdom, fullfilling our Saviour's Command and dividing their Goods among the Poor and thus leaving their Country, exercis∣ed the Office of Evangelists among these who had not yet heard the
Doctrine of Faith by most diligent preaching of the Gospel and fur∣nishing their Hearers with the Holy Scriptures: these, so soon as in any remot and barbarous Country they had laid the Foundations of Faith and ordained Pastors, and had committed to these Pastors the care of this New Plantation, being content therewith and accompani∣ed by the Grace and Power of God hast'ned to other Countries; for even to that time the Divine Power of God's Spirit wrought Miracles by these Men, so that at the first hearing of the Gospel some whole Peoples readily imbraced the Christian Religion. Behold Reader how plainly and fully Eusebius relates the thing we plead for viz. that those Officers were altogether extraordinary unfixed and temporary. §. 5. Wretch'dly therefore does D. M.Page 111. castrat this full and plain discourse, while he only says that an Evangelist, in the Notion of Euse∣bius, was a Person that preached the Gospel to those that had not heard of it or re∣sisted it; and thus dissembles the whole matter in question which Euse∣bius clearly determines. And according to this Relation of Eusebius, 2 Timothy 4. 5. he is en∣joined to do the Work of an Evangelist, and never made a long stay at one place for even after the time of his pretended Ordination to the Bi∣shoprick, we find him not rarely with the Apostle Paul as his Attendant or Fellow Labourer: which not only his joint Superscriptions to the second Epistle to the Corinthians and these to the Philippians, Colossians, both his Epistles to the Thessalonians, and to Philemon: but also the long Journeys and Peregrinations wherein we find Timothy still imployed, ir∣refragably make manifest: for after he is supposed to have been Bishop of Ephesus, he was accompanying Paul in his Voyages Acts 20. 4. and was with him Prisoner at Rome as is probable from Philippians 1. and 1. Heb. 13. 23. as also frequently imployed in long Voyages to several Churches, and that in Businesses which could not be expeded in a day as is evident 1 Cor. 4. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 10. Philip. 2. 19. Heb. 13. 23. 2 Tim. 4. 21. So that if he was Bishop of Ephesus he will prove a suffi∣cient Patern for non-residence. Most of which things may be suppos∣ed of Titus, whose frequent long Journeys are mentioned by the same Apostle. Yea they have just as good ground in 2 Tim. 4. 10. to fix Titus his Episcopal Chair in Dalmatia, which was the Fancy of Aquinas In locum. Titus etiam missus ab eo abiit in Dalmatiam, ubi finaliter fuisse Episcopus dicitur. and others as, they can ever shew for their dream of its being among
the Cretians. And indeed the very Phrase from which they gather the Prelacy of Titus (as we have already observed of Timothy) gives real ground to conclude the contrary: For this Cause (saith he) I left thee in Crete that thou shouldest set in Order the things that are wanting and ordain Elders. From which place any ingenuous Man shall be compell'd to in∣ferr, that Titus was only left there to supply some present want, and to return again, much rather than that he was the fixed Arch-Bishop of Crete. §. 6. It's amazing then that in defiance of so clear Antiquity, yea and so clear and full Scripture evidence, some dare to transform Timo∣thy and Titus unto ordinary and fixed Officers; why? they see that a∣mong the ordinary and fixed Church-Officers; they cannot find what they covet, the Scriptures making Bishop, Pastor, and Presbyter one and the same, but yeelding no place to their Diocesan Bishop, a Lord and Ruler over other Bishops or Pastors. They are compell'd there∣fore, in imitation of the Romanists, who degrade the Apostle to find the Bishop of Rome and Antioch, just so to handle the Evangelists that Peter be not alone, but may find other degraded Companions if he shall by chance, in his Journey from one of his Sees to another, visit Crete or E∣phesus. §. 7. But more strange is that most precarious Assertion of D. M. Page 112. that Philip the Evangelist had no Power of Ordination. But it's yet more admirable how, to establish Timothy a Bishop, he can adducePage 107. the eleventh Act of the Council of Chalcedon: surely, had he read the learned StillingfleetIrem. Pages 302, 303. who hath for ever baffl'd them in this their Al∣legation, he had blush'd at the very mentioning thereof. And we learn from HieromeProem. in Tit. Scribit ad Titum &c. that Titus, after he had given some Instruction to the Churches of Cret, was to return again to the Apostles, and to be succeeded by Artemas or Tychicus, for comforting of these Churches in the absence of the Apostle. Judge Reader if Hierome thought Titus was fix'd Arch-Bi∣shop of Crete. It's questionable (saith ChrysostomeHom. 1. in 1 Tim. .) if the Apostle had then constituted Timothy Bishop there: for he saith, that thou might'st charge some that they teach no other Doctrine. Thus he, without a word more for solution of this his Doubt. Judge therefore if, from the very
Scripture, whereon (alone) they would found Timothy's being Bishop of Ephesus, he really concludes not the quite contrary Doctrine. It's doubtfull (saith a most earnest Prelatist, Salmeron the JesuitDisp. 1. in 1 Tim. Dubium est an Episcopus fuerit Ephesinus &c.; if Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, for altho' he preach'd and ordain'd some to the Ministry there, it follows not that he was the Bishop of that place, for Paul preach'd also there above two years, and absolv'd the Penitents, and yet he was no Bishop. Add that now and then the Apostle call'd him away unto himself and sent him from Rome to the Hebrews with his Epistle. And in the second Epistle he commands him to come to him shortly. Timothy was also an Evangelist of that Order Eph. 4. He gave some Apostles &c. So that Dorotheus says in his Synopsis, that Timothy preach'd through all Grecee but he stayed at Ephe∣sus not to be Bishop, but that in the constitute Church of Ephesus he might op∣pose the false Apostles &c. It appears therefore that he was more than a Bi∣shop, altho' for a time he preached in that City as a Pastor and ordain'd some to the Ministry. Hence it is that some call him Bishop of Ephesus. And to conclude this matter, the celebrated Stilling fleetIren. Page 340. ingenuously grants that Timothy and Titus were no fixed Bishops or Pastors but Evange∣lists, notwithstanding [saith he] all the opposition made against it, as will ap∣pear to any who will take an impartial survey of the Arguments on both sides. §. 8. As for the Apocalyptick Angels, tho', with Beza, we should affirm that by one of 'em one single Moderator is mean'd, we yeeld them nothing, but, e contra, cut the sinews of their Argument. With this D. M.Page 117. ingages not; only he calls the Alterableness of the Moderator, which Beza holds as defensible, ridiculous, which is said without proof, and tho' it were so, touches not the marrow of our An∣swer. But they shall find their Foundation yet weaker for such a stru∣cture, so soon as they shall with attention read over the contexts of the place now in Controversie. The seven Stars which are the seven Angels are said to be held in God's right hand; whereby, without peradven∣ture, is signified the great care our Lord had of the Pastors of these Flocks, in order to the promoting of the great Gospel-Design, the gaining of Souls to himself. But Bishops, I mean Diocesans, as such, and distinct from other Pastors, are not at all Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments, by whom mostly this Gospel-design is effected. Moreover, how few should they be, to whom this care was extend∣ed,
and how small comfort should the bulk of the Labourers in the Word and Doctrine be able to reap from the Scripture; which other∣ways is one of the most refreshing Cordials to the weary and fainting Labourers of Christ's Vineyard. And if we consult the Epistles to these Churches, how many things shall we find therein that argue, beyond scruple, that the Spirit is speaking to the collective Bodies of Church-Officers and not to one Man only. Shall we believe that for the sin of one Diocesan Bishop, who, as such, was scarce so much as a Preacher of the Gospel, all the Candlesticks of the Gospel were to be remov∣ed from the whole Church, and the Light thereof extinguished: a grie∣vous Punishment, and too universal, providing the Diocesan only were to be charged with Defection. Yea have we not much better rea∣son, to judge that this declining, and deserting of their first Love, im∣puted to the Ephesian Angel, had crept into, at least, the far greater part of the Church-Officers; and so the sin charged upon them, and the punishment threatned shall have a far greater correspondency. More∣over the trial of false Teachers, for which the same Ephesian Angel is commended, is not the Work of any one Church-Officer, but of the Ecclesiastical Senat, which therefore must be the Angel, who upon this account is here commended. D. M. yeelds that the Heavenly Admo∣nitions first address'd to these Angels were also communicated to the Churches but by the interposal of their Angels. But, were this as certain as, from what is now said, it appear precarious, yea and uncredible; yet this Angel or Bishop might be only a Praeses or Moderator, so his Argument is not at all relieved. Who (continues he) cann't be call'd a Colledge of Angels but one single Angel &c. Which is a most flat begging of the Question. And tho' (saith he) there be Instructions in these Epistles, in which, besides others, the Angels are particularly admonished, yet they are no less adress'd to single Angels than the Epistle to the Philippians is to that Church, Tho' St. Paul uses particular Compellations Ch. 4. verse 2. 3. Where he perverts the state of the Question which is not, If in any Epistle there may be Instru∣ctions that concern some beside these to whom they are chiefly directed? But if what is here said to the Angel can agree to any one Man? And beside what is instanced, to what one Man in the World can that agree which is promi∣sed to the Philadelphian Angel? viz. That the Hereticks were to come and Worship before his Feet. Such a promise indeed is made to the Church, Isai. 60. 14. but to one meer Man no where.
§. 9 From all which 'tis evident that by the Name of Angels, not particular Men, but at least the Ecclesiastick Senats are design'd which is not unfrequent in Scripture, as Mal. 2. 7. where 'tis said that the Priests lips should keep knowledge, from whose mouth the Law was to be sought, the reason of which is subjoin'd, that he was the Messenger or Angel &c. as the Seventy have it. I know from the Passage Dr. Ham∣mond, on the Revelation, attempts to conclude the quite contrary, al∣ledging that in this place the High-Priest only is to be understood, but without any ground of his alledgiance: this his Assertion further sup∣poses, that the High-Priest alone was the Cabine of Knowledge, and the Peoples Teacher from whom the Law was to be learned; quite contra∣ry to 2 Chron. 17. 8, 9. where we learn that amongst the rest of the Teachers sent through the Kingdom by Jehoshaphat, were Elishamma and Jehoram Priests. Moreover the 4, 5, and 6. verses of the same second of Malachy, where under the name of Levi in the singular Number all the Levites are undeniably to be understood, and what's said of Levi as of one Man is certainly mean'd of a Multitude; evince that under the name of Priest in the following verse, we must understand a Plurality. §. 10. But the 24. verse of the second Chapter, Vnto you I say and to the rest of Thyatira puts this beyond Debate. But Hammond ex∣cepts, that in the Ancient Greek Mss. And particularly that at St. James  is left out, and the words read To you the rest or To the rest of you in Thyatira. But be it so, yet I think these will not serve to discredit the Vulgar, and universally received Greek Copy in which this particle is found. Yea 'tis found in so many Greek Copies, and these of so good Note, that I doubt if any of all these who during eight or nine Score of years, translated or expounded this Place, has ommitted it; and altho' some Copies of the Vulgar Latine want it; yet there be no few that re∣tain it; and amongst other two Mss. in the Library of Glasgow. And Aretas or rather Andreas who lived in the fifth Century; above, as I be∣lieve, the age of most of the Mss. now in the World, I except not that at St. James's notwithstanding of what is fabled to the contrary, retains this Particle as a part of the then uncontroverted Copy. And after him Beda: to which we may yet add the ablest of the Romanists, as Diony∣sius Carthusians, Lyra the Glossa interlinearis, and a Lapide, no Friends to Presbytry.
§. 11. But D. M.Page 117. tells us that these words in the 24 v. But unto you I say, &c. cannot be applyed so properly to the Angel of the Church of Thy∣atira as to these mention'd in the end of the 23 verse, the other Churches of Asia. Which, (saith he) because they are mentioned in the Speech directed to the An∣gel of the Church of Thyatria the immediat transition from him to them is easie. But except we force the place nothing of this kind can be thence col∣lected, there being nothing in this Epistle spoken to or of the other Churches except the meer mentioning thereof, the more to hold forth the greatness and conspicuousness of the Punishment denunced against the Strayers in Thyatira. Yea the latter part of the 24 verse, And to the rest in Thyatira proclaims that the former part of the verse is to be understood of the same People of Thyatira likewise. In a word his gloss is so uncouth and strain'd that you cannot easily tell what to make of it. And 'tis, at least, no more odd than his Conduct all along. §. 12. And to instance, in the present Theme, he would fain ridi∣cule Salmasius for affirming that, under the names of the Angels, the Chur∣ches themselves or the more pure and Angel-like parts thereof are to be under∣stood. According to Salmasius his Iterpretation (inferrs D. M.) the seven Stars must needs be the seven Churches of the seven Churches. As if such Phrases were not frequent enough in Authors, and yet not justly lyable to any such Inference; or as if the more holy and spiritual part of the Church were the whole visible Church: for except D. M. so affirm, the Author of this Gloss cann't be accus'd of nonsense; who yet is not Salmasius, for he only learn'd it from Aretas, or Andraeas, and other Fathers, and defended it against the Jesuite Petavius, whom D. M. would patronize against both Protestants and Fathers. The second of the Homilies ascribed to AugustineEt Angeli earum ibidem non debent intelligi, nisi aut Episoopi aut praepositi Ecclesiarum.—Nam quia etiam Angelus nuncius interpraeta∣tur, quicunque aut Episcopus aut Presbyter aut etiam Laicus frequenter de Deo loquitur, & quomodo ad Vitam eternam perveniat meritò Angelus Dei dicitur. in Apoca∣lypsin informs us that under the name of Angel not only Bishops but other Church-Rulers are likewise understood. And again, seeing Angel signifies a Messenger; whosoever, whether Bishop, Presbyter or Laick frequently speak∣eth of God, and declares how we may obtain eternal Life, deservedly gets the name of an Angel of God. And AretasComment. in Apocalyps. Cap. 3. . saith, he calleth the Church
it self the Angel. And PrimasiusIn Cap. 1. Apoc. saith by these Angels of the Church are to be understood the Guides and Rectors of the People, who ruling in particu∣lar Churches, Preach the Word of Life to all Men: for the name of Angel signifies a Messenger. AndIn. Cap. 2. again both Church and Angel is compre∣hended under the Person of the Angel. And thus their main Scripture-Ar∣gument even the Fathers being Judges goes to ruine. §. 13. Yea the more sagacious of our Adversaries well perceive that neither this Scripture, nor any other, supports their Doctrine: Where∣fore Petavius never attempts to bring his Proofs from Scripture, but on∣ly from Ecclesiastick Traditions. Add hereto the words of Dr. Bur∣net Confer. Page 310. As for the Notion (saith he) of the distinct Offices of Bishop and Presbyter, I confess, it is not so clear to me: and therefore since I look upon the Sacramental Actions, as the highest of sacred Performances; I cannot but acknowledge these who are empower'd for them, must be of the highest Office in the Church. So I do not alledge a Bishop to be a distinct Office from a Pres∣byter; but a different degree in the same Office, to whom for Order and Vnities sake, the chief inspection and care of Ecclesiastical Matters ought to be refer∣red, and who shall have Authority to curb the Insolencies of some factious and turbulent Spirits. His Work should be to feed the Flock by the Word and Sa∣craments, as well as other Presbyters; and especially to try and ordain Entrants, and to Oversee, Direct, and Admonish such as bear Office. And I more willingly incline to believe Bishops and Presbyters, to be the several degrees of the same Office, since the names of Bishop and Presbyter, are used for the same thing in Scripture; and are also used promiscuously by the Writers of the two first Centuries. Where he plainly contradicts Dr. Pearson, who, in favour of his Ignatius, largely pleads for the accurat distinction of Bi∣shop and Presbyter in the second Century, denies Bishop and Presbyter to be distinct Orders; and finally acknowledges, that in the chiefest parts of the Ministerial Function they are equal: and so really denudes the Bishop of all the degree he left him. But more clearly elsewhere, I acknowledged (saith heConfer. Page 331.) Bishop and Presbyter, to be one and the same Office; and so I plead for no New Office-Bearers in the Church. Next, in our second Conference, the Power giv'n to Church∣men was proved to be double. The first Branch of it, is their Autho∣rity to publish the Gospel, to manage the Worship, and to dispence
the Sacraments. And this is all that is of Divine-Right in the Mini∣stry, in which Bishops and Presbyters are equal sharers, both being vested with this Power. But beside this, the Church claims a Power of Jurisdiction, of making Rules for Discipline, and of appointing and executing the same; all which is indeed suitable to the common Laws of Societies, and to the general Rules of Scripture, but hath no posi∣tive Warrant from any Scripture-Precept. And all these Constituti∣ons of Churches into Synods and the Canons of Discipline, taking their rise from the Divisions of the World into the several Provinces, and beginning in the end of the second, and beginning of the third Century, do clearly shew they can be derived from no Divine Origi∣nal; and so were, as to their particular Form, but of humane Consti∣tution: therefore as to the management of this Jurisdiction, it is in the Churches Power to cast it in what mould she will. A Presbyter (ac∣knowledges even Cornelius à LapideIn Philip. 1. 1.) is equal to a Bishop in the chief∣est Order, which is the Order of the Priest-hood. §. 14. To which add the Judgement of Dr. Hammond a Man so dis∣temper'd with extreme Passion for the Hierarchy, that he makesOn Rev. 4. compared with his Notes on Acts 11. him that sat on the Throne Rev. 4. God the Father, and the four and twenty Elders with their Golden Crowns, an Image and Representation of the Metro∣politan Bishop of Hierusalem, and the four and twenty Bishops of Judaea in Council, for Golden Crowns or Mitres he makes the Characters of the E∣piscopal Dignity. Yet even he asserts (on Acts 11. 30. & Philip. 1. 1.) that the Title of Presbyter in Scripture times belonged principally if not only to Bishops: There being (saith he) no evidence that any of that second Order were then in∣stituted but Bishops (only) and Deacons. This he at large confirms, and so really overthrows Prelacy when he would fainest establish it, joining with the Presbyterians in their grand Antiprelatick Principle; viz. that simple Presbyter (as the Hierarchicks phrase it) without Power of Or∣dination or Government, or a distinction between Bishop and preach∣ing Presbyter, is a meer stranger, & without all Foundation in the Holy Scriptures. From all which 'tis clear that these Bishops or (which is all one) preaching Presbyters, in Scriptures, and during the Apostolick age, were nothing save Pastors of particular Congregations.
Section VI. Our meaning of Ignatius confirmed from the Writings of the Apostles, his immediat Ancestors MOreover nothing can be more clear for the Idenity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter, than that known Scripture Acts 20. 17, 28. They Answer, that the Bishops of Asia, not the Pastors of Ephesus, were, by Paul, sent for, which some would support from the 18 ver. From the first day that I came into Asia &c. But since, as is clear ch. 19. verse 10. from his coming into Asia, he had been most in Ephesus, he might truly say so much tho' the Ephesians only had been present; but suppose he spoke to others beside, we are at no loss; the Question is, if he gave not, tho' amongst others, the Title of Overseers or Bishops to these he sent for? verse 17. And if these were not the Elders of Ephesus? They yet object the words of Irenaeus viz. That Paul called together to Miletum the Bishops and Presbyters of Ephesus and the neighbouring Towns. But as for his seem∣ing here to distinguish Bishops from Presbyters, this Scripture where they get both Names, and which Iraeneus had then in his view, and his frequent promiscuous using of these Names, perswade me that he only respected the 17 and 28 verses, and so took Bishop and Presbyter Syno∣nimically for one and the same. His adding of the neighbour Towns to E∣phesus might flow from his inadvertency whereat no attentive Reader of IrenaeusLib. 2. Cap. 4. will marvel, and yet this is as likely to have crept into the Version, for the Original of Iraeneus we have not, because these Elders their belonging to Ephesus alone is not only so clear from the 17 verse, that the repeating of the word Ephesus would really prove a redundan∣cy, wherefore the Syriack omits it in the former part of the verse and expresses it in the latter, and called for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus: but also all the Ancients either affirm, as Hierome, or suppose that these Elders belonged only to Ephesus, which even Dr. MauricePages 31, 32. yeelds against Dr. Hammond and says, that then, properly speaking, there might not
be a Bishop amongst them all, for they are Presbyters belonging not to several Congregations; but to one Church and might have a Bishop. But not only the promiscuous attributing to them the Names Bishop and Presbyter, their being, and that without any insinuation of their Subjection to a su∣periour Bishop, enjoin'd by the Apostle to Oversee and feed the Flock; and finally the very Repetition of this Fiction of their Hierarchy in the Apostolick Age sufficiently refute it. Who (continues he) the Anci∣ents thought was Timothy. And thus all resolves into the fictitious Episco∣pacy of Timothy, already overthrown. Now 'tis observable how they contradict one another, and by halfs acknowledge to be false all they plead for: for some, as Dr. Maurice, perceiving that the Ancients af∣firm and the Scriptures proclaim all these Elders to belong to the Church or City of Ephesus, acknowledge these could be no Diocesan Bishops. Others as Dr. Hammond (in locum & alibi) and PetaviusApud Wal. Mess. Page 96. seeing that these are not only dignifi'd with the name of Bishop but intrusted with the care of the Flock, and that without Paul's mentioning of any superiour Bishop; when, if e∣ver, there was ground to have mention'd him; yeeld that, of necessity, these Elders must be Bishops or more than simple Presbyters. Whence is all this Contradiction and Confusion of Tongues? but from the force of Truth before which Men must either bow or break, and be compell'd, tho' af∣ter never so much interpolation and disguise, to express what they would fainest conceal. The matter is, their Diocesan Bishop, their simple Presbyter, their distinction between Bishop and Presbyter are meer An∣tiscriptural Figments, in the sustaining of which against this and the like Scriptures, they are obliged to confront one another, and in the throng of their blunderings intirely yeeld the Controversie. §. 2. The same line of confusion runs along their Answer to Philip. 1. 1. with the Bishops and Deacons &c. whence 'tis clear that there were in one City many Bishops who were no other thing than Presbyters, and that these were no distinct Orders, the Deacons being immediatly sub∣join'd, these were the Bishops of the several Cities of Macedonia under Philippi the Metropolis (saith Dr. Hammond in locum) 'tis denied by Dr. MauricePage 27. I could never find reason (saith he) to believe them any other thing than Presbyters. Philippi was a Metropolis because a Colonie; saith Dr. Hammond: but that this will not follow is acknowledged by Dr. Maurice. Thus they are still by the ears. But saith Dr. Hammond, the
Apostle might retain the Episcopal Power in his own hands, and tho' absent might exercise it by Letters: but they can give no ground why the like may not be said of the Apostle in reference to the rest of the Churches, and so Timothy and Titus shall be dethron'd and our Adversaries, endeavour∣ing to Answer one of our Arguments, loss two of their own, yea all of them: for it being no less presumable that John would keep the Episco∣pal Power over the Churches of Asia in his own hand then that Paul kept that of Philippi, there shall be no ground nor colour to Metamor∣phose the Apocalyptick Angels into Diocesan Bishops? Or it's possible (continues Dr. H.) that then the Bishop's Chair was vacant. But if so and a Diocesan so necessary as they pretend, without peradventure the A∣postle had not only mention'd it. but also spent some part of his Epistle in directing and giving them Rules in order to their choice of a fit Suc∣cessour. Or the Bishop (saith he) might be absent, and Epaphroditus by the Ancients judged Bishop of Philippi appears to have been then with Paul. But this Dream of Epaphroditus his being Bishop of Philippi, the Doctor in that very placePage 636. condemns and overthrows, and so frees us of further trouble about it. §. 3. Yea in none of these Answers does Dr. H. rest, but, as is said, in this pretext that Philippi was a Metropolis over many subject Bishops, leaning mainly on Acts 16. 12. whose Arguments were examined by Dr. StillingfleetIr. Page 369. Et seq. and Mr. Clerkson.Prim. Episc. Page 7. Et seq. Dr. Maurice, tho' a grand Enemy to Hammond's grand Principle, undertakes notwithstand∣ing the defence of some of these Arguments against the latter, but medles not with the former, and saith that Beza's Manuscript hath and not  as hath also the Syriack and Arabick. But OEcumenius and Theophilact, and even Chrysostome, yea and the received Greek Copy which Translators, generally follow, read not . But see∣ing, as the learned Stillingfleet demonstrats, Philippi was not then a Me∣tropolis in the Civil sence which is the Foundation of all their Structure, 'tis impossible that it can be call'd by Luke  or first in respect of Dignity; but only either must be mean'd as Luke may well be understood that it was the first Colony they mett with coming from Samothrace, or in respect of Situation it being scarce within the Bounds of the proper Macedonia, but on the Thracian side of the River Strymon the Boundary
between Thrace and Macedonia, yet it might be nearer to the proper Ma∣cedonia than was Neapolis, and therefore is rather to be reckon'd a part of that Country than Neapolis could be: wherefore on both, at least, certainly on one of these accounts, appears the nullity of Dr. Maurice his Answer, while he says that not Philippi but Neapolis was the first in Si∣tuation. Of the same kidney is his saying that Philippi might be more con∣siderable in Luke's time than in the time of P. Aemilius: seeing this is a mean begging of the Question: for he brings nothing from any Re∣cords which a Matter of this kind requires, to make in the least proba∣ble the growth of Philippi between the time of Aemilius and Luke: and ChrysostomeHomil. 35. In Act. Apost. . speaking of Luke's time, tells us that it was no great City. Moreover Dr. Stilling fleet, ex abundanti, clearly shews through the several periods of time that Philippi was of no greater Dignity in the time of Luke than in the time of P. Aemilius. Dr. Maurice adds as a proof of Philippi's Metropolitan-ship, in Luke's time that the Bishop of Philippi is mention'd as Metropolitan in Liberatus, the Council of Ephesus, Sedulius, and in an old Notitia. To which I Answer with Dr. StillingfleetIren. Page 361. in the like Case: But what validity there is in such Subscriptions, or Allegations in the latter end of the fourth, or the time of the fifth Century to prove a Metropo∣lis: in the first, let any-one judge that doth but consider how common a thing it was to alter Metropoles, especially after the new Disposition of the Roman Im∣pire by Constantine. Yea Carolus à sancto Paulo who was most versant in these Matters, and with him Dr. Stillingfleet, believe that for the first six Centuries Philippi was no Metropolis. §. 4. But I will not enlarge in overthrowing a Fancy so wild and gross. But in the end of the second Century, (saith Dr. Burnet,Conferences. Pages 307, 308.) the Churches were framed in another mould from the Division of the Empire: and the Bishops of the Cities did, according to the several Divisions of the Em∣pire, associat in Synods with the chief Bishop of that Division or Province, who was call'd the Metropolitan, from the Dignity of the City, where he was Bishop. And hence sprang Provincial Synods, and the Superiorities, and Precedencies of Bishopricks. You see how the chiefest of Prelatists disown and disclaim this Metropolitan Fiction: but none more ful∣ly than Dr. Stillingfleet who has nervously baffl'd all their Pretences, prevented whatsoever Dr. Maurice advanced (for I speak not of Mr.
Clerkson who has also sufficiently done it) and finally, more particularly, ruined all their Pretexts for Philippi's Metropolitan-ship, either in a Ci∣vil or Ecclesiastick sense, during the first Century or Apostolick age. Judge therefore of Dr. Maurice his Candor, which minds me of ano∣ther piece of his Legerdemain to evite the force of Philippians 1. 1. For if (saith hePage 27.) in Mr. Clerkson's Opinion, the Bishops mention'd Philip. 1. 1. be no other than Presbyters, then this place is impertinently alledg∣ed, since many Presbyters are by all sides acknowledg'd to have belong'd to one Church, but if he speak of Bishops in the common Ecclesiastical sense, and then conclude from this Passage that there were many in the Church of Philippi, his Opinion is as singular as that of Dr. Hammond which he endeavours to refute, for my part I must profess I am not concern'd in this Dispute; and I could never find reason to believe them any other thing, than Presbyters—Page 30. Or were these Bishops only Presbyters ruling the Church of Philippi, with common and equal Authority? Then our Author must give up the Question, and in stead of making many Bishops, must own that there was none at all there, but Presbyters only, if he thus contend he will abuse his Reader with the ambiguity of a word, which he takes in one sense, and the Church in another. That many Presbyters might belong to one Congregation, none ever deni'd; that many Bi∣shops in the allowed and Ecclesiastical sense of the word, had the oversight of one City, sounds strange and incredible to the ancient Christians. Where he sleely supposes as granted that Bishops in Philip. 1. 1. must either be understood of their simple Presbyters or of Diocesan Bishops, and then equipps his horn'd Argument no other ways than if he had professedly declined all Dispute, till once his Adversary had, out of kindness, yeelded the Que∣stion, which is only about the Scriptural and Apostolick sense of the word and notion of the Office of a Bishop, if that, and the Office of a preach∣ing Presbyter be not in Scripture one and the same, and consequently if these at Philippi were not Scriptural Bishops no less than they were Presbyters? Now that he concern'd not himself in this Dispute, nor was in earnest in it. I deny not: his slippery dealings make it but too, too apparent: his simple intimation that these were only their simple Pres∣byters, I pass, having already blown off all their noticeable Depravati∣ons of Philip. 1. 1. I have yet mett with; and observe that he, following the Romanists, insinuats that we cann't understand the Scripture's mean∣ing, untill we have their Churches Commentary. His ambiguous and
unhandsome conduct is no less apparent in these his Phrases (common Ecclesiastical sense—which he takes in one sense, and the Church in another) For either he may mean that the Church, when she speaks of Bishops who were in after times, understands, by this Name, only Diocesans; and so touches not in the least (contrary to what he insinuats) the Churches re∣ceived sense of this Text, nor what Notion she had of Scriptural-Bi∣shops: Or his sense may be that, when she speaks of Apostolick and Scriptural Bishops, she then still means Diocesans and Rulers over their simple Presbyters, and this he must mean if he speak to the Purpose. And then I inquire what Church was of this mind? Surely neither Primi∣tive nor reformed Churches, I except not that of England, whose great∣est Lights we have already heard disclaiming all Divine Right of Dioce∣san Episcopacy, and identifying Bishop and Presbyter. Yea many, even of the Romanists, are forc'd to confess so much; There are Catholicks (saith the Jesuite JustinianusIn Philip. 1. 1. Haeserunt in eodem Luto nonnulli Catholici.) who have stuck in the mud of Aërianism. The Church then he means must be only a few factious Novelists, who, in despite of both Divine and Humane Records, and the common Sen∣timent of Christians, dare to obtrude on the World, as a Fundamental of Religion, their privat and wild Fancies. Neither is it strange that so few imbrace this conceit of denying the Scripture-Identity of Bishop and Presbyter. §. 5. For beside these Scriptures now adduc'd let them but look un∣to 1 Tim. 1. 3. where they shall find a transition from Bishop to Dea∣cons without any mention of intermediant Presbyters, and consequent∣ly the Identity of these Offices. BellarmineDe Clericis. Cap. 15. Answers that the A∣postle gives a general Instruction to the Clergy, & that under the name of Bishops & Presbyters all the superior Clergy is comprehended. But seeing they make a Distinction of these Offices so necessary, it was requi∣site they had been handl'd in particular, and not hudl'd up in a general, seeing no where in Scripture there's any more particular Distinction of Bishop and preaching Presbyter assigned: but Bellarmine's main Answer to this and all such Scriptures is, that the Names Bishop and Presbyter were then common to both Orders: which Answer all the Hierarchicks and more particularly D. M. borrow from the Jesuite. But I answer and argue with Junius against BellarmineTom. 2. Col. 1211. that seeing the Names were then
common, and a real community of Names imports a community of things which by these names are signifi'd; it necessarily then follows that, as the Names were then common, so were the Offices design'd by these Names. But to see the Reform'd conquering, and the Jesuites foil'd some are much pain'd: and in special D. M. who spends about 17 pagesPage 22. Et seq. for the support of Bellarmine's Answer: the substance whereof, and of his first three QueriesPages 157, 158. is, that Still in the Pentateuch the High Priest is nam'd by the same Appellative (without any distinction of Order or Jurisdiction) that the other Priests were nam'd by: and the title of a Priest was promiscuously ap∣ply'd, without any distinction or marks of Eminence to the High Priest as well as to the Subordinat. And, The Apostles retain'd the Phraseology of the Jews who spoke of Priests and Levites as two distinct Orders, without mentioning the High Priest. And, When the Ancients Dichotomiz'd the Clergy, they in other places plainly reckon up three distinct Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon. But is there never in all the Scriptures any Title, Distinction, or Marks of Eminence giv'n to one Priest, which were not communi∣cable to all of 'em? Got ever all of 'em promiscuously the Title of High Priest, or such distinctive Appellations? Did the Apostles so retian the Phraseology of the Jews, as that they sometimes make a Bipartite and sometimes a Tripartite Division of ordinary Church-Officers, and give to any one ordinary Pastor, sometimes at least, a distinguishing Title and Marks of Eminence which are at no time communicable to all ordi∣nary Pastors promiscuously? As to the Ancients their sometimes Dicho∣tomizing, sometimes Trichotomizing the Clergy; it's most certain that in their Dichotomies they ey'd the prime primitive Church, and in their Tri∣chotomies their own times. But Christ saith D. M.) is call'd an Apostle & a Bishop, the Apostles, Presbyters and Deacons. But was Christ so call'd an A∣postle that he had no other peculiar titles or marks of Eminence, or that on the other hand the name Christ was giv'n promiscuously to all Apo∣stles or ever giv'n to any of 'em? Lastly, was the Apellation of Apostle e∣qually communicable to all Presbyters or ordinary Pastors, as to the twelve and some few else extraordinary Officers? All which he must swal∣low, else he gives no relief to his Friend Bellarmine. We Argue, that see∣ing to no ordinary Pastor is giv'n any peculiar Appellation, Character, or Description, but what is equally common to all, there must be an Equality and Parity amongst all of 'em; and this they can never get o∣ver.
Moreover among the Evangelists, yea and among the Apostles, Officers superior to ordinary Pastors, the reformed Churches being Judges, there was a compleat Parity as was also among the Deacons their Inferiours: notwithstanding of all which the Hierarchicks must plead for certain Stories of Preheminence among the ordinary Pastors; in favours; whereof ne gry quidem they can bring from the Word of God the only Rule of Faith and Doctrine. §. 6. Add hereto Tit. chap. 1. where we not only find the Apostle using indifferently and promiscuously the two words Bishop and Elder, but also he alledgeth the necessity of fit Qualifications in the one, to prove that the same are required in the other; the Presbyters that were to be Ordain'd must be blameless &c. because a Bishop must be so: wherein either we have an ocular Demonstration of the Identity of these two Of∣ficers, or else (which I abhorr to think) the Apostles reasoning is more pitifull than the most equivocant Paralogism; their being not so much as a nominal Connexion betwixt the Antecedent and Consequent; and no less ridiculous than if one should reason that every Captain of a single Company must be able to guide and manage a whole Army, because such Qualifications are required in a General. Now, seeing these Scriptures already vindicated, to name no others, evidently declare that there was no such thing as a Diocesan Bishop, that there's a com∣pleat Identity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter, and consequently a Parity of all ordinary Pastors, they of necessity condemn the Hierar∣chick and Diocesan Imparity: for I'm perswaded these who alledge that they find in Scripture a Distinction between these Offices, will judge that they may with reason enough conclude the Divine Right of Epis∣copacy. Hence judge of D. M's fifth Querypag. 158. where and in what places of Scripture the superiority and jurisdiction of one Priest above another is forbidden? And if it be not plainly forbidden, then the Fancy of a Jus Divinum in favours of Presbytry (such as is exclusive of all other Forms of Ecclesiastical Government) is groundless and Chimerical. From all which I conclude that if the Ignatian Bishop and Presbyter most be understood in the Notion of our Adversaries, he then quite cros∣ses the Apostles, & so his Doctrine is stark nought, or (which is a far more charitable Sentiment) his Epistles have suffer'd no small interpolation.
Section VII. The grand Objection, taken from the Commentaries of the Ancients, remov'd. BUT the Fathers, as our Adversaries pretend, glossing on these Texts, went quite cross to our Doctrine, To the Bishops and Deacons (saith ChrysostomeOn Philip. 1. 1.) What means that? What? was there a Plurali∣ty of Bishops in one City? Not at all: for at that time the Name was yet com∣mon, so that a Bishop was also nam'd a Deacon, that is a Servant. And adds, that both Timothy and Titus were Bishops. Of the same mind (say they) were Hilary, Epiphanius, Theodoret, OEcumenius and others: which harmonius Consent of Ancients cann't but be the true meaning of the places in Controversie. But as these, and such Fathers confess, and their Works proclaim, they were, like others, subject to humane Weak∣ness and Corruption, fell into compliance with the growing Errors, in∣to immoderat heat, prevarication and self-repugnancy, and negligence to search for the Scriptures their meaning. How loudly sounded the debate concerning rebaptizing between Stephen and Cyprian, which ore almost the whole body of Christians into a pair of Factions? With what heat was it prosecuted? And, which is most lamentable, how pitifully was the truth on both hands deserted? For altho' it be commonly believ'd that Stephen only held the truth, and Cyprian and his fail'd, yet Stephen and the Romans did no less betray it: On the other extream, while they asserted the sufficiency of Baptism, altho' administred by the grossest Hereticks and capital Enemies of the Fundamentals of Christi∣anity. How great, both before and after that time, were the Contests about Easter? How scandalous were the Contests between Chrysostome, Epiphanius and Theophilus: and between Hierome and Ruffine. Not to name others, in all which it is apparent how little they believed one a∣nother, and how much many of 'em prevaricated in favours of their par∣ticular Fancies.
§. 2. But their Contradictions to one another are less to be admired when we clearly perceive that one and the self same Author, either out of negligence or some other weakness, hath given us quite contrary Doctrines. Justine Martyr, which Sculte observesMedull. Theol. Patrum. Vol. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 17., in one place ascribes the whole Work of Regeneration to free Grace, and in another de∣stroyes what he had builded; and places free Will in the room thereof. And Clemens Alexandrinus, as the same Scultet observesLib. 5. Cap. 13. following Ju∣stine Martyr delivers the like inconsistencies about the same Theme: he sometimes ascribes our Salvation wholly to Faith, and again tells us that we may purchase it with the Treasure of our Works. §. 3. Of the same kind are their polemick Discourses, wherein their study was much more directed to bespatte their Antagonists, and alure the vulgar Auditor, than solidly to support the Truth. I shall never believe that OptatusContra Parmenianum. Lib. 3. believed himself, when he maintain'd that all the Menaces utter'd in the Old Testament against Tyre and her King had for their Object Parmenianus the schismatical Bishop of the Donatists, who lived at Carthage, that had once been a Tyrian Colony, but in the time of Parme∣nianus was inhabited by Romans who had either quite extirpated or expel∣led thence the whole Race of the Tyrians. With no less lightness, but more danger did Justine MartyrApologia ad Antonium pium Imp. . long before Optatus, endeavour to perswade the Gentiles, that all Mankind were Partakers of Christ, be∣cause they were Partakers of Reason, and Christ is called  which also signifies Reason. Where we see that Justine leans only on a pitifull Equi∣vocation, the deceit of which could not be unknown to him who natively spoke Greek. Neither were Origenes, Methodius, and others, as Hie∣rome witnesseth, more solide in their Writings. Yea Hierome himself distinguisheth between Progymnasticks and Dogmaticks, alledging that in the former of these a Disputant hath liberty to muster up many Arguments in which he hath no confidence. §. 4. To these we may add both their Homilies and Expositions wherein it's not easily determined when they spoke their own minds, or when they gave us only Transcripts of others, to believe and defend which they held themselves but little obliged. Yea Hierome oftner
than once tells us that it was the common Practice of the Writers of these times to give the Expositions of others, and yet conceal the names of the Authors, and so involve the Reader, and make him take for their judgement the things they never believ'd. §. 5. If we search into the causes of so strange dealing, we have heard out of Hierome that one of 'em was meer sloath and neglect. See much more to this purpose in Dallaeus de usu Patrum. Another Cause, why they both spoke, wrote and practised otherways than they knew could be warranted by Scripture, was their unjustifiable Compliance with both Jews and Pagans; good perhaps intentionally being out of design the better to Proselyte them, but eventually proved as unhappy as its Practice was unwarrantable, and destitute of Scripture ground. Hence their Deacons were named Levites, their Bishops Priests and High-Priests, the Lord's Table the Altar, and the Lord's Supper a Sacrifice, and at length Diocesan Bishops and Arch-Bishops were instituted in imitation of the Lombard. Lib. 4. Distinctione 24. M. Pagan Flamines and Protoflamines. Another Cause thereof, which especially takes place in their Homiles and Expositions, was the multi∣tude of Alterations and Corruptions well grown before any of these Ho∣milies and Commentaries we now enjoy were extant, these were too deeply rooted to be opposed; and therefore they believed themselves under a kind of necessity to accommodat their Comments and Declama∣tions thereto, at least, so to temper and compose them that they should not thwart therewith. Of this sort of Conduct, we have a clear instance in Augustine, who sometimes commends and praises several unscriptural Ceremonies: ButEpist. 118. elsewhere speaking his Mind more freely dis∣approves them as both unwrantable and burdensome. He indeed there intimats that some things commonly observ'd throw the World tho' they were not written yet might be kept as having come from the Apostles or general Councils; such as was the Observation of the Lord's Passion, Resurrection and Ascension. But even this, as is most probable, he yeelded out of humane Weakness and Fear to oppose the then prevailing Innovations: for, the needlesness of such preterscriptural Observations he evidently declares elsewhere De Doctrina Christiana. Lib. 2. Cap. 9. saying that all things which belong either to Faith and Manners are plain∣ly contain'd in Scripture. From all which is clear, that we cannot at all be sure if the Fathers, Commenting on the places in hand, either knew
their true meaning, or if they did, sincerely gave us what themselves believed. §. 6. And that in their Explications of these Texts, we have not their genuine Sentiments, is to me evident. First, because they gave such Reasons of their Exposition as the greatest Prelatists count stark nought. Thus BellarmineDe Clericis. Cp. 15. rejects and overturns the Grounds of every one of these Expositors in particular, except these of Chrysostome only, who yet hath nothing of any moment above the rest: for Chryso∣stome exponing Philip. 1. 1. alledges only in defence of his Exposition that the sole Title and Name of Bishop was common to both Orders: but this is refused by Dr. Hammond and others, and, as we shall hear, by Chrysostome himself. But the Jesuite intending to retain that Expositi∣on, thought himself obliged to embrace some of their Defences, where∣as in truth they themselves never believ'd them to be solide, but only the growing Corruptions being too strong to be opposed, and some of 'em having got an Episcopacy which was then creeping in, and which they, depending on the Churches Authority, thought they might retain, they believ'd that for the fashion they might so gloss the Scriptures where∣by Episcopacy is wounded that the People should not perceive the un∣warrantableness thereof. Secondly, The main ground common to all these Expositions why they expone any of these Texts as if they condemn'd not a Diocesan Bishop, is a sufficient evidence that they were far from being in earnest in their Glosses, for they still alledge that there behov∣ed to be a Bishop above these Bishops in Philippi whom Paul salutes, be∣cause there might not be Plurality of Bishops in one City. This Practice indeed was for the most part current in this time, tho' not universal, as we learn fromDe heresi Miletiana. Epiphanius, informing us that even in these times there used to be a Plurality of Bishops in one City. Yet quite contrary to this Text which they either carelesly or timourously shuffl'd. They judged (saith Dr. StillingfleetIren. Page 317.) the Practice of the Apostles by that of their own times; as is evident by Theodoret and the rest of the Greek Commentators, assigning that as the reason why the Presbyters spoken of in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, were not Bishops in the sense of their Age, because their could be but one Bishop in a City. And Petaviusapud Wal. Mess. pag. 6. & 114. grants that many true Bishops were some∣times at once in one City. AndApud Salmas. apparat. ad libros de primatu. Page 23. altho' the Episcopal Order be of Divine Right,
yet at's not of Divine Right that there should be only one Bishop in one City, this was only brought in by the Authority of the Church and Councils, and according∣ly Hierome and Ambrose are to be understood. By what Law (saith Episcopacy asserted. Page 132. J. Taylor) speaking of Philippi and that not as a Metropolis) may there not be more Bishops than one in a proper sense in one Diocess? Where 'tis not unpleasant to hear so great a Prelatist by one Interrogation over∣throwing the whole Episcopal Cause, and propugning the main Plea of the Presbyterians viz. that in Philippi alone there were many who had not only the power of dispensing the Word and Sacraments, but also of Ordination and Jurisdiction, and were every way Bishops in a proper sense. Thirdly, Some of these Expositors proclaim what we alledge for ,—&c. OEcumenius who, like the rest intimats, as if in Philippi there had been a Bishop superior to the plurality of Bishops saluted by the Apostle. Yet on Acts 20. and 17. gives this Paraphrase. Because many are ig∣norant of the Manner especially of the New Testament, whereby Bi∣shops are call'd Presbyters and Presbyters Bishops. This much may be observed both from this place and from the Epistle to Titus and to the Philippians, and 1. to Timothy. From this place therefore of the Acts we may arrive at the certainty of this Matter. For thus it is written, from Miletus he sent and called the Elders of the Church, it is not said the Bishops. And afterwards he subjoins, over which the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops to Feed or Rule the Church: and from the Epistle to Titus, that thou mightest appoint Elders in every City, as I ordain'd thee: and from the Epistle to the Philippians, to all that are at Philippi with Bishops and Deacons: and, as I believe, the same may be gather'd from the frist to Timothy: If any Man (saith he) desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good Work; a Bishop there∣fore should be blameless. And shortly after, let not a Widow be taken into the number under threescore years (which the Transcriber of OEcumenius hath out of negligence inserted from the 5. Chap. and 9. ver. in stead of the 8. verse of the 3. Likewise let the Deacons be grave &c.) For this is the Church Canon directing what manner of Man such an one viz. the Deacon ought to be. Thus far OEcumenius, and not a word more to this purpose, where, having really proposed the now much tossed Que∣stion, mustres up four of the chief Places from which the Identity of
Bishop and Presbyter is commonly inferr'd, and directs us to learn the Solution of this Doubt therefrom. Hence 'tis certain that OEcumeni∣us, no less than Hierome and Aërius of old, and Presbyterians now, be∣liev'd the Scriptural Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, seeing, he having brought up these Scriptures, which, even in the Judgement of our Adversaries, creat to the Hierarchicks a vexatious Scruple, and pun∣gent Objection, is so far from glossing them, as thereby to leave any room for a Diocesan Bishop, that he plainly informs us, that these Scriptures only suffice to dissolve all our Scruples and period the Dispute. 'Tis evident then that OEcumenius, commenting on Philip. 1. 1. or wherever he seems to say nothing against a superiority of Dio∣cesans, spoke only out of compliance with the Custom of his time, or some such weakness. Neither is the matter less clear of Theodoret, who, altho' he ascribes an Episcopal Dispensation over the Philippians to Epa∣phroditus, yet even then he looks on him as no ordinary or fixed Offi∣cer, which is really yeelded by PetaviusApud Wal. Mess. Pag. 80. and is plain from Theodo∣ret himselfIn priorem Ep. ad Tim. Cap. 3. The Apostle (saith he) calls a Presbyter a Bishop, as we shewed when we expon'd the Epistle to the Philippians. Which may be al∣so learn'd from this Place. For after the Precepts proper to Bishops, he de∣scribes the things that agree to Deacons, omitting the Presbyters. But, as I said, of old they call'd the same Men both Bishops and Presbyters, but these who are now call'd Bishops they then call'd Apostles: But afterward the name of Apostle was left to the real Apostles: And the name Bishop giv'n to these that were of old call'd Apostles. Thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians—Thus was Titus the Apostle of the Cretians, Timo∣thy of the Asians, Thus the Apostles and Presbyters at Hierusa∣lem write to the Antiochians. And on 1 Cor. 12. 28.—first Apostles—The Apostle saith not God hath sent onlie Twelve Apostles but also the Seventy. And these who also received the like Grace. For Paul himself after his Calling was of the same Order, and Barnabas and many others. And a∣gain he calls Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians. Where 'tis clear as the Sun, that Theodoret, by these his Bishops or Apostles, under∣stands only the real Apostles themselves together with Timothy and Titus and other such Evangelists and extraordinary Officers, who never had any fixed Station. And this was well perceiv'd by the Jesuite Me∣dina, who therefore really yeelds Theodoret with Hierome, Aërius, Au∣gustine
&c. to the Presbyterians, and warmly recented by Petavius, who, besides many other places, spends at once near aDe Hierarchiâ Ecclesiasticâ. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. whole Chap∣ter to prove Theodoret a self repugnant blunderer. Hence it's clear that they cann't rent Theodoret from us, untill (Tullus-like) they first rent him from himself. Wherever therefore these Ancients so spoke as that they seemed not to oppose the Divine Right of Episcopacy; 'tis clear they did so out of carelesness, or unwarrantable Compliance, but most∣ly, as may be gather'd from the handling Aërius mett with, out of fear least they had derived on their Heads the hate of much of the then dege∣nerating Church, and secularizing Clergy. Section VIII. Moe clear Testimonies of the primitive Doctors against the Divine Right of Diocesan Episcopacy, and for the Iden∣tity of Bishop and Presbyter produc'd and vindicated. THE Bishop (saith AmbroseIn Epist. ad Ephes. Cap. 4. or rather Hilary, the ancient∣est Commentator save some Fragments of Origen, now extant) because he opens the hidden sense of the Scriptures, is said to. Prophecy, chiefly because he dispenses the words of future hope. Behold the very Idea the Ancients still retain'd of a Bishop, and yet it's nothing but the real Notion of every true Pastor or Dispenser of the Word and Sacraments. Which Order may now be that of the Presbyters. For in the Bishop are all Orders; for he is the first Priest that is the Prince of Priests, and Prophet, and Evangelist. And whatsoever else is for fullfilling the Office of the Church and Service of the Faithfull. And, The Apostle calls Timothy a Presbyter whom he had insti∣tuted a Bishop, for the first Presbyters were called Bishops; so that one Dying the next succeeded. And lastly, in Aegypt the Presbyters ordain in the Bishop's absence; where we see what he means by the Prince of Priests, and that with him a Bishop was nothing but the first either in Age or in respect of Ordination amongst the Colledge of Presbyters without any other
Preheminence or Power over the rest but what these respects gave them. Which, I'm sure, exceeds not the Dignity of a Moderator of a Synod or Presbyter. But because the following Presbyters were not found worthy of the first place this way was changed by a Council that none by his being first in order, but by his desert might be made a Bishop, and that by the Votes of many Priests, least an unworthy Man should rashly usurp the Office to the offence of many. There were born Priests under the Law of the Race of Aaron the Levite, but now all are Priests according to the Apostle Peter; and therefore Priests may be chosen out of the People. And on 1 to Timothy 3. But after the Bishop he straight way subjoins the Ordination of a Deacon, and why? But because of Bishop and Presbyter there's but one Ordination for both of them are Priests, but the Bishop is first, so that every Bishop is a Presbyter not every Presbyter a Bishop, for he's the Bishop who is first among the Presbyters. Finally the Apostle shews that Timothy was ordain'd a Presbyter, but because he had no other Presbyter be∣fore him he was a Bishop. And from thence he shews how Timothy can Ordain a Bishop for 'twas not lawfull for the Inferiour to Ordain a Superiour. §. 2. Hence appears the perverseness of BellarmineDe Clericis. Cp. 15. affirming that Hilary says only there was no need of a new Election, but denies not (saith he) the necessity of a Consecration or Episcopal Ordination. A flat Contra∣diction of Hilary's express saying that there's but one Ordination of both Bishop and Presbyter, and that even Timothy was of no higher Order than that of a Presbyter, whose whole primacy consisted in his meer be∣ing the first Presbyter in respect of age or time of his Ordination as Hi∣lary hath taught us: And so, as he doth also all-along thro' the fore-ci∣ted Passages, explains fully his calling the Bishop Prince of Priests, which the Cardinal also objects, and shews that thereby we're to understand only such a Dignity as either meer priority of Ordination or Seniority yeelds. Thus Hierome also understands this Title, whoCatal. Scriptor. calls Pe∣ter Prince of the Apostles, and yet assertsTom. 2. Fol. 12.—Aetati delatum est quia Petrus senior erat. that any Priority Peter had was given to his Age only, which in that very place he makes as good as nothing. Informing us that the Church was equally founded on all the A∣postles, and that the rest no less than Peter received the Keys. Take but ano∣ther
place of Hilary, By Angels (saith heIn 1. ad Cor. 11. 10. the Apostle means the Bishops as we learn in the Revelation of John, who being Men are chal∣leng'd for not reproving the people, or commended for their Vertues—And because Sin entred by the Woman she ought to have this token that in the Church, for the reverence to the Bishop, her head ought not to be free but cover'd with a vail; and she has not power to speak because the Bishop represents Christ's person; she ought there∣fore because of the Original of Transgression appear subject before the Bishop as before the Judge because he is the Lord's Vice-gerent. Here we see that, according to Hilary, there was a Bishop over every Congregation, and in every place of publick Worship frequented by Men and Women, and that the Apocalyptick Angels were only such Congregational Pastors. From which we may well gather that when any in these early times had the name Bishop more peculiarly giv'n them, yet the Primacy could be but only of Order, and nominal which is fitly illustrated by the Athenian Archons. Petavius thereforeDe Hierarchia Eccles. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. to shield his Cause from so deadly blows, does his outmost to discredite these Commentaries, and make their Au∣thor some obscure fellow: and to prove they belong not to Hilary the Luciferian, he brings two passages thereof that shew their Author to have been of the Roman Communion which Hilary deserted. But might he not have been of that Communion when he wrote the com∣mentaries, and yet deserted it afterward? This the Jesuit attempts not to disprove. But whosoever this Author was, or by whatsoever name known, neither are we hurt nor the Hierarchicks helped thereby; his Authority is unquestionably great, being cited by the Councils of Paris and AyxApud Blondellum. no mean Conventicles under the name of Ambrose: af∣terward the learn'd, as BellarmineDe scrip. Eccles. and the Divines of LovainIn Scholis ad Cap. 4. Lib. 4. Augustini contra duas Epistolas Pelagiani. gave these Commentaries to Hilarie a Roman Deacon and stout Opposer of the Arrians; the Foundation of which Opinion is strong: For Au∣gustine oftner than once attributes these Commentaries to Hilarie. And it's likely that Petavius knew that the Authority of this Writer was not to be shaken with all his Cavills, but only at that time he had
found nothing else to say, wherefore he afterwardsIn appendice ad Hierarchiam. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. excogitats more Quibbles to darken and deprave this Author; and chiefly strives to make Hilary speak nothing for the Right of Seniority, and against the Election of a Successor to any deceasing Bishop. He says therefore that when Hilary tells us, that one dying, the next or following succeeded, we must not understand it in respect of Years or Ordination, but any of 'em indefinit∣ly taken, who was notwithstanding afterward to be elected by the Clergy, but all the Presbyters in time becoming unworthie of the Episcopal Honour the Method was altered, and another not out of the Colledge of Presbyters, but out of some other Order according to their desert was admitted unto that Office. To sup∣port which Gloss, he brings Hierome's saying that the Presbyters of Alex∣andria named one elected from among themselves, Bishop, as if Hierome were not speaking of Alexandria alone, and to instance therein, that Prela∣cy came not soon to any growth; or as if Hierome and Hilary could not agree in its being of humane Original, and yet differ in the circumstan∣ces of its rise. The rest of his prolix Discourse on this Theme is only a train of meer Cavills and Clouds too thin and airy to feed a very Cha∣maeleon, all which are quite dissolv'd and disappear if we but look into one small parcell of Hilary's words, where he tells us that after the Me∣thod was altered then the Bishop whose desert raised him was constitute by the Judgement or Votes of many Priests or Presbyters: For this Clause being of design inserted by Hilarie to shew the Opposition between the latter and the former Method of coming to the Primacy, proclaims that as after the Change, Suffrages and Election were used, so before this Change, there had been no such Custome. With this the Jesuite darrs not ingage nor with Hilary's making the Ordination of both Bishop and Presbyter, the same, his making Timothy only a Presbyter, his placing all the Es∣sence or Constitutive of a Bishop in being the first Presbyter of the Col∣ledge, his giving a Bishop to every Congregation, &c. These I say, he never adventures once in the least to handle; wherefore surely he was conscious to himself that he spent both Pains and Brains for the sole production of a bulkish nothing. § 3. To Hilary I add Chrysostome (which Theoplylact his real Epito∣mator transcribes) After (saith heIn prior. E∣pist. ad Tim. homilia 11ma,  &c. the Apostle had discoursed
concerning the Bishops, and described them, declaring what they ought to have, and from what they ought to abstain; omitting the order of Presbyters he descends to the Deacons; and why so? But because between Bishop and Presbyter in a manner there is no difference, seeing that also to the Presbyters the Care or Govern∣ment the Church is committed, and whatsoever he said of Bishops agrees also to the Presbyters, in Ordination alone they are Superiour, and they seem to have this onlie more than the others. Where he clearly overthrows all their Di∣stinction between Bishop and Presbyter; notwithstanding that to some he may seem to give the Power of Ordination to Bishops above Presbyters. For First, The words are most capable of another Translation. Thus only in the Matter of Ordination they have got up or set themselves a∣bove them. Secondlie, Of the Power of Ordination, it's being proper to Bishops, he speaks most doubtfully  they seem &c. (saith he). Thirdly, Had he believ'd that the Power of Ordination by Divine Right belong'd to Bishops above Presbyters, he had never said that there's not∣withstanding in a manner nothing between them: surely Epiphanius thought the Power of Ordination made a most large and notable Differ∣ence. Once again I shall with our Adversaries suppose that Chrysostome allows that Power of Ordination by Divine Appointment was appropri∣ated to Bishops they cann't with reason deny, but that, in all other things to a hair, he asserts the Equality, yea the Identity of Presbyters with Bi∣shops. Now will they stand to Chrysostome herein? Surely they will not; for thus they should be oblig'd to let go all the Prerogatives and Priviledges Bishops both claim and exerce over their Pastors, all their Power Paramount of Governing the Church and her Pastors, all their exorbitant Wealth, Grandeur, Pomp, and Splendor, and, in a word, whatsoever renders to them the Hierarchie amiable or desireable, and so should be really reduc'd to the condition of an ordinary Parish-pastor. And were things so, little, I'm sure, would they care or stickel for up∣holding of any Distinction between these Officers: hence let them blush any more to pretend to Chrysostome's Patrociny: seeing all they can, with the least colour plead for, being giv'n, not granted, he really sub∣verts their Cause, and levells their Diocesan Prelat with a parochial Pa∣stor. §. 4. BellarmineDe Clericis. Cap. 15. 10. Answers that Chrysostome and others, while they say that onlie in Ordination a Bishop is above a Presbyter, speak onlie of such
things which no way agree to Presbyters for Iurisdiction and Confirmation may be performed by Presbyters by vertue of Commission from the Bishop. But thus he really makes Chrysostome contradict himself: Chrysostome said they differ'd nothing save in Ordination; Bellarmine compells him to say that they have another Difference no less conspicuous than is between the King and his Commissioner, who can do many regall Acts, being warranted by him thereto. Does such a Power lodg'd in the Bishop, which agrees to none of the Presbyters, make no Distinction between him and them? Or rather, does it not make up the far greater and more conspicuous part of the prelatical Eminency above the rest of the Clergy? Add hereto Chrysostome's Books of the Priest-hood, wherein, altho' he expresly professes he was to treat of the Office of a Bishop, yet in these Books there's nothing but what concerns a congregational Pa∣stor, nothing but what concerns publick prayer, dispensing of the Word and Sacraments, and such Duties that terminat on the People a∣lone, but not a word of the Duties of the Bishop or Prelat over inferiour congregational Pastors as their Object which is a sure Demonstration that, with Chrysostome, Bishop, Priest, and Pastor were Synonymous Terms. §. 5. To these add Pelagius a grand Heretick indeed, but never branded as such for ought he said of Church-Government, whoIn Rom. 12. restricts all Church-Officers to Priest and Deacon. AndIn 1 Cor. 1. asserts that Priest without any Discrimination or Restriction are the Successors of the Apostles. AndIn Philip. 1. 1. Here (saith he) by Bishops we understand Presbyters for there could not have been more Bishops in one Citie: but we have this Mat∣ter also in the Acts of the Apostles Where it's clear that Pelagius, altho', in conformity to the introduc'd Custome of distinguishing Bishops from preaching Presbyters, he endeavour'd accordingly to expone this place with as little dammage thereto as is possible, deduceth nothwithstand∣ing the Ground of the Difference between Bishop and Presbyter from the Churches latter Custome of having but one Bishop in one City, and not from any Scripture-Warrant, and indeed when he brings to clear his Comment the 20. of the Acts 17. and 28. he plainly intimats that even when he and others of that Age seem most clearly to hold forth a Diffe∣rence betwixt Bishop and preaching Presbyter, they then believ'd no such thing to flow from Divine Institution.
AndIn 1 Tim. 3. There is a Question (saith he) why the Apostle made no men∣tion of Presbyters but comprehended them under the Name of Bishops, because, (answers he) this is the second, yea, in a manner, the very same Degree with that of Bishops, as the Apostle writes in the Epistle to the Philippians; To the Bishops and Deacons: when yet one City cann't have more Bishops than one: and, in the Acts of the Apostles, Paul being to go to Hierusalem and having gathered the Elders of the Church, saith, among other things, take heed to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops. Hence it's most evident that he believed both Offices to be, by Scripture-Warrant, one and the same, and not a meer Communication of Names only. But the thing most observable here, is, that to prove the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, he brings Philip. 1. and hereby shews us, that some of the Ancients, from whose accustom'd Phrases he departed not while he ex∣poned it, when they seem to inferr from that place, only a Communi∣ty of Names, did really believe no such thing, but were perswaded that Philip. 1. 1. quite overthrows all Distinction betwixt Bishop and preaching Presbyter. And SeduliusIn Tit. 1. asserts and proves the Identi∣ty of Bishops and Presbyters, and concludes from the Example of the E∣phesian Elders or Bishops, that there were many Bishops in one City, con∣trary to the Practice of his Age; and that, among the Ancients, Bishop and Presbyter was one and the same. And PrimasiusIn 1 Tim. 3. proposeth the Question, why the Apostle comes to the Deacons without any mention of the Presbyters? And Answers in the very words of Pelagius. Thus it's clear, even these whom the Hierarchicks take for the prime Pillars of Prelacy being Judges, that there's no Divine Warrant for Diocesan Episcopacy, and that a Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture in Apostolick times are one and the same. For (saithEpist. 19. 2d Hieronymum. Augustine, (with whom I begin, tho' Younger than Hierome, being longer to insist on the other) tho' according to these Names of Honour which the Custome of the Church hath now brought in fashion the Office of a Bishop be greater than that of a Presbyter, yet in ma∣ny things Augustine is below Hierome; where we see that the whole Diffe∣rence was in Expression rather than reality, and that even that was only by Custome not by Divine Appointment. These words (hath now brought in fashion (answers BellarmineDe Clericis. Cap. 15. are not opposed to the ancient time of the
Church, but to the time before the Christian Church, so that the sense is, before the times of the Christian Church these Names Bishop and Presbyter were not Titles of Honour but of Office and Age, but now they are Names of Honour and Dignity. D. M. follows his Master Bellarmine in this wretch'd De∣tortion, Page 81. & seq. and adds that this was but a mannerly Complement to Augu∣stine. A piece of immodesty proper to D. M. not arriv'd at by the Je∣suite; Augustine then was only some frenchisi'd Spark that intended not to speak as he thought: but I reply with JuniusTom. 2. Col. 1214. that this their An∣swer is clean contrary to Augustine's mind and intention; for he was not so mad as to compare things so hetrogeneous as were the Rites and Customes of the Gen∣tiles, and these of the Church: if it be said that he spoke of the Church of the Jews, where, pray, is there any mention of Bishops in all the Old Testament, and History of the Jewish Church. I add that if this had been Augustine's meaning, he had too much drepress'd, and in too unworthy Terms ex∣press'd Christ's Institution to busk a Complement for Hierome. But Augustine, saith D. M. reasons from the Succession of Bishops. This Ro∣mish Cavill is a 1000 times baffl'd, and by none more sufficiently than by Dr. StillingfleetIrenicum. Pag. 300. & seq. who shews that from such Reasonings of the Fa∣thers, and their mentioning of Successions of Bishops, it can never be proved that Bishops were of a higher Order, or had any other Power over Presbyters, nor that in all places there was so much as any Diffe∣rence at all between them, nor that they mean'd ought save a Succes∣sion of Doctrine, and that no less is said of Presbyters. Lastly, Bishop JewelDefens. apolog. Pages 122, 123. advanceth this very passage of Augustine, and thereby proves the Identity of Bishop and Priest or Presbyter. And he thus Englishes Augustine's words, The Office of a Bishop is above the Of∣fice of a Priest, not by Authority of the Scriptures, but after the Names of Honour, which the Custome of the Church hath now obtain'd. §. 7. Let us (saith HieromeIn Epist. ad Titum. attend diligently to the words of the Apostle saying that thou should'st Ordain Elders in every City as I appointed thee, and what kind of Presbyter ought to be ordain'd, he declares in the following Discourse; If any (saith he) be blame∣less, the Husband of one Wife &c. and after, he Inferrs, For a Bishop must be blameless as the Steward of God; Therefore both Bishop and
Presbyter is one and the same. And before that by Sathan's instiga∣tion there were Divisions about Religion, and it was said in the Chur∣ches, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the Church was go∣vern'd by a common Council of Presbyters: But after that whomso∣ever any had baptized were by them counted their own, not Christs, it was Decreed thro' the whole World that one, Chosen out of the Presbyters, should be set over the rest to whom all care of the Church should belong, and the Seeds of Division be removed. But you may think that this is our Mind and not the Mind of the Scriptures that a Bishop and a Presbyter is one and the same thing, and that the one is a Name of Age, and the other of Office. Let them read over the words of the Apostle to the Philippians, where, as Hierome professed∣ly asserts the Presbyterian Thesis, so he clearly proves it by the Presby∣terian Arguments. And I would fain learn wherein, as touching the Scriptural Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, he differ'd from Aërius. They differ'd as much (answers BellarmineDe Clericis. Lib. 1. Cap. 15. as Heaven and Hell. For Hierome still held that a Bishop was greater than a Presbyter as to the point of Ordination, and that doubtless by Divine Right. Bellarmine is herein fol∣low'd only by some of the more impudent of his Brethren as Bayly the Jesuite and Petavius; and last of all appears their perpetual shadow D. M.Page 65. & seq. with whom Hierome is a grand Asserter of the Episcopal Hi∣erarchy, and Aërius a grand Heretick. But JuniusCol. 1212. answers to both the Jesuites and their Genuine Issue, that Hierome, when he said, what doth the Bishop except Ordination which a Presbyter does not? understood it only of his oun time. But Bellarmine (saith Junius) confounds the time (as doth D. M.) that he more easily may deceive the Simple. We have heard already that many of the greatest Lights of the Church of England, yea, and of the Romanists, have exploded this shamefull and Jesuitical At∣tempt of making Hierome for the Divine Right of Prelacy, or for any Difference between Bishop and Presbyter. To which add Dr. Stillingfleet. For (saith heIrenicum. Page 276. as to the Matter it self, I believe upon the strickest En∣quiry, Medina's Judgement will prove true that Hierome, Austine, Am∣brose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, were all of Aërius's Judgement as to the Identity of both Name and Order of Bishops and Presbyters in the primitive Church &c. Of what Church then
shall we count D. M. and his Brethren who only scrape together these most dishonest and a thousand times baffl'd depravations and perversions of the Jesuites, and being plum'd with the feathers of so unlucky Birds, can appear without any more shame and blushing than as if they were the innocent penns of a Dove? But Hierome (subjoins Bellarmine, who is transcrib'd by D. M.) acknowledges that the Difference between Bishop and Presbyter, as also the Princely Prerogatives of Bishops, was introduc'd by the very Apostles, when 'twas said, I am of Paul &c. But it's answer'd by JuniusTom. 2. Col. 1213. that the former of these can never be prov'd from Hierome, and the latter Hierome denies, while he saith, when these whom any baptiz'd were counted their own &c. Where [saith Ju∣nius] Hierome shews that 'twas not when this Evil was at Corinth only, but when 'twas spread thro' the whole Churches: And the latter of these [continues Junius] Paul denies while he reproves this Evil in the Corinthians, and yet neither in the first nor in the second Epistle makes ever the least mention of setting up a Bishop over them. They who use this Argument (saith Dr. StillingfleetIren. Page 280. among many other Answers far better than ever such a Cavill deserv'd) are greater Strangers to St. Hierome's Language then they would seem to be, whose Custome it is, u∣pon incidental Occasions to accommodat the Phrase and Language of Scripture to them as when he speaks of Chrysostome's Fall, cecidit Babylon, cecidit, of the Bishops of Palestine, multi utroque claudicant pede—All which Instances (saith the Doctor) are produc'd by Blondel, but have the good fortune to be pass'd over without being taken nottice of. And now judge whe∣ther there was more Ignorance or Impudence in D. M's following QueryPage 159. Whether the Opinion of St. Hierome be not disingenuously repre∣sented by the Presbyterians, since he never acknowledg'd nor affirm'd any intervall after the Death of the Apostles, in which Ecclesiastical Affairs were govern'd communi Presbyterorum consilio? Bellarmine objects also (as doth his Epe D. M.) that Hierome says James was made Bishop of Jerusalem, pre∣sently after the Death of our Saviour. But both are repell'd by IuniusCol. 1213. who shews that the common reading of that place of Hierome's Catalogue is corrupted. And Answers that James was only left while the Apostles went thro' the World for the Commodity of that Church, and was never absolutely or∣dain'd a Bishop by the Apostles, for James himself was an Apostle. Of the
same Mind is Salmasius, that James resided not at Jerusalem as one of their Hierarchick Bishops, but as an ApostleVide inter alia Wal. Mess. Page 45. Et seq. & Page 193. Et seq. And yet D. M.Page 138. is not asham'd to tell his Reader, as the Concession of Salmasius, that we have a Diocesan Bishop establish'd in the person of St. James the Just, in the City of Jerusalem. Now that Hierome understood James's Episcopacy in the sense giv'n by Junius and Salmasius against the Jesuites, is most apparent especially if we consider how the Ancients us'd to speak of the Apostles and Apostolick extraordinary Church-Officers in the Stile of their own times, and how positive Hierome was for the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter during the Apostolick age and first primitive Church. Add hereto that Hierome (as he shews in his Preamble to Dexter) was altogether uncertain of much of what he wrote in his Catalogue of Writers, which is yet more clear from his account of Paul, for the writes that he was a Native of Gischalis, and during the Wars between the Jews and Ro∣mans sted with his Parents to Tarsus when Gischalis was taken. Which, I'm sure, Hierome, a Man so well acquaint with the Affairs of the Jews, who had no Wars with the Romans for many years after the time where∣in the Fabler, whom Hierome transcribes, suppos'd these Wars to have been commens'd, and Gischalis taken, could never believe; but only, because he could light on no better, transcrib'd things as he found 'em. Which removes, tho' no more could be said, D. M's Objection from Hierome's mentioning of Ignatius his Epistles, whereon D. M. with no small Ostentation insists. He follows also Bellarmine objecting that Hie∣rome makes Bishops the Apostles Successors. But Junius Replies that Hie∣rome denies not this to be also the priviledge of Presbyters. It's also objected by Dr. PearsonVind. St. Ignat. Part 1. Pages 191, 192. that Hierome, in his Epistle to Heliodorus, speaks of the Deacons as the third Order. And seeing this, of all the passages of Hie∣rome produc'd by the Papists to involve him in self-repugnancy, is most plausible, take it at full length. If a Man (saith HieromeEpist. ad Heliodorum. de∣sires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good Work: These things we know; but add what follows, A Bishop then must be blameless &c. and having ex∣press'd the rest of the things which there follow concerning a Bishop, the Apostle uses no less diligence in setting forth the Duties of the third Degree, saying, Likewise let the Deacons be grave &c. But passing that he was scarce
more than a Child when he wrote that Epistle, and wrote clearly for the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter in his riper years, it's certain he pretends no Divine Warrant for this Tripartition. Yea from the very words they would now detort, it's most evident that tho' Hierome, following the Custome of his Age, mentions a third Degree, he notwithstanding takes both Paul's Bishop and Presbyter for one and the same thing. More∣over in this same Epistle Hierome makes all who had the Power of Dispens∣ing the Sacraments, Successor, to the ApostlesAbsit ut de his quicquam sinistrum loquar: qui Apostolico gradui succedentes, Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt: per quos & nos Christiani sumus &c.. which the Jesuites and their Supporters appropriat to Bishops: hence they are baffl'd with the very places of Hierome they endeavour to abuse. §. 7. But I return to Hierome, Philippi, continues he, is a single Town of Macedonia, and truly in one City there could not be (called are they as) moe Bishops. But because at that time they called the same Men both Bishops and Presbyters, therefore he spoke indifferently concer∣ning both Bishops and Presbyters. From these words (saith Petavi∣us Appendice ad Hierarchiam Lib. 2. Cap. 5. It can be evidently demonstrated that Hierome believed that Bishops and Presbyters were not one and the same Order, yea even in the Age of the Apostles: For had he so believ'd he had never said that there could not be a plurality of Bishops in one City, when surely there was a plurality of Presbyters. As if Jerome's whole discourse, scope, and conclusion, were not directly opposite to what the Jesuite impudently fathers on him, who in the words Petavius abuses, only meets with some Wranglers as he elsewere terms them, who, to elude the proof Jerome brought for the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, from Philippians 1. & 1. absurdly contended that in the City of Philippi alone there were a multitude of Bishops distinguish,d from, and superior to other Pastors. But yet this may seem doubtfull (con∣tinous Jerome) to some except it be confirmed by another Testi∣mony. It is written in the Acts of the Apostles that when the Apostle was come to Miletum he sent to Ephesus and called for the Elders of that Church, to whom, amongst other things, he said, take heed to your selves and to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops to feed the Church of Christ.—And observe this diligently how the Apostle calling the Elders of Ephesus, which was but one City afterwards names them Bishops, if any receive the Epistle
which under Paul's Name is written to the Hebrews, there also the care of the Church is equally divided amongst a plurality. For he writes to the People, Obey your Governours and be subject to them, for they watch—And Peter, who received his Name from the strength of his Faith, saith in his Epistle, The Elders which are among you I exhort who am also an Elder—We have enlarged on these things that we might shew that among the Ancients Bishops were all one with Presbyters. Hierome then never, as Petavius and his Fol∣lowers impudently pretend, thought that there had hapned no alterati∣on, or that Bishops bore greater bulk in his time than they had done in the Age of the Apostles) but by little and little to the end the seeds of Schism might be remov'd, the whole care was devolv'd upon one; wherefore as the Presbyters know that by the Custome of the Church they are subject to their prefect, so let Bishops know that rather by Custome than by the Truth of Christ's Institution they are greater than Presbyters, and ought to Rule the Church in common with them, i∣mitating Moses who, when he alone had Power to Rule the Israelites, chused other Seventy with whom he might judge the People. Here (say they) is a proof of Superiority of Bishops by Divine Right, but they should remember that Hierome here undertook to prove the quite contrary. And it's most injust to fish and search for self-contradictions in any Author when with ease he may be understood otherways as the Matter is here. Hierome is arguing a majori ad minus, from Moses his Practice who, tho' he had sole Authority by Divine Right, yet shar'd it with others, to that which ought to have been done by the Bishops of his time whom only Church Custome not Christ's Appointment had raised over other Pastors. And indeed they might on equal grounds inferr from John 13. 14. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye onght also to Wash one anothers Feet, that every Apostle yea and every Believer is Lord and Master of the rest. §. 8. And writing to Euagrius I hear (saith Hierome) there is one so mad as to preferr the Deacons to the Presbyters that is to the Bi∣shops. For seeing the Apostle clearly teaches that Bishops and Pres∣byters are one and the same, how can a Server of Tables and Widows, proudly preferr himself to these at whose Prayers the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood is consecrated: you will require a Proof, hear a Testimony, Paul and Timothy to all the Saints in Philippi with the Bi∣shops
and Deacons; would you have another Example in the Acts of of the Apostles, Paul thus speaks to the Presbyters of one Church, Take heed to your Selves and the whole Flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you Bishops to Rule the Church, &c. And that none may conten∣tiously plead that in one City there were many Bishops, here also a∣nother Testimony wherein it's most evidently proved that both Pres∣byter and Bishop were one and the same, and then produces the 1 to Titus, and 1 to Timothy 4. 8. 14. neglect not—with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytry. And 1 Peter 4 and 1. 2 John 1. 3 John 1. And all these to prove that he had undertaken viz that both Bishop and Presbyter were one and the same. Now it's most observable that that he inferrs this Conclusion not only from Scriptures written long after the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where it's said, I am of Paul &c. but even from the last Epistle of John the longest Liver of all the Apo∣stles. And therefore no less notticeable is D. M's extream stubbor∣ness and aversion from Truth, who would force Hierome to introduce Bi∣shops presently after that Schism mention'd 1 Cor. 1. And accordingly, as his bad Cause oblig'd him to do with this and the rest of Hierome's Testimonies, wholly smuther'd it. And indeed all hitherto who have adventur'd to graple therewith have been conquer'd thereby, yea even Bellarmine himself is compell'd to give up the Cause. Hierome indea∣vours, (saith the JesuiteDe Clericis. Cap. 15.) to conclude the equality of Bishops and Pres∣byters from the Epistle to Titus, to the Philippians, and from the Epistles of Peter and John which were written after the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Neither can the Jesuite find another way to be even with Hierome, but by arraigning him as fraughted with self-repugnancy, levity, and in∣stability in this Matter; and all the Arguments he brings to prove Hie∣rome a Favourer of Episcopacy are only so many fruitless Attempts to make that appear. But let us go on with Hierome. But (saith he) the reason why after this (viz. the writing of both the Epistles of John) one was chosen and set over the rest, was that there might be a remedy of Schism, least every one, draw∣ing the Church of Christ to himself, should divide it. For in Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist even to Heraclas and Dionysius the Presbyters still gave to one elected from amongst themselves, and placed in a higher seat, the Name of Bishop, as if an Army should creat a General, or the Deacons should chuse one
of themselves whom they know to be industrious and name him Arch-Deacon. On these words D. M. triumphs, The Custome was (saith he) even from the days of St. Mark the Evangelist that a Presbyter was chosen who Go∣verned the whole Society: this in the Opinion of St. Hierome cuts off that ima∣ginary Interval, wherein the Chruch is said to have been Governed by a Parity of Presbyters. Where he forgeth a Gloss no way contain'd in the words of Hierome, whose Example of an Army and Deacons are only adduc'd to shew the manner of that Presbyter or nominat'd Bishop's entrance, and not at all the measure of his Power over his Collegues. And that no Power over the rest can be collected from this place is beyond Scruple clear from Hierome's present Scope, who introduces this Ancient Alex∣andrian Practice to clear and prove the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, which, according to him, remain'd in the Church for a while after the Writings of John, the longest Liver of all the Apostles. Had D. M. perused Dr. StillingfleetIrenicum. Pages 273, and 274. he had taught him that both Election and Ordination of this Alexandrian Bishop was only performed by his Fellow Presby∣ters, & that the Original of Hierome's exsors potestas, any Power he mentions in Bishops over Presbyters, is by Hierome attributed not to any Episcopal Insti∣tution but to the free choice of the Presbyters themselves: for what doth a Bishop (continues Hierome) except Ordination, which a Presbyter may not do. Here the Jesuites and their Follower D. M. dream they find a fine Distin∣ction made by Hierome between Bishop and Presbyter: but first they must make an unseasonable Antiptosis, and compell Hierome to speak con∣trary to the express words of this place which are in the present Tense, contrary to the scope and design of this Epistle, which is professedly to shew the great Dignity of Presbyters, yea even their Identity with Bi∣shops, and thereby to reach a sharper reproof to the petulant Deacon. And contrary, finally, to Hierome's most clear and most frequently repeat∣ed Doctrine of the Scriptural Identity of both Offices. Were it not mad∣ness then to dream, with the Jesuits, that, in these words, Hierome makes any Distinction between the Scripture-Bishop and Presbyter, who is here only asserting that in all places (Rome excepted, where the Presby∣ters were more depressed and the Deacons more raised than in other Churches) even then in his time, a Presbyter was allow'd by the Ca∣nons and Constitutions of the Churches to do ought that a Bishop might do, save Ordination alone. This his Design of holding forth the most
great dignity of Presbyters, yea even their equality with Bishops, which Bellarmine acknowledges that he may the better compesce the Insolency of the Deacons, Hierome all along this Epistle prosecutes: and having again cited the Epistles to Timothy and Titus to prove that a Presbyter is contain'd in, i. e. is one and the same with a Bishop, otherwayes a Deacon is also in a Bishop; and so Hierome had crossed his own Design by the very Argument wherewith he minded to compass it, and, hav∣ing added some other Topicks to the same purpose, thus concludes his Epistle. And that we may know that the Apostolick Traditions are brought from the Old Testament, that which Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple, the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons claim in the Church, Nunc animis opus Aenaeae, nunc pectore firmo. All the Jesuites and their Complices will presently be about our Ears, But Solamen nobis Soeios habuisse malorum. Their Attaques are no less on Hierome than us, wherefore this is one of the chief places brought by BellarmineDe Clericis. Cap. 15. to involve Hierome in a maze of self-contradiction, and make him propugn Prelacy, who is followed by others of the Hierarchicks but chiefly the Jesuites: And lastly in the rear comes D. M. concluding that the Hierarchy of the Christian Church is founded upon Apostolick Tradition, and that the Apostles had the Modell of the Temple in their view when they erect∣ed this Plat-form. But JuniusCol. 1213. Answers that their Conclusi∣on is a non sequitur. For (saith he) this comparison is not particu∣lar between each of these particular Officers under the Old Testa∣ment, and these under the New, but in common shewing, that as they are all obliged to serve the Church of the Jews, so all the Church-Of∣ficers under the New Testament ought to serve the Christian Church. Moreover, (continues Junius) tho' we should give that the Comparison were particular, yet their Conclusion would not follow, seeing Hie∣rome speaks only of the Church Polity of his own time, and the Que∣stion now is about Hierome's Sentiments of the Church Government and Polity in the Apostolick Age and first primitive Church. And that this in Hierome's Mind was not Hierarchick but a meer Parity of Pastors, Junius already evinced: and Dr. StillingfleetIrenicum. Pag. 266. & seq. at more length
overthrows this their Jesuitical Doctrine, and Demonstrats that by Apo∣stolical Tradition in Hierome only Ecclesiastick Custome of some Antiquity is mean'd, & asserts that it's not imaginable that Jerome who had been pro∣ving all along the Superiority of a Presbyter above a Deacon, because of his Identity with a Bishop in the Apostles times should at the same time say that a Bishop was above a Presbyter by the Apostles Instituti∣on, and so directly overthrow all he had been saying before. The plain meaning (continues Dr. Stillingfleet) then of Jerome is no more but this, that as Aaron and his Sons in the Order of Priesthood were above the Le∣vites under the Law: So the Bishops and Presbyters in the Order of the Evan∣gelical Priesthood are above the Deacons under the Gospel. For the Com∣parison runs not between Aaron and his Sons under the Law, and Bi∣shops and Presbyters under the Gospel; but between Aaron and his Sons, as one part of the Comparison under the Law, and the Levites under them as the other; so under the Gospel, Bishops and Presby∣ters make one part of the Comparison, answering to Aaron and his Sons in that wherein they all agree; viz. the Order of Priesthood; and the other part under the Gospel is that of Deacons, answering to the Levites under the Law. The Opposition is not then in the Power of Jurisdiction between Bishops and Priests, but between the same Power of Order, which is alike both in Bishops and Presbyters (ac∣cording to the acknowledgement of all) to the Office of Deacons which stood in Competition with them—Hereby we see how un∣happyly those Arguments succeed, which are brought from the Ana∣logy between the Aaronical Priesthood, to endeavour the setting up of a Jus Divinum of a paralell Superiority under the Gospel. All which Arguments are taken off by this one thing we're now upon, viz, that the Orders and Degrees under the Gospel, were not taken up from Analogy to the Temple.—Other passages of Jerome they also study to abuse, but these now handl'd are the most specious. But of such Allegatons out of Jerome, hear the same Dr.Irenicum. Page 277. Et seq. And among all these fifteen Testimonies produced by a learned Writer out of Je∣rome for the Superiority of Bishops above Presbyters, I cannot find one that doth found it upon any Divine Right, but only upon the con∣veniency of such an Order for the Peace and Unity of the Church of God: But granting some passages may have a more favourable aspect
towards the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters in his other Writ∣ings, I would fain know whether a Man's Judgement must be taken from occasional and accidental Passages, or from designed and set Discourses; which is as much as to ask, whether the lively Repre∣sentation of a man by picture, may be best taken, when in hast of other business he passeth by us, giving only a glance of his countenance, or when he purposely and designedly sits in order to that end that his countenance may be truly represented? He adds that Jerome, in his Commentaries, where he expresly declares not his own mind, transcribes often out of others without setting down their names &c. §. 9. Most dishonest therefore is the conduct of the Loyolites, and of others of the Prelatists their Associats in this Matter, but above all men that of D. M. who, beside all this his foul dealling, following Bayly the Iesuite, has scarce adventur'd to lay before his Reader in nglish so much as one scrape or particle of what the Reform'd bring from Jerome against the Romanists and such Hierarchick Advocats; which in D. M. is the most certain product of both extream Disingenuity & Diffidence But so great is the power of prejudice that they stick not to sacrifice both their Credit, and whatsoever else they should reckon most estim∣able, to such Dreams, as even most of the Church of England, yea and of the Romanists either acted by the love of the Truth or compell'd by its Power, had condemn'd. We have heard how Bishop Jewel, Dr. Mor∣ton, the Bishop of Spalato, and Dr. Stillingfleet, renounce and explode so palpable an untruth. And Dr. ForbesIrenicum. Pag. 130. is of the same Mind, yeeld∣ing that Hierome is all one with Aërius in this, that Bishops by Divine Right are not at all Superior to Presbyters. And that these two are in∣tirely of one and the same Mind, we have heard also granted by the most learn'd of the Romanists as Alphonsus de Castro, and Medina, some whereof acknowledge, that none could be of another Opinion concerning them. And Benedictus Justinianus and other Romanists are of the same Mind. How then, were all these Doctors sitting in Council to determine of this very Matter, should they chastise and brand these most partial and disingenuous Dealers, we have now to do with? O∣ther Hierarchicks who would not confess so much in plain Terms, yet sometimes discover both their disingenuity and true Sentiments so pal∣pably as if they had expresly made the same Confession. Dr. Pearson,
tho' he says nothing in his own Name, yetVind. Ignat. Part. 2. Pag. 22.—tam multa de Presbyteratus Autoritate congerit, ut cum eam stabiliat, aeqnalem penè ipsi Episcopali poestai statuere cen∣seatur. acknowledges that Hierome hath said so much for the Authority of Presbytry, and endeavoured so much to establish it, that he is judged to make it well nigh equal to the Episco∣pal Order. And Bellarmine tells us that Hierome was self repugnant, and knew not what he said. And Petavius, tho' the most pertinacious wrang∣ler of all the Society, grantsDog. Theol. Tom. 3. Pag. (mihi.) 747. Hieronyn us—Presbyteros suppares Episcopis facit &c. that Hierome makes Presbyters well nigh all one with Bishops but not the very same (saith the Jesuite) or intirely their Equalls being Inferior in so much as they want the Power of Ordination. And Pag. 756.—regendae Ecclesae potest tem externam∣que Gubernatianem sola consuetudine, non dispositionis Dominicae Veritate Episcopis tribuit. that according to Hierome's Mind meer Custome and not the Lord's Ap∣pointment gave to the Bishops above Presbyters any Power they have either in Ruling the Church, or external Government. And were things brought to this pass, I'm sure they should make but small account of the sory re∣mainder Petavius makes Hierome leave them, as being altogether use∣less for support of the Pomp and Splendor of their Hierarchy. To these add the Jesuite Celotius who after a thousand Meanders and serpentine windings to elude and deprave these clear Testimonies of Hierome, at length, seeing all would not do, rejects them all as the For∣geries of unlucky Aërian hands never written by Hierome. For which Cellotius is chastised even by Petavius and others of the Loyolites them∣selves. Into such Discord, Confusion and Torment do Men usually throw themselves, so soon as they obstinatly resolve to wage War with so clear and irradiant Verities. And here it's observable that in all times, and in all Churches, the Authority of Hierome has been exceeding great, and above most of the primitive Writers which came not to pass without a special Divine Providence that he, and in him the whole primitive Church whose Judgement in these Matters he most clearly delivers, might remain as an unsuspected and an uncontroverted witness against some of latter Ages pretendedly Catholick but really Sectarian Nove∣lists. Among the great Services he did to the Church, two Pieces are more especially notticeable viz. his most clear asserting and acurat distin∣guishing the Canonical Books from the Apocryphal above all who han∣dled or wrote of that great and most necessary Article: and, which
is the Matter in hand, his Antiprelatick Doctrine of the Identity of Bi∣shop and Presbyter: these not only Hieronymian, but also truly Catho∣lick Doctrines are with equall fierceness impugn'd by the Romanists: and I appeal to the impartial Reader if their Exceptions against this lat∣ter be a whit more solide than these which are advanced against the for∣mer, viz. Hierome's Judgement of the Canonical Scriptures which are to be found collected and learn'dly refuted by Dr. CosinScholast. Hist. Of the Canon of Scripture. Page 74. Et seq.. And indeed these Sophisters, endeavouring to subvert these Catholick Doctrines of Hierome, dash only on an Adamantine Rock: for as never any Articles were better founded, so, notwithstanding of whatsoever practical A∣berrations therefrom were fall'n into, none were more universally im∣brac'd, receiv'd and handed down: for to speak of the Matter of our present concern, this Hieronymian Doctrine all following Church Wri∣ters ratifie and approve; the bulk of subsequent Commentators, Writers of Offices and of other Treatises, asTimotheus Lib. 3. Salvianus, Isidorus HispalensisDe Officiis. Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Et de Originibus. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. AmalariusApud Blandellum. Page 80., Rabanus MaurusDe constit. cler. Lib. 2. Cap. 6., yea, and intire Councils as that 2 of SevilCan. 7. which ascribes the whole Difference and Speriority only to Church-Canons and late Constitutions: and after them GratianDistinct. 60. and LombardSentent. Lib. 4. Distinct. 24., who affirm that in the primitive Church there was only Pres∣byters and Deacons and his Expositors, among whom is AestiusComment. In locum. who very fairly quites the Scriptures, and tells us that this Superiority is not very clear from Scripture, which is nothing but a Confession of the Truth of Hierome's Doctrine forced from this great Prelatist and School-man. Yet adds Aestius, this may be sufficiently proved another way. To which words Dr. Stillingfleet occurrs. Ingenuously said (saith heIren. pag. 294.) however; but all the difficulty is, how a Jus Divinum should be prov'd, when Men leave the Scriptures. But in the recounting and transcribing of such Confes∣sions or Testimonies, I will not inlarge. And now having rescued the principal Scriptures, our Antagonists detort in favours of their Distin∣ction between Bishop and Presbyters, and vindicated some places com∣monly adduc'd for the Identity thereof, as also evinced that the most celebrated of the Ancients did no otherways understand these Scrip∣tures, nor derive the Original of Prelacy from Divine Institution, I
may with confidence conclude that Ignatius had none before him of the Judgement that he (if we believe the Hierarchicks) so passionately fa∣vour'd. Section IX. The Testimonies of Ignatius's contemporaries disproving what our Adversaries would force him to speak, and confirm∣ing what we have prov'd to be his mind, viz. that he cashiers a Diocesan Prelacy. HAving viewed the Apostolick Writings and dived into their most ancient Commentators and primitive Doctors, and having found that in the time of the Apostles the immediat Ancestors of Ignatius there was in the Church no such thing as a Diocesan Prelate. Let us next look unto what remains of his Contemporaries or these who lived near Ignatius's time, and we shall have ground to deduce the same Infe∣rence. And first it's observable that these Writers, such as Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the Corinthians (for the rest that bear his Name are undoubtedly spurious) Polycarp to the Philippians, Hermas or Pa∣stor, Justine Martyr, tho' they, as occasion offers, frequently menti∣on Pastors, Doctors, Bishops, Presbyters, indifferently taking all of 'em for on and the same Office, yet of a Diocesan Prelat, or one set over other Pastors, or over these that had Power of Dispensing the Word and Sacraments, in all their Writings have not a syllable. Which Argument against a Diocesan Prelat, tho' negative, is not to be slighted if we consider these Authors their closs Vicinity to the Apostles the oc∣casion they had to have mention'd him had he been then existent, their more than a Pythagorick silence concerning him. Yea the same kind of negative Argumentation Eusebius uses, while he disproves and ex∣plodes some Writings forg'd in the Name of John, Andrew, and other ApostlesHist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 25. because (saith he) no ancient Ecclesiastick Writers mention
these Books. We shall find moreover that they positively disclaim Dio∣cesan Prelacy. I begin with Clemens Romanus, who, writing to the Co∣rinthians, commends their former carriage in these words, Ye walked in the commands of God, and being obedient to these that had the rule over you, and giving your Elders due honour, ye were wont to admonish the younger with Moderation, to seek after things that are honestpag. 4.. And againpag. 98. Wherefore the Apostles, preaching the Word thro' the severall regions, and proving by the Spirit the first fruits thereof, ordain'd Bishops and Deacons for these who should believe: neither was this a new Ordinance, for many ages before, it was written concerning Bishops; for so in a certain place saith the Scripture, I will appoint their Bishops in Righteousness and their Deacons in Faith. Andpag. 102. Our Apostles by Jesus Christ our Lord knew that there would arise Contention concerning the Name of a Bishop, and therefore, being endew'd with a perfect Fore-knowledge, they or∣dain'd the fore-said Officers, and left unto us describ'd the particular services of both Ministers and Offices, to the end that approv'd Men might succeed in the place of the defunct, and execute their Office. These therefore who are ordain'd by them or by other famous men with the Consent of the whole Church, who blamelesly serv'd the Sheepfold of Christ with humility and quietness, & without baseness, and who for a long time had a good Testimony from all: These, I say, cann't be justly thrust out of their Office: for we commit no light sin if we cast out these from the Bishops Office who holyly and blamelesly perform'd it. Blessed are these Presbyters or Pastors who have per∣fited their journey and are dead, and who have obtain'd a profitable departure: for they are not afrai'd least any thrust them out of their places into others: For we see that you have cast some from their Charge which they perform'd with honour.pag 119, 120. It's base Beloved, yea very base and unworthy of a Conversation that is in Christ Jesus, to hear that the most stable and ancient Church of Corinth, for the sake of one or two should raise sedition against the Presbyters. Andpag. 124. If I be the Cause of Contention, schism and sedition, I'le depart and be gone whithersoever ye will, and do what the People shall command, providing only that the sheepfold of Christ, with the Presbyters ap∣pointed over it, may have peace. Andpag. 132. And you therefore,
who were the Authors of this Division subject your selves to your Presbyters. Hence Observe First, that he never names, or so much as insinuats that in Corinth there was any Bishop Superintendent over the rest of the Pastors. But as the Apostle to the Hebrews had done be∣fore him, honours equally all their Pastors with the Title of these that bear Rule over them. Secondly, That, in imitation of the same Apostle Paul, he names only Bishops and Deacons as the only Orders of Divine Institution, by whom the whole Gospel-Service was to be perform'd. Therefore afterward when he names Presbyters in distinction from the Flock and as Rulers o∣ver it, he cann't be understood (as Petavius and Pearson would force him) to speak of Presbyters with Relation and Respect only of their Age, but to give them this Demonstration as a peculiar Designation of a Church-Office; and so the word Presbyter most of necessity with Cle∣ment coincide in its meaning with the word Bishop, and both of 'em be∣come Synonymous Terms to hold forth but one and the same thing. Thirdly, That the Apostles did not, as we find afterward Decreed by the Synod of Sardica, and admonish'd by Pope Leo, chuse out only the greater Cities, and neglect and forbear to place Bishops in lesser Villa∣ges, that the name of Bishop hereby might not fall into Contempt, but indifferently and without distinction of places every where settled them according as there was a probability they might serve the great end of their calling therein. Fourthly, That to found the Distinction and number of these Orders, if we believe Clement, the Apostles had no eye unto the Jewish Church-Polity, so as to make it a Pattern for that of the Christian, but only to what was prophecied and foretold by the Prophets concerning a new frame of the New Testament Church, and thus Clement really contra∣dicts all the Patrons of the Hierarchy, who would still found their triple Orders on that of the High-Priest, Priests and Levites of the Temple. Fifthly, That in Corinth it was attempted to throw out a plurality of real Bishops and cast them from their Charge, and that the Sedition was not moved against one only but divers Bishops in that Church. Many other things might be observed; but these serve sufficiently to prove that there was a plurality of true Bishops of Corinth, who were in nothing distinguished from Pastors of particular Flocks, or preaching Presby∣ters.
§. 2. PetaviusAppendice ad Hier. Eccles. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. notwithstanding cann't abide any such Infe∣rence from the words of Clement. Wherefore he scrapes together se∣veral things whereby to ward off the force of these Passages: and al∣ledges that Clemens his silence of the Bishop of Corinth makes nothing for us. For Pope Siricius (saith he) in his Epistle to the Church of Millain maketh no mention of their Bishop, altho' in that mean time Ambrose occupied the Chair. But the vast Difference between the Cases and the Circumstances of the Churches of Corinth and Millain quite nullifies the Jesuites Instance. The People of Millain jointly both Clergy and Laity had thrust out Jo∣vinian, few or none of them (for ought we hear) being prosylited to his Doctrine: wherefore Siricius had nothing to do but shew them in General that he had excommunicated Jovinian with two or three others who had fled to Rome for Sanctuary. So there was no special Ground or Cause why particular mention should be made of Ambrose the Bishop, or any other, whether of the Clergy or Laity, the whole Body there∣of, for ought now known, being without any Schism earnest enough for the expulsion of Jovinian, and only expecting what the Bishop of Rome which they acknowledged as the first See, and whether Jovinian had fled, would do in this Matter. Whereas, one the other hand, Clemens writes to a Church cut in pieces with a Schism in their own Bowels, in∣fected with Sedition of no small part of the People against their Pastors, broken with (as appears plain) a division of the very Pastors them∣selves; and this grown to such a hight, that some of the Pastors were thrust from their places, and driv'n out: now in this Case the Bishop had either the best of it; and so the seditious part merited a severe, and special reprimand on the account of their Opposition to, and Separa∣tion from their Bishop, and thus he should certainly have been menti∣oned: or else he was the Cause of the Division; or, at least, joined with the injurious, and therefore should have been particularly reproved or admonished. Clement, it's true, names none: but the influence which the good or evil Carriage the Bishop had, and could not but have in such a Matter, had certainly obliged Clement either to mention his name of give some signification of him, if there had been any Dio∣cesan Bishop existent in Corinth. Clemens speaks of several Pastors of Flocks, which I think none will deny, intimats the diversity of their Car∣riage in that Business, and gives Directions accordingly. How can it
be apprehended that he should pass over the chief Pastor, and go to the rest without so much as the least Direction unto him, the least mention of him, yea or the least insinuation that there was, in Corinth, any such thing. Petavius's next Attempt is on these words of Clement,Page 98. where he tells that the Apostles instituted Bishops and Deacons. And the Jesuite contends, that two distinct Orders are not here mean'd, but that the word Dea∣con is only explicative of the former word Bishop, and cites several places where the word Deacon is taken in a signification of Honour, and applied to the Apostles and Civil Magistrates: And afterward terms Salmasius ridi∣culous, for saying that Clemens nam'd only Bishops and Deacons without mention of Presbyters. For (saith the Jesuite) Presbyters are more fre∣quently mention'd by Clement than either Bishops or Deacons. But certainly these Orders are again and again mention'd by Clement without adding any thereto ordetracting therefrom; when he appears to reckon up all the Church-Officers that are of Divine Institution. And altho' the word Deacon be sometimes taken for the Designation of a higher Office. Yet, as Petavius himselfAppendice ad Hierar. Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Si∣quidem Diaconus aliàs, idque passim, non propriè, sed appellativè sumitur: & tunc ferè aliud nomen in gignendi casu huic adjungitur &c. else where observes, It is with the addition of such a word or phrase as guides our Judgement, and gives us to learn that by it is not understood this lower Order of Church-Officers as Rom. 13. the Magistrate is called  the Minister of God. But there is no such explicative word or particle in Clement to alter the common Sig∣nification thereof, on which account we're not lightly to resile there∣from. But that which utterly overthrows the Jesuite's Cause, is Cle∣ment's closs Conformity to the Apostle in his account of Church-Orders, who 1 Tim. 1. 3. beyond all Scruple of any Party, takes these words in the sense we plead for to Clement, and makes not at all the word Deacon exegetick and explicative of the word Bishop: but by it designs a di∣stinct Order of Church-Officers from what is signifi'd by the other. For doubtless Clement Paul's Fellow-Labourer took the words in the same signification and meaning, wherein the Apostle had understood them. And accordingly Clement, for Confirmation hereof, adduces the words of Isaiah 60. 17. which place, as he then certainly found it in the Septua∣gint, contains the words Bishops & Deacons exactly as Paul expresseth & distinguisheth Church-Officers: and on this Ground Clement goes when
he intimats that the Apostles in their Institution of Church-Officers had an eye to these words of the Prophet. In vain therefore labours Petavi∣us to disprove the Copy of Isaiah used by Clement, and brings the He∣brew, Hierome and others taking the word in a different signification: for thus he hath not Salmasius or any other modern Defender of Presbytry but Clement himself, whom he pretends to vindicate, for his Adversary: seeing we Dispute not concerning the Greek Copy Clement used, but of the thing he inferr'd from these words of Isaiah according to the Copy he then cited. Neither is it more to the Jesuite's advantage that the word Presbyter is several times found in Clement. For seeing, as is plain, yea and the Jesuite himself not only grants but proves, that it frequent∣ly there denotes, not a degree of Age but a Church-Officer, it must of necessity be a Term altogether Synonymous with the word Bishop. For they themselves plead not for the Equipolency thereof with the word Deacon, wherein Petavius himself shall afford us no small assistance, who having, but to no purpose (seeing never Man denied it) shewed that with Clement the word Presbyter is sometimes taken appellatively, to de∣note old Age but no Church-Officer, subjoins these remarkable words; At other times Clement so uses the word Presbyter as thereby to signifie a cer∣tain Function and publick Office in the Ministry, and a certain Dignity in the Church, which he calls an Episcopacy or the Office of a Bishop. From this plain Testimony of a Man in learning, and love to Prelacy, second to none that ever undertook its Defence, it's clear, as the Light it self, that with Clement the word Bishop and the word Presbyter when he takes it for a Church-Function, are Terms altogether Synonymous. For if Episcopacy or the Office of a Bishop be competent to Clement's Presbyter, and things as they ought, receive Denominations from Forms wherewith they're cloathed, then this Presbyter in the Judgement of Clement is really a Bishop, and indeed this is superlatively clear to any, who, but with an open and unprepossess'd Mind reads the places of Cle∣ment we have already produced. Howbeit the Testimony of such an Adversary gives no small additional Confirmation to the Truth thereof. Yea the same Adversary in the same place acknowledges, that even then the Title of Bishop was also common, and in after times only appropriated to one. And again, It's clear (saith Petavius) from this place, that there was a Council or Ecclesiastick Senate ordain'd by the Apostles at Corinth; whose Dignity and Office Clemens calls Episcopacy, and the chiefest of the Clergy he
names Presbyters, as also from this which Clement afterward writes. It's base Beloved, yea most base &c. And he names the same Presbyters Pa∣stors and Church-Governours of the Christian Sheepsold. And now judge how the Jesuite after these Concessions could yet say, that it follows not from hence that in Corinth or at other Cities there was no peculiar Bi∣shop. §. 3. And here again we find D. M.Page 44. Et seq. at his old filching Trade transcribing Petavius his Perversions of Clement, or bringing what is no more serviceable to either Cause or Credit: as that Clement comprehends all the Jewish Clergy under the name of Priests and Levites: Therefore (In∣ferrs D. M.) It follows not from Clement his naming only Bishops and Dea∣cons, that Bishops and Presbyters are not in Clement distinct Offices. But D. M. should remember that Clement not only Dichotomizes but Trichoto∣mizes the Jewish Clergy into three Parts. But does he any where so divide the Christian Clergy? He not only names the two Kinds of Of∣fices, but so names them as to identifie and take for one and the same Bishop and Presbyter: which Petavius and D. M. and their Brethren by all means labour to make him distinguish. But St. Clement (saith D. M.) exhorting the Corinthians to order sets before them the subordination under the Temple-Service, how the High-Priest, Priests, and Levites were distinguish'd by their proper Service, and immediatly recommends to them, that every one of them should continue in his proper Order. Now (continues D. M.) when we consider the primitive Method of reasoning from Jewish precedents, St. Clement had never talked at this rate, if the Jurisdiction of one over many Priests had been abolished under the New Testament. But, why does he mutter, for it if he can bring ought for his purpose he must also Inferr from this passage of ClementPages 94, and 96.  &c. that as there was a High-Priest over all the Jew∣ish Church, so there must be another High-Priest over all Christians. And that all Christians must bring Oblations and Sacrifices to the Tem∣ple at Hierusalem: for from these Topick does Clement exhort the Co∣rinthians to Harmony. Whether then D. M. be a Romanist or a Jew may be a Question; for unquestionably his way of reasoning symbolizes with both of them. The Truth is, nothing can be inferr'd from this
place of Clement, but that as under the Old Testament every one, whe∣ther Church-man or Laick, was to abide in his own Order without raising Schism or Confusion, so it ought to be under the New Testa∣ment. St. Clement himself (continues D. M.) distinguishes the from the  An express untruth, and I challenge D. M. and his Complices to prove it. Nor can it be (adds D. M.) an Objection of any weight, that the first who were their Spiritual Governours are mention'd in the plural number, since this was an Encyclical Epistle addressed to Corinth as the principal City, and from thence transmitted to its dependencies &c. By which words, if he speaks sense, he intimats that there were in the Apo∣stolick age Metropolitan Cities in an Ecclesiastick sense, whose Bishops according to the Civil Dignity of these Cities were Metropolitan, and had their numbers of inferiour and dependent Bishops. A most nau∣seous and hatefull Hypothesis of some giddy Papaturiants which, as we have heard, even the more candide of the Episcopalls, disclaim and ex∣plode. I shall shut up all concerning Clement with the Suffrages of two illust∣rious Names, neither whereof, I'm sure, did ever favour Presbytry: I mean Grotius and Stillingfleet. Had Episcopacy (saith the DoctorIren. page 279.) been instituted on the occasion of the Schism at Corinth, certainly of all places, we should the soonest have heard of a Bishop at Corinth for the remedying of it; and yet almost of all places, these Heralds that derive the Succession of Bi∣shops from the Apostles times, are the most plunged whom to six on at Corinth. And they that can find any one single Bishop at Corinth at the time when Cle∣mens writ his Epistle to them (about another Schism as great as the former, which certainly had not been according to their Opinion, if a Bishop had been there before) must have better Eyes and Judgement, than the deservedly admir∣ed Grotius, who brings this in his Epistle to Bignonius as an Argument of the undoubted Antiquity of that Epistle, quod nusquam meminit exsortis &c. that Clement no where mentions, that singular Authority of Bishops which by Church custome after the Death of Mark at Alexandria, and by its Example in other places began to be introduced, but Clemens clearly shews as did the A∣postle Paul, that then by the common Council of the Presbyters who both by Paul, and Clement are called Bishops, the Churches were governed. §. 4. I proceed next to the Vindication of Polycarp. Subject your selves (saith heEpist. ad Philipp.) to the Presbyters and Deacons as to God and Christ,
and, as Virgins, walk with a pure Conscience, let the Presbyters be simple or in∣nocent, mercifull in all things, turning all Men from their Errors, visiting all who are weak, not neglecting Widows, Orphans, and those that are Poor, but alwayes providing such things as are good in the sight of God and Men. Here we learn that the highest Office then in the Church of Philippi was that of a Presbyter, and that there was a Plurality to whom the Philippians were to be subjected without the least mention of a particular Bishop governing those Presbyters. And, which deserves no overly Consi∣deration, we here see that as, when Clement gives an account of Church Orders, he named two only, so we have the same number expressed by Polycarp, but they altered their Denomination of the former Order, and they whom Clement calls sometimes Bishops, sometimes Presbyters, Poly∣carp calls still Presbyters. It's most observable also, how both Paul and Polycarp subject the Church of one single City Philippi to a Plurality or Multitude of Pastors, whom Paul calls Bishops, and Polycarp Presby∣ters. From all which the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter most inevita∣bly results. §. 5. And indeed this Passage of Polycarp so much gravells the Hie∣rarchicks, that Dr. Pearson is driven to his last Leggs, and compelled to present us with a shift unworthy of its Author. Who can prove (saith heVind. Ignat. Part. 2. Page 168. Sed quis dabit Episcopum Philippen∣sium tunc in vivis fuisse? Quis praestabit Philippenses &c.) that the Bishop of Philippi was then alive, who can shew us, that the Philippians asked not Counsel at Polycarp, for this cause, that they then enjoyed not a Bishop, for thus Polycarp bespeaks them. These things Bre∣thren, I write not of my self to you concerning righteousness, but you have moved me thereunto. Thus Pearson, and indeed it's enough here to return the Question inverted, who is able to prove, if there had been a Bishop in Philippi, that he was not alive? For seeing he affirms it, he or his Ad∣vocats are obliged to instruct what they say. That which he pretends to from these words of the Epistle wherein Polycarp saith he was moved there∣to by the Philippians themselves, affords him not the least support; there not being therein one syllable concerning the vacancy of the Bishops Seat or the Church Government during this Defect; or how to fill the Chair. Of all or any of these nec vol nec vestigium, but only (as is e∣vident from Polycarp) they seem to have desir'd of him some Direction concerning the blameless walk of any Christian. And indeed, the Bi∣shop
within a very few lines fairly yeelds the Cause, really acknowledg∣ing that he had said nothing to the purpose. But seeing (saith he) these things are uncertain, we have no certainty from the Discourse of Polycarp. Well then, it must follow, for ought he knew, that Polycarp knew no Diocesan Bishop in Philippi, that he had never heard of his Death, see∣ing nothing hereof can be gathered from him. And that he had never heard of his Life or Being, we may well conclude from this, that he devolves the whole Church-Affairs upon a Plurality of Presbyters. But once again; Is it at all credible, but that if Polycarp had written to the Philippians after the death of their Bishop and during the vacancy of the Chair, he had comforted them after this so considerable a Loss, and giv'n them Directions for chusing of a worthy Successor, especially if [as Pearson would have] they had ask'd his counsell concerning this very Matter? Had ever a Pastor like Polycarp neglected so seasonable an Office? His profound silence therefore of the Death of any such Bi∣shop in Philippi sufficiently demonstrats that this Dr. Pearson's Invention was only the product of a desperate Cause, and that there was left here no doore of Escape. And here let me observe that Philippi is no less fatal to the Episcopals, than its neighbouring plains were to the Pompeians: for they are stung and confounded with the very first words of Paul to that Church, and, as we have heard, amongst their other wild shifts, they answer that the Bishop was often absent. But there was a good number of years between the writing of Paul and that of Polycarp to the Philippians, and yet we see the Bishop is never come home; Why taryeth the wheel of his Lordship's Chariot? Hath he not sped at Court? And having supplanted some of the Nobility, made a prey of the Office of Chancellour or Treasourer, that after so long absence there is no news of his return? Nor are we ever like to hear any more of him, for now [say they] he's dead: I had perhaps believ'd them, were't not impossible for one to die who was never alive. But enough of this; for such Answers would really tempt one to think that their Authors studi'd nothing more than to ridicule their oun Cause and afford Game to their Reader. §. 6. And here I cann't but nottice the ill-grounded vapouring of D. M. whopag. 49. & seq. from the inscription of the Epistle (Polycarp and the Presbyters that are with him) concludes that he was vested with Episcopal
jurisdiction and eminency amongst these Presbyters. And so much he pre∣tends to bring out of Blondel as as his forc'd Confession, which is so far from being true, that it's brought in by Blondel as an Objection and silly Conjecture of the Episcopals, which heApolog. prosent. Hieron. pag. 14. & seq. diverse ways over∣throws. And indeed never was there a more wretch'd deduction fram'd, seeing, as Blondel at large shews, the phrase natively yealds only this sense viz. Polycarp and the rest of the Presbyters of that Colleage. And thus D. M. may as well inferr Peter's Superiority and Power over the rest of the Apostles from Acts 2. 37. To Peter and to the rest of the Apostles. Moreover Blondel demonstrats how, on diverse accounts, Polycarp without any Eminency and Power over the rest may be particularly no∣minated rather than others; as, because he was first in Order and Years. But I insist not herein, but referr to Blondel who hath nervously baffl'd this their pitifull Coujecture. D. M. adventures to ingage with no∣thing of what he saith, and yet is not asham'd to bring to the Field so blunted a weapon. I pass also D. M.'s two Arguments for Polycarp's Diocesan Episcopacy, drawn from the pretended Succession of Dioces∣an Bishops in Smyrna, and the Epistles of Ignatius mention'd by Polycarp, having overthrown both of 'em already, and proceed to the Testimony of Hermas whoLib. 1. Vis. 2. thus speaks: Thou shalt write two Books, thou shalt send one to Clement and one to Graptes, and Clement shall send it to foraign Cities; for to him this is permitted: and Graptes shall admonish the Widows and Orphans, but thou shalt read it with, or relate it unto the Presbyters in this City who govern the Church. Where we see that not any one Bishop, but a Colledge of Presbyters (call'd, doubtless, afterward by the same Author, Bishops) govern'd the Church of one City. Yet D. M. pretends to find here a palpable Evidence of Episcopacy; For (saith hepag. 53. & seq.) the sending of the Encyclical Epistle to foraign Cities is insinuated to be the peculiar Priviledge of Clement then Bishop of Rome. But if he con∣clude from this place of Hermas that Clement had any Power over these to whom he was to send that Book or Epistle (as for Clement's being Bishop of Rome it's so far from being insinuated here, that the quite contary is from this very place most evident) he may as well inferr from Col. 4. 16. that they had Power over the Laodiceans whither they were to send, and cause to be read the Apostle's Letter.
Secondly, D. M. ascribing to the Bishop of Rome Power over fo∣raign Cities, erects a Pope rather than a Bishop. But I'll assure him he came not in so early: for seeing there was undoubtedly one Bishop (at least) in every particular City so soon as there were any in the World, this place of Hermas (if it bear D. M's Inference and give a Power to Clement over foraign Cities) insinuats nothing of a Bishop's Dignity above Presbyters, but of the power of one Bishop over another or rather of a Pope over other Churches. A falshood most unanimous∣ly exploded by Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, and the rest of the Ancients D. M. seeks also for his Prelacy in these words of Hermas viz.Lib. 2. Mand. 12. The Earthly Spirit exalts it self and seeks the first seat.Lib. 3. Simil. 8. Some contend for Principality and Dignity. But what if Hermas had said that some con∣tended to get an Empire and Popedome over the whole Church; would D. M. hence conclude that it was lawfull or then practised in the Church, or when the Apostles contended who should be the greatest? Had Christ before that time assured them of the lawfulness of such an Office, and told them, that they were to have one to be a Prince over the rest? By no Logick therefore can it be inferred for Hermas his words that a chief Seat or Principality (for both are one and the same with Hermas) was then either exercised or held lawfull. Again, tho' both had been then in Custome, no Power of one over the rest can be hence concluded; seeing the chief Seats are given to the Modera∣tors of Synods and other Presidents of Assemblies, who have no prima∣cy of Power but only of Order. And againLib. 1. Vis. 3., The polished and white Stones (saith Hermas) are the Apostles, and Bishops, and Doctors, and Deacons, who walked in the Clemency of God, ad exercised the Office of a Bi∣shop, and taught and served. And,Lib. 3. Simil. 9. Such are some Bishops, that is Go∣vernours of the Churches, and these who have the Chare of the Services. §. 7. In both places (saith Blondel) he makes only two Degrees that of the Bishops who governed the Churches, and that of the Dea∣cons who had the charge of the Services, for it's acknowledged by all that the Doctors are all one with the Bishops, when they are said to have performed the Office of a Bishop, and that the Apostles as they are opposed to Bishops, were placed above the whole Clergy. This (repons D. M.) is Tergiversation with a Witness, and a frau∣dulent
Trick in Blondel, since Presbyters in the primitive Church are frequently distinguished by the Name of Doctors: and Blondel's Com∣mentary is a manifest violence offered to the Text, for Doctors are not said to have performed the Office of a Bishop but to have taught: and this is very agreeable to their Character, being so much imploy'd by their respective Bishops in teaching the Catechumeni; and the na∣tural position of these words will allow of no other meaning. Which Answer D. M. hath learned from the Practice of our late Bishops, during whose Epocha the Buffund might have hid himself well nigh the whole year from the Bishop's fury in the Bishop's pulpit, seeing he scarce ever came thither to play the Doctor or ought else. As for the Ancient and true primitive Bishops, they perpetually preach'd or taught (saith Le MoynVaria sacra. Page 34. Moreover the Fathers generally take Pastor, Bi∣shop, and Doctor for one and the same as Chrysostome, Theophylact, Theo∣doret, Sedulius; and after them, Aquinas, Haymo, Benedictus Justini∣anus with others on Ephes. 4. 11. Of the same mind are Hierome, Augustine and AnselmApud Corn. a Lapide in Eph. 4. 11., and the pretended Clemens Romanus cited by Gratian and Benedictus Justinianus, and the Fathers of the Council of Carthage. Of the same Mind are the ablest of our E∣piscopals, as Field, Hammond and HeylenHistory of Episcopacy. Part 2. Page 39. So truly did Blondel say that Bishop and Doctor is universally taken for one and the same. Nei∣ther was ever the Presbyter either in Cyprian or any other Ancient, called Doctor in opposition to the Bishop but to other Ecclesiastick Presbyters, who taught not, of whose existence, as was before touched, we have most sufficient assurance. But D. M. in contradiction to the Apostle would have a Bishop who is no Teacher or Preacher, like the Droll who said, he mett with Priests who were no Clerks. And seeing with Hermas there are but two Orders of Church-men, and Bishops, and praesides Ecclesiarum Church Governours are reciprocal Terms taken for one and the same: and seeing that his Presbyters are expresly term'd Church-Governours; it's most evident that he takes Bishop and Presby∣ter for one and the same, and that the word Doctor is purely exegetick or explicative of the word Bishop, and that both of them, which I'm sure is not unfrequent in all sorts of Authors, evidently signifie one and the same thing.
§. 8. I now proceed to Justine Martyr whoApolog. ad Antonium Pium.  &c. thus gives an ac∣count of the state of the Churches their particular and weekly Assem∣blies for receiving the Word and Sacraments. After this, Bread and Wine tempered with Water is brought to the Ruler or Governour of the Brethren, which when he hath received, he gives praise and glo∣ry to the Parent of all—The Deacons give to all present Bread and Wine tempered with Water after they are Consecrated by Thanks-giving, and carry them to such as are absent. And on Snn∣day all who live either in Cities or in the Country come together into one place—And when the Reader has ceas'd, the Governour makes an exhortatory Sermon—The voluntary Contribution is laid up with the Governour who distributes it to the Orphans &c. Where it's not only observable that Justine following not the pretended Ignatius but the Apostle, Clement, Polycarp, Hermas, mentions only two Orders of Church-men, viz. Governours and Deacons, but also that he gives a  or Bishop to every Congregation, and that Just∣ine's is all one with the Bishop who was then in being is yealded by the fiercest Hierarchicks, HeylenHist. of Episcopacy, part 2. pag. 39. who yeelds his whole Plea and says that Justine's President of the Congregation, or Bishop, ordinarily celebrat∣ed the Eucharist and Preach'd God's holy Word; and MauriceDefence of Diocesan Episcopacy pag. 39.. Well then, 'tis all one how this ancient Church-Ruler be named, whither Pres∣byter, Governour, or Bishop, seeing there was one for every Congrega∣tion that mett for receiving the word and Sacraments, the Controversy between us and the Hierarchicks, which is not about Names but Things, is fully ended if they stand to Justine's Decision. §. 9. Dr. Maurice would have Justine to be understood as speak∣ing only of the Diocesan Bishops Church. For (saith he) to carry the Bread and Wine to all absents in their severall Duellings, was not convenient nor easy in numerous Congregations, and they knew not well who were absent. But this Perversion is too wretch'd & palpable to wheedle any in in his right wit out of Justine's plain Meaning. Dr. Maurice knew well enough that in these times of such Fervor and Love among Christians, and such Veneration for the Lord's Supper, they doubtless most exactly ob∣serv'd the Ordinances, and absented not without speciall and weighty
Causes. And seeing the Custome of receiving the Elements at home, when they could not come to Church was then in vigour, and believed to be their Duty (if these Elements were given to Absents as their pro∣per Communion, or were only the  the last remains of the Cu∣stume of the  the Love Feasts, I now dispute not) they took spe∣cial care to signifie their Absence and Causes thereof, by their Relations or Christian Brethren to their Deacons, and such as were concerned to know it. Neither, if we consider the Church-Discipline of these times, is it to be doubted that the Deacons had an exact List of all to whom they were each Lords Day to give the Sacrament, and conse∣quently by no means could be ignorant who were either absent or pre∣sent. Wherefore, tho' the Deacons had been fewer than they were, they could easily, tho' the whole Congregation had been never so nu∣merous, carry the Elements to these very few whom sickness or other lawfull and weighty Reasons had confined to their Habitations: all which Dr. Maurice well enough perceived; and therefore he's here no less feeble in his Actings than a man breathing his last, and advan∣ces only such triffles as may make his Friends ashamed and confirm his Adversaries. Neither do I wonder hereat, seeing he undertook the Defence of a palpable untruth: for not only speaks Justine of the Christian Assemblies in common without the least exception, but clear∣ly tells us that he speaks of the meatings of all the Christians for receiv∣ing the Word and Sacraments, not only in Cities, but in the Country a place too base for the Cathedral and Diocesan Bishops Chair, and of all such Congregations, as in the first day of the Week, as the Apo∣stle speaks, made Collections or had Deacons for that end, which be∣longs to every Congregation where the Word and Sacraments are dis∣pensed. Neither is this ought but what we have discover'd to be the Mind of their Ignatius himself, and seconded with the Suffrages of the greatest Friends to Prelacy. §. 10. Wherefore most vain is D. M'sPage 58. Et seq. Labour to prove that it follows not from Justine that there were then only two Orders of Church-men. Seeing Justine giving a Governour or Bishop to every Congregation, quite overturns Diocesan Episcopacy. And more vain yet is this, that as, what he undertakes tho' proved is nothing to his purpose, so the Reasons he brings prove nothing of what he undertakes. For his first
Reason, viz. That Justine intended only to give a true account of what was ordi∣narly performed in the Christian Meetings in opposition to the abominable Sto∣ries propagated against them by their Enemies, so that he had no occasion to reckon up the several Gradations of the Hterarchy, is equally favourable to Prelatists and Papists, who may as well use it for a Sanctuary to their Pope as they to their Prelats. And indeed had there then either been a Pope over all or a Prelate with Princely Power as D. M. pleads for over a multitude of Churches, the Christians seeing they were frequently re∣proached with an intended Rebellion, had found themselves obliged in a special manner to apologize for their Princes and absolute Lords, who would have been looked on as little less than the Emperour's Rivalls and Arch-Promoters and Heads of the supposed Insurrection. Moreover, which we have already noted, and fully shews the nullity of D. M's Reason, not only Justine but all the genuine Writings of them that went before him, mention only, like Justine, these two Orders of Church-men. D. M's second Reason, viz. That the Christians were most shy to publish a∣ny thing relating either to the Mysteries of their Religion or the Constitution of the Church, more than was absolutely necessary in their own Defence &c. is ano∣ther lurking place for Romanists when urg'd to shew the Antiquity of their Innovations: and indeed if it do any thing, it tends to prove that no Party can make any Advantage of ought spoken or written by the Fa∣thers; and if so, have att the Foundation of Diocesan Prelacy, its prime Advocats acknowledging that no Argument for it can be draun from Scripture, but only from the writings of the Fathers. His third Reason is, that as the Offices, so the names of Bishop and Presbyter were not only known to be distinguished in his days among the Christians (but he brings no genuine Writer of that Age to prove this, and that it is most false is already evinced) but even the Heathens knew so much: and cites A∣drian's Epistle to Servianus: but it's highly probable that the Emperour if we allow him any knowledge of these Affairs, understands under the name of Presbyters the very same Officers, the very same Men, that he means by the name Bishops, rather than e contra: see Pray the Letter it self apud Flav. Vopis. in Saturnino. §. 11. 'Twere easie to shew divers succeeding Fathers to have been of Justine's Mind and Strangers to Diocesan Episcopacy, ignoring all Discrimination between Bishop and preaching Presbyter or Pastor. I
shall only here with one ChamierPaustratiae Tom. 2. Lib. 10. Cap. 6. Denique ausim asserere nunquam ab Episopis distingui, nedum separari Presbyteros apud Irenaeum. against Bellarmine and the rest of the Jesuites, assert against their Successors and Defenders under whate∣ver Name they be known, that according to Irenaeus the Churches were com∣mitted to the Presbyters, no less than to the Bishops, that these who are now reckoned Popes, High-Priests, universal Bishops, are only Presbyters in the Judgement of Irenaeus: and that in him Presbyters are not so much as once distinguished, and far less separated from Bishops. From what is said, ap∣pears the vanity of D. M's Popish Query.Pages 158, 159. Whether (all things duly considered) a more evident and universal Tradition for the Superiority and Jurisdiction of a Bishop above a Presbyter, can be reasonably demanded; and whether the Argument from universal Tradition, be not in this Case the most proper and most necessary? And whether the Tradition for the Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, be not more universal, unanimous and uncontradi∣cted, in the Primitive Ages, than many other Traditions that are unquestion∣ably received? What these his other Traditions are, we are not ignorant. The Doctrine certainly of the morality of the Sabbath, of Baptism, and of the Holy Trinity, and the like; these theyVide Petavium de Hierarchia Eccl. Lib. 1. and D. Taylor Episcopacy asserted. think lean only on Tradi∣tion, and that the Institution of their Diocesan Prelats, Metrapolitans, and Arch-Prelats, and other such Effects and Inventions of a degenerat∣ing and apostatizing Church, are better founded than these most Scrip∣tural Catholick and necessary Doctrines. Section X. Other Observations and Arguments eversive of Diocesan Prelacy. AND now in the next place, I would gladly learn how they will describe, or whereon they can found their Romish, or, which is all one, their Hierarchick Diocesan Bishop. For as Augustine
De civitate Dei. Lib. 19. Cap. 19. Exponere voluit quid sit Episcōpatus: quia nomen est operis non honoris &c. well observes, it is a name of Labour and Travel, not of Honour and Dignity: and indeed, it imports only Watchfullness, Labour and Care as its most native and proper Signification; and on this account, only the King gets the name of Bishop in HesychiusAd vocem. as he gets the name of Pastor in HomerIliad. .. And Hesychius gives it no less to every Watch∣man. Thus the word Bishop denotes a vigilant Watchman in Suidas Ad vocem. where he tells us that some bearing this Name were sent by the Atheni∣ans to observe the Affairs of their subject Cities who were called Watchmen. So is the same word understood to denote only Care and Labour by Jullius PolluxLib. 3. Cap. 21. whereas, on the other hand, the word Presbyter when taken for a Function or Office, natively imports Rule and Honour Suidas ad vocem, & Hesychius ad vocem.. A Presbyter (acknowledges even SaraviaSaravia de diversis gradibus. Cap. 9.) is a Name of Honour, and was given to the more honourable, and to the Magistrats among the Jews in the Old Testament, and was thence transferred to signifie the Governours of the Churches of Christ in the New Testament, but they are called Bishops from their watchfull Care which is a Name of Work and Labour. The name Presbyter (saith Dr. StillingfleetIren. Pages 285, and 286.), as the Hebrew ZAKEN tho' it originally import Age, yet by way of connotation it hath been looked on as a Name both of Dignity and Power among the Jews, in the times of the Apostles, it is most evident that the Name  imported not only Dignity but Pow∣er; the Presbyters among the Jews having Power both of Judging and Teach∣ing given them by their Semicha or Ordination. Now under the Gospel the A∣postles retaining the Name, and the manner of Ordination, but not conferring that judiciary Power by it, which was in use among the Jews, to shew the Dif∣ference between the Law and the Gospel, it was requisite some other Name should be given to the Governours of the Church, which should qualifie the importance of the word Presbyters to a sense proper to a Gospel state; which was the Origi∣nal of giving the Name  to the Governours of the Church under the Gospel; a Name importing Duty more than Honour, and not a title above Presbyter, but rather used by way of Diminution and Qualification of the Power imply'd in the name of Presbyter &c. The Hierarchicks therefore should act much more rationally if they turn'd the Tables, and gave the name of Presbyter to their Diocesan, and that of the Bishop to their in∣feriour Curats, who usually do most of the Pastoral Work. In the
mean while it's sure from what we just now learned out of these Authors that during sounder Antiquity, before men equally abused Names and Things, a Bishop could never be either ane Order or Degree or any thing else above▪ a Prsbyter. But from Names if we pass to things, and look into Scripture and sounder Antiquity, we shall find the ancient Bishop so different from the present Diocesan, that the very Idea's and notions of the two are diametrically opposite one to another. The Apostles themselves Acts 6. 2, 4. following the Commandment of their Master, found it their Duty so assiduously to labour in Preaching and Prayer that they thought it unreasonable to be diverted even by the Distribution of the Collecti∣ons, and Care of the Poor, which otherwayes was a Work both lawfull and pious. And to Timothy, who, if we believe the Hierarchicks, was ane Arch-Bishop of a vast Diocess, it's injoyn'd as his proper Task to Preach the Word, to be instant in season and out of season, to re∣prove, to rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. I need not here multiply Texts; read and read over again the whole New Testament, and you shall find that the Exercise of Prayer, Dispensing the Word and Sacraments was the main Duty and perpetual Imploy∣ment of every Pastor or Minister of Christ. Look, on the other hand, to the bulk of the Hierarchick Lord-Bishops, they haue a quite diff∣erent Work and Exercice, and if any of 'em happen to spend some time in the Ministerial Duties how are they commonly gaz'd on and depre∣dicated as Men of extraordinary Condescension, superlatively stuping to a piece of Service far below the Episcopal Grandeur and unusual to the Order? Are they not then quite another thing than the Apostolick and Scripturall Bishops? This Apostolick Example the Conscientious Primitive Bishops or Pastors clossly follow'd; not so much as once dreaming that any who was ordain'd a Minister of the Gospell, and intrusted with a Flock, might on whatsoever pretext neglect to exercise himself perpetually in Prayer and Dispensing the Word and Sacraments. This they judg'd his constant Imployment, and this was the Practice of all the sincere Bi∣shops even after the Distinction of Degrees was introduc'd, as appears in the weekly and sometimes the dayly Homilies and Lectures of Chrys∣ostome and Augustine which are yet extant. And it's already observed how Hilary makes the Bishop a sedulous Dispenser of the Words of su∣ture
Life. And indeed all the Hierarchick Grandeur and Domination whereby a Bishop was intirely Metamorphosed into a quite other thing than what he had once been, could never notwithstanding obliterate and blot out of thinking Mens Minds the true Scriptural Notion and I∣dea thereof. The Episcopal Dignity consists in Teaching (saith Balsamon In Can. Apost. 58. .). And the fourth Council of Carthage decrees that a Bishop shall not be imployed in caring for his houshold Affairs, but shall wholly occupy himself in Reading and Praying, aud Preaching the WordCaranza summa Con. folio 118. Can. 20.. §. 12. 'Twere endless to alledge all that may be produc'd to this purpose; neither could any Man who ever seriously read the Bible have any other Notion of a true Bishop than what is common to every Pastor of a Congregation; seeing the Apostle's Description of a Bishop 1 Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. agrees equally to all of them. And here it's observable, that still where Bishops are spoken of in Scripture, not only is the Work and Office which is injoin'd them, that of Teaching and Feeding, but also the Name is correlative to the Flock, and not to a Company of Clergy-men, as Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you Overseers or Bishops  to Feed the Church of God. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the Flock of God which is a∣mong you, taking the oversight thereof or Bishoping it ; and accordingly, as we have oftner than once demonstrated, over every particular Congregation there was a Bishop. This Assertion may be strongly confirmed from the undoubted Pra∣ctice of the Church in the fourth Century, even when she was fall'n into no small Declension from the Primitive Purity. For the Council of Sardica DecreesCan. 6. . that a Bishop may not be placed in a Village or small Town where one Presbyter may suffice. Dr. MauricePage 67. says that this Canon is justified by the Arrians their great multiplication of Bishops to strengthen their Party. But the Council it self assigns a quite different Ground that moved them to make this Decree, viz. that the Name and Authority of a Bishop fall not into Contempt. Where we see the Design of abolishing the Primitive and Apostolick Custome of giving a Bishop indifferently to every Congregation, whether in City or in Countrey,
was the Introduction of a secular Pomp and Grandeur into the Church, which finally resolv'd into a Papal Slavery. However, this Sardican Canon had not so good effect, but that, about twenty years after, a new Sanction thereto was found needfull: for the Council of LaodiceaCan. 56.&c. Decrees that it shall not be lawfull to place Bishops in little Villages or Countrey Places, but only Visitors, and that the Bishops who were already placed in these little Villages and Countrey Places, should for the future do nothing without the knowledge of the Bishop of the City. Mark, how a pace the mild and fraternal Church Regimen is turn'd into a Worldly Domination and Dignity to pave the way for a papal Ty∣ranny. These rural Bishops or Countrey-parish Pastors (for they can be call'd nothing else) whom Dr. BeverigeOn the 56 or 57 Canon of Laodicea. Ergo ante hoc  eti∣am revera Episcopi constituti sunt. acknowledges for real and true Bishops, were also assaulted, and the subjecting and inslaving of them to the Prelates and Clergy in the greater Cities, design'd by other Councils as that of AncyrumCan. 13., and of NeocesariaCan. 14., and of An∣tioch Can. 10., there they are called Chorepiscopi i. e. Countrey Bishops. And it has been disputed if these were real & true Bishops. But the same Dr. Beverige not only yeelds, but at large pleads for the AffirmativeOn the 13 Canon of the Council of Ancyrum. Quibus etiam conficere non dubit amus veteros Chorepiscopos,—revera Episcopos fuisse—Enimvero cum Episcopi in Civita∣tibus solum antiquitus ordinati fuerint &c.. He pretends in the mean while that anciently Bishops were ordained in Cities only, many whereof had according to the model of the Em∣pire, such ample Territories that 'twas impossible for the Bishop of the City his alone to visit and sufficiently to guide them, and so it seem'd needfull for such Bishops to have, according to the amplitude of their Bishopricks, one or two Coajutors in some Region without the City, who might disburden them of some parts of the Episcopal Function, which could not be done but by some consecrated Bishops. Hence 'twas that some of these great Bishops Ordain'd, in some part of their large Provinces, these Bishops, but with this provision, that these without their leave should do nothing of moment, seeing these Regions also belonged to the Care of the City Bishop, which we learn, (continues he) from the tenth Canon of the Council of Antioch, where it's expresly Decreed, that no Country Bishop Or∣dain
Presbyter or Deacon without the Bishop of the City, to which, he and his Region is subject. But indeed there's no such thing, to be learn'd from that Canon, it only says. that the Chorepiscopus and his Region was subject to the City (as they really were in a Civil Sense) not to the Bishop of the City: and tho they had said so it's no proof of his Conclusion, seeing they usually pretended Antiquity for the great∣est Innovations. How far either in, or nigh to the Time of the Apostles the Church was from giving to the Bishop such a Princely Dignity as he pretends, or from allowing him to do the Work proper to himself by substitute Vassals, none acquainted with what remains of these Ancient times can be ignorant, and is already oftner then once evinc'd. And now I'm sorry to find a Protestant of sence and Learning lean on that shame∣full and most exploded Falshood, viz. that the Apostles took the Go∣vernment of the Empire for their Pattern of Church-Government; and darring to publish such gross Falshoods whereof even the more ingenu∣ous Romanists are ashamed. The Ecclesiastical Degrees (saith SuaveHistory of the Council of Trent. Page 216. Et seq.) were not Origi∣nally Instituted as Dignities, Preheminencies, Rewards, or Honours, as now they are, and have been, many hundred years, but with Mi∣nistery, and Charges, otherwise called by St. Paul, Works, and those that exercise them, are called by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, Work∣men; and therefore no Man could then enter into cogitation to absent himself from the Execution thereof in his own Person: and if any one (which seldom happend) retired from the Work, 'twas not thought reasonable, he should have either Title or Profit. And tho' the Mi∣nisteries were of two sorts, some Anciently called, as now they are, with care of Souls: others of temporal things, for the sustenance and service of the Poor and Sick, as were the Deaconries, and other inferiour Works, all held themselves equally bound to that Service, in Person; neither did any think of a substitute, but for a short time, and for great Impediments, much less to take another Charge, which might hinder that. §. 13. Bnd now to go on, these Countrey Bishops or Pastors could not yet by all these Councils be Un-bishoped. And therefore Pope Damasus must next fall on them, and authoratively defineCaranza Fol. 100. &c. that they
were stark nought in the Church, their Institution wicked and contrary to the holy Canons. And thus he acted suitably to his purpose, seeing the enslaving the lesser and Country Churches to the Domination of these of the greater Cities made fair way for subjecting all to Rome, which on many Accounts was greater than any of the rest. He also hereby gratified and much obliged the Bishops of these great Cities who were desirous of nothing, more than of Domination, and accordingly they even at these times were giving him their mutual help for raising of the Papal Throne, yea before the time of Damasus this same Council of Sardica, which thought it too vile and base for a Bishop to Dwell out of a great City, Decreed alsoCan. 3.  &c. That if any Bishop thought he was injured in a∣ny Cause by his Comprovincials and ordinary Judges, it should in this Case be lawfull for him to appeal to the Bishop of Rome. Let us honour (say they) the Memory of St. Peter, that either these who examined the Matter or other neighbouring Bishops write to Julius Bishop of Rome, and if he think it fit then let the Matter be tried and judged again, and let him appoint Judges for the Purpose, but if he approve of what's already done, and think not fit to call it in∣to Question, then the things already done shall be accounted firm and stable. Thus these Fathers, many whereof otherwise were excellent Men, the first, I think, that ever gave such Deference and Authority to the Pope, 'twas not therefore incongruous that both of these Decrees should pro∣ceed from one and the same Council. Hence it's to be noted, that the Tympany of these times had not only exerted it self in separating the things God had conjoin'd, and in an holygarchick Confinement of the Power God had given e∣qually to all Pastors, unto a few whom they named Bishops, a Name al∣so equally belonging to all Christ's Ministers; but also in subjecting of the Presbyters, yea and even the Bishops of the Countrey to the very Presbyters of the CityNeocesar. Can. 13. & Ancyrum. Can. 13. but much more the Bishops or Pastors of the Countrey to the Bishops of the Cities, and these again to the Bishops of the greater Metropolitan Cities, and so on till at length (not to name the rest of the higher and lower roundles of this Hierarchick Lad∣der) all centred in Rome. Yet in these very times it was notwithstanding firmly rooted in Mens
Minds that whosoever dispensed the Word and Sacraments, and had a Flock or Congregation was a true Bishop, as I have made out to be the mind of Hilary, and many others of the fourth and fifth Centuries. Moreover Optatus assertsLib. 3. that Preaching or Exponing is the proper Province of a Bishop. But, to proceed, these Chorepiscopi, or Countrey Bishops of Parish Pastors were in the third Century called absolutely Bi∣shops at the Countrey Places or Villages; so speaks the Council of Anti∣och, He (say these Fathers) i. e. Paulus SamosatenusEusebius Lib. 7. Cap. 30.  &c. suborn'd the Bishops of the neighbouring Countrey Villages and Towns, as also Presbyters his Flatter∣ers to praise him in their Homilies. Dr. Mauricepag. 77. answers that it ap∣pears not hence that these were Parish Bishops for Chorepiscopi had many Congregations. As if these who dwelt not only in greater Towns, but al∣so in the very Countrey Villages which were near to Antioch, and near to one another, and that even where the far greater part of the Inhabi∣tants were not of their Flocks, yea were not at all Christians, could be by any in their Wit judged to be any thing else save Parish Bishops or Pastors. But let us hear one of the learn'dest of our Adversaries deter∣mining the Controversie.Dr. Burnet's Observations on the first and second Canons commoaly ascribed to the Apostles, pag. 47, 48, & 49. That (saith he) which next occurrs to be considered is, in what places Bishopricks were founded, and Bishops settled. We find in all Cities where the Gospel was planted, and Churches constituted, that Bishops were also Ordain'd. Among the Jews, wherever there were an hundred and twenty of them toge∣ther, there did they erect a Synagogue, and a lesser Sanhedrin the Court of twenty three Judges. Compare to this Acts 1. 15. where the number of those that constituted the first Christian Church, is the same. So it is like wherever there was a competent number of Chri∣stians together, that a Church was there settled. Yet in some Vil∣lages there were Churches and Bishops; so there was a Bishop in Be∣thany: and St. Paul tells of the Church of Cenchrea, which was the Port of Corinth. It is true, some think that the Church of Corinth mett there. Which Opinion he irrefragably Refutes, and then pro∣ceeds, saying, Therefore it's probable that the Church of Cenchrea was distinct from Corinth: and since they had Phebe for their Dea∣conness, it's not to be doubted but they had Both Bishops and Dea∣cons.
From the several Cities the Gospel was dilated and propagat∣ed to the places round about. But in some Countries we find the Bi∣shopricks very thick sett. They were pretty throng in Asrick, for at a Conference which Augustine and the Bishops of that Province had with the Donatists, there were of Bishops two hundred eighty six pre∣sent, and one hundred and twenty absent, and sixty Sees were then Vacant, which make in all four hundred sixty and six: there were al∣so two hundred and seventy nine of the Donatists Bishops. Thus he. And now, not to multiply Testimonies in so confessed and plain a Matter, it's most certain that, at least, for upwards of the three first Centuries, you shall not meet with the meanest Dorp, or countrey place where there was a Church or Congregation to hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments, but it had also its proper Bishop, I averr no Example to the contrary either has yet, no not by Dr. Maurice or any o∣ther, been, or can be brought from the gennine Monuments of these times. Yea even from the spurious Writings of Impostures the greatest Adorers of the Hierarchy, good proofs of this Truth may be adduced; For the thirty eight of the Canons ascribed to the Apostles, gives the care of the Ecclesiastick Goods to the Bishop, as Justine Martyr gives to his  who, as we have seen already, was purely a Parish Pastor. And the 39 Canon saith, Let the Presbyters and Deacons attempt no∣thing without the Bishop, for to him the Lord's People is committed, and for their Souls he must give an Account. Now I demand of all Men brook∣ing either Conscience or Candor if Souls could be committed to any save him, who was their ordinary Feeder and Instructer. And the Pseudo-Dionysius clearly intimats, that wherever either Baptism or the Lord's Supper was administrat'd, a Bishop was there, and was the Dispenser thereof. The High-Priest (saith heDe Hierarchia Eccles. Cap. 2.  &c.) that is the Bishop, preaches to all Men the true Gospel, every one that desires to Partake of these Heaven∣ly Things, coming to one of the learned in these Mysteries, desires to be led to the High-Priest—and he brings him to the High-Priest, who receiving him with gladness as a Sheep on his shoulders—praises the bountifull prin∣ple, by which all are called who are called at all—The High-Priest dips him thrice. The High-PriestCap. 3.  &c. himself having made a holy Prayer
at the Divine Altar and beginning to Offer, goes round about the whole Chore—and the High-Priest praising the Holy Divine Actions, sacrifices the most Divine Thing—and taking and delivering the Divine Communion he ends with a Holy Thanksgiving. Do &c. nothing (saith the Pseudo-Ignatius to Hero a Deacon of Antioch) without the Bishops for they are Priests, thou their Deacon: they Baptize, Sacrifice or Dispense the Lord's Supper, impose Hands: thou serves them as St. Stephen in Jerusalem admi∣nistred to James and the Elders. From which place it's most evident, that all Pastors or Priests (as the Author speaks) are true Bishops, that on the account of such things as are common to all Pastors, they receive the prime Episcopal Honour and Deference, that there was a Colledge of true Bishops in the single City of Antioch, & accordingly that the rest of the Elders with James at Jerusalem were really true Bishops no less than he. I don't say that Bishops and Congregations were reciprocal every∣where in the fourth or fifth Century when these Impostors wrote, only being to personat Apostolick Men, they saw themselves obliged to mix into their Legends some shreds of true Antiquity. The stuff they in∣vented themselves was of a far different and contrary Mettal, and far from being so conform and like to the Apostolick and prime Primitive Church. §. 14 And here it's to be added, that as every Bishop had once, which continued in very many places for a good space, one Congregation on∣ly, so all Bishops whatsoever are of the same Dignity, and Equal with one another. For Cyprian(Mihi) Lib. 2. Epist. 1. calls all Bishops Collegues, adding, we force none, we give Laws to none, seeing every Governour in the Administrati∣on of the Church, hath Power to do according to his own Will, for which he is to give God an Acconnt. And,In sententiis Episcoporum de Hae∣reticis baptizandis. Page 334. for none of us is a Bishop of Bishops, or by a Tyrannical Power can force his Collegues to Obedience &c. And Hie∣rome Epist. 85. saith, wheresoever Bishops be, at Rome or Eugubium, Constan∣tinople, Rhegium, Alexandria or Tanis, they are all of the same Dignity and Priest-hood, Riches and Poverty make not a Bishop either higher or lower, they are all the Successors of the Apostles. Which is also Augustine's Mind, and must be granted by all who acknowledge the Equality of the Apo∣stles, and that Bishops were their Successors.
Now the Truth of these two Things, viz. the allowableness of a Bi∣shop to every Congregation, yea the primitive Reciprocalness of a Bi∣shop and a Congregation, and the Equality of Bishops among them∣selves being supposed, which indeed is undoubtable to all the Ingenu∣ous, their whole Hierarchy turns to nothing. And now I hope that which some pretend to be a mighty Prejudice, viz. that Episcopacy still de facto has been, and from the earliest times of Christianity we hear of Bishops, is many ways removed, and that by this time it has clearly appeared, that either profound Ignorance, Os∣scitancy, or the masly beam of Interest in Mens Eyes has been the true Source of this Prejudice. Moreover, suppose that it could not be easily told when this Cor∣ruption, which is like the Tares sown during the sleeping of the Hus∣band-man, crept into the Church: Can they tell when all other Cor∣ruptions made their first Entry? As for Example, can they give a di∣stinct account when the use of Oyl in Baptism, whereof TertullianDe Baptismo. Cap. 7. Exinde egressi de lavacro perunguimur bene∣dicta unctione de pristina Disciplina, qua ungui oleo decorum in sacerdotium solebant. speaks as of a thing constantly practised among Christians, came first in Fashion? The like I may say of Exorcization, and many other things altogether uncertain as to their Beginning, and yet by all Lovers of the Truth of Christianity to be Corruptions, whereof see store in Chamier's PanstratiaTom. 4. Lib. 5. Cap. 16.. Secondly, I trust also that by the foregoing Discourses, the Weapon the Papists and other Hierarchicks use against the Reformed Churches to prove that they have no Ministers, because of the want of a Successi∣on of Bishops, is sufficiently blunted. And this minds me of an Objection I was assaulted with from a Gen∣tleman of that Perswasion, 'twas that these Episcopal Men who ordain∣ed our Pastors, gave them the Power of Ordination neither in express Terms, nor yet intentionally; Ergo not at all. I Repon'd, that tho' they did not give it them intentione Operantis, yet notwithstanding inten∣tione Operis: in so much as they ordain'd the Ministers of the Gospel, all whom we sustain to be true Bishops. I add, this is to a hair like Becan Compen. Manualis Cap. 12. Paragr. 11. the Jebusites arguing against Luther's Call to be a Protestant-Minister,
Luther (saith he) had no lawfull Calling to the Ministry he exercised after his Defection, for then he began to oppugn the Catholick Church, abolish Feasts, Monastick Vows, and Prayers for the Dead, these things he could not do by the Power which he had received in the Catholick Church, for the Bishop who ordained him, gave him no Power for the Destruction of the Church. §. 15. But there yet remains a great Prejudice, and no wonder, for it comes from a great City, Rome (say they) and other such vast Ci∣ties, which certainly contain'd many Congregations, have been always ruled by their particular Bishops as the Catalogues yet extant evinc But tho' 'twere so, seeing it's at least, no less certain, that in other places Bishops and Congregations were Reciprocal, we are even with them, and their Argument quite evanishes, and Antiquity allows us to give a Bishop to every Congregation, no less than it warrands their giving a multitude of Parishes to any one Bishop. And Dr. Mauricepage 449. acknow∣ledges, he never yet heard of any Man who made it essential to a Bishop to have many Congregations under him. And he's so far in the right herein that, during prime Antiquity, 'twas never so much as dream'd, that 'twas either essential or any way requisite for a Bishop to have a plurality of Congregations. It's not (saith hepage 451.) the being Pastor of one or many Congregations that makes one a Bishop; but the Order. There are (saith SaraviaExam. Tract. de triplici Epis∣copatuum Genere pag. 16. and have been Bishopricks so small that their Bishops had only one or two Presbyters; for we measure not a Bishoprick by the number of the Clergy or by the amplitude of the City or Diocess, the magnitude of Riches, but by the Authority of the Episcopal Degree, altho' the Bishoprick be included in one small Parish alone. And some of the most Episcopal amongst them ac∣knowledge that any of our Ministers tho' they have but one Parish, want nothing to make them Bishops but only the Episcopal Consecration, whereby they at once yeeld the whole Plea, destroy their Hierarchy, and withall discover their preterscriptural, and therefore antiscrip∣tural Superstition. And now seeing there is all the warrant and allowance that either can be desir'd or thought on that a Bishop and a Pastor of one single Flock or Congregation is one and the same, and that every Congregation may have its own proper Bishop, their Plea for the Distinction between Bi∣shop and preaching Presbyter, tho' its Ground were no less solide than it's naught and slippery, becomes really of no subserviency at all to their
Hierarchick Cause, and so on this account is truly exhausted (for providing the Pastor of any Parish or Congregation be constantly im∣ployed in Preaching and Edifying the People, we shall not envy him others, so far as is requisite, to assist him, the People may be instructed the better) Don't therefore Dr. MauricePreface to his Defence of Diocesan Episcopacy. and the Men of that stamp, while they pretend that tho' there be allowed to every Congre∣gation its proper Bishop, yet there's a most different and momentuous Controversie behind, about the Distinction between Bishop and Pres∣byter, seek, as the Proverb is, a Knot in the Rush, and triffle with a witness? Give them moreover out of sole kindness, that theSee Doctor Scot's Christian Life. Vol. 2. Chap. 7. and D. M. Page 98. Et seq. Apostolick Power and Office is permanent and to be transmitted to all Bishops, yet on Supposition of these Truths, viz. that every Congregation had, yea or may have its proper Bishop, and that all Bishops are equal, they shall be compelled to desert the whole of their Plea, and acknowledge the sure Foundation and Lawfullness of what they call Presbyterian Pa∣rity. Secondly, EusebiusHist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 8.  &c. plainly says that it cannot be known who were the Successors of the Apostles to feed the Churches they had planted, save what is to be collected from the words of the Apostles, and so break the Chain at the Top, where it should be strongest, and shews that their best twisted Cords become Ropes of Sand, to which, as we already noticed, the learn'dest of their own Writers subscribe. Thirdly, To come to Rome in particular, altho' 'twas the Head of the World, and indeed the Head and Fountain from whence all the Hierarchicks draw their best support, no Man of Reason, whoever look'd into the divers, yea and contrary Accounts given by the Anci∣ents of the first pretended Successors of Peter; can ever inferr that the Romans had, in these early times of Christianity, one peculiar Dioce∣san Bishop over the rest of the Pastors: yea indeed Cletus, Clemens, Li∣nus, all whom, if you compare the best Accounts they have, you shall find to have been at one and the same time Bishops of Rome, and Succes∣sors of Peter, are a good evidence that he had no singular Successor at all. This was so made out by the Protestant Writers, that for ought I
know the Romanists were despairing of any plausible Answer, altho' I doubt not, but they take Heart, since some among the ProtestantsPearson suis posthumis & Dodwell. have used prodigious Endeavours to gratifie them, and reconcile real Contradictions, and fix the singular Successors of Peter. I can scarce light on any of the Books they cite, and yet I'm at no great loss. For, 4ly, It's certain that Peter was never at Rome, which at once dispatches the grand Plea of all the Hierarchicks. The whole stream of Writers Arnobius. Lib. 2. Euse∣bius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. Epiphanius. Tom. 2. Page 59. Philastrius. Hie∣ronymus Cat Script. Augustinus Tom. 6. Page 6. Sulpitius severus Lib. 2. and others. who record Peter's Voyage thither either relate or suppose that his Errand was to oppose Simon Magus, so that the Truth of both these Relations must stand or fall together. But Simon Magus, (if we belive OrigenesContra Celsum Lib. 1.) was never there. Simon (saith he) the Smaritan and Majician endeavour'd by Sorcery to destroy some, and I belive deceived many with his delusions. But now throw all the World you shall scarce find thirty who follow him, and I perhaps have called them more than they are. Indeed there are some few in Palestine, but in the rest of the Regions of the World his very Name is not heard off, altho' he mainly desired that his Fame might be spread abroad, and if perhaps there be any report of him at all, it's only to be learned from the Acts of the Apostles. And Time, which often has discovered things commonly taken for Truth to be altoger False, hath verifi'd the words of Origenes: For the Statue which gave the occasion of the fixion is now found to be the Image an old Sabin King or ficti∣tious Deity called by the Romans Semo Sangus, Sancus or SanctusDionys. Halicar. Lib. 4. Ovidius Fast. Lib. 6. Livius Dec. 1. Lib. 8. Augustinus de civitate Dei. Lib. 13. Cap. 19. which Justine Martyr, throw his unskilfulness of the Latine Tongue, and a Cheat put upon him by some Samaritans, took for Simon Ma∣gus as is acknowledged even by the learned RomanistAn∣not, in Euseb. Lib. 2. Cap. 13. Valesius. The Inscription of this statue is Semoni Sango Deo Fidio. Now ac∣cording to the Genius of the Age the fraud prevail'd, and Simon Magus must be brought to Rome, made to effect monstruous Prodigies; and therefore Simon Peter his old Adversary must also be sent thither to Con∣jure and Baffle him a second time. And this is the prime Source of Pe∣ter's imaginary Journey to Rome, and his fictitious Roman Episcopacy, and the whole Papal Structure. For, as Simon Magus his coming to
Rome is mention'd by none before Justine, and by him only on this false Ground, so Peter's Journey thither is before that time mention'd by none, save Papias, if he may be said to mention it, for if at all, he does it very obscurelyEusebius lib. 2. cap. 15.. And tho' he had been never so positive in this Matter, it's of small Consequence, for, as Eusebius already told us, (tho' elsewherelib. 3. cap. 36. he forgets himself) he was of so little Wit, so fabulous and given to believe everything he heard, that his Testimony merites little or no Credit. Irenaeus indeed says that Papias was a hear∣er of the Apostles, and himself also intimats so much, but again clearly denyes it while he saysEuseb. lib. 3. cap. 39.  &c. that he used, when he met with any: who had been acquainted with the Elders, to enquire what Andrew, Peter, Philip, Thomas, James, John, Matthew and the rest of Christ's Disciples had been wont to say. And this he intimats had been his Practice only, when he was a young Man, and so gives us clearly to understand that when he wrote, there was not one of the Hearers of the Apostles alive. So far was Papias from being their Disciple. 'Twas he also who gives out that Mark wrote not his Gospel by Divine Inspiration, but only by the help of his Memory. 'Twas he also who was the Father of the carnal and gross Chiliasts, and the first who abused the Scriptures, turning them all to Allegories, and had not so much as the knowledge to distin∣guish Philip the Apostle from Philip the Evangelist. The same Papias is the first Author of the report of Peter's Journey to Rome (providing it may be said that he reportes it at all) which mistake, as Eusebius in∣timates Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 15., flow'd from his misunderstanding of 1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church that is at Babylon &c. And seeing that by Babylon in the Apoca∣lyps Room is mean'd, he and many of these times, thro' their want of skill to distinguish between the Prophetick Mystick, and Epistolick plain Phrase and Stile, concluded that in Peter also Room is to be under∣stood. But this Gloss is so forraign and absurd that even the most learn'd of the Romanists, as Petrus de Marca Bishop of Parisde Concordia Sacerd. & Imp. tom. 2. pag. 174. acknowledg∣es that these Words of Peter are not to be understood of Rome, but of the east∣ern Babylon, where (saith the Bishop) Peter was settl'd hereditary Patiark. Some indeed understand them of a City bearing that name in Egypt, and this Spanhemius F. and Dr. PearsonPosthm. de Success. Rom. Pontif, Dissert. 1. cap. 8. prefer to the Assyrian Babylon:
the former because the old Chaldean Babylon was then desolate, the letter for this that after Anilaeus a chief man among the Jews in these parts had injured the Inhabitans, many of them were cut off and the rest driven from Babylon, who fled to Ctesiphon, the most part whereof notwithstan∣ding in a combination made against them by the Assyrians and Greeks were either cut off or expell'd. Therefore he concludes that tho' Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision, yet he could expect no har∣vest of the Jews in these parts. Now, as to the ground Spanhemius goes on, it seems sufficient to prove that it could not be the old Chaldean Babylon: For it's certain from Scripture, and Plinius witnesseslib. 6. cap. 26. Caetero in solitudinem rediit, exhausta vicinitate Seleuciae. that 'twas then reduced to a solitude. It seems therefore to be mean'd of the Principal City of the Parthian Impire which succeded to Babylon in name no less then in honour as is clear from that in Lucanlib. 1., Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda Trophaeis Ausoniis.— If this their chief City was Ctesiphon or Seleucia, may be a doubt Pli∣nius ibid. Ctesiphontem—condidere Parthi quod nunc est caput Regni. calls Ctesiphon the Head of the Parthian Kingdom. But Strabo seems to be more clear in this matter, and to give light to Pliny, Taci∣tus, Herodianus, Am. Marcellinus, or otherwise to lay open the ground of their mistake. Seleucia (saith he)lib. 16.  &c. a City by the bank of Tigris, as Babylon was of old, is now the Metropolis of Assyria, near it there is a great Village Ctesiphon wherein the Parthian Kings used to winter, sparing Seleucia that it might not be spoiled by the warlike Scythians (by whom I understand their Auxiliary or guard Souldiers who were rude and ready to Mutany, aud therefore were not brought within their Chief and Treasure City) this Village is now arriv'd at even the power and greatness of a City. Where, as is evident, he so much prefers Seleucia to Ctesiphon that he makes the former the chief City of the Impire. More∣over Crassus when he design'd the conquest of Parthia and the possession of the Kings treasures being asked by the Messengers of Orodes King of Parthia why he broke the peace made with Pompey and Sylla, said he would answer them at SeleuciaFlorus lib. 3. cap. 11.—Seleucia se responsurum esse respondit. proudly insinuating that he would subdue and
spoile their chief City. And this City expresly gets the name Babylon by Stephanusad vocem Babylon. ., and he confounds it with the old Babylon. Hence it appears that Seleucia was the chief City of the Parthian Impire, and commonly then got the name of Babylon, and that the very place of old Chaldean Babylon was not then known, for they were certainly in distant places; therefore, if Josephus seem to mention another Ba∣bylon distant from the chief City of the Parthians this is rather to be understood of the Country Babylonia then of the old Chaldean Babylon which then was ruined now tho' the Jews for a time might be compelled to leave that principal City of Parthia they might notwithstanding soon after be permited to return no less then these who were expelled Rome by Claudius, got Liberty shortly to come thither again. This Dr. Pearson allows and therefore cannot deny the probability of the other However this be, nothing is more certain then that by Babylon, which Peter mentions, the literal proper and well known Babylon, which was then the chief City of Parthia Seleucia, must be meaned, otherwayes the dispersion to which he writes had neither known where he was nor what Church saluted them, which is quite contrary to the Apostles Intention there. For at that time the Apocalypse was not written, and yet on this most false Supposition viz. that by Babylon Peter under∣stands Rome, was his Journey thither founded and so must prove no less false in the matter of fact, and with it his Episcopacy and that of the earliest Popes his pretended Successors seeing all lean on his Journey thither. And 'its with no less confidence and concord averred and delivered then is either his, or his pretended Successors their Episcopacy, or ought else Subsequent to this his falsly supposed Voyage. And indeed the evidence of this our Assertion is so strong that it compell'd even the learned Romanists themselves to acknowledge the Truth thereof, as J. Bapt. Mantuanus, Michael Caefenas, Marsilius Patavinus, Joh. Aventinus, Joh. Lelandus, Car. Molinaeus, who are Cited by Spanhemius F. in his Golden Dissertation on that Sub∣jectPage 22. In the mean while I cannot but wonder how this otherways accurat and learned Antiquarypage 146. finds an Aegyptian Babylon in that distick of MartialLib. 14. Epigr. 15..
Haec tibi Memphitis Tellus dat munera, victa est Pectine Niliaco jam Babylonis acus. Th' Aegyptian slay gives Tapistry more fine Than ever Babylon could sue or spin. Where the Poet only preferrs the Aegyptain woven Cloath to the finest needle-work of the old Chaldaean Babylon; But, as it is most apparent, no more here either expesses or insinuats that there is a place named Babylon in Aegypt, thenLib. 8. Ep. 28. where he comends a Gown be∣stow'd on him by Parthenius a gentle-man of Domitius's Chamber in this distick, Non ego praetulerim Babylonica picta superbe Texta, semiramiâ quae variantur acu. It far excells the rich Embroideries Of Babylon built by Semiramis. Moreover Clemens Romanus speaking of the Death of Peter and Paul, intimates that he knew sufficiently where and by whom Paul was kill'd with other such Circumstances of his Death, but insinuats that he had no such knowledge of any such Circumstances of the Death of Peter. And it's colligible from Jeromein 23. Mat. that both Peter and Paul were not kill'd by the Romans but by the Jews, in, or not far from Palaestine. 'Twere easie to discover the Forgerie and Falshood of their other Catalogues of Bishops pretended to have been in the like great Cities, as for example that of the Bishops of Jerusalem whereof they fainEuseb. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 1. . Euseb. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 32. & lib. 4. cap. 5. that the Apostles made James Bishop, and that on a ground to base and carnal, viz. because he was the Son of Joseph, and so related to Christ whom the Apostle Paul knew not according to the flesh. 2 Cor. 5. 16. and then make him and his pretended successor Simeon to continue Bishops of that See from a little after the death of our Savior to, I know not what year of Trajanus, between which time and Adrian Trajanus's immediat suc∣cessor his rebulding of Jerusalem, they give to that Church thirteen Bishops, to all of whom little more than twenty years can be assingn'd; yea some three or four of these are cramm'd into one yearEuseb. Chronic. and yet we hear of none of these thirteen who died a violent death, but which yet more fully discovers the Forgery all along from the destruction of
the City by Titus, untill 'twas rebuilt by Adrian there was no Inhabitant there, no place for my L. Bishop's grace, nothing whereon to exercise the Episcopal power save rubbish and desolation.Iren. pag. 301. In none of the Churches (saith Dr. Stilling fleet) most spoken of is the succession so clear as is necessary. For at Jerusalem it seems somewhat strange how fifteen Bishops of the Circumcision should be crouded into so narrow a room as they are, so that many of them could not have above two years time to rule in the Church. And it would bear an inquiry where the seat of the Bishops of Jerusalem was from the time of the destruction of the City by Titus, (when the walls were laid even with the ground by Musonius) till the time of Adrian. I shall yet in the last place adduce a few passages, and I intreat my Reader seriously to weigh them and from whom they came, for I am sure they will give great light and satisfaction to all the truly conscienti∣ous and disinterested. The sixt Anathematism (saith a RomanistSuavis Hist. of the Council of Trent pag. 743.) was much noted in Ger∣many; in which an Article of Faith was made of HIERARCHY, which word and signification thereof is aliene, not to say contrary to the holy Scrsptures: and tho' 'twas somewhat antiently invented, yet the Author is not known, and in case he were, yet he is an Hyperbolicall Writer, not imitated in the use of that Word, nor of others of his Invention, by any of the Ancients: and following the Stile of Christ our Lord, and the Holy Apostles, and primitive Church, it ought to be named, not Hierarchy, but Hierodiaconia, or Hierodoulia. And Dr. Heylen, whoHist. of Episcopacy, part 2. page 39. like to Balaam blessing Is∣rael when he would fainest have cursed them, uses to establish a Presby∣terian Parity of Pastors while he is most desirous to destroy it, makes the Bishop in Justine Martyr's time all one with the President of the Congregati∣on and ordinary Preacher of God's Word and Celebrator of the Eucharist there∣in. And pleads that in Tertullian's mind Baptism was a work most proper to the Bishop in regard of his Episcopacy or particular Office. And the Doctor contends out of Tertullian that in his time Christians receiv'd the Eucharist only from the Bishop's handspart 2 pag. 96, 97., and so there were no fewer Bishops than Congregations who mett for hearing of the Word and Celebration of the Sacraments. What shew of reason can be given (saith Dr. Stilling-fleet Iren. page 257. why the Apostles should slight the Constitution of the Jewish Syna∣gogues,
which had no dependance on the Jewish Hierarchy, and subsisted not by any Command of the Ceremonial Law? The Work of the Synagogue not belong∣ing to the Priests as such, but as Persons qualifi'd for instructing others. And pag. 264, 265. We are to take nottice, that the Rulers of the Church under the Gospell do not properly succeed the Priests and Levites under the Law, whose Office was Ceremonial, and who were not admitted by any solemn Ordination into their Function.—It is then a common Mistake to think that the Ministers of the Gospell succeeded by way of Correspondence and Analogy to the Priests under the Law; which Mistake hath been the Foundation and Originall of many Errors. For when in the primitive Church, the name of Priests came to be attributed to Gospell-Ministers from a fair Complyance (as was thought then) of the Christians only to the name used both among Jews and Gentiles: in process of time, corruptions increasing in the Church, those names that were used by the Christians by way of Analogy and Accommodation, brought in the things themselves primarily intended by these names: so by the metaphoricall names of Priests and Altars, at last came up the Sacrifice of the Mass; with∣out which, they thought the names of Priests and Altars were insignificant. This Mstake we see run all along thro' the Writers of the Church, as soon as the name Priests was apply'd to the Elders of the Church, that they derived their Succession from the Priests of Aaro's Order. In short he still contends that the model of Governing the Christian Church was an exact imitati∣on of that of the Synagogues, which were no other thing than the par∣ticular parish Churches among the Jews, and in every one of which there was a a Bishop paralell to him who, in the Apocalypse, is the An∣gel of the Church. And Dr. Lightfoot is of the same mind; The Apostle (saith he) Vol. 1. pag. 308. calleth the Minister Episopus, from the common and known title of the CHAZAN or Overseer in the Synagogue. AndVol. 2. pag. 133. Be∣sides these there was the publick Minister of the Synagogue who pray'd publickly and took care about reading the Law, and some∣times preached if there were not some other to discharge this Office. This person was called SHELIACH TSIBBOR the Angel of the Church, and CHAZAN HAKENESETH the Chazan or Bishop of the Congregation. The Aruch gives the reason of the name: The Chazan (saith he) is SHELIACH TSIBBOR the Angel of the Church (or
the publick Minister) and the Targum renders the word ROVEH by the word HOSE one that oversees. For it's incumbent on him to oversee how the Reader reads and whom he may call cut to read in the Law. The publick Minister of the Synagogue himself read not the Law publick∣ly but every Sabbath he called out seven of the synagogue (on other days fewer) whom he judged fit to read. He stood by him that read, with great care observing that he read nothing either falsly, or improperly and calling him back and correcting him, if he had failed in any thing, and hence he was called CHAZAN that is  i. e. Bishop or Overseer. Certainly the signification of the word Bishop and Angel of the Church had been determined with less noise if re∣course had been made to the proper fountains and men had not vainly disputed about the signification of words taken I know not whence. The service and worship of the Temple being abolished as being Ceremo∣nial, God transplanted the worship and publick adoration of God used in the synagogues, which was moral, into the Christian Church: to wit, the publick Ministry, publick prayers, reading God's Word, and preaching &c. Hence the names of the Ministers of the Gospel were the very same, the Angel of the Church, the Bishop which be∣longed to the Ministers in the synagogues. There were also three Deacons or Almoners on whom was the care of the poor &c. Among the Jews (saith Dr. BurnetObserv. on the 1 Can. page 2. he who was the chief of the syna∣gogue was called CHAZAN HAKENSETH the Bishop of the Con∣gregation and SHELIACH TSIBBOR the Angel of the Church. And the Christian Church being modelled as near the form of the syna∣gogue as they could be, as they retained many of the Rites so the form of the government was continued, and the names remained the same, AndObs. on the 2 Can. page 83. In the synagogues there was first one, that was called the Bishop of the Congregation. Next, the three Orderers, and Judges of every thing about the synagogue who were called TSEKENIM, and by the Greeks  or  that is Elders. These ordered and deter∣mined every thing that concern'd the synagogues or the persons in it. Next them, were the three PARNASSIN or Deacons, whose charge was to gather the Collections of the rich, and to distribute them to the poor.
All the Presbyters (saith the Learned Le MoyneVria Sacra tom. 2. pag. 35. Nam non omnes Presbyteri onus concionandi & Verbum Dei enarrandi in se recipiebant &c.) took not on them the burden of preaching and exponing the scriptures, some were ta∣ken up in serving at the administration of the Sacraments searching into scandals, visiting the sick, strengthning the weak, and providing for the Churches profit, but the business of preaching belonged only to the Apostles the Bishops and the first Presbyters. Hence in times of the ancient Church the Bishops perpetually preached which the in∣ferior Presbyters did not except they were admitted thereto by the Bishops and chief Presbyters. Most memorable to this purpose are the words of the learned Jesuite Sirmundusapud Le Moyne pag. 36, ibid. Ver∣bam Dei, soli olim in Ecclesia praedicabant Episcopi, quarum proprie id Munus erat. Post eti∣am id Presbyteris, sed non uno apud omnes tempore permissum &c. Anciently (saith he) the Bishops only and no others preached the word of God for this was their proper province and work 'twas afterwards, tho' not alike soon every where, allowed to the Presbyters to preach: this was soonest begun in the East, as is clear from the practice of Pierius, Chrysostome, and others who preached while they were only Presbyters. And now judge, tho' nothing else had been adduced but what is just now brought from these profoundly learn'd and most unsuspected Ar∣biters, if the Regimen and Way of the true primitive Church was not according to the Gospell Humility and Simplicity, most opposite to a terrene Domination, Prelaticall Grandor and Power over other Pastors, and the vanity of preterscripturall and superstitious Ceremonies? if she then enjoy'd not Bishops or Pastors, Ruling Elders and Deacons? if then, whosoever had power to dispense the Word and Sacraments with the Charge of any particular Flock or Congregation, was not re∣ciprocally one and the same with a Bishop, and finally, if the primitive Way was not entirely one with that of our Church of Scotland, and others of the reformed Churches, which is now known by the name of Presbytry? Hence it's carefully to be noted how odd and grievous Alterations were made both as to the use of Terms and in the Offices they had pri∣mitively signifi'd in Scripture. In, yea even after the Apostolick Age we find that the word Bishop, whereever it holds forth an ordinary Church-Officer, alwayes signifying a Labourer in the Word and Doct∣rine, and Dispenser of the Srcraments, Pastor of a Flock or Congrega∣tion.
We find also the Word Presbyter taken as its equivalent denoting this very thing: elsewhere (as is now made evident) the word Presby∣ter signifies no Pastor of a Flock, but only one who was to assist him in Ruling and Guidance thereof; some also of this latter kind of Presby∣ters designing the Ministry, there beeing then few or no Theological Schools, were trained up for the Office under the Inspection of Bishops or Parochial Pastors, and accordingly whiles assisted them therein. But this was only accidental to the Office of a ruling Presbyter. Afterward there was a new kind of Church Office invented whose chief work was not to feed any Flock or Congregation and yet was reputed the Pastor of many Flocks which was a compleat Contradiction. His Province was mainly to rule and domineer over a multitude of both Past∣ors and Flocks, him they called the Bishop. Another Office epually new and unknown to Scripture and prime Antiquity was a kind of semi∣pastor or half Minister who was to do all the Ministeriall Work, and yet was so far from having any Pastorall Power that on the contrary he was only the subject and substitute of another, and him they called the Presbyter: As for the other sort of Presbyters they came in time to be well nigh intirely abolished and forgotten. The like ChrysostomeOn the 6 of the Acts hom. 14. observes of the Deacons, saying that in his time such Deacons as the Apostles ordained were not in the Church. Hence it's not strange if the Ancients, while sometimes they violent the Scriptures to make them favour what in their oun times was obtaining, and at other times while, either out of design and freedome, or casually they light on the true Meaning of the Scriptures, speak most perplexedly of Bishops and Presbyters, and afford no small ground of Wrangling and Disputation to all that are exercised in this Controversy. In the mean while such Immutation was not made in a day, 'twas sloe and apparently plausible like the weed which at lenth you may see that it is groun up, yet its act of growing ye shall never perceive. This Alteration, as even Spanhemius F.Introduct. ad Hist. Nov. Test. Pag. 166. no enemy to the Hie∣rarchy, observes, began first in great Cities, and beside the gene∣rall occasions or rather pretexts for it, which we already noted, there was this colour more peculiar to great Cities; in Rome, for ex∣ample, tho there were Christians sufficient to make up severall ordinary
Congregations, yet at some special times all or most of these used to meet at one place, and accordingly were accounted but one Church. This might occasion the making of a  or one particular Modera∣tor among the Pastors who got some primacy of Order, and at these more solemn meetings of the People appeared & spake most and in time got the appropriation of the name Bishop: all this was notwithstanding only a meer prostasy: he must nixt have a power over his Collegues in the City: the Bishops, the parochial Pastors of the Country and lesser Cities are next to be invaded. This Fermentation, which had small beginnings and still grew untill all was soured, suelled especially and was most operative in a time of peace, whereof in the third Century they had a good space, even from the Death of Valerian untill Dioclesian's Persecution. The Emperors themselves (saith EusebiusHist. Eccles. Lib. 8. Cap. 1.—. then so much favoured them that they not only gave them Liberty of the publick Exercise of their Religion, but also made some of them their Chamberlains and Governours of Provinces. In this time the alteration of both Government and Worship was certainly not a litle promoved. For nothing then reign'd among the Christians but con∣tention & ambition. They were not content (continous he) with the former E∣difices but builded large Churches from the foundation—But when thro' too much liberty we fell into sloath and negligence, when every one began to envy and backbite another, when we managed as 'twere an intestine warr amongst our selves with Words as with Swords, Pastors against Pastors, and People against People, being dashed one on another, exercised flrife and tumult, when deceit and Guile had grown to the highest pitch of wickedness—When being void of all sense we did not so much as once think how to please God; yea rather on the other hand impiously we imagined that human Affairs are not at all guid∣ed by Divine Providence, we dayly added Crimes to Crimes when our Pastors ha∣ving despised the Rule of Religion strove mutually with one another, studying no∣thing more then how to outdoe one another in strife, threatning Emulation, Ha∣tred, and mutual Enmity, proudly usurping Principalities or Prelacys as so many places of Tyrannicall Domination. To this time doubtless did the Nicene Fathers look in their Ancient Customes that they mention, which will be denyed by none who remember that even things of a very late dateVide sis Clementis Epist. Pag. 112. & Iren  verba apd Eusebium hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 24. & Optatum Milevitanum Lib. 1. used then to be
called ancient, and, which is yet more, they were wont to pretend Apostolick Authority and Tradition for every one of their Innovations. For this their Pride and Superstition and such Vices God sent a long and most grievous Persecution, after which it might have been reason∣ably thought they would have returned to the Humility and Simplicity of the Gospell, and Apostolick Age. But so far were they from this that the Gangren began faster than ever to consume the Vitals of Chrsit∣ianity, and having got a Christian Emperor to indulge and enrich them they quickened their Pace, and in the gadiness of Pride and giddiness of Superstition, extravaging without bounds in this Declension they piece and piece laid aside the Scripture, and in the model of their Government and Worship eyed and followed three patterns, the Jewish Policy, Ceremonies, and Temple, where there was one High-Priest, the magnificent and splendid Government of the Roman Empire, over which there was one Head, one Emperor. And lastly, the way of the Roman Pagan Priests in which there was also at Rome a Pontifex Maximus or High-Priest over all the many Degrees of Priests in the Empire, and so in process of time it came to pass that he who by his first Institution was design'd to be a Pastor of a Flock or Congregation, and to imitate the Apostolick Simplicity and Humility, turned to be the great Antichrist, the son of Perdition. and grand Emissary and Lieu∣tennant of the red Dragon, and these who were ordain'd to be his Fel∣low-Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel became his Underlings and Slaves in that Apostacy, and being martial'd into a thousand Ranks and Orders proved so many Squadrons of hellish Locusts, so that scarce in any part of the Creation of God was there ever a more sad and direfull Depravation, if it were not when our first Parents fell into the Cloutches of the old Serpent, or when the Sons of God became his greatest Ene∣mies, and those morning Stars, the beautifull Angels turned into infernal Firebrands, black and abominable Devils. Most observable notwithstanding, yea and adorable is Divine Pro∣vidence in this, that even in the growth and increase of this black Apo∣stacy, the Church in Opinion and Doctrine, at least, still held fast the great, and capital Articles of Christianity, as the sufficiency of the Ca∣nonicall Books of Scripture, the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, of free Grace, of Justification by Faith in Christ's Blood &c. Their great sin lay not in the Defect but in the Excess, by superadding to these gold∣en
Foundations a heap of hay and stuble, the wild Fancies of Apostatising Brains; And in process of time equalizing, yea and preferring them to these Divine and most necessary Truths comprehended in the Books of the Old and New Testament. Then it was when, tho' they still ac∣knowledged the Identity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter, or Pastor of a Congregation, they must, among'st the rest of their novell Fop∣pereis, raise one Bishop, or High-Priest (as they spoke) over a num∣ber of other Pastors, and Churches, whose Ordination and Consecration must be accompani'd with a dale of Alloy suitable to this their humane and unwarrantable Institution: He must have a Cudgell put in his hand, to signifie his Rule and Authority over the People, and a Ring to signifie his Pontifical Honour, and the hidden Mysiereis wherewithall he is intrustedIsidorus de Officiis lib. 2. cap. 6. The Bishop being consecrated, shaven, and anointed, it was his proper Work and Office to erect and consecrate Churches, to make their Chrism or Holy Oyl; For the Art of Besmearing was pretty early in the Church, no later at least than their Diocesan, and therewith to anoint the forehead, Eyes, and Ears of the Baptized, to receive the Penitents, and perform such greasy businesses about them. These and the like Actions were reserved as the special Ornament and Badges of the High-Priest's HonourVide Con. Hispalense 2. Can. 7. apud Carranzam fol. 269. & Isidorum de Originib. lib. 7. cap. 12. & de Officiis Ecclesiasticis lib. 2. cap. 7. & Rabanum Maurum de Institut. Cler. lib. 1. cap. 6▪. And indeed hitherto they acted congruouly, for 'twas but meet, that their own Antichristian Inventions, the Institution whereof never came into God's mind, should be appropriated to their own Church-Officer whom God never appointed, Caetera conveniunt sed non levis error in uno est. For they debased and polluted God's Ordinance, I mean the Ordi∣nation of Pastors which they threw in among their Trash, and left likewise to their Bishop or High-Priest as a part of his peculiar Province (Superstitionists sometimes for such Fooleries deprave the Scripture, which Dr. Lightfoot one of the learn'd est of the Church-of-England Divines, observes and baffles, Here (saith he)on Acts 8. 17. Episcopacy thinketh it hath an undenyable Argument for Proof of its Hierarchy, and of the strange Rite of Confirmation &c.) And this is very like another Prac∣tice for Antiquity also not a white lower than their Diocesan, they
made another fixed Church-Officer whom they called an Exorcist. His Office was to dispossess and cast out DevilsVide Isidorum de originib. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. & Rabanum Maurum de Institut. Clericorum Lib. 1. Cap. 10.. Now surely such an ordinary Church-Officer was never appointed by God, and there∣fore, 'tis most likely that some of those Exorcists needed some to have casten the Devils out of themselves, or at least, to have giv'n them a a round doze of Hellebore, no less, then did any of the  their Patients. But seeing they made such a Church-Officer, and the dis∣possessing of Devils was among'st the greatest and most miraculous Works that ever was practis'd even by the greatest Apostles. It may be thought that this Exorcist was one of their highest Church-Officers, a Metropolitan certainly, Arch-Bishop or Patriarch, but he was none of these, yea he was no Bishop, no Presbyter, no Deacon, no Sub-Deacon, yea not so much as an Acolyth, that is a Candle-carier, for they us'd in fair-day-light and Sun-shine to light Candles in the Church to obey and fulfill (as they said) that Scripture, John 1. 9. That was the true Light, which lighteneth every Man that cometh into the WorldVide Isidorum de originib. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. Rabanum Maurum de Institut. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.. This Exorcist was yet a degree lower than their Candle-Carier, and there∣fore was plac'd in the very rear and tail of all their Clergy. So danger∣ous, yea and unaccountable were many of their Actings, but especially in the matter of Church-Office-bearing. Moreover I appeal to all the judicious and conscientious if out of a conscientious desire of conforming to the primitive Church, our Ad∣versareis make such a horride noise, bussle and Schism for their Hie∣rarchy. For, suppose it to be as true as I hope by this time to all the unbyassed it's manifested to be false, that in all points they could vouch their Hierarchy to be warranted by the true primitive Church and the Government of the one intirely like that of the other, yet do they not desert her in many other things? Did the primitive Church use Organs in Divine Worship? Were they not first introduced in the seventh Century by Pope VitalianPlatina in Vitaliano & Volater. apud Onuphrium in Chronographia. And yet it is doubtfull if they were so soon received: For Aquinas dislikes and condemns them Secunda secundae Quest. 91. Articul. 2.. Or where, pray, in the true primitive Church shall they find the Surplice, Corner-Cap and Tippet? Or where, to name no more,
shall they find the Bishop allowed to involve himself in secular cares; Civil and State Offices or Imployments? Some used indeed, when they pleased, the Christian Emperor allowing it, to make the Bishops Arbiters of their private Debates, but to all the good Bishops, as AugustineIn Psalmum 118. complains, this was a most weighty Grievance. But in more early times even this was not permitted, for CyprianLib. 1 Ep. 9.—Cum singuli di∣vino sacerdotio honorati & cuncti in clericali Ministerio constituti non nisi altari & sacrificiis deservire, & precibus atque orationibus vacare debeant. Scriptum est enim &c. con∣demns as altogether unlawfull that any Church-man should be so much as a testamentary Tutor to any Pupil. And mark the ground he goes on, For (saith he) whosoever are honoured with the Divine Priest-Hood or have a place in the Clergy ought only to serve at the Altar, and spend their time in Prayer and Supplication. For, 'tis written, no Man that warreth intangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier. Th is such a clear and inevitable Condemnation of the Practice of the Hierarchicks, that the Learned Annotators, Pamelius, and the Bishop of Oxford, finding nothing wherewith to elude it, skipp it over with deep silence. And now judge if Cyprian was of one mind with the Bishop of Five Churches, who will have the mean∣ing of Paul's words cited by Cyprian to beHist. of the Council of Trent. pag. 490. that every Christian ought to abstain from those things which are repugnant to Christian Profession, which are sins only; and will not have the Apostle to speak any thing of Church-men in particular, or if Cyprian would have expon'd the sixth of the Canons ascribed to the Apostles as doth Heylyn, whoHistor. of Episcop. part 2. page 25. makes the Canon only to mean that Bishops or inferiour Clergy-Men might not be Consuls, Praetors, Generals, or undergoe such publick Offices in the State of Rome, as were most sought for and esteemed by the Gentiles there. Heylen is here somewhat intricat, and his cause required it. However the sum of his drift is, that the exercising of these or the like Offices is allowed to any Pastor by the Canon. Now, altho' 'tallowed it not when the Em∣pire was Pagan, and he would prove something of this kind from 1 Cor. 6. where he must count all Magistrats thro' the Christian World, Pagans and Unbelievers, for otherways none shall ever prove from this Scripture, so much as the lawfullness of a Bishop or Pastors, judging and determining any difference between any two that referr themselves to his Arbitration. And tho' he should prove it, pray what is this topart. 2. pages 22, 23.
part. 2. pag. 376. 377. the exercising the Office of Consul, General, Praetor, Chancel∣lour, Treasurer or the like pieces of such temporal Power and Grandor? Judge moreover, were there no more but Paul his words to Timothy, 1. 4, 13, 14, 15. And 2 Tim. 4. 2, 5. If there be Leasure left any Pastor to be either Consul, General, or ought else of this nature: and consequently if all the shifts they use on this head be not sufficiently overthrown by these Scriptures only. But I had almost for∣gotten to notice how they torment themselves that they may torment and detort Cyprian, For Saravia says, that the Canon Cyprian speaks off was but particular and provincial only for the Church of Carthage. But Hey∣len refutes Saravia his comment and says Cyprian spoke so, because the Church was then almost destitute and unprovided of Presbyters. As if Cyprian had not spoken of Chruch-men absolutely and without the least intimation of any such restriction, and grounded his saying on a Scripture which, whatsoever it speaks of Church-men, confessedly says it of the mall, be they many or few or in whatsoever time and place they live. Moreover it's most certain that in Matthew 20. 25, 26, 27, 28. The Princes of the Gentiles &c. And Mark 10. 42, 43, 44, 45. And Luke 22. 25, 26, 27. All Pastors of Flocks are prohibited to exer∣cise Dominion, secular and state Dignity, and a parity of the Apostles amongst themselves, and in them a parity of all ordinary Pastors or Ministers of the Gospell among themselves is enjoyned. D. M.Pag. 16 & seq. pretends to engage with the latter part of this Inference, but first he mis-states the question as if from these Texts we pleaded for a perfect equality of all the Officers of Christs house without distinction between extraordinary and ordinary Ministers, or between Pastors and other Officers, and so his saying that the Apostles exercised Jurisdiction over other Ecclesiasticks, whether true or false, is nothing to the purpose. But saith D. M. Our blessed Saviour supposeth degrees of Subordination amongst his own Disciples as well as other societies, and therefore he directs the Ecclesiasticks who would climb up to the highest places in the Church, to take other methods then these that are most usual amongst the Grandees of the World: He that deserved preferment in the Church was to be the servant of all. Which answer he steals from the Jesuite BellarmineDe Pon∣tifice Lib. 5. Cap. 10. who answers that Christ only directs ecclesias∣tick Princes, & teaches that as such they ought to rule their subjects, not as do Kings
and Lords, but as Fathers and Pastors, To whom Junius replyesTom. 2. Col. 875, 876. that all this is quite contrarie to both Christs words and scope, The sons of Zebedie (saith he) desired a Dominion, this Christ rejects and refuses to give them; again the falshood of this answer is demonstrated positively by Christs following words, who in stead of this Dominion which they desired, enjoyns them a humble Ministry and Service. Wherefore there is a clear opposition between Domi∣nion and Ministry, the former belonging the World, the latter to the Church. Bishops are not (saith Bellarmine) here forbidden to exercise a dominion like that of godly Kings, but only like that of Tyrranical Kings who know not God. We deny (replyes Junius) that there is any such restriction, neither can it be proved. And accordingly Junius refutes and bafles all the Sophistrie that Bellarmine, and, after him, our Prelatists ordinarly bring to prove that only tyrrany and not all sort of principality or superiority is by our Saviour in these Texts, prohibited. And with Junius joyns the whole stream of Protestant Writers. But our Saviour (saith D. M.) did that himself among them, which he now commanded them to do to one another, and therefore the doing of this towards one another in obedience to the command now under consideration, could not inferr a Parity, unless that they blasphemously infer that Christ and his Apostles were equal: For our Saviour recomends what he en∣joyns from his own constant and visible practice among them, viz, that he himself who was their Lord and Master, was their sevant, and therefore, it becomes the greatest among them, in imitation of him, to be modest, calm, and humble, towards all their subordinate Brethren. A sturdy argument forsooth, as if our most blessed Master to quell his Disciples their ambition of aspiring to a preheminence over one another, and to render them more content with a humble and brotherly parity, could not adduce and urge his own most holy and meek example of his most wonderful condescending to take upon him the form of a Servant, and do the works of a Servant among his Apostles, and that so humblie, as if he had been only their Companion and nothing above them: but he must anone be concluded to degrade and throw down himself into a meer equality with his Dis∣ciples. Can any in the exercise of his wit make such a Collection? Nei∣ther can better befall him: for, as is his constant practice this wretched Paralogism he also borrows from another Jebusite Cornelius a Lapide, who at the same rate depraves this Text of Matthew to save from a mortal blow Peter's fictitious Primacy. But in the next place, which is little better, D. M. turns Jew on our hand: Let it be further considered (saith he) that
the Hierarchy and Subordination of Priests was established by Divine Authority in the Jewish Church, and if our Saviour had pulled down that ancient Polity, and commanded an equality among the Presbyters of the New Testament, he would not have stated the Opposition between his own Disciples and the Lords of the Gentiles, but rather between the Priests of the Mosaic Oeconomy and the Disciples of the New Tes∣tament. And agian, fearing least his Jdaism and also his self-repugnan∣cy should not have otherways been apparent enough, We do not (saith hepage 27.) now plead, as some ignorant People may pretend, that there ought to be a Bishop above Presbyters, because that there was a High-Priest among the Jews, but rather thus, that the Hierarchy that obtained in the Patriarchal and Jewish Oeconomy was never abrogated in the new. Well then, is there on Earth a visible High-Priest over the whole Church the Levitical Orders, Rites, & Temple-service, the very things wherein the Jewish Hierarchy consisted, and shadows of Christ to come, now al∣lowable. But to come to his cavill, and quiet this child of Ignorance, D. M. should know that beside the Disciples ambition to get up over one another, according to the carnal apprehension they then entertained of Christ kingdome (wherein our Hierarchick Lord Bishops are the Apostles successors indeed, and all Hierarchicks, men of Apostolick principles) they looked also for a great, worldly, and civil power and dominion, which was not at all comprehended in the Jewish Priesthood, nor was then possessed by any of the Priests; and so our Lord's stateing the opposition between his Disciples and the Lords of the Gentiles, is by far more apt for his purpose than if he had stated it between them and the Priests of the old Oeconomy, which had been altogether lame, and doon scarce the half of his bussiness. In a word, the Romishness and Falshood of all these his Cavills is manifest, were there no more, from this only, that if they do any thing, they make for the defence of that new Romish Doctrine of Peter's Supremacy, which both the Fathers, and all sound Protestants, not only Presbyterians, but also Episcopals, yea some that otherwise deserve not the name of Protestants, as Dr. Hey∣len Hist. of Episcopacy part 1 pag. 15. & seq., explode, & prove that there was a compleat Equality & Pa∣rity amongst the Apostles: And they deduce their Conclusion especi∣ally from this text of Matthew's Gospel and its parallels. And indeed if there be, as doubtless there are, any places of Scripture fit to prove it,
these texts deservedly hold the first place. The Author of the Opus im∣perfectum, thought by some to be Chrysostome, saith, on this place of Matthew, Quicunque autem desiderat primatum in terrâ, inveniet confusio∣nem in coelo, Whosoever desires a primacy on Earth, shall find Confusion in Heaven. Now suppose the truth of these words, and compare them with the words of the Apostle 1 Tim. 3. 1. If a man desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. And it's clear the Office of a Bishop is quite another thing than a Primacy; for to desire the former is lawfull and laudable, but to desire the latter is dangerous and damnable: and so much by the way, for I love not to transcribe the labours of others See if you please for example Rectius Instruendum.. And so angry is D. M. at New Opinions, and for their sake at every thing that's New, that he scarce ever advances any Argument, Vin∣dication, or Defence, but what is so frequently and soundly baffl'd, so bare and worn, as to vy even with the old ancient Garments of the Gibeonites. These Texts, as I said, prohibite also all Pastors of Flocks to exercise Dominion, Secular or State Dignities, which is irrefragably made out by our Writers against Bellarmine de Pontifice, and other Ro∣manists. However  either the Possession or Hope of such Emoluments and Dignities, as also the glistering gayetie of gorgious and theatrick Ceremonies, close mens mouths, and keep them from ack∣nowledging the Truth, for which even a PaganPersius Satyrâ secundâ. may come in to reprove them, O curvae interris animae, & coelestium inanes! Quid juvat hoc templis nostros immittere mores? Et bona Dijs ex hac scelerata ducere pulpa. Dull earthy minds who know no heavenly thing, What profites it into the Church to bring Our own Inventions? or to dream that we Can with Lust's fewel please the Deity. Dicite Pontifices, in sancto quid facit aurum? Speak out your minds ye Priests and do not lie, Can gold your holy places sanctifie? It's an old saying that the Church brought forth Riches, but the Daugter devoured the Mother, who when she had wooden Cups she
had golden Priests, but afterward she got golden Cups and wooden Priests. Even their Pseudo-ClementEpist. ad Jacobum fratrem Domini. is prolix on this subject, ex∣horting the Bishop to be dis-engaged of all worldly cares and affairs, and perpetually imploy'd in Preaching and Prayer, and the like Ministerial duties. And indeed all Pastors of Flocks would carefully abstain from secular and state Offices, and every thing else that may abstract them from their Charges and Flocks, least their  procure them Functius's reward. But if our Hierarchicks will not hear our blessed Lord and his Apostles, if they will not hear the genuine writtings of the Ancients, nor yet these spurious pieces whose Authros were otherwayes sufficiently Hierarchick and Ceremonious, I think they might listen to the Bishop af Aiace, for he was a Member of the Council of Trent: John Baptista Bernard (saith Suavehist. of the Council of Trent pag. 489.) Bishop of Aiace, who, th he believed that residencie was de jure Divino, yet thought it not fit to speak of that question, delivered a singular speech, saying that, not aiming to establish one Opinion more then another, but only so to inforce residency, as that it may be really executed, he thought it vain to declare from whence the obligation came, or whatsoever else and that it was sufficient only to remove the cause of Absence; which is, that Bishops do busie themselves in the courts of Princes, and in the affairs of the World, being Judges, Chanchellours Secretaries, Counsellours, Treasurers, and there are but few Offices of state into which some Bishop hath not insinuate himself. This is forbidden by St. Paul, who thought it necessary that a Soul∣dier of the Church should abstain from secular Employments. Let God's com∣mand be executed, and them forbidden to take any Charge, Office, or Degree, ordinary or extraordinary, in the affairs of the World; and then their being no cause for them to remain at Court, they will go to their residencie, of their own accord, without Command or Penalty, and will not have any occasion to depart from thence. In conclusion he desired that the Council could constitute, that it should not be lawfull for Bishops or others, who have care of souls, to exercise any secular Office or Charge. But all this was in vain, for that Synagogue of Sathan was deaf like the Adder, & the Bishop of Five Churches who harang'd to the contrary & eluded or neglected all his reasons telling the Council withall, that if Aiace were follow'd their Church would anon become base & contemp∣tible, was heard with applause of the the whole Conventicle (tho' not
without a self-contradiction as the Historian observes) so that this inge∣nuous and Christian Discourse was slighted and contemned. Neither can I find much ground to expect any fairer treatment from men of a Tridentine Spirit, whose strenth lyes mostly in mean sophistry, and un∣manly snatching at colours and shaddous, disimulation of the unsound∣ness of their Cause, banter and Hectoring, noise and ill founded claims to Antiquity. From these I may look for unkind handling indeed; but withall have some assurance to meet with better dealling from all the Admirers and Students of most true and only unspotted Antiquity, the sacred Scripturers, whom God hath quicken'd by his Precepts, who know that serious and assiduous Meditation in God's Law and keeping his Precepts will make them understand more than even the Ancients, and therefore rejoyce in the Way of his Testimonies as much as in all Riches, and esteem the Words of his Mouth more than their necessary food, to whom these are the Joy and Rejoyceing of their heart. These, I am somewhat confident, will not be much displeased with what I have said. My Antagonist, if any happen, or I'm exceedingly mistaken, will be of quite different Qualities, I can sincerely affirm that I have not wil∣lingly or wittingly injured the Truth, or any man's person, and that the Love of sacred Verity moved me to publish these papers. Others, doubtless, of suitable Abilities may soon advance things of far great∣er worth than what can come from we whose mite is so mean and incon∣siderable, and who, beside the other disadvantages that environ me, according to the good Pleasure of him that doth all things well, from the very womb have laboured under the want of that noble Sence of SEEING, and so am oblig'd to read with the Eyes and write with the Hands of others. Yet tho' I be deprived of the sweet Light and pleas∣ure of beholding the Sun, it little moves me, if so be I may see the infi∣nitely more precious Light of the most glorious and dear SON of Righteousness, and be illuminated and enlyven'd with that all healling Vertue which is in his Wings. FINIS.
