J40A 99826148 30540
The Merry MANS Resolution Or a LONON Frollick. He goes a wooing yet the matters so, He cares not much whether he speeds or no, Cause City Wives and Wenches are so common He thinks it hard to find an honest woman Ben't angry with this fellow I protest That many a true word hath been spoke in jest, By degrees he layes a wager money's scant Vntil five shillings out, then ends his Rant. The Tune is much in Request, Ile hold thee five shillings. IF young Men & Maidens will listen a while I'le sing you a Sonnet will make you to smile Then come my own Dearest and be not so coy, Whatever thou fearest ile get thée a boy. Ile hold thee a six pence tis silver compleat If thou art but willing I can do the feat. Then be not so scornful bt loving anti Kind If thou will but kiss me ile tell thee my mind For I am a Gallant that's vers'd in the trade I know what belongs to Wife, Widdow and Maid Ile hold thee a willing as round as a King Those Lasses that kiss well loves the rather thing. Then dear let me feel if thy flesh it be warm For I vow and protest I will to thee no harm, But buddle and cuddle weel toy and weell kiss What hurt honest Neighbours can come of all this Ile hold you three six-pences in ready Coyn Most Gis when they'r pleased with young men will joyn. BUt when they are sullin nere matter't a pin, But touze um and touz um twill please um again And when you have done it, this story is true If you do but kiss um they'l straight wayes kiss you Ile hold you two shillings lay with me that can The fairest th Nation will lye with a man. Then why should young Females continue sonice, When Ladies of pleasure do count it no vice To be kind to their Neighbours as well as the rest For kissing and Courting is still in request, Ile hold two and six pence that's just half a crown Highest Girles in all Europe. are easiest blown down. To talk of Complexions too tedious it were, Or to know their conditions by th'colour of hair, Yet this ile assure you, either Black, Red or Brown When they'r in the humour theyl freely ly down Ile hold you three shillings who gainst me dare lay That Women delight much with young men to play. Theres Mary & Betty, with Nancy & Jone, They'l lye with a Tinker ere they'l lye alone, There's Peg, Dol and Bridget Rebecca and Kate They laugh when they hear ont but long till they hav't Ile hold thee three & six pence Maids love Men the best When they come a wooing in earnest not felt. Fine Susan and Sarah brave Lasses indeed Yet they'l lye with a Broom man if they stand in need, Likewise pretty Parnel and simpering Sisse When young men imbrace them how kindly they kiss Ile hold you four shillings the nicest that be At one time or other makes use of a P— Then bear be contented for thou shalt have one, And shalt be prevented of lying alone: For I'm stout and lusty and fit for delight Ile hug thee & Kiss thee ten times in a night Ile hold four & six pence Ile hold thee no less Ile here a hole through thy coat then by guess. For I am an Archer, Well skil'd in that Art Though I shoot at young Damsels they nere feel it smart Ile hold thee five shillings, ile hold thee no more. Ile bore a hole through thy smock even before. This song throughout England on purpose I send To make young men merry, and there is an end. Printed for J. Williamson at the Bible in Canon street & on London Bridge.
