L3184 99830210 34660
A VINDICATION Of Mr. Christopher Love, FROM Divers scandalous reproaches cast upon him by the Malignant party. Who charge him to be a hinderer of the Treaty at Uxbridge, and a disturber of the Peace of this Common-Wealth. WHEREIN He cleereth himself from those aspersi∣ons; and sheweth that he alwayes constantly endeavoured that Peace with Truth might be established; to the Glory of God, and the comfort of this NATION. Written with his own hand, before his death, and now published for General satisfaction. LONDON, Printed by R. Wood, 1651.
A Vindication of Mr. Christopher Love from divers reproaches cast upon him by the Malignant party. IF a mans good name be as precious Oyntment, there will not be wanting many Flyes (to carry about flying Reports) to corrupt it: Although I deserve not a name among the chil∣dren of the most high God, yet would I not lose that room which any hath vouchsafed me in their hearts, not be made an abhorring to them. 'Tis true, this Sermon which I preacht at Vxbridge exposeth me to the envy of the bad, the jealousie of the good, yea the scandalous Reports of all; should I now be silent, I should strengthen those reports, and ratifie the rumours unjustly raised against me. I confesse the meannesse of my gifts, and fewnesse of my years, (being no more then 28.) doth lay a great discouragement upon my spirit to come into pub∣lick view, to hold forth the dim light of a candle now the Sun shineth; to bring in my poor mite, when men now adayes cast in of their abundance in∣to Gods Treasury; had I not been prest under the
pressure of reproaches, I should never have brought my Sermon (which I preacht at Vxbridge) to the Presse; when I Preacht it, I accounted it no other then as an untimely birth, that should never see the Sun; the reason why I now bring it to light, is not any high conceit that I have of it, but a false conceit that many have both of the Sermon, and my self that preacht it. I am presented to the world as an enemy to Treaties, or a peace by that way; I can make my Appeal to Heaven, where my witnesse is, that in the travel of my Soul I have uncessantly cryed unto God for a good successe to that Treaty, that by it Peace and Truth might flourish in our dayes, onely an unsound and an unsafe peace have I preached and prayed against. I have onely two things faithfully and humbly to present to your consideration. First, the Call that I had to preach at Vxbridg at that day. Secondly, the Matter which I preacht. For the first, viz. the Call that I had to preach, I shall briefly relate: On Wed∣nesday night the 29 of January, (being the monethly Fast) I had notice that the Commissioners were come to Vxbridg, and that Mr. Martial or some other Mi∣nister that attended upon the Honourable Commis∣sioners, was to preach the Thursday following; (which was the first day of the Treaty) hearing of this, I rode from Windsor Castle to Vxbridg on Thurs∣day morning; went forth with to Mr. Martial, to know whether he Preacht, who told me he did not, yet said that there was a Sermon: soon after I went towards the Church to be an Hearer. As I was go∣ing, I met the Governour of the Town, who told me that he with others had been waiting in the Congre∣gation
for a Sermon, but the Minister expected to preach was not come; whereupon he desired me that I would preach, else the Congregation would be disappointed. To whom I answered, that I had no thoughts of preaching, but to be an hearer, yet rather then the Congregation should be disappoint∣ed, I would spend some half an hour to give them a word of Exhortation, which accordingly I did. Now whether this was not a hand of Heaven to cast me upon the work, let my accusers themselves be Jud∣ges. I am constrained to write the manner how I came to preach, to wipe off those scandals that are cast upon me. Some say that I intruded my self on the work, when divers can tell how earnestly Capt. Hampton, the Governour of the Town, did sollicite me, telling me else the Congregation would be dis∣appointed. Some were so shamelesse as to say, that I thrust M. Martial down the Pulpit staires, when 'tis well known M. Martial was not there all that day; besides, had he been there to preach, I am so far from doing any such unchristian action, as to rob the Congregation of the Labours of him whose Books I am no worthy to carry after him, yea (if it were an expression meet for a meer man, I could say, whose shooe-latchet I am not worthy to untye. Others say, that one Mr. Kem was to preach; others say, some adjacent Minister, (whose turn it was to supply the lecture that day) whether the one or the other, I knew not then; onely this I know, it was almost a 11 of the clock when I was entreated to preach: the Governour and some of the people came out of the Congregation, thinking they had been disappointed of a Sermon; yea, I did my self also bid the Clark call a
long Psalm, that so if the Minister who was appoin∣ted to preach had come in the mean time, he might have supplyed the place. Object. What ever your Call was to preach that day, yet the matter which you preacht was unseasonable in that place, before that Auditory, and at that time. To which I answer, First, it was their usual Lecture-day; but a Country Auditory, none of the Commissioners of ei∣ther fide were there. Secondly, Had they been there, I spake not a word touching the Commissioners of either side, only prayed for our own. Thirdly if any thing were unseason∣able, it must be this; I advised the Auditors not to dote too much on Treaties of Peace: What unseasonablenesse was in this? I hope a Minister may advise a people not to dote too much upon ordinances, or upon duties, yet this no di∣sparagement to either, or to the authority of God that en∣joyns both; one may advise another not to dote too much upon Wife and children, yet this advice doth not reflect to the disgrace of either: in the like manner, might not a Mini∣ster advise a Congregation not to dote too much upon that Treaty, yet this advice no wayes reflects on the Treaters, or Treaty it self. I said further, that whiles our enemies go on in their wicked practices, and whiles we keep to our principles, we may as soon make fire and water to agree, and (I had almost said) reconcile Heaven and Hell, as their spi∣rits and ours; either they must grow better, or we must grow worse, before it is possible for us to agree; wherein is this unseasonable? shw me, and I will fall down with an ac∣knowledgment at your feet. Object. Why did you not write this Vindication sooner; had there not been a fault you would not have been so long silent, and suf∣fer many aspersion thus to spread. To which I briefly answer, First, I acknowledge such a sense and apprehension I have of these poor fruits o my stu∣dies, that I had no thoughts at all to print my Sermon, had not the importunity of divers friends, who are both godly and wise, prevailed with me, as also the consideration that
these scandals would not onely reflect upon my self, but on other Ministers also who cleave to the Par∣liament proceedings, as if they were of the same spi∣rit that I am unjustly presented to the World to be of, had not there considerations swayed with me, I should not have brought my Sermon to publick view, but have waited in silence, submission, and patience on my God for a Vindication, knowing as∣suredly the innocency and integrity of my heart and carriage to be clear in this matter; I blesse God, the integrity of my spirit (being in nothing about this matter conscious to my self) hath been as a brazen wall against all the scandals which have hence been darted against me, that none of them have entred to to pierce the quietnesse and content of my spirit; I remember what the Poet said, —Hic muru abeneus esto Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. Secondly, it was meet I should be thus long silent, lest I should have anticipated the Parliament (before whom some accusations against me were presented) I should have been pragmatical, unwise, yea also have blemisht my own vindication, should not I have waited for their determinations; who have (by an Order of the House of Commons) cleared and acquitted me touching this matter. It was requisite I should stay untill the Treaty was over, lest it might exasperate the spirits of our enemies, and so father that on me as if I had not a peaceable disposition, which indeed is the bastard that ought to be layed before their own doores; though their words be smoother then butter, yet war is in their hearts, but Peace in mine.
Fourthly, I deemed it my best way to wait a while in silence that I might the better hear and know the scandalous aspersions cast upon me, that I might the easier clear my self. Some report that I ran out of Vxbridge as soon as I had preacht the Sermon, as be∣ing ashamed of what I had done, whereas 'tis known by divers I went publickly up and down the Town, and staid at least four hours after the sermon in the Town; others say that I retired my self, and kept out of the way when I was sent for by the Parlia∣ment, when divers can testifie I went up and down the City; yea, was so far from hiding my self from any Court of Judicature, that I used meanes that I might be heard; that I might come to answer the accusations that were against me. Malignants (who would have it so) reported that I was whipt out of Vxbridge, or committed close prisoner in Vxbridge by our Commissioners, brought in a Cart to London, committed by the Parliament close Prisoner to New∣gate, with many other lying reproaches would they fasten upon me, whereas 'tis well known I was never before either Paaliament, or Honourable Commissi∣oners imployed by them, or any else about this bu∣sinesse, only I was sent for by an Order of the House of Commons, but in regard nothing was brought in against me, I was by them acquitted. Thus Courteous Reader, referring my self to thy favourable censure, I humbly take leave for this time; pressing my self to be An earnest well-wisher to Truth and Peace, with them who love both in sincerity, Christopher Love. FINIS.
