L969 12202467 56134
The right Honble. Robert Dudley Earle of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, knight of the noble order of St. George & St. Michall, and late one of her Maties. noble. privy counsell etc. W Marshall sculpsit.
LEICESTER'S COMMON-WEALTH. Conceived, spoken and published with most earnest protestation of dutifull good∣will and affection towards this Realme. By ROBERT PARSONS Jesuite. WHEREUNTO IS ADDED Leicesters-Ghost. JOB, 20.27. The Heavens shall reveale his Iniquitie, and the Earth shall rise up against him. LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. MDCXLI.
THE EPISTLE DIRECTORY, TO M. G. M. IN GRATIOUS Street in London. DEare and loving friend, I recei∣ved about tenne daies agon your letter of the 9. of this present: wherein you demand and soli∣cite againe the thing, that I so flatly denied you, at my late being in your chamber: I meane to put in writing the relation which then I made unto you, of the speech had this last Christmas in my presence, betweene my right worshipfull good friend and patron, and his guest the old Lawyer, of some matters in our state and country. And for that you presse me very seriously at this instant, both by request and many reasons, to yeeld to your desire herein, and not only this, but also to give my consent for the publishing of the same, by such secret meanes as you assure me
you can there find out: I have thought good to confer the whole matter with the parties themselves, whom principally it concerneth (who at the receipt of your letter were not far from me:) And albeit at the first I found them averse and nothing inclined to grant your demand: yet after upon conside∣ration of your reasons, and assurance of se∣cresie (especially for that there is nothing in the same contained, repugnant to charity or to our bounden duty towards our most grati∣ous Princes or Countrey, but rather for the speciall good of them both, and for the fore-warning of some dangers imminent to the same) they have referred over the matter to mee, yet with this Proviso, that they will know nothing, nor yet yeeld consent to the pub∣lishing hereof, for feare of some future flou∣rish of the ragged Staffe to come hereafter a∣bout their eares, if their names should breake forth: which (I trust) you will provide, shall neuer happen, both for their security, and for your own. And with this I will end, assuring you that within these five or six dayes, you shall receive the whole in writing by another way and secret meanes, neither shall the bearer suspect what he carrieth: wherof also I thought good to premonish you. And this shall suffice for this time.
THE PREFACE OF THE CONFERENCE. NOt long before the last Christmasse,Scholar. I was requested by a letter from a very worshipful and grave Gentleman, whose sonne was then my pupill in Cambridge, to repaire with my said Scholar to a certaine house of his neare London, and there to passe over the Holy-dayes in is company:The occsin o hs  and etng. for that it was determined that in Hillary tearme following, his said sonne should be placed in some Inne of Chancery, to follow the study of the Common-law, and so to leave the Vniversity. This re∣quest was gratefull unto mee in respect of the time, as also of the matter, but especially of the company. For that, as I love much the yong Gentelman, my pupill, for his towardlines in religion, learning, and vertue: so much more I doe reverence his Father, for the riper
possession of the same ornments, and for his great wisedome, experience, and grave judgement in affaires of the world that do occurre: but namely touching our own Country, wherin truly I do not remember to have heard any man in my life, discourse more substantially, indif∣ferently, and with lesse passion, more love and fidelity, then I have heard him. Which was the cause that I tooke sin∣gular delight to be in his company, and refused no occasion to enjoy the same. Which also he perceiving, dealt more o∣penly and confidently with me, then with many other of his friends, as by the relation following may well appeare. The persons and place of this con∣ference.When I came to the foresaid House by London, I found there among other friends, an ancient man that professed the law, and was come from London to keepe his Christmas in that place, with whom at divers former times I had been well acquainted, for that he haunted much the company of the said Gentle∣man my friend, and was much trusted and used by him in matters of his pro∣fession, and not a little beloved also for his good conversation, notwithstanding some difference in religion between us. For albeit, this Lawyer was inclined to
be a Papist, yet was it with such mode∣ration and reservation of his duty to∣wards his Prince and Countrey and pro∣ceedings of the same: as he seemed al∣waies to give full satisfaction in this point to us that were of contrary o∣pinion. Neither did he let to protest oftentimes with great affection,A temperate Paist. that as he had many friends & kinsfolk of contrary religion to himselfe: so did he love them never∣thelesse for their different conscience, but leaving that to God, was desirous to doe them any friendship or service that he could, with all affection, zeale, and fidelity. Neither was he wilfull or ob∣stinate in his opinion, and much lesse re∣proachfull in speech (as many of them be) but was content to heare whatso∣ever we should say to the contrary (as often we did:) and to read any booke also that we delivered him, for his in∣struction. Which temperate behaviour, induced this Gentleman and me, to affect the more his company, and to discourse as freely wih him in all occurrents, as if he had been of our own religion.
THE ENTRANCE TO THE MATTER. ONe dy then of the Christmasse, we three rtiring our selves after dinner, into a large Gallery, for our recreation, (as often wee were ccustomed to doe, when o∣ther went to cars a & others pas∣times:) this Lawyer by chance had in his hand a little booke, then newly set forth, containing A defence of the publique justice done of lte in Eng∣lad,The booke of Iustce. uon divers Priests and other Papistes for trea∣son: Which book, the Lawyer had read to him∣selfe a litle before, and was now putting it up in∣to his poket; But the Gentlman my friend, who had read over the same once or twice in my company before, would needs take the same into his hand againe, nd asked the Lawyer his juge∣ment upon the booke. The Lwyer answered:Lawer. That it was evill pen∣nd in hs opnion to prove the guiltines of some pesons therin named in prticulr, as also to per∣swde in generall, that the Ppistes both abroad and at home, who meddle so earnesly wih defnce and increase of their religion (for these ae not all, said he) doe cosquently wsh and lbor some change in the state: but yet whe∣hr so farre forth, and in so deepe a degree of propr treason, as here in this booke boh in
generall and particular  presumed and inforced, that (quoh he) is some what hard (I weene) for you or me (in respect of some other difference be∣tween us) to judge or discene with indifferency. Gentleman.Nay truly sid the Gentleman, for my prt I thinke not so, for that reason is reason in what religion soever. And for my selfe, I may protest, that I beare the honest Papist (if there be any) no malice for his deceived conscience, wheof among others yur selfe can be a witnes:The Papists practices against the state. maty hs Practi∣ces against the state, I cannot in any wise digest: and much lsse may the Common-wealth beare the same (wherof we all depend,) being a sinne of all other, the most hainous, and least pardona∣ble. And therfore seeing in this, you grant the Papist both in generall broad, and at home, and in particular such as are condemned, execued and named in this booke to be guilty: how can you insinuate (as you doe) that there is more presu∣med or enfored upon them by this booke, then there is just cause so to doe? Lawyer.Good Sir, said the othe, I stand not here to ex∣amine the doings of my superiours, or to dfend the guilty, but wish hartily rather their puishment that have deserved the ame. Only this I say, for xplication of my former speech: that men of a diffrent religon fom he state wherin they live,Two sorts of dealing against the sate. may be said to deale against the same state in two sorts: the one, by dealing for the increase of heir said different religion, which is alwies either directly,Directly. or indirectly against the state, (Dectly) when the said religion containeth ay point or article directly impugning the said ae, (as perhaps you will say that the Roman Rligion doth against the present state of England in the pont of Supremcy:Indirectly.) and (Indirectly) for that every different religion divideth in a sort and
draweth from the state, in that there is no man who in his heart would not wish to have the chief Governour and state o be of his religon, if he could: and conseqently misliketh the other in re∣spct of that: and in this kind, not only those whom you call busie Papists in England, but also those whom we call hot Puritans among you, (whose difference from the state especially in mat∣ters of governement is very well known) may be called all traytors, in mine opinion: for that every one of these indeed, do labour indirectly, (if not more) against the state, in how much soever each one endavoureth to increase his part or faction that sieth a Governour of his own religion. And in this case also,The state of all Subiects is a state of different reli∣gion. are the Protestants in France and Flanders under Catholike Princes: the Calvinists (as they are called;) under the Dke of Saxony, who is a Lutheran: the Lutherans under Casimere, that favoureth Clvinists: the Gre∣cians and other Christians under the Emperor of Constantinople, under the Sophy, under the great Chame of Tarray, and under other Princes that agre not with them in religion. All which Sub∣jcts doe wish (no doubt) in their hearts, that thy had a Prince and state of their owne religi∣on, instead of that which now governeth them: and consquently in this first sense, they may be called all tryors, and every act they doe for ad∣vaement of their said diffeent eligion (di∣viding between the state and them) tendeth to treason: which their Princes supposing, do some∣times make divers of their acts treasonable or punshable for treason.The second kind of treason. Bu yet so long as thy beake ot forth unto the second kind of treason which containeth some actuall attemp or treaty against the life of the Prince, or state, by rebellion or ohewise: Wee doe not properly condemne
them for traytors, though they doe some acts of their religion made treason by the Prince his lawes, who is of a different faith. The application of the former example.And so to apply this to my purpos: I thinke, Sir, in good sooth, that in the first kind of trea∣son, as well the zealous Ppist, as also the Puri∣tans in England, may well be called and proved traytors; but in the second sort (whereof wee speake properly at this time) it cannot be so pre∣cisely answered, for that there may be both guil∣ty and guilties in each religion. And as I cannot excuse all Pritans in this point, so you cannot condemne all Papists, as long as you take me and some other to be as we are. Gentleman.I grant your distinction of treasons to be true, (said the Gentleman,) as also your application thereof to the Papists and Puritans (as you call them,) not to want reason, if there be any of them that mislike the present state (as perhaps there be:) aleit for my part, I thike these two kinds of treasons, which you have put down, be rather divers degrees then divers kinds: wher∣in I will refer mee to the judgement of our Cambridge friend here present, whose skill is more in logicall distinctions. But yet my reason is this, that indeed the one is but a step or degree to the other, not differing in nature, but rather in time, ability or oportunity. For if (as in your former examples you have shewed) the Grecians under the Turke, and other Christians under o∣ther Princes of a different religion, and as also the Papists and Puritans (as you earme them) in England (for now this word shall passe be∣tweene us for distinction sake,) have such aliena∣tion of mind from their present regiment, and doe covet so much a governour and state of their owne religion:Two degrees of treason. then no doubt but they are also
resolved to imply their forces for accomplishing and bringing to passe their desires, if they had o∣portunity: and so being now in the first degree or kind of treason, doe want but occasion or ability, to breake into the second. True Sir, said the Lawyer,Lawyer. if there be no o∣ther cause or circumstance that may withhold them. And what cause or circumstance may stay them I pray you (said the Gentleman) when they shall have ability and oportunity to doe a thing which thy so much desire?Gentleman. Divers causes (quoth the Lawyer) but especi∣ally and above all other (if it be at home in their owne Country) the fear of servitude under for∣raine nations,Lawyer. may restraine them from such at∣tempts: as we see in Germany that both Catho∣liques and Protestants would joyne together, a∣gainst any stranger that should offer danger to their liberty. And so thy did against Charles the fifth. And in France not long agoe, albeit the Pro∣testants were up in armes aginst their King, and could have been content, by the help of us in Eng∣land, to have put him down, and placed another of their own religion: yet when they saw us once seazed of New haven,France. and so like to proceed to the recovery of some part of our states on that side the Sea: thy quickly joyned with their owe Catholiques againe to xpell us. In Flanders lkewise,Flanders. though Monsieur were called thither by the Protestants, especially for de∣fence of thir religion, against the Spaniard: yet we see how dainty divers chief prostants of Ant∣werp, Gaunt▪ and Bruges were, in admitting him, and how quick in expelling, so soon as he put them in the least feare of subjection to the Frenh. And as for Portgll,Portugal.  hve heard some of he
chiefest Catholiques among them say, in this late contention about their Kingdome: that rather then they would suffer the Castilian to come in upon them, they would be content to admit what∣soever aids of a contrary religion to themselves, and to adventure whatsoever alteration in religi∣on or other inconvenience might befll them y that means rather then endanger their subjction to their ambitious neighbour. The old hatred of East Grecians towards the West Latins.The like is reported in divers histories of the Grecians at this day, who doe hate so much he name and dominion of the Latines: as thy had rather to endure all the miseries which daly they suffer under the Turke for their relgion and othewise: then by calling for aid from the West to hazard the subjection to the said Ltines. So that by these examples you see, that feare and horrour of externall subjection may say men in states, and consequently also both Papsts and Pu∣ritans in the state of England, from pssig to the second kind or degree of treason, albeit they were never so deepe in the first, and had both ability, time, will, and oportunity for the o∣ther. Scholar.Here I presumed to interrupt their Speech, and said: that this seemed to mee most cleare, and that now I understoo what the Lawyer meant before, when he affirmed, that albeit the most part of Papists in generall might be said to deale against the state of England at this day, in that they deal so earnestly for the maintenance and in∣crease of their religion, and so to incurre some kind of treason: yet (perhap) not so far-forth nor in so deepe a degree of proper treason s in this booke is presumed or inforced:Not all Papists propely tray∣tors. though for my part (said I) I do not see that the book presu∣meth or inforceth all Papists in generall to be pro∣perly
traytors, but onely such as in particular are therein named, or that are by law attainted, con∣demned or executed: and what will you say (quoth I) to those in particular? Surely (quoth he) I must say of these,Lawyer. much after the manner whih I spke before: that some here named in this book are openly knowne to have beene in the secod degree or kind of treason: as Weslmeland, Noron, Sanders,The Priests and Seminaries that were executed. and the like. But divers others (namely the Priests and Seminaries that of late have sufered,) by so much as I could see delivered and pleaded at their arraignements, or heard protested by them at their deaths, or gathered by reason and dis∣course of my slfe, (for that no forraine Prince or wise councellor would ever commit so great matters of state to such instruments:) I can∣not (I sy) but thike, that to the wise of our state, that had the doing of this busines, the first degree of treason (wherein no doubt they were) was sufficient to dspatch and make them away: especially in such suspitious times as these are: to the end that being hanged for the first, thy should never bee in dager to fall into the second, nor yet to draw other men to the same: which pehaps was most of all mis∣doubted. After the Lawyer had spken this,Gentleman. I held my peace, to heare what the Gentle man would an∣swer: who walked up and down two whole turnes in the Gallery without yeelding ay word again: and then staying upon the sudden, cast his eyes sadly upon us both, and said: My masters howsoever this be which indeed ap∣pertaines not to us to judge or discus, but rather to perswade our selves, that th state hath reason to do as it doth, and that it must oftentimes as well
prevent inconveniences, s remedy the same when they are happened: yet for my owne part I must confesse unto you, that upon some consideratons which use to come unto my mind, I take no sall griefe of these differences among us (which you terme of divers and different religions) for which we are driven of necessity to use discipline toward divers, who possibly otherwise would be no great malefactors.The considera∣tions. I know the cause of this diffrence is grounded upon a principle not easie to cure, which is the judgement and conscience of a man, where∣unto obeyeth at length his will and affction, whatsoever for a time he may otherwise issem¦ble outwardly. I remembr your speech bfre of the doubtfull and dangerous inclination of suh as live discontented in a State of a different reli∣gion, especially, when either in deed, or in their owne conceipt, they are hardly dealt withall, and where every mans particular punishment is taken to reach to the cause of the whole. I am not ignorant how that misery procureth amity,Misery moveth mercy. and the opinion of calamity moveth affe∣ction of mercy and compassion, even towards the wicked: the better fortune alway is subject to en∣vie, and he that suffereth, is thought to have the better cause; my experience of the divers reignes and proceedings of King Edward, Queene Mary, and of this our most gracious Soveraigne hath caught me not a little, touching the squell of these affairs.A good wsh. And finally (my good friend) I must tell you plaine (quoth he, and this he spake with great asseveration) that I could wish with all my heart, that either these differences were not a∣mong us at all, or else that they were so temperat∣ly on al parts pursued, as the common state of our country, the blessed reigne of her Majesty, and the common cause of true religion were not endan∣gered
thereby. But now: and there he brake off, and turn ae. The Lwyer seeing him hold his peace and de∣part,Lawyer. he stepped after him, and taking him by the gowne, said merrily; Sir, all men are not of your complexion, some re of quicker and more str∣rig Spirits, and doe lve to fish in water that is troubled, for that thy oe partcipate the Black∣moores humour,The nature and practice of the Gunans. tht dwll in Guinea (whereof I suppose you hve heard and seene also some in this Land) whose exrcise at home is (as some write) the one to hunt, catch, and sell th other, and always he stronger to make money of the weakr for the time. But now if in Egland we should live in peace and unity of the state, as thy doe in Germny, notwithstading thir dif∣ferences of Religion, and tht the on shul not prey upon the other: the shul the great aul∣cons fr the Feld (I meane the favourites of the time) faile whereon to fed, which wre an in∣convenienc as you knw. Truly Si said the Gntleman,Gentleman. I thnke you rove neerer the make then you weee: for if I be not deceived; the vy ground of muh of thse broiles whref we talke, is but a very py: nt in the minds of the Prnc or State (whse inen∣tions no doubt be most jst and holy) bt in the greedy imagition and sutle cont of him, who at this prsnt in rspct of or sinns, is pr∣mitted by God, to tyranize both Prince ad State: and beng himslfe of no religion, feedeth notwithstandig upn our differencs in ligion, to the fatting of imslfe and ruine of he Ralm.The Trant of Englsh stae. For whereas y the common dsticton now r∣ceived in speech, thre are three noble diffe∣rences of religion in the Lnd, he two extreams,Three  in Egand. whereof are the Papst and he Paritan, and the
religious Protstant otaining the meane: this fellow being neither, maketh his gaine of all: and as he sekh a Kingdome by the one extreame, and spile by the other so he useth the authority of the third, to compsse the fist two, and the couter-mine of eah one, to the overthrow of all thre. .To this I answered: In good sooth Sir, I see now where you are: you are fallen into the com∣mon place of all our ordinry take and confe∣nce in the Universiy:The ule of ecete. for I know that you meane my Lord of Lester, who is the subjct of all pleasnt discourses at this dy hroughou the Rlme. Gentlman.Not so pleasant as pittifull, answered the Gen∣tlmn, if all mttrs and circumsanes were wel consiered, excpt any man tke pleasure to jest at or owne miseries, whih are like to be greater by his inquy (f God avet t not) then by al the ikednss f England bsides: he being the man that by all probbiliy, is like to be the bne and ftall dstiny of or tat, with the eversion of rue rlgon, whereof by indirct meanes, he  th the Lan dh noursh. Lawy.Now  (qth th Lwy) if you say th  for he Proestants opinion of him, wht shll I  for his mrits towards the Pa∣pst▪ who for as mh s I cn perceive, doe  thesls ltle bholding uno hm, albe∣ fr hs aine he was some yeere; their secret frin agit you: untill by his friends he was prswaed, Lord Nths pcy. and chiefly by th Lrd North by way of poliy, as the said Lord boseth, in hope of gater ge, t step ovr to the Puritans, a∣ganst us both, whom notwithstanding it is pro∣bble, that he loveth as much, as he doth the rest.
You know the Bears love, said the Gentleman, which is all for his own panch,Gentleman. and so this Bear∣whelp, turneth all to his own commodity, and for greedinsse thereof, will overturn all if he be not stopped or muzld in time. And suely uto me it is a strange speculation, whereof I cannot pick out the reason (but onely that I do attribute it to Gods punishment for our sinnes) that in so wise and vigilant a State as ours is,A strange spe∣culation. and in a Countrey o well acquined and bea∣ten with suh danges; a man of such a Spirit a he is knowne to be, of so extrme ambition, prde, falshd and tchry▪ so borne, so bed up, so nzled in treason fom his infancy, descen∣ded of a tribe of traytours, and flshd in con∣spiracy aganst the Royll blood of King Henries children in his tndr yers, and exrcsd ver since in drifts agains the same, by the bloo and rune of dirs others: a man so well knowne to beare srt in  aainst hr Majsty, for causes irreconcilable, and most dradly rancour against the bet and wsst Concllours of her Hghnsse: tht suh a oe (I say so hfull) to God and man, an so markble to the sim∣plest Subjct o thi Land, by the pulique n∣signes of hi yrannous purpose, shuld b  so many yeres wthout chk, to aspire to tyranny by most manifest wyes, and to psssse himef (as now h hath do)  Cour, Cou∣cll and Coury, whout : so that nohing wanth to him but only hs plea∣sre, and the dy already coneived in his minde to dispose as h lit, boh of Prince, Crown, Realm an Rligin. It s much truly (quoth I) that you sy, and it ministrh not a little mrvaile unto my,Shlr. wher∣of your Worship is no the first, nor yt the
person of accompt which I have heard discourse and complaine.The Queens Ma∣iesties most ex∣cellent good na∣ture. But what shall I say hereunto? there is no man that ascribeth not this unto the sigular benignity and most bountifull good na∣ture of her Majesty, who measuring other men by her owne Heroicall and Princely sincerity; cannot easily suspect a man so much bounden to her grace, as he is, nor remove her cofidence from the place, where she hath heaped so infinite benefits. Gentleman.No doubt (said the Gentleman) but this gra∣cious and sweet disposition of her Majesty is the true originall cuse thereof: which Princely dis∣position, as in her highnesse it deserveth all rare commendation, so lyeth the same open to many dangers oftentimes, when so bengne a nature meeteth with ingrate and ambtius persons: which observation perhaps, cusd her Mjesties most noble Grandfather and Father (two renow∣ned wse Princs) to withdraw sometime upon the sudden, their great favour from certaine Sb∣jects of high estate. And her Majesty my esily use her owne excellent wisdome and memory, to recll to minde the manifold examples of peri∣lous haps fallen t divers Princes, by too muh confidence in obliged proditours: with whom the name of a Kingdome, and one houres reige, weyeth more, then all the duty, obligation, hone∣sty,Fears that sub∣iect: have of my Lord of Leicester or nature in the world. Would God her M∣jsty could see the continuall feares that be in he faithfull Subjcts hearts, whiles that man is abou her noble person, so well able and lkly (f th Lord avert it not) to be the calamity of her Prie¦ly blood and name. The talke wll never out of many mouthes an minds,Sir Francis Wal∣ingham. that diver ancient mn of this Relme and once a wise Gentleman now a Councllour
had with a certaine friend of his, concerning the presage and deep impression, which her Mjesties Father had of the house of Sir Iohn Duey, to be the raine in time of his Majsties royall house and blood, which thing was ke to have been ful∣filled soon after (as all the world knoweth) upon the death of King Edward, by the said Dudley, this mans Faher: who at one blow, procured to dis∣ptch from a possession from the Crown, all three children of the said noble King. And yet in the middest of thse bloody practices against her Ma∣jesty that now is and her sister (wherein also this fellowes hand was so far, as for his age he could thrust the same) within sixteen dayes before King Edwards death (he knowing belike that the King should dye) wrote most flattering letters to the Lady Mary (as I have heard by them who then were with her) promsing all loyalty and true ser∣vice to her, after the decease of her brother,Deepe disimul∣tion. with no lsse panted words, then this man now doth use to Queene Elizabeth. So deal he hen with the most deare chldren of his good King and Master, by whom he had bene no lsse exalted and trusted, then this man is by her Mjsty. And so deply dssembled he then when he had in hnd the plot to dstroy hem boh. And wht then (alas) my not we feare and doubt of thi his son, who in outragious ambition and dsire of reigne, is not infriour to his Fathr or to any ohr aspiring spirit in the world, bu far more islent, cull▪ vindiative, xpert, po∣tet, subtile, fie and sox I e the ever he was?  like wll the good motion propounded by the foresaid Gentlema to his frend at the same time, and doe assure my self t would be most pleasant to the Realme, nd profitble to her Majsty, to wit, that this mans actions might be called pub∣liquly
to triall, and liberty given to good subjects to say what they knw against the same, as it was permitted in the fist yeer of Kin Henry the eight aginst his Grandfather, and in the first of Queen Mary against his Father:Edmund Dudley and then I would not doubt, but if these two his Ancestors were found worthy to lose their heads for treason;Robert Dudley. this man would not be found unworthy to make the third in kindred, whose treacheries doe farre spasse them both. Lawyer.After th Gentleman hd sad this, he Lawyr stood still, somewhat smiling to himslfe, & look∣ing round about him, as though he had bin hlfe afraid, and then sid; My masters, doe you read over or study the Statutes that come forth? have you not heard of the provio mad in the last Par∣liament for punishment of those who speake so broad of such mn as my Lrd of Leicstr is? Gentleman.Yes, said the Gentleman, I hve herd how that my Lord of Leicster was very carefull and dil∣gent at tht time to have suh a Law to passe a∣gainst talkrs:The Law against talking. hoping (blik) that his L. unde tat generall restrit migh ye the more quily in harbor from th tempest of men tos, which aed busily at that time▪ of dirs hs Lorshp actions and asian whih perhaps himslf would have wished to pss wih ore scresie. As of his discontntment and pprtion to rebllion, up∣on Monseurs fist coig ino the Land; of his disgrce and chk rcve i Cu; of th  dth of the nobe Ple of Essx; & of ths mns hstly  widow,Actons of Lei∣cester whereof he would have no speec. who he set up nd downe th Conty om hse t ouse by privew  to avid the sight & know∣ledge of th Qeees Mjesty. Ad albet he hd noton by usd her at hi good king bfre, for saisfyi of hs owne last, but lso mrried and
remarried her for contentation of her friends: yet denied he the sme, by solemne oath to her Maje∣sty, and received the holy Communion thereupon (so good a conscience he hath) and conseqentl threatned most shrp revenge towards all subjects which should dre to speake thereof: and so for the conaling both of this and other his doings, which he desired not to have publk, no mavale though his Lorshp were so diligent a prouer of that law fr silence. Indeed (said I) it is very probable that his Lord∣shp ws in great distresse about that time,Shla. when Monsius mattes were in hnd, and that he did many things and purposed more, whreof he de∣sired lss spech mong the people, specially af∣terwards, whn hs said desigements tooke nt place. I was my slfe that yer not fr from War∣wik when he cme thither from the Court a full Me content, and when it was thught most cer∣tainly throughot the Realm, that he would hve takn armes soo after, if the marriage of her Ma∣jesty wih Monseu hd gone frward. The thig in Cambridge an in all the Coutey s I roe, was in vry mas  and it was a wonder to see not oely he counenncs, but als the bh∣viour, and to  the bold spches of all such as were of his fction. My Lrd himselfe had given ot a little before at ▪ upon  marriage. worh that th matte woul cos may brkn hds before  next; and my Lord of Wawik hd sid opnly at his table in Grenwih, Sir  bing by (if I be not decived) th  not o e suffrd (I meane the marrg) whih wod of his oe cming abroad ( by his own Lady then also preet)  com∣mon compnio,
Lordships part against the Queenes Mjesty. Such running there was, such seding and posting a∣bout the Realme, such amplification of the pow∣es and forces of Casimre and other Princes, ready (as was affirmed) to present themselves unto his aid, for dfence of the Realme and Rligion a∣gainst strangers: (for that was holden to be his cause) such numbring of parties and complices within the Realme, (whereof himslfe shewed the Catalogue to some of his frins for their comfort) such debasing of them tht fvoure the marrige (especially two or three Counellurs by name,To Sir Thomas Layton.L. Treasurer. L. Chambelaine M. Controler. who were said to be the cuse of all, and for that were appointed out to be shaply punshed to the errour f all others:) such letters were written and intercped of purpose▪ imprting great powers to be ready, and so mny other things done and designed▪ tending all to mnifest and open warre: as I began hartly o be afrid, and wished my selfe bake at Cambridge again, ho∣ping that bing ther y Scholrs gwne should excuse e from necssiy of ighting, or if not, I ws resolved (by my Lords good leve) to follow Aistotle, who prefrth lway the Lyon beore the Beare; assuring my selfe withall, tht hi Lord∣ship should hve no btter succsse in this (if it came to rill) then his Faher hd in as bad a cause, and so much the more for that I ws pri∣vie to the mindes of some of his friends, who mnt to hve deceived him, f he matte hd bro∣ken out.Sir Thomas Hib∣bot. And amongst othr there was a certan Vice-prsident in the Wld, who being left in ther come and absence of another, to pocure frinds; said in a place secrely not fr from Lud∣lw, that if the mattr came to blwes, he would follow his Mistresse, and leave his Mastr in the briars.
Marry sir (qd the Getlman) and I trow ma∣ny more would have followed that example.Gentleman. For albeit I know, hat the Ppsts were most named and misdubed of his part, in that cause, for their open indiation towards Mnsieur, & consequent∣ly, for greater discredit of the thing it selfe, i was given out every where by this Champon of reli∣gion, that her Majesties cause was the Papists cause (even as his Father hd done in the like enter∣prise before him, though all upon dissimulation,Leicesters Father a traiterous Papist as appeared at his death, where he professed himself an earnest Papist:) yet was there no man so sim∣ple in he Ralm, which descried not this vizrd at the fist: neither yet any good subject (as I sup∣pose) who seing her Mjsty on the one part, would not have taken against the other part, what so ever he had beene. And much more the thng it selfe in controversie (I meane the marriage of her royall Mjesty with the brother and heire ap∣parant of France) being taken and judged by the best,The honour and comodities by the marriage with France. wisst and faithfllest Protstants of the Realme, to be oth honourable, convenent, profi∣table and needfull Whereby onely, as by a most soveraigne, and present remedy, all our maladies both abroad and at home, had at once been cured: all foraign enemies, and domestical conspirators, all differences, all dangers, all feares had ceased together: France had bene ours most assured; Spaie would not a little have trembled; Scot∣land hd ben quiet; our compttors in England would have qukd; and for the Pope he might have put up his pipes. Or iffrences in religion at home, hd been ither lss, r no geater thn now thy are, for that Mosieur beng but a mode∣rate Ppist, and noting vhement in hs opnins was content with vey reasonable conditios, for hmslfe and hs strngers only in use of thir
conscience not unlikely (truly) but that in time he might by Gods grace, and by the great wisdome and vertue of her Mjesty have been brought also to embrace the Gospell,Ethelbert King of Kent, conver∣ted An. Dom. 603 as King Ethelbrt an hea∣then was by noble Qeen Bertha his wife, the first Christian of our English Princes. Unto all which fel city, if the Lord in mercy should have added also some issue of their royall bodies (as was not impossible, when fist this no∣ble match was movd,) we then (doubtlss) had been the most forunate people under heaven, and might hve ben (perhaps) the meane to hve re∣stored th Gospell thoughout all Europe besides, as our Brethren of France well cosidered and hoped. Of all whch singular benefits boh present and to come, boh in Re and Sp, his tyrant for his own private lucre (faring lst heey his ambition might be rstrained, and his treachey rveled) hth bereaved the Realme, and done what in him lyeth besides, to alienate for ver and make our mortall enemy this great Prince, wh souht the love of hr Mjsty with so muh hnour & con∣fidnc as never Prince the like, putting twc his own prson in jopardy of the s, and to the prill of his maons envios hee in England, for her Mjsties sake. Lawyer.When yu spak f  Lawyr) I cannot but ealy b  thse con∣sidrations wll  lso fr some ohr; espcially  you will thike me ; for tht I spke it oly in  and good of my Countrey, ad tht is,  Msiurs  wth our noble Princss, ides th hope of isse (whch was the principll) thre wnted not also probablity, that sme  or ltle tlration
in religion, between you and us, might have been procured in this state, as we see that in some other Countries is admitted to their great good. Which thing (no doubt) would have cut off quite all dan∣gers and dealings from forraine Princes,Tolleration in Religion, with union in defence of our Country. & would hve stopped mane devises and plots within the Realme: wheras now by this breach with France, we stand alone as me seemeth without any great uniion or friendship abroad, and our differences at home grow more vehement and sharp then e∣vr before. Upon which two heads, as also upon infinit other causes, purposs, rfs and pretences, there doe ensue daily more deepe, dangerous and desperate practises, evry man using either the commodty or necessity of the time and state for his owne purpose, specially now when all men presume that her Mjsty (by the continuall thwatins which have ben sed against all her marriage) is not like to leave unto the Realme, that precious jewell so much and long desired of all Englsh harts, I meane the Royll heires of hr wne body. Thwartigs call you the defeating of all her Mjstis st honourble offr, of marriage?Gentleman, (said the oth) truly in my opinion you should have used anther word to xpess the nature of so wcked a fact: whery lone, if there were no other, this ufortunate man, hath de more hurt to thi Cmmon welth▪ hn if h hd murdered mny thosads o her sbjects, r btryd whole aie to the profssd  remember well my slfe, foure  ppose,Dvers marriages of her Madesea∣ed. un∣dmined by his menes: the fist wth the Swe∣thn King the scond with  of Au∣str, te third wth  France that now reignth, and the fourth wh th in other and hire of the said Kingm. For  may
other secret motions mae by great Potentates to her Majesty for the same purpose, but these foure are openly known, and therefore I name them. Which foure are as well knowne to have been ll disturbed by this Dawe, as they were earnestly pursued by the other. And for the first thee Suters, he drove them a∣way,Leicesters devi∣ces to drive away all Sutors from her Maiesty. by protesting and swering that himslfe ws contracted unto her Majesty, wherof hr highnesse was sufficiently advertised by Cardinll Chtlian in the first trety for France, and the Cardinall soone after puished (as is thought) by this man with pyon. But yet this speech he gve out then, every where among his friends both strangers and others, hat he, forsooth, was assued to her Majesty, and consequently tht all othr Princes must give over their suits, for him. Whereunto notwithstanding, when the Swden would hard∣ly give care, this man conferred wih his Privado to make a most unseemly and isloal proof ther∣of, for the othes satisfaction, whih thing I am enforced by duty to passe over with silence, for honour to the parties who are touched there∣in: as also I am to conceal his said filhy Pi∣vado, hough worthy otherwise for his dishone∣sty to be displyed to the world: but my Lord himslfe, I am sure, doth well remember bth the man and the matter. And albeit there was no wise man at tht time who knowing y Lord suspected not the flshood, and hs arrogant f∣firmation touching his contract with her Mje∣sty, yt some both aboad and at home might doubt thereof perhaps:Leicester con∣vinced himselfe of impudency. but now of late, by hs knowne mrriage with his Minion Dme Lttice of Essex. he hath declred manifesty his owne most impudent and disloyall dealing with his so∣veraigne in this report.
For that report (quoth the Lawyer) I know that it was common,Lawyer. and maintained by many for di∣vers yeeres; yet did the wiser sort make no ac∣count thereof, seeing it came onely from himslf, and in his own bhlfe. Neither was it credible, that her Majesty who refused so noble Knights and Princes, as Europe hth not the like,The basenesse of Lecesters ance∣stors. would make choice of so meane a peere as Robin Dudley is, noble onely in two descent, and both of thm stained with the block. from which also himselfe was pardoned but the other day, being codemned therunto by law for his deserts,Anno 1. R. Mary. as appeareth yt in publik records. And for th widow of Essx, I marvaile sir (quth he) how you call her his wife, seing the Canon-law standeth yet in force touch∣ing matters of marriage wthin the Realme. Oh (said the Gentlman laughing) you meane for that he procured the poisoning of her husband in his journy from Ireland.Gentleman. You must think that Dctor Dale will dispence in that mattr,Doctor Dale. as he did (at his Lordships appointment) wth his Ita∣lan physiian Doctor Iulio, to have two wives at once; at the lestwise the matter was permitted,Doctor Iulio. and born out by them both publiquely (as all the world knoweth) and that against no lsse persons then the Archbishop of Canterbury himslfe, whose overthrew ws principally wrought by ths tyrant for contraying his will,The Archbishops oerhow for not allowing two wives to Leice∣ster his Physician in so beastly a demand. But for this controversie whether the marrige be good or so, I leave it to b tried here∣after, between my yong Lord of enbighe, and Master Philip Sidney, whom the same most concer∣neth: for that it is lik to deprive him of a good∣ly inheritance, if it take place (as some will say that in no reason it can) not only in rspect of the precedent adultery and murder betweene the par∣ties; but also for that my Lord was contracted
at least,The Lady Shef∣field now Em∣bassadresse in France. to another Lady before, that yet lveth, whereof Master Edwd Dia and Mster Edmond Tiney, both Courters, can be witnesses, and con∣sumated the same contract by generation of chil∣dren. But ths (as I said) must be left to be tried hereafter by them who shll have most interest in the case. Onely for the present I must advertise you, that you may not take hold so exactly of all my L. doings in wmens affaires, neither touch∣ing their marriages, neither yet thir hsbands. For first his Lordship hath a speciall fortue, that when he dsireth any womans favour, then wht person so evr standeth in his way, hath the luk to dye quickly for the finishing of his desire. As for xample,The death of Leicesters fist Lady and wife. when his Lordship was in full hope to marry hr Majsty, and his owne wife stood in his light, as he supposed; he did but send her aside to the house of his servant Forster of Cumner by Oxford, where shortly after she had the chance to fall fom a paire of stires, and so to breake her neck, but yet wihout hurting of her hood that stood upon her head. But Sir Rihard Varney,Sir Richard Var∣ney. who by commandement remaned with her that day alone, with one man only, and hd sent away perfore all her Srvants from hr, to a Market two miles of, h (I sy) wih his man can tll how she died, whih man being taken after∣ward for a fellony in the marhes of Wales, and offering to publish the manner of the said murder, was made away privily in the prson: and Sr Richar himslf dying abut the same time in Lon∣don, cried pitiosly nd baphemed God, and said to a Gentleman of worship of mine acquin∣tance, not long before his death, that all the divels in hell did teare him in pieces. The wife also of Bal Buttle kinsman to my Lord,Bald Batler. gve out the whole fact a litte bfoe her death Bt to return
unto my purpose, this was my Lords good fortun to have his wife dye, at that time when it was like to turne most to his profit. Long after this he fll in love with the Lady Sheffild, whom I signified bfore, and then also had he the same fortune to have her husband dye quickly with an extreame rheume in his head (as it was given out) but as others sy, of an artifici∣all carre that stopped his breath. The like good chance had he in the death of my Lord of Essex (as I have said before) and that t a time most fortunate for hi purpose;The suspitious death of the Lord Sheffield. for when he was co∣ming home from Ireland, with intent to revenge himselfe upon my Lord of Leycester, for begetting his wife with hilde in his absnce (the childe was a dauhter, and brought up by the Lady Shandoies, W. Knooles his wif:) my Lord of Ley hearing ther∣of, wantd not a friend or two to accompny the Dputy, as among other, a couple of the Earles owne servants,The poisoning of the Earle of Essex. Crompton (if I misse not his name) yeoman of his bottles, and Lli his Secretary, en¦tertained afterwrd by my Lord of Leiester: and so he dyed in the way of an extreame flux, caused by an Italian Ripe, as all his friends are well as∣sured; the mker wheof was a Chyurgeon (as is beleved) that thn was newly come to my Lord from Italy: a cunning man,The shfing of a chlde in dame Lettice belly. and sre in ope∣ration, with whom if the god Lady had beene sooner acquainted and sed his helpe, sh should not have needed to sitten so pensive at home and fearefull of her husbands former returne out of the same Country, but might have spared the yong childe in her blly, which she was enforced to make away (cruelly and unnaturally) for clea∣ring the house against the good mans arrivall. Neithr must you mrvaile though all these di∣ed dvers manners of outward diseases, for this
is the excelleny of the Ilian art, for which this Chyrugian and Doctor Iulio wre entertained so carefully,The diver ope∣ration of Roylor who can mak a mn dye, in what maner o shw of sikness you wll: by wose instructons o doubt but hs Lorship is now cunning, espcially dding also to hese he coun∣sell of his Doctor Bayy,Doctor Bayly the yonger. a man also no a little studied (as he seemeth) in his art: for I heard him once my selfe in publique Act in Oxford, and tht in presence of my Lord of Leicster, (if I be not deceived) maintain, that poyson might so be tempred and given as i should not appere presently, and yet should kill th prty aferward at what time should be appointed. Which agu∣ment belike pleased well his Lodship, and the∣fore was chosen to be discussed in his audience, if I be not deceived of hs being that dy pre∣sent. So, though one dye of a flux, and aoher of a catarr, yt his impreth ttle to th mat∣ter, but shewth rathr the great cunning and skill of the Arificr. Death of Cardi∣nall Chatilian.So Cardinall Chatilian (a I hve sai before) having accused my Lrd of Leicester to th Qeens Majesty, and after tht, pssig from Lonon to∣wards France about the marriage, died by the way at Canterbury of a burning fever: and so proved Doctor Bayie asserion rue, that poyson may be given to kill at a day. Schlr.At this the Lawyer cast up his eyes to heaven, and I stood somewhat musing and thinking of that which had beene spoken of the Earle of Es∣sex, whose case indeed moved me more then all the rest, for that he was  very noble. Gentleman, a great advancer of true Religion, a Ptron to many Preachers an Students, and towards me and some of my friends in pricular, he had bene in some things very benficiall: and
therefore I said that it grieved me extreamly to heare or thinke of so unworthy a death contrived by such meanes to so worthy a Peere. And so much the more, for that it was my chance, to come to the understanding of divers particulars concer∣ning that thing, both from one Lea an Irish-man,Lea. Honnie. Robin onnies, and others, that were present at Pentereis the Merchants house in Dublin upon the Key, where the murder was committed. The matter was wrought especially by Crompton yeo∣man of the bottels, by the procurement of Lloyd as you haue noted before, and there was poyso∣ned at the same time, and with the same cup (a given of curtesie by the Earle) one Mistresse Als Draykot, a goodly Gentlewoman,Mistris Draykot poisoned with the Earl of Essx whom the Earle affectioned much, who departing thence towards her owne house, (which was 18. miles off, the foresaid Lea accompanying her, and waiting upon her) she began to fall sick very grievously▪ upon the way, and continued with increase of paine and excessive torments, by vomiting, untill she died, which was the Sunday before the Earles deah, ensuing the Friday after; and when she ws dead, hr body was swolne unto a mon∣strous bignesse and deformity, whereof the good Earle hearing the day following▪ lamented the case greatly, and said in the presence of his Ser∣vants, Ah poore Alice, the cup was not prepared for thee, albeit it were thy hard destiny to taste thereof. Yong Honnies also, whose father is Master of the chldren of her Mjesties chappell, being at that time Page to the said Earle, and accustomed to take the taste of his drinke (though since enter∣tined also among other by my Lord of Leicester, for better covering of matter) by his taste that he then tooke of the compound cup, (though in very
small-quantity, as you know the fashion is:) yet was he like to have lost his life, but escaped in the end (being yong) with the losse onely of his haire; which the Earle perceiving, and taking compassi∣on of the youth, called for a cup of drinke a little before his death,The Earle of Essex speech to his Page Robin Honnie. and drunke to Honnies, saying, I drinke to thee my Robin, and be not afraid, for thi is a better cup of drinke then that whereof thou tookest the taste when we were both poysoned, and whereby thou hast lost thy haire and I must lose my life. This hath yong Honnies reported o∣penly in divers places, and before divers Gentle∣men of worship sihence his coming into England; and the foresaid Lea Iishman, at his passage this way towards France, after he had been present at the forenamed Mistris Draykts death, with some other of the Eales servants, have and doe most constantly report the same, where they may do it without the terrour of my Lord of Leicesters re∣venge. Whrefore in this matter there is no doubt at all, though most extreame vile and intollerable indignity, that such a man should be so openly murdered without punishment. What Noble-man within the Realme may be safe, if this be suffered? or what worthy personage will adventure his life in her Majesties service, if this shall be his reward? But, Sir, I pray you par∣don me, for I am somewhat perhaps too vehe∣ment in the case of this my Patron and noble Peere of our Realme. And therefore I beseech you to goe forward in your talke whereas you left. Genleman.I was recounting unto you others (said the Gen∣tleman) made away by my Lord of Leicster with like art, and the next in order I think was Sir Ni∣celas Throgmarton,Death of Sir Ni∣cholas Throg∣marton. who was a man whom my Lord of Leicester used a great while (as all the World
knoweth) to overthwart and crosse the doings of my Lord Treasurer then Sir William Cicill,Sir William Ci∣cill now Lord Treasurer. a man specially misliked alwayes of Leicester, both in re∣spect of his old Master the Duke of Somerset, as al∣so for that his great wisdome, zeale and singular fidelity to the Realme, was like to hinder much this mans designments; wherefore understanding after a certaine time that these two Knights were secretly made friends, and that Sir Nicholas was lke to detect his doings (as he imagined) which might turne to some prejudice of his purposes: (having conceived also a scret grudge and griefe against him, for that he had written to her Maje∣sty at his being Embassadour in France, that he heard reported at Duke Memorances table, that the Queene of England had a meaning to marry her Horskeeper) he invited the said Sir Nicho∣las to a supper at his house in London, and at supper time departed to the Court, being called for, as he said, upon the sudden by her Mjesty, and so perforce would needs have Sir Nicholas to sit and occupie his Lordships place, and there∣in to be served as he was: and soone after by a surfeit there taken, he died of a strange and incurable vomit. But te day before his death, he declared to a deare friend of his,The poisoning of Sir Nicholas in a salet. all the cir∣cumstance and cause of his disease, which he affirmed plainly to be of poison, given him in a Salet at supper, inveying most earnestly a∣gainst the Earles crulty and bloody dispositi∣on, affirming him to be the wickedest, most perilous, and pefidious man under heaven. But what availed this, when he had now received the bait? This then is to shew the mans good fortune, in seeing them dead, whom for causes he would not have to live. And for his art of poisoning, it is such
now, and teaheth so far, as he holdeth all his foes in England and elsewhere, as also a good many of his friends in fear therof, and if it were knowne how many he hth dispatched or assaulted that way, it would be marvailous to the posterity. The late Eale of Sussex wanted not a scruple for many yeers before his death,The Lord Cham∣berlin. of some dram received, that made him incurable. And unto that noble Gen∣tleman Monsieur Simiers,Monsieur Simiers it was discovered by great providence of God, that his life was to be attemp∣ted by that art, and that not taking place (as it did not through his owne good circumspection,) it was concluded that the same should be assulted by violence, whereof I shall have occasion to say more hereafter. It hah beene told me also by some of the ser∣vats of the late Lady Lenox, who was also of the blood Royall by Scotland,The poisoning of th Lady Lenox. as all men know, and consequently lttle liked by Leicester; that a little before her death or siknesse, my Lord tooke the paines to come and visit her with extraordinary kindnesse, at her house at Hackney, bestowing long discourses with her in private: but as soone as he was departed, the good Lady fell into such a flx, as by no meanes could be slayed so long as she had life in her body; whereupon both she her selfe, and all such as were neere about her, saw her disease and ending day, were fully of opi∣nion, that my Lord had procured her dispatch at his being there. Whereof let the women that served hr be examined, as also Fowler that then had the chiefe doings in her affies, and since hath beene entertained by my Lord of Leice∣ster. Maet also, a stranger borne, tbat then was about her, a sober and zealous man in religion, and otherwise well qualified, can say somewhat in this point (as I thinke) if he were
demanded. So that this art and exercise of poi∣soning, is much more perfect with my Lord then praying, and he seemeth to take more pleasure therein. Now for the second point, which I named, touching marriages and contracts with Women: you must not marvaile though his Lordship be somewhat divers,Leicesters most variable dealing with women in contract and marriages. variable and inconstant with himselfe, for that according to his profit or plea∣sure, and as his lust and liking shall vary (where∣in by the judgement of all men, he surpasseth, not onely Sardnapaus and Nero, ut even Helio∣gbatus himselfe:) so his Lordshp also changeth Wves and Minions, by killing the one, deny∣ing the other, using the third for a time, and he fawning upon the fourth. And for this cuse he hath his tearmes and pretences (I warrant you) of Contracts, Precontracts, Postcontracts, Pro∣tracts and Retracts; as for example: after he had killed his first wfe, and so broken that con∣tract,Contracts. then forsooth would he needs make him∣selfe Husband to the Queenes Majesty, and so defeat all other Princes by vertue of his precon∣tract.Precontracts. But after ths, his lust complling to ano∣ther place,Postcontracts. he would needs make a postcontract with the Lady Sheffild, and so he did, begetting two children upon her, the one a boy called Ro∣bin Sheffild now living, some time brought up at Newington; and the other a daughter, borne (as is knowne) at Dudley Castle. But yet after, his concupiscence changed againe (as it never stayeth) he resolved to make a retract of this postconrct,Retract. (thugh t were as surely done (as I have said) as bed and Bible could make the same) and to make a certaine new protract,Protract. (which is a continuation of using her for a time) with the widow of Essex: but yet to stop the mouhes of
out-criars, and to bury the Synagogue with some honour,Leicesters two testaments. (for these two wives of Leicester were merrily and wittily called his old and new Te∣staments, by a person of great excellency within the Realme) he was content to assigne to the former a thousand pounds in money with other petty consideratios, (the pittifullest abused that ver was poore Lady) and so betake his lims to the latter, which latter notwithstanding, he so useth (as we see) now confessing, now forswea∣ring, now dissembling the marriage; as he will alwayes yet kep a void place for a new surcontract with any other, when occasion shall require. Now by my truth sir (quoth I) I never heard nor read the like to this in my life;Scholar. yet have I read much in my time, of the carnalty and licencious∣nesse of divers outragious persons, in this kinde of sin, as namely these whom you have mentio∣ned before; especially the Emperour Heliogabalu who passed all other,Varius Helioga∣balus, and his most infamous death. and was called Varius, of the varity of filth which he used in this kinde of carnality or carnall beastlinesse: whose death was, that being at length odious to all men, and so slain by his own Souldiers, was drawn through the City upon the ground lke a dog, and cast in∣to the common privy, with this Epitaph; Hic pro∣jectus est indomitae & rabide libidinis catulus.An Epitaph. Here is thrown in the Whelpe of unruly and raging lust: which Epitaph may also one day chance to serve my Lord of Leicester (whom you call the Beare∣whelp) if he go forward as he hath begun, and dye as he deserveth. But, good sir, what a compassion is this, that a∣mong us Christians, & namely in so wel governed and religious a Common-wealth as ours is,A pittifull per∣mission. such a riot should be permitted upon mens wives, in a
subject? whereas we read that among the very Heathens, lesse offences then these, in the same kinde, were extreamly punshed in Princes them∣selves, and that not onely in the person delin∣quent alone, but also by extirpation of the whole family for his sake,The exerpation of the Tarquini∣ons.Anno Dom. 959. as appeareth in the example of the Tarquinians among the Romans. And here also in our owne Realme, we have regi∣stred in Chronicle, how that one King Edwin above six hundred yeeres past, was deprived of his Kingdome, for much lesse scandalous facts then these. I remember well the story (quoth the Gentle∣man) & thereby doe easily make conjecture,Gentleman. what difference there is betwixt those times of old, and our dayes now: seeing then, a crowned Prince could not passe unpunished with one or two out∣ragious acts, whereas now a subject raised up but yesterday from the meaner sort,The intollerable lcenciousnes of Leicesters carna∣lity. rangeth at his pleasure in all licenciousnesse, and that with secu∣rity, void of fear both of God and man. No mans wife can be free from him, whom his fiery lust liketh to abuse, nor their husbands able to resist nor save from his violence, if they shew dislike, or will not yeeld their consent to his doings. And if I should discover in particular how many good husbands he had plagued in this nature, and for such delights, it were intolerable; for his concu∣piscence and violence do run joyntly together, as in furious beasts we see they are accustomed. Nei∣ther holdeth he any rule in his lust besides onely the motion and suggestion of his own sensuality; kindred, affinity or any other bnd of consangui∣nity; religion, honour or honesty taketh no place in his outragious appetite: what he best liketh, that he taketh as lawfull for the time. So that kinswoman, allie, friends wife or daughter,
or whatsoever female sort besides doth please his eye: (I leave out of purpose, and for honour sake, tearmes of kinred more neere) that must yeeld to his desire. The keeping of the Mother with two or three of her daughters at once or successively, is no more with him, then the eating of an Hen & her chicken together. There are not (by report) two noble women about her Majesty (I speake upon some accompt of them hat know much) whom he hath not solicited by potent wayes: neither conten∣ted with this place of honour, he hath descended to seeke pasture among the waitig Gentlewo∣men of her Majsties great chamber, offering more for their allurement,Mony well spent then I thinke Lais did commonly tak in Corinth, if three hundreth pounds for a night, will make up the sum; or if not, yet will he make it up otherwise: having re∣ported himselfe (so little shame he hath) that he offered to another of higher place, an 100 pound lands by the yeere, with as many jewels as most women under her Majesty used in England;Anne Vauisour. which was no mean bait to one that used traffick in such merchandize; she being but the leavings of ano∣thr man before him, wherof my Lord is nothing squemish, for satisfying of his lust, but can be con∣tent (as they sy) to gather up crums when he is hungry, even in the very Landry it selfe, or other place of baser quality. And albeit the Lord of his great mercy, to doe him good,The punishments of God upon Lei∣cester to do him good. no doubt, if he were revokeable, hath laid his hand upon him, in some chastisement in this world, by giving him a broken belly on both sides of his bowels, whereby misery and putrifaction is threatned to him daily: and to his yong Sonne, by the widow of Essex (being Filius peccati) such a strange calamity of the fal∣ling
sicknesse in his infancy, The children of adulterers shall be consumed, and the seed of a wic∣ked bed shall be rooted out, saith God, Sap. 3. as well may be a witnesse of the Parents sinne and wickednesse, and of both their wasted natures in iniquity: yet is this man nothing amended thereby, but accor∣ding to the custome of all old adulterers, is more libidinous at this day then ever before, more gi∣ven to procure love in others by conjuring, sorce∣ry, and other such meanes. And albeit for him∣selfe, both age, and nature spent, doe somewhat tame him from the act, yet wanteth he not will, as appeareth by the Italian ointment, procured not many yeers pst by his Chyrurgion or Moun∣tibanke of that Countrey,Leicesters oynt∣ment. whereby (as they say) he is able to move his flesh at all times, for kee∣king of his credit, howsoever his inability be o∣therwise for performance: as also one of his Phy∣sitians reported to an Earle of this Land, that his Lordship had a bottle for his bed-head,Leicesters bottle of ten pounds the Pint to the same effect. But my Masters whether are we fallen, unadvisedly? I am ashamed to have made mention of so base fil∣thinesse. Not without good cause (quoth I) but that we are here alone, and no man heareth us.Scholar. Wherefore I pray you let us returne whereas we left: and when you named my Lord of Leicesters Daughter borne of the Lady Shffield in Dudley Castle, there came into my head a prety story concerning that affaire: which now I will recount (though some∣what out of order) thereby to draw you from the further stirring of this unsavory puddle and foule dunghill, whereunto we are slpped, by following my Lord somewhat too far in his paths and actions. Wherefore to tell you the tale as it fell out: I grw acquainted three months past with a certain Minister, that now is dead, and was the same man
that was used in Dudley Castle, for complement of some sacred ceremonies at the birth of my Lord of Leicesters daughter in that place: and the matter was so ordained,A pretty device. by the wily wit of him that had sowed the seed, that for the better co∣vering of the harvest and secret delivery of the Lady Sheffield, the good wife of the Castle also (whereby Leicesters appointed gossips might with∣out other suspition have accesse to the place) should faine her selfe to be with childe, and af∣ter long and sore travell, God wot, to be delive∣red of a cushion (as she was indeed) and a little after a faire coffin was buried with a bundell of clouts, in shew of a childe; and the Minister caused to use all accustomed prayers and ce∣remonies for the solemne interring there∣of:An act of atheism for which thing afterward, before his death, he had great griefe and remorse of con∣science, with no small detestation of the most irreligious device of my Lord of Leicester in such a case. Here the Lawyer began to laugh a pace both at the device and at the Minister;Lawyer. and said, now truly if my Lords contracts hold no better, but hath so many infirmities, with subtilties, and by∣places besides: I would be loth that he were mar∣ried to my daughter, as mean as she is. But yet (quoth the Gentleman) I had rather of the two be his wife,Gentleman. for the time, then his guest: especially if the Italian Chyrurgian or Physitian be at hand. True it is (said the Lawyer) for he doth no poison his wives,Lawyer. whereof I somewhat mervaile, especially his first wife; I muse why he chose ra∣ther to make her away by open violence, then by some Italian confortive. Gentleman.Hereof (said the Gentleman) may be diver
reasons alleaged. First,The first reason why Leicester slew his wife by violence, rather then by poyson. that he was not at tht time so skilfull in those Italian wares, nor had about him so fit Physitians and Chyrurgions for the purpose: nor yet in truth doe I thinke that his minde was so setled then in mischiefe, as it hath beene sithence. For you know, that men are not desperate the first day, but doe enter into wickednesse by degrees, and with some doubt or staggering of conscience at the beginning. And so he at that time might be desirous to have his wife made away, for that she letted him in his de∣signements, but yet not so stony-hrted as to appoint out the particular manner of her death, but rather to leave that to the discretion of the murderer. Secondly,The second rea∣son. it is not also unlike that he prescribed unto Sir Richard Varney at his going thither, that he should first attempt to kill her by poyson, and if that tooke not place, then by any other way to dispatch her howsoever. This I prove by the re∣port of old Doctor Bayly, who then lived in Ox∣ford (another manner of man then he who now liveth about my Lord of the same name) and was Professour of the Physicke Lecture in the same University.Doctor Bayly the elder. This learned grave man re∣ported for most certaine, that there was a pra∣ctice in Cumner among the conspiratours, to have poysoned the pooe Lady a little before she was killed, which was attempted in this oder. They seeing the good Lady sad and heavy (as one that wel knew by her other handling that her death was not far off) began to perswde her, that her disease was abundance of melancholly and o∣ther humors, and therefore would needs counsaile her to take some potion, which she absolutely re∣fusing to do, as suspecting still the worst; they sent one
day, (unwares to her) for Doctor Bayly, and desi∣red him to perswade her to take some little poti∣on at his hands,A practice for poisoning the Lady Dudley. and they would send to fetch the same at Oxford upon his prescription, mea∣ning to have added also somewhat of their owne for her comfort, as the Doctor upon just causes suspected, seeing their great importunity, and he small need which the good Lady had of Physick; and therefore he flatly denied their request, mis∣doubting (as he after reported) lest if they had poisoned her under the name of his Potion. he might after have beene hanged for a colour of their sinne. Marry the said Doctor remained wll assured that this way tking no place, she should not long escape violence, as after ensued. And he thing was so beaten into the heads of the principall men of the University of Oxford, by these and other meanes: as for that she was found murdered (as all men said) by the Crow∣ners inquest, and for that she being hastily and obscurely buried at Cumner (which was condem∣ned above, as not advisedly done) my good Lord, to make plain to the world the great loue he bare to her in her life, and what a griefe the losse of so vertuous a Lady was to his tender heart, would needs have her taken up againe and reburied in the University Church at Oxford, with great pomp and solemnity: that Doctor Babington my Lords Chaplain,Doct. Babington making the publike funerall Sermon at her second buriall, tript once or twice in his speech by recommending to their memories that vertu∣ous Lady so pitifully murdered, instead of so piti∣fully slaine. A third reason.A third cause of this manner of the Ladies death, may be the disposition of my Lords na∣ture; which is bold and violent where it feareth no resistance (as all cowardly natures are by
kinde) and where any difficulty or danger appear∣eth, there, more ready to attempt all by art, sub∣tilty, treason and treachery. And so for that he doubed no great resistance in the poore Lady to withstand the hands of them which should offer to break her neck: he durst the bolder attempt the same openly. But in the men whom he poisoned, for that they were such valiant Knights, the most part of them, as he durst as soon have eaten his scabard, as draw his sword in publike against them: he was infor∣ced (as all wretched irefull and dastardly creaures are) to supplant them by fraud, and by other mens hands. As also at other times, he hath sought to doe unto divers other noble and valiant persona∣ges, when he was afraid to meet them in the field, as a Knight should have done. His treacheries towards the noble late Earl of Sussex in their many breaches, is notorious o all England. As also the bloody practises against di∣vers others. But as among many none were more odious and misliked of all men, then those against Monsieur Simiers, a stranger and Embassadour; whom first he practised to have poisoned (as hath bin touched before) and when that device tooke not place,The intended murder of Mon∣sieur Simiers by sundry meanes. then he appointed that Robin Tider his man) as af∣ter upon his Ale-bench he confessed) should have slaine him at the Blackfriars at Greenwich as he went forh at the garden gate; but missing also that purpose, for that he found the Gentleman better provided and guarded then he expected, he dealt with certaine Flushiers and other Pirates to sinke him at Sea, with the English Gentle∣men his favourers, that accompanied him at his returne into France. And though they mis∣sed of this practice also, (as not daring to set upon
him for feare of some of her Majesties ships, who to breake off this designment attended by speciall commandement, to waft him over in safety) yet the foresaid English Gentlemen were holden foure houres in chace at their coming backe, as Master Rawley well knoweth, being then present, and two of the chasers, namd Clark and Harris, confessed afterward the whole designment. The intended murder of the Earle of OrmondThe Earl of Ormond in likewise hath often de∣clared, and will avouch it to my Lord of Leicesters face, whensoever he shall be called to the same, that at such time as this man had a quarell with him, and thereby was likely to be enforced to the field (which he trembled to thinke of) he first sought by all meanes to get him made away by secret murder, offering five hundred pounds for the doing thereof. And secondly, when that de∣vice tooke no place, he appointed with him the field, but secretly suborning his servant William Killigre to lye in the way where Ormond should passe,William Killegre and so to massacre him with a caliver, be∣fore he came to the place appointed. Which murder, though it tooke no effect, for that the matter was taken up, before the day of meeting: yet was Killigre placed afterward in her Majesties privy Chamber by Leicester, for shewing his rea∣dy minde to doe for his Master so faithfull a ser∣vice. Scholar.So faithfull a service (quoth I) truly, in my opinion, it was but an unfit preferment, for so facinorous a fact. And as I would be loth tha many of his Italians, or other of that art, should come nigh about her Majesties kitchen; so, much lesse would I, that many such his bloody Champions, should be placed by him in her Highnesse chamber. Albeit for this Gentleman in particular, it may be, that with change of his
place in service, he hath changed also his minde and affection, and received better instruction in the feare of the Lord. But yet in general, I must needs say, that it can∣not be but prejudiciall and exceeding dangerous unto our noble Prince and Realme, that any one man whatsoever (especially such a one as the world taketh this man to be) should grow to so abso∣lute authority and commandry in the Court, as to place about the Princes person (the head, the heart,Preoccupation of her Maiesties person. the life of the land) whatsoever people liketh him best, and that now upon their deserts towards the Prince, but towards himselfe; whose fidelity being more obliged to their advancer, then to their soveraigne, doe serve for watchmen about the same, for the profit of him, by whose appointment they were placed. Who by their meanes casting indeed but nets and chaines, and invisible bands about that person, whom most of all he pretendeth to serve, he shutteth up his Prince in a prison most sure, though sweet and senselesse. Neither is this art of aspiring new or strange unto any man that is experienced in affairs of former time;An ordinary way of aspiring by preoccupation of the Princes per∣son. for that it hath been from the begin∣ning of all government a troden path of all aspi∣rers. In the stories both sacred and prophane, foraine and domesticall of all Nations, King∣domes, Countries and States, you shall read, that such as ment to mount above others, and to go∣verne all at their owne discretion; did lay this for the first ground and principle of their purpose;A comparison. to possesse themselves of all such as were in place about the principall; even as he who intending to hold a great City at his owne disposition, dareth not mak open war against the same; getteth secret∣ly into his hands or at his devotion, al the Towns,
Villages, Castles, Fortresses, bulwarks, Rampires, Waters, Wayes, Ports and Passages, about the same, and so without drawing any sword against the said City, he bringeth the same into bondage to abide his will and pleasure. This did all these in the Roman Empire, who rose from subjects to be great Princes, and to put downe Emperours. This did all those in France and other Kingdomes, who at sundry times have tyrannized their Princes. And in our owne Countrey the examples are manifest of Vorti∣ger, Harold, Henry of Lancaster, Richard of War∣wicke, Richard of Glocester, Iohn of Northum∣berland, and divers others, who by this meane specially, have pulled downe their lawfull So∣veraignes. And to speake onely a word or two of the last, for that he was this mans Father; doth not all England know,The way of aspi∣ring in Duke Dudley. that he first overthrew the good Duke of Somerset, by drawing to his devotion the very servants and friends of the said Dke? And afteward did not he possesse himselfe of the Kings owne person, and brought him to the end which is knowne, and before that, to the most shamefull disheriting of his owne royall Sisters: and all this, by possessing first the principall men, that were in authority about him? Wherefore sir, if my Lord of Leicester have the same plot in his head (as most men thinke) and that he meaneth one day to give the same push at the Crowne by the House of Huntington, a∣gainst all the race and line of King Henry the se∣venth in generall, which his Father gave before him, by pretence of the House of Suffolke, against the Children of King Henry the eight in parti∣cular; he wanteth not reason to follow the same
meanes and platform of planting speciall persons for his purpose about the Prince, for surely his fa∣thers plot lacked no witty device or preparation, but onely that God overthrew it at the instant: (as happely he may doe this mans) also notwith∣standing any diligence that humane wisedome can use to the contrary. To this said the Gentleman:Gentleman. that my Lord of Leycester hath a purpose to shoot one day at the Diadem by the title of Huntington, is not a thing obscure in it selfe, and it shall bee more plainly proved hereafter. But now will I shew unto you for your instruction, how well this man hath fol∣lowed his fathers platforme (or rather passed the same) in possessing himsele of all her Majesties servants, friends, and forces, to serve his turne at that time for execution, and in the meane space for preparation. First, in the privy Chamber,Leycesters po∣wer in the privy Chamber. next unto her Ma∣jesties person, the most part are his own creatures (as he calleth them) that is, such as acknowledge their being in that place, from him: and the rest he so over-ruleth, either by flattery or feare, as none may dare but to serve his turne. As his reign is so absolute in this place, (as also in all other parts of the Court) as nothing can passe but by his admission, nothing can be said, done, or signi∣fied, whereof hee is not particularly advertised: no bill, no supplication, no complaint, no sute, no speech, can psse from any man to the Prin∣cess (except it be from one of the Councell) but by his good liking: or if there doe, he being ad∣monished thereof (as presently he shall,) the party delinquent is sure after to abide the smart there∣of. Whereby he holdeth as it were a locke upon the eares of his Prince, and the tongues of all her Majestes servants, so surely chained to his girdle,
as no man dareth to speak any one thing that may offend him, though it be never so true or behove∣full for her Majesty to know. As well appeared in the late marriage with Dame Essex,Leycester marri∣ed at Waen∣stead: when her Maiesty was at M. Stoners Houf Doctor Culpeper Physition Mini∣ster. which albeit it was celebrated twise: first at Killingworth, and secondly at Waenstead (in the presence of the Earle of Warwick, Lord Noth, Sir Francis Knooles, and others) and this exactly known to the whole Court, with the very day, the place, the witnesses, and the Minister that married them together: yet no man durst o∣pen his mouth to make her Majesty privy therun∣to, untill Monsieur Simiers disclosed the same, (and therby incurred his high displeasure) nor yet in many dayes after for feare of Lycester. Which is a subjection most dishonorable and dangerous to any Prince living, to stand at the devotion of his subject, what to heare or not to heare of things that passe within his own Realme. No sute can passe but by Leycester.And herof it followeth that no sute can prevaile in Court, be it never so meane, except he first be made acquainted there with, and receive not only the thankes, but also be admitted unto a great part of the gaine and commodity therof.Read Polidore in the 7. yeare of King Richard 1. and you shall find this pro∣ceeding of cer∣taine about that K. to be put as a great cause of his overthrow. Which, as it is a great injury to the suter: so is it a far more grea∣ter to the bounty, honour and security of the Prince, by whose liberality this man feedeth only, and fortifieth himselfe, depriving his soveraigne of all grace, thanks and good will for the same. For which cause also he giveth out ordinarily, to every suter, that her Majesty is nigh and persimo∣niou of her selfe, and very difficile to grant any sute, were it not only upon his incessant solicita∣tion. Whereby he filleth his own purse the more, and emptieth the hearts of such as receive benefit, from due thankes to their Princes for the sute obtained.
Hereof also ensueth, that no man may be pre∣ferred in Court (be he otherwise never so well a deserving servant to her Majesty) except he be one of Leycesters faction or followers: none can be advanced, except he be liked and preferred by him: none receive grace,No preferments but by Leycester to Leycestians. except he stand in his good favour, no one may live in counenance, or quiet of life, excep he take it, use it, acknow∣ledge it from him, so as all the favours, graces, dignities, riches and rewards, which her M∣jesty bestoweth, or the Realme can yeeld, must serv to purchase this man private friends, and favourers, onely to advance his party, and to fortifie his faction. Which faction if by these meanes it be great, (so as indeed it is:) you may not marvile, seeing the riches and wealth, of so worthy a Common weale, doe serve him but for a price to buy the same. Which thing himselfe well knowing, frameth his spirit of proceeding accordingly. And first,Leycesters anger and insolency. upon confidence thereof, is become so insolent and impotent of his Ire that no man may beare the same, how justly or injstly soever it bee conceived: for albeit he begin to hte a man upon bare surmises onely (as commonly it fal∣leth out, ambition being always the mother of suspition) yet he presecuteth the same with such implacable cruelty, as there is no long abi∣ding for the party in ht place. As miht bee shewed by the examples of many whom hee hath chased from the Court, upon his only displeasure, without other cause, being known to be other∣wise, zealous Protestant. As Sir Ierome Bwes, Mr. Geoge Scot, and others that we could name. To hs insolency is also joyned (as by nature it followeth) mst absolute and peremptory de∣ling in all things whereof it pleaseth him to dis¦pose,Leycesters pe∣remptory deal∣ing.
without respect either of reason, order, due, right, subordination, custome, conveniency, or the like: whereof notwithstanding Princes them∣selves are wont to have regard in disposition of their matters: as for example, among the servants of the Queenes Mjestis houshold, it is an anci∣ent and most commendable order and custome, that when a place of higher roome falleth voyd, he that by succession is next, and hath made proof of his worthinesse in an inferiour place, should rise and possesse the same, (except it be for some extraordinary cause) to the end that no man un∣experienced or untyed, should be placed in the higher roomes the first day, to the prejudice of o∣thers, and disservice of the Prince. Breaking of or∣der in her Maie∣sties houshold.Which most reasonable custome this man con∣temning and breaking at his pleasure, thrusteth into higher roomes any person whatsoever, so he like his inclination, or feele his reward: albeit he neither be fit for the purpose, nor have beene so much as Clarke in any iniour office before. The like hee useth out of th Court, in all o∣ther places where matters should passe by order,Leycesters vio∣latng of all or∣der in the Coun∣try abroad. election, or degree: as in the Vniversities, in ele∣ctio of Schlars, and Heads of houses, in Eccle∣siasticall persons, for dignities in Church, in Offi∣cers, Magistrates, Stewrds of lands, Sheriffes and knights of Shires, in Burgesses of the Parliament, in Commissiners, Judges, Justices of the peace, (whereof many in every shire must weare his li∣very) and all other the like: where this mans will must stand for reason, and his letters for absolute lawes, neither is there any man, magistrate, or communer in the Realme, who dareth not sooner deny their petition of her Majesties letters, upon just causes (for that her highnesse is content after to be satisfied with reason) then to resist the com∣mandement
of this mans letters, who will ad∣mit no excuse or satisfaction, but onely the exe∣cution of his said commandement, be it right or wrong. To this answered the Lawyer, Now verily, sir,Lawyer. you paint unto me a strange patterne of a perfect Potentate in the Court: belike that stranger, who calleth our State in his printed booke Leycestren sem Rempublicam, a Leycestrian Commonwealth,A Leycestrian Commonwealth or the Commonwealth of my Lord of Leycester, knoweth much of these matters. But to hold, si, still within the Court: I assure you that by con∣siderations, which you have laid downe, I doe begin now to perceive that his party must needs be very great and strong within the said Court, seeing that hee hath so many wayes and meanes to encrease, enrich, and encourage the same, and so strong abilities to tread dowe his enemies. The common speech of many wanteth not rea∣son, I perceive, which calleth him the heart and life of the Court. They which cal him the heat (said the Gentle∣man) upon a little occasion more,Gentleman. Leycester called the heart and life of the Cout. would call him also the head: and then I marvell what should bee left for her Majesty, when they take from her both life, heart, and headship in her own Realme? But the truth is, that he hath the Court at this day in almost the same case as his father had it in King Edwards dys, by the same device, (the Lord forbid that ever it come fully to the same state, for then we know what ensued to the principall:) and if you will hve an evident de∣monstration of this mans power and favur in that place, call you but to minde the times when her Majesty upon most just and urgent occsi∣ons, did withdraw but a little her wonted fa∣vour and countenance towrds him: did not all
the Court as it were, mutiny presently? did not e∣very man hang the lippe?A demonstration of Leycestes tyranny in the Court. except a few, who af∣terward paid sweetly for their mirth; were there not every day new devices sought out, that some should be on their knees to her Majesty, some should weepe and put finger in their eyes: other should find our certaine covert manner of threat∣ning: other reasons and perswasions of love: o∣ther of profit: other of honour: other of nessity: and all to get him recalled back to fa∣vour againe? And had her Mjesty any rest per∣mitted unto her, untill she had yeelded and gran∣ted to the same? Consider then (I pray you) that if at that time, in his disgrace, he had his faction so fast assured to himself: what hath he now in his prosperity, after so many yeares of fortification? wherin by all reason he hath not been negligent,Leycester provi∣deth never to come in the Qenes danger againe. seeing that in policy the first point of good fortification is, to make that fort impregnable, which once hath been in danger to be lost. Wherof you have an example in Rihar Duke of York, in the time of K. Henry the sixt, who being once in the Kings hands by his own submission, and dismissed againe (when for his desrts, he should have suffered) provided af∣ter, the King should never be able to over-reach hm the second time, or hav him in his power to do him hurt, but mde himselfe strong enough to pull downe the other wih extirpation of his family.Anno Regni 3. And this of the Court, houshold and Chamber of her Majesty. But now if we shall passe from Cout to Councell, we shall find him no lesse for∣tified but rather more:Leyesters puis∣sance in the privy Councell. for albeit the providence of God hath bin such, that in this most honoura∣ble assemblie, there hath not wanted some two or three of the wisest, gravst, and most experienced
in our state, that have seen and marked this mans perillous proceedings from the beginning, (wherof notwithstanding two are now deceased,L, Keeper. L. Chamberlain. and their place supplied to Leyceters good liking:) yet (alas) the wisdom of these worthy men, hath dis∣covered alwayes more, then their authorities were able to redresse: (the others great power and vio∣lence considered) and for the residue of that bench and table, though I doubt not but there be divers, who do in heart detest his doing (as there were also, no doubt among the Councellours of King Edward, who misliketh this mans fathers attempts, though not so hardy as to contrary the same:) yet for most part of the Councell present, they are known to be so affected in particular, the one for that he is to him a Brother, the other a Father, the other a Kinsman, the other an allie, the other a fast obliged friend, the other a fellow or follower in faction, as none will stand in the breach against him: none dare resist or encounter his designe∣met: but every man yeelding rather to the force of his flow, permitteth him to pierce, and passe at his pleasure in whatsoever his will is once setled to obtaine. And hereof (were I not staied for respect of some whom I may not name) I could alledge strang ex∣amples, not so much in affaires belonging to sub∣jects and to privat men,Matters wherin the Councell are inforced to wink at Leycester. as (were the cause of Snow∣den forrest, Denbigh of Kilingworth, of his faire Ps∣tures fouly procured by Southam, of the Archbsh. of Canterbury, of the L. Bakley, of Sir Iohn Throg∣marton, of M. Robnson and the like;) wherin those of the Councell that disliked his doings, least d∣red to oppose themselves to the same, but also in things that appertaine directly to the Crown and dignity, to the State and Common-weal, and to the safety and continuance therof. It is not secure for
any one Councellor, or other of authority, to take notice of my Lords errours or misdeeds, but with extreame perill of their owne ruine. Leycesters intel∣ligence with the rebellion in Ire∣land.As for example: in the beginning of the re∣bellion in Ireland, when my Lord of Leycester was in some disgrace, and consequently, as hee imgined, but in fraile state at home, he thought it not unexpedient, for his better assurance, to hold some intelligence also that way, for all e∣vents, and so he did: whereof there was so good evidence and testimony found, upon one of the first of accompt, that was there slaine, (as ho∣nourable personages of their knowledge have assured me) as would have beene sufficient, to touch the life of any subject in the land, or in any state Christian, but onely my Lord of Leycester, who is a subject without subjction. For what thinke you? durst any man take no∣tice hereof, or avouch that he had seen thus much? durst he that tooke it in Ireland, deliver the same where especially hee should have done? or they who received it in England, for it came to great hands, use it to the benefit of their Princesse and Countrey? No surely: for if it had beene but onely suspected that they had seene such a thing, it would have beene as dangerous unto them as it was to Action to have seene Diana and her mai∣dens naked:Acteons case now come in England. whose case is so common now in England as nothing more, and so doe the exam∣ples of divers well declare: whose unfortunate knowledge of too many secrers brought them quickly to unfortunate ends. Salvatour slaine in his bed.For we heare of one Salvatour a stranger, long used in great mysteries of base affaires and disho∣nest actions, who afterward (upon what demerit I know not) sustained a hard fortune, for being late with my Lord in his study, well neare untill
midnight, (if I be righly informed) went home to his chamber, and the next morning was found slaine in his bed. Wee heare also of one Doughy,Doughty hanged by Drake. hanged in haste by Captaine Drake upon the Sea, and that by order, as is thought, before his de∣parture out of England, for that he was over pri∣vy to the secrets of this good Earle. There was also this last Summer past,The story of Gates hanged at Tiborne. one Gates hanged at Tiborne, umong others, for rob∣bing of Carriers, which Gates had beene lately Clrke of my Lords kitching, and had layd out much money of his owne, as he said, for my Lords provision, being also otherwise in so great favour and grace with my Lord, as no man living was thought to bee more privy of his secrets then this man, whereupon also it is to be thought, that hee presumed the rather to commit this robbery, (for to such things doth my Lords good favour most extend,) and being apprehended, and in danger for the same, he made his recourse to his Honour for protection, as the fashion is, and that hee might hee borne out, as divers of lesse merit had beene by his Lordship, in more haynous causes before him. The good Earle answered his servant and deare Privado courteously, and assured him for his life, howsoever for outer shew and comple∣ment the forme of Law might passe against him. But Gates seeing himselfe condemned, and no∣thing now betweene his head and the halter, but the word of the Magistrate which might come in an instant, when it would bee too late to send to his Lord: remembring also the small assurance of his said Lords word by his former dealings towards other men, whereof this man was too much privy, he thought good to sollicite his case also by some other of his friends, though not so
puissant as his Lord and Mster, who dealing in∣deed, both diligently and effectually in his affaire, found the matter more difficult a great deale then either he or they had imagined: for that my Lord of Leycester was not onely not his favourer, but a great hastener of his death under hand; and that with such care, diligence, vehemency, and irresi∣stable meanes, (having the Law also on his side) that there was no hope at all of escaping: which thing when Gates heard of, he easily beleeved for the experience he had of his masters good nature, and said, that he alwayes mistrusted the same, con∣sidering how much his Lordship was in debt to him, and hee made privy to his Lordships foule secrets, which secrets hee would there presently have uttered in the face of all the world, but that he feared torments or speedy death, with some ex∣traordinary cruelty, if hee should so have done, and therefore hee disclosed the same onely to a Gentleman of worship, whom hee trusted speci∣ally, whose name I may not utter for some causes, (but it beginneth with H.) and I am in hope ere it be long, by meanes of a friend of mine, to have a fight of that discourse and report of Gates, which hitherto I have not seene nor ever spake I with the Gentleman that keepeth it, though I be well assured that the whole matter passed in substance as I have here recounted it. Whereunto I answered, that in good faith it were pitty that this relation should be lost,Scholar. This relation of Gates may serve hereafter for an addition in the second edion of this booke. for that it is very like, that many rare things bee de∣clared therein, seeing it is done by a man so pri∣vie to he affaires themselves, wherein also hee had beene used an instrument. I will have it (quoth the Gentleman) or else my friends shall faile me, howbeit nor so soone as I would, for that he is in the West Countrey that should pro∣cure
it for me, and will not returne for certaine months, but after I shall see him againe, I will not leave him untill he procure it for me, as hee hath promised: well (quoth I) but what is be∣come of that evidence found in Ireland under my Lords hand, which no man dare pursue, avouch, or behold. Truly (said the Gentleman) I am informed that it lyeth safely reserved in good custody,Gentleman. to be brought forth and avouched whensoever it shall please God so to dispose of her Majesties heart, as to lend an indifferent eare, as well to his accusers, as to himselfe, in judgement. Neither must you thinke that this is strange, nor that the things are few which are in such sort reserved in decke for the time to come,The deck reser∣ved for Leyce∣ster. even a∣mong great personages, and of high calling, for seeing the present state of his power to bee such, and the tempest of his tyranny to be so strong and boysterous, as no man may stand in the rage thereof, without perill, for that even from her Majesty her selfe, in the lenity of her Princely nature, hee extorteth what hee design∣eth, either by fraud, flattery, false information,Leycesters puis∣san violence with the Prince her slfe. request, pretence, or violent importunity, to the over-bearing of all, whom hee meaneth to oppresse: No marvaile then though many even of the best and faithfullest Subjects of the Land, doe yeeld to the present time, and doe keepe silence in some matters, that otherwise they would take it for dutie to utter. And in this kind it is not long sithence a wor∣shipfull and wise friend of mine told mee a te∣stimony in secret, from he mouth of as noble and grave a Councellour as England hath en∣joyed these many hundred yeares: I meane the
late Lord Chamberlaine,The Earle of Sussex his speech of the Earle of Leycester. with whom my said friend being alone at his house in London, not twenty dayes before his death, cofrred some∣what familiarly about these and like matters, as with a true father of his Countrey and Common∣wealth: and after many complaints in the behalf of divers, who had opened their griefs unto Coun∣cellours, and saw that no notice would be taken thereof, the said Nobleman, turning himselfe somewhat about from the water, (for hee sate neare his pond side, where he beheld the taking of a Pike or Carpe) said to my friend, It is no marvell, sir, for who dareth intermeddle himselfe in my Lords affaires? I will tell you (quoth he) in confidence betweene you and me, here is a wise a man and as grave, and as faithfull a Coun∣cellour as England breedeth,The Lord Burgh∣ley. (meaning thereby the Lord Treasurer) who hath as much of hs keeping of Leycesters owne hand-writing, as is sufficient to hang him, if eithr he durst present e same to her Majesty, or her Majesty doe ju∣ice when it should be presented. But indeed (quoth he) the time permitteth neither of them both, and therefore it is in vaine for any man to struggle with him. These were that Noblemans words, whereby you may consider whether my Lord of Lycester be strong this day in Councell or no: and whe∣ther his fortification be sufficient in that place. But now if out of the Councell, we will turne but our eye in the Countrey abroad,Leycester po∣wer in the coun∣trey abroad. we shall finde as good fortification also there, as we have perused already in Court and Councell: and shall well perceive that this mans plot is no fond or indiscreet plot, but excellent well grounded, and such as in all proportions hath his due correspon∣dence.
Consider then the chiefe and principall parts of this land for martiall affaires, for use and com∣modity of armour, for strength, for opportunity, for liberty of the people, as dwelling farthest off from the presence and aspect of their Prince, such parts (I say) as are fittest for sudden enterprises, without danger of interception: as are the North, the West, the Countries of Wales, the Islands round about the land, and sundry other places within the same: are they not all at this day at his disposition? are they not all (by his pro∣curement) in the onely hands of his friends and allyes? or of such, as by other matches have the same complot and purpose with him? In Yorke is president the man that of all other is fittest for that place, that is,Yorke Earle of Huntington. his nearest in affi∣nity, his dearest in friendship, the head of his fa∣ction, and open competitor of the Scepter.Barwick. The Lord Hun∣den. In Bar∣wicke is a Captaine, his wives uncle, most assured to himselfe and Huntington, as one who at con∣venient time may as much advance their designe∣ments, as any one man in England. In Wales the chiefe authority from the Prince is in his owne brother i law:Wales. Sir Heny Sidney The Earle of Pembrooke. but among the people, of naturall affection, is in the Earle of Pembrooke, who both by marriage of his sisters daughter is made his ally, and by dependance is knowne to be wholly at his disposition. The West part of England is under Bedford,The West. Earle of Bed∣ford. a man wholly devoted to his and the Puritans fa∣ction. In Ireland was governour of late the principal instrument appointed for their purposes:The Lord Grey. both in respect of his heat and affection toward their de∣signements, as also of some secret discontentment which he hath towards her Majesty and the state
present for certaine har Her Maiesty (s he saith) for striking of Ma∣ster Fortesene, calling him lame wretch: that grieved him so, (for that he was hurt in her ser∣vice at Lieth) as he said, he would live to be reven∣ged. speeches and ingrate recompences, as he pretendeth: but indeed for that he is knowne to bee of nature fyrie, and im∣patient of stay, from seeing that Commonwealth on foot, which the next competitours for their gaine have painted out to him and such others, more pleasant then the Terrestriall Paradise it selfe. This then is the Hector, this is the Ajax appoin∣ted for the enterprise, when the time shall come. This must be (forsooth) another Rcard of War∣wicke, to gaine the Crowne for Henry the ninth of the House of Yorke: as the other Richard did put downe Henry the sixt of the House of Lanca∣ster, and placed Edward the fourth, from whom Huntington deriveth his title therefore this man is necessarily to be entertained from time to time (as we see now he is) in some charge and mar∣tiall action, to the end his experience, power, and credit may grow the more, and he be able at the time to have souldiers at his commandment. And for the former charge which held of late in Ire∣land, as this man had not beene called away, but for execution of some other secret purpose, In Scotland, or elswhere, against the next inheri∣tors, or presen possessor. for advancement of their designements: so bee well assured that for the time to come, it is to bee fur∣nished againe with a sure and fast friend to Ly∣cester and to that faction. Sir Iohn Parott.In the Ile of Wight I grant that Leycester hath lost a great friend and a trusty servant y the death of Captaine Hrsy,Sir Edward Horsey.Sir George Ca∣rew. but ye the matter is supplied by the succession of another, no lesse as∣sured unto him then the former, or rather more, through the band of affinity by his wife. The two Ilands of Gersey and Gernsey are in the posses∣sion of two friends and most obliged dependents.Sir Amias Paulet Sir Thomas Layton. The one, by reason he is exceedingly addicted to
the Puritan proceedings: the other, as now being joyned unto him by the marriage of mistris Bsse, his wives sister, both daughters to Sir Francis, or (at least) to my Lady Knooles, and so become a rivall, companion and brother, who was before (though trusty) yet but his servant. And these are the chiefe Keyes, Fortresses, and Bulwarkes, within, without and about the Realm, which my Lord of Leycester possessing, (as hee doth) hee may be assured of the body within: where notwithstanding (as hath beene shewed) he wanteth no due preparation for strength: ha∣ving at his disposition (besides all aydes and o∣ther helpes specified before) her Majesties horse,Her Maiesties stable, her ar∣mour, munition, and artillery The Tower. and stables, by interest of his owne office: her Armour, Artillery, and Munition, by the office of his brother the Earle of Warwicke. The Tower of London and treasure therein, by the depen∣dence of Sir Owin Hopton his sworne servant, as ready to rescue and furnish him with the whole, if occasion served, as one of his predecessours was, to receive his Father in King Edwards days, for the like effect, against her Majesty and her Si∣ster. And in the City of London it selfe,London. Sir Rowland Heyward, &c. Mad Fleetwood, Gentleman. what this man at a pinch could doe, by the helpe of some of the principall men, and chiefe Leaders, and (as it were) Commanders of he Commons there, and by the bestirring of Fleewood his madde Recor∣der, and other such his instruments: as also in all other Townes, Ports, and Cities of impor∣tance, by such of his owne setting up, as hee hath placed there to serve his designements, and Justices of peace, with other, that in most Shires doe weare his livery, and are at his appointment: the simplest man within the Realme doth con∣sider.
Whereunto if you  now his owne forces and furniture which hee hth in Killingworth Castle, and ohe places, as also the forces of Hun∣tington in particular, wth their friends, followers, allies and compartenrs, you shall finde that they are not behide in their preparations. Scholar. My Lord of Huntingtons preparation at Ashby.For my Lord of Huntingons forwardnesse in the cause (said I) there is no man, I thinke, which maketh doubt: mry for is private forces, albeit they may be very goo, for any thig I oe know to the contrary, (especially at his house within five and twenty miles of Killingworth, where one told mee som yeares past, tha he had furniture ready for five thousand men:) yt do  not think but they are far friour to my Lord of Leyce∣ster, who is tken to have excssive store, and that in divers placs.Killingworth Castle. And as for th Castle last men∣tioned by you, there are men of good intelligence, and of no small judgement, who eport that in the same he hath to furnish ten thousand good soul∣diers, of all things necssay both for horse and man, besides all other muition, armour, and ar∣tillery, (whereof great store was brought thither under pretence of triumph, wen her Mjesty was there, and never as yet carried backe againe) and besides the great abundnce of ready coyne there (as is said) sufficient for any geat exploit to bee done within the Realme. And I know tht the estimation of this place was such, among divers, many yeares agoe: as when at a time her Mjesty ly dangerously sick, and like to dye, at Hampton Court, a certaine Gentleman of the Court came unto my Lord of Huntington,Ralph Lane. and told him, that for so much as he tooke his Lord to be next in succession after her Mjesty, hee would offer him a meane of great helpe for compassing of his purpose, after the
decease of her Majey which was,The offer and acceptation of Killingworth Castle. the possession of Killingworth Castle (for at that time these two Earles were not yet very friends, nor confe∣derate together) and that being had, he shewed to the Earle the great furniture and wealth which theeby he should possesse for pursuit of his pur∣pose. The propsiion was well liked, and the mat∣ter esteemed of great importance, and consequent∣ly received wih many thankes. But yet afterward her Majesty by the good provdence of God, reco∣vering againe, leted the execution of the bargain: and my Lord of Huntington having occasion to joyne amity with Leyester, had more respect to his owne commodity, then to his friends security, (as commonly in such persons and cases it falleth out) and so discovered the whole device unto him, who forgat not after, from time to time, to plague the deviser by secret means, untill he had brought him to that poore estae, as all the world seeth: though many men be ot acquainted with the true cause of this his disgrace and bad fortune. To this answered the Lawyer:Lawyer. I good faith (Gentlemen) you open great mysteries unto me, which either I knew not, or considered not so par∣ticularly before; and no marvell, for that my pro∣fession and exercise of Law, restraineth me from much company keeping▪ and when I happen to be among some that could tell mee much herein, I dare not either aske, or heare if any of himselfe beginne to talke, lest afterward he speech com∣ming to light, I be ftched over the coales (as the proverb is) for the same, under pretence of ano∣ther thing. But you (who are not suspected for religion) have mu greatr priviledge in such matters, both to eare and speake agine, which men of mine estate dare not doe Onely this I
knew before,The prerogative of my Lord of Leycester. that throuhout all England my Lord of Leycester is taken for Dominus fac totum: whose excellency above oth i infinte, whose authority is abolue, whose cōndment is dread∣full, whose dislke is dngro, and whose fvour is omnipotent. And for his will, though it be seldome Law, yet alwaye is his power above law an thre∣fore we Lawyers in all cases brought unto us, have as gret rgrd to his inclination, as Astro∣nomers have to th Plnet dominant, or as Sea∣men have to the North Pole. Leycester the Star directory to Lwyers in their claents affaires.For as thy hat faile, doe direct heir course according to th situation and dirction of that starr whih guideth them at he Pole: and as Astronomers who make Prognostications. doe foretell things to come, according to the aspect of the Planet dominant, or bearing rule for he time: so we doe guide our Clients bake, an do prognosticate what is like to ensue of his cause, by the aspct and inclination of my Lord of Lyce∣ster. And for that reason, as soone as ver wee heare a case proposed, or custome is to ask, what part my Lord of Lyster is lke to favour in he matter, (for in all mttrs lghtly of ay por∣tance he hath a par) or what may be gathered of his inlinati therein: and accordng to that we give a guess, more or lesse, what end will en∣sue But this (y Masters) is from the purpose: and threfore returning to you former speech a∣gae, I do say, that alb6it I was not privy before to the particulr povsions of my Lord and hi frends, in such and such places: yet seeing him acompted Lord Generall over all the whole Realme, and to have at his commandement all these severall commodities and forces pertainig to her Majesty which you have mentioned be∣fore,
and so many more as be in the Realme, and not mentioned by yu (for in fine he hath al:) I could not but account him (as hee is) a potent Prince of our State, for all furniture needfull to defence or offence, or rather the onely Monarch of our Nobility, wh hth sufficient nedfull to plunge his Pince, if he should bee discontented, especially for his abundance of money, (which, by the wise,Leycesters furni∣ture in money. is tearmed the Sinewes of Martiall actions) wherein by all mens judgements, hee is better furnshed at this day, then ever any sub∣ject of our land, either hah beene heretofore, or lightly may be hereafter, both for bankes wih∣out the Realme, and stuffed coffers within. Inso∣much that being my selfe in the last Parliament, when the matter was moved for the grant of a Subsidie, after that, one for her Majesty had gi∣ven vey good resons, why her Highnesse was in want of money, and consequently needed the assi∣stance of her faithfull subjects therein, another that sate next me, of good account, said in mine eare secretly, these reasons I doe well allow,The saying of a Knight of the Shire touching Leycesters mony and am contented to give my part in money: but yet for hr Majesties need, I could make answer as one answered once the Emperour Tiberius in the like case and cause, Abundè ei pecuniam fore, si à li∣berto suo in soietatem recipitur; that her Majesty should have Money enough, if one of her servants would vouchsafe to make her Highnesse partaker with him; meaning thereby my Lord of Leyce∣ster, whose treasure must needs in one respect be greater then that of her Majesty; for that he lay∣th up whasoever he getteth, and his expences he casteth upon the purse of his Princesse. For that (said the Gentleman) whether he doe or no, it importeth little to the matter:Gentleman, seeing both that which hee spendeth, and that he hord∣eth,
is truly and proprly his Princes Treasure: and seeing hee hath so many and dvers wyes of gaining,The infinit waies of gaining that Leycester hath. what should he mke accou of his own private expences? if hee lay ut on for a thou∣sand, what can that make him h poorer? hee that hath so goodly land, possssis, Seignio∣ries, and rich ffies of his owne, as he is knowne to have: hee that hath so speciall fvour and au∣thority wih the Prince, as he can obtaine what∣soeve he listh to demand: h ht ath his part and prtion i all sures besides,Sures. that  grace, or els (for the most prt) are ende by Lw: he tht may hop and change what lans hee listeth with hr Mjsty,Lands.  them of al their woods and other cmmoities, and rack them afterward to the uttermost penny, and then returne the sme so tenter-stretched, and bare shorne, into hr Ma∣jesties hands againe, by fresh xchange, rent for rent, for other lands never  sd before hee that posseseth so many gainfull Lcences to him∣selfe alone,Licences. of Wine, Oyls, Currans, loath, Velvets, with his new office for Licence of alie∣nation, most pernicious unto the Commonwealh as hee useh the same, with many other the like, which were suffiient to enrich whole Tones, Coporations, Countries and Commonwealths: he that hath the art, to make gaiull to himselfe every offence,Falling out with her Maiesty.Offices. displeasure, and flling ou of her Majesty with him, and every angry countnance cast upon him: he that hath his share in all offi∣ces of great profit, and holdeth an abslute Mono∣ply of the same: he that dispsh at hs will the Ecclesisticll livigs of the Realme, maketh Bi∣shops, nne, but suh as will doe reason. or of his Chaplains whom he listeth,Clergy. and retaineth to him∣selfe so much of the living as liketh him best: hee that sweepeth away the glebe from so many Be∣nefices
throughout the Land, and compoundeth with the person for the rst.Benefice. He that so scoureth the University and Collds where he is Can∣cellou,Vnivesity. and selleth both Heaships and Scholrs places, and all ohr offices, roomes and digni∣ties, tha by art or violnce may yeld money: he tha makth title to what land or other thing he please,Oppressions. and driveth the parties to compound for th same same: he that akeh in whole Forests, Commons, Woods, and Pastures to himslfe, compelling the Tenants to make him pay new rent, and what he cesseth: he that vexeth and op∣psseth whomsoever hee lst,Rapines. taketh fom any wht hee lt, and maketh his owne claime, sui, and end as he list:Princes favour. he tht selleth his favour with the Prince, both abroad in forraine countries, and at home, and setteth the price thereof what him∣selfe will demand: he that hath and doth all this, and besides this,Presents, hath infinite presents daily brought unto him of great vlue, both in Jewels, Plte, al kinde of Furniture, and redy Come: this man (I sy) may easily beare his owe ex∣pences, and yet lay up sfficiently also to weary h Prince when need shall require. You hve said much sir,Lawye. (qoth h Lawyer) and such matter as toucheth nearly bth her Ma∣jesty and the Commonwealth: and yet in my conscience if I were to plead at he barre for my Lord, I could not tell which of all these members to deny. But for that which you mention in the last part, of hs gaining by her Mjesties favour, both at home and aboad:Leycesters home gaine by he Ma∣esties faour. Touching his home-gaine, it is evident, seeing all that he hath is got∣ten onely by the opinion of her. Majesties favour towards him, and many men doe repaire unto him with fat presents, rather for that hey suppose he may by his favour do them hurt, if he feele not
their reward, then for that they hope he will la∣bour any thing in their affaires. You remember (I doubt not) the story of him that offered his Prince a great yearly rent,A pretty story. to have but this favour onely, that hee might come every day in open audience, and say in his eare, God save your Majesty, assuring himselfe, that by the opinion of confidence and secret favour, which hereby the people would conceive to be in the Prince towards him, he should easily get up his rent againe double told. Wherefore my Lord of Leycester receiving daily from her Majesty grea∣ter tokens of grace and favour then this, and himselfe being no evill Merchant, to make his owne bargaine for the best of his com∣modities, cannot but gaine exceedingly at home by his favour. And for his lucre abroad upon the same cause, I leave to other men to conceive what it may b,Leycesters for∣raine gaine by her Maiesties favour. sithence the beginning of her Majesties reigne, the times whereof and condition of all Christen∣dome hath beene suh, as all the Princes and Po∣tentaes round about us, have beene constrained at one time or other, to sue to hr Highnesse for aid, grace, or favour: in all which sutes, men use not to forget (as you know) the parties most able by their cedt, to further or let the same. In particular onely this I can say, that I have heard of sundry Frenchmen, that at such time as the treaty ws betweene France and England, for the re-delivery of Callis unto us againe, in the first yeare of her Majesties reigne that now is, when the Frenchmen were in great distresse and misry, and King Phiip refused absolutely to make peace with them, except Callis were restored to England (whither for that purpose he had now delivered the French hostages:) the Frenchmen
doe report (I say) that my Lord of Leycester stood them in get stead at hat necessity,Leycesters bribe for betraying of Callis. for his reward, (which you may well imagine was not small, for a thing of such importance) and became a suiter, that peace might be conluded, with the release of Callis to the French which was one of the most impius facts (to say the truth,) that ever could be devised against his Common∣wealth. A small mtter in him (said the Gentleman) for in this he did no more,Gentleman. but as Christ said of the Jwes: hat they filled up the measure of their Fahers sinnes. And so if you reade the story of Kig Edwards time, you shall finde it most evi∣dent, that this mans fther before him,Leycesters fa∣ther sold Bul∣logne. sold Bul∣loge o the French by like treachery. For it ws dlivered up upon compositon, wthout ne∣cessiy or reason, th five and twentieh of April, in he fourth year of King Edward the sixt, when he (I mea Duke Dudley) had now put in the Tower the Lord Protector,Earles of Arun∣del and South∣hampton pt out of the Councell by D. Dudley. and thrust out of the Coucell whom he listed, as namly, th Earls of Aundel and Southmpton, and so invaded the whole government himsefe, to sell, spoile, or dis∣pose at his pleasure. Wherefore this is but natu∣rall to my Lord of Leycester by discent, to make merchndise of the Sae, for his Grand∣father Edmund also was such a kinde of Copes∣man. An evill race of Merchants for the Common∣wealth (quoth the Lwyer) but yt, Sir,Lawyer. I pray you (said he) expound unto me somewht more at large, the nature of these licences which you na∣med, as also the changing of lands with her Mje∣sty, if you can set it downe any plainer: for they seeme to be things of excssive gaine: especially his way of gaining by offending her Majesty, or
by her Highnesse offce towards him, for it see∣meth to be a device above all skill or reaso. Leycesters gaine by falling out with her MaiestyNot so (quoth the Gentleman) for yo know that every falling out must have an attonement agine, whereof hee being sue by the many nd puissant meanes of his frends in Court, as I have shewed before, who shall not give her Majesty rest untill it be done: then for this aonement, and in perfct reconciliation on hr Mjsties part she must gant my Lord some su or other, which he will have alwaye ready povided for that pur∣pose, and this sute shall hee well ble to reward his friends, that laboured for his ecocilement, and leave also a good remainder for himselfe. And this is now so ordinary a practice with him, as all th Reale obsrvth the same, and disdain∣eth that her Majesty should bee so unworthily a∣bsed. For if her Hghnesse fall not out with him as often as he desireh to gaine this way, then he picketh some quarrell or other, to shew him∣selfe discontented with her, so that one way or other, this gainfull reconciliation must be made, and that often for his commodty. The like art he exerciseth in inviting her Majesty to his ban∣quets, and to his hoses, where if shee come, she must grant him in sutes, tenne times so muh as the charges of all amount unto: so that Robi playeth the Broker in all hi affires, and maketh the uttermost pnny of her Mjesty every way. Gentleman.Now for his change of lands, I thinke I have beene reasonable plaine before: yet for your fuller satisfaction, you shall understand his further dealing therein, to be in this sort. Be∣sides the good lands, and of ancient possession to the Crowne, procured at her Majesties hand, and used as bfore was declared: hee useth the same tricke for his worst lands, that he pos∣sesseth
any way, whether hey come to him, by ex∣tort meanes and plaie oppression, or through maintenance and broken titles or by consenage of simple Gentlemen, to make him their heire, or by what hrd title or unhonest meanes so ever,Leycesters frau∣dulent chage of lands wih her Maiesty whereby he hath notably endammaged the Crowne. (for hee practizeth store of such and thinketh little of the reckoning:) after he had tried them likewse to the uttermost touch, and letten them out to such as shall gaine but little y the bargaine: then goeth he and changeth the same with her Mjesty for the best lands he can pick out of the Crowne, to the end that hereby he may both eforce her Mjesty to the defence of his bd titles, and him∣selfe fill his coffrs with the fines and uttrmost commodity of both the lands. His licences do stand thus▪ first he got licence for certaine great numbers of cloaths,Leycesters licen∣ses. to be trans∣ported out of this land, which might have beene an undoing to the Marchant ubject, if they had not redeemed the same with great summes of mo∣ny: so that it redounded to great damage of all occupied about that kind of commodity After that he had the grant for carrying over of barrell staves and of some other such like wares. Then procured hee a Monopolie, for bringig in of sweet wines, oyles, currans and the like: the gaine wherof is inestimable. He hd also the for∣feit of all wine that was to be drawn above the old ordinary price, with licence to give autho∣rity to sell above that price: wherin Cptaine Horsey was his instrument, by which meanes it is incredible what treasure and yearely rent was gathered of the Vintners throughout th land. To this adde now his licence of silkes and vel∣vets,Slkes and Velvet. which only were enough to enrich the Mjor and Aldermen of London, if they were all deced
(as often I have heard divers Marchants affirme.) And his licence of alienation of lands, which (as in part I have opened before) serveth hm not onely to excessive gaine, but also for an ex∣treame scourge, wherewith to plague whm he pleaseth in the Realm. For seeing that wthout this licenc,The Tyrannicall licence of aliena∣tion. no mn can by, sell, passe, or alie∣nate, ay land tht any ais may b drawn to that tenure, as holden in hiefe of the Prince: (as commonly now most lan my) he calleth into qustion whatsoever likth him best, be it ne∣ver so cleare: and under this colour, not only en∣richeth himselfe without all msure, bu rven∣geth himselfe also, wher he wll, without all order. Here th Lwyer stood still a petty while, bi∣ting his lip,Gentleman. a e wer stonshed, and thn sai; Veily I have not he so may and so apprant things, or so odious, of any mn tht ver lived in our Common wealth. And I marvale much of my Lord of Leycester,Edmund Dudley. hat h Grandthers fortune doth not move him much, who lost his head in the beginning of Kng Henry he eighs dayes, for much lesse and fwer offences, i the same kind, committed in the time of Kg Henry the seventh: for he was thought to be the inven∣tour of these pooligs and molestations, where∣with the people were burthened, in the latter days of he said King. And yet had he great pretence of reason to alledged for himselfe: in that these exactions were made to the Kings use, and not to his, (albeit no doubt) but his own gaine was al∣so there. Mster Stow writeth in his Cronicle, that in the time of hs imprisonment in the Tow∣er,Edmund Dudleis booke written in the Tower. he wrot a notble book, intituled The tree of Common wealth, which book the said Stow saith, that hee hath delivered to my Lord of Leycester
many years agone. And if the said book be so no∣table as Master Stow affirmeth: I marvile that his Lord in so many yeares, doth not publish the sam, for the glory of his ancestors? It may be (said the Gentleman) that the secrets there in contained, be such,Gentleman. as it seemeth good to my Lord, to use them onely himselfe, and to ga∣ther the fruit of the tree into his owne house alone. For if the tree of the Common-wealth in Edmund Dudlis book, be the Prince and his race: and the fruits to be gathered from that tree, bee riches, honours, dignities, and preferments: then no doubt, but as the writer Edmund was cunning therein: so have his two followers, Iohn and Ro∣bert, well studied and practized the same, or ra∣ther have, exceeded and farre pssed the authour himselfe. The one of them gathering so eagerly, and with such vehemency, as he was like to have broken down the maine boughs for greedinesse: the other yet plucking and heaping so fast to him∣slfe and his friends, as it is and may be, most jusly doubted, that when they have cropped all they can, from the tree left them by their father Edmund (I meane the race of King Henry the se∣venth) then will they pluck up the Stemme it self by the rootes, as unprofitable:The supplanting of the race of Henry the 7. The inserting of Huntington. and pitch in his pace another Truke that is the line of Huntin∣gton) that may bgin to feed a new, with fresh fruits againe, and so for a time content their ap∣petites, untill of gatherers, they may become trees, (which is their finall purpose) to feed themselves at their own discretion. And howsoever this be, it cannot be denied,Edmund Dd∣leies brood more cunning then himselfe. but that Edm. Dudlis brood, have learned by this book, and by other meanes to be more cnning gathe∣rers, then ever their first progenitor was that made the book. First for tht he made profession to ga∣ther
to his Prince (though wickedly) and these men make demonstration, that they have ga∣thered for themselves: and that with much more iniquity. Secondly, for that Emund Dud∣ley though hee got himselfe neare about the tree, yet was he content to stand on the ground, and to serv himselfe from the tree, as commo∣dity was offered: but his children not etee∣ming that afe gthring, will needs mount aloft upon the tree, to pull, croppe, and rifl at their pleasure.Northumberland and Leycester with their Prince will not be roled. And as in the second poit the Sonne Iohn Dudley was more subtle, then Ed∣mund the Father: so in a third point, the Ne∣phey Robert Dudley is more crafty then hey both. For that, hee seeing the evill successe of those two that went before him, hee hath provided together so much in convenient time, and to make himselfe therewith so fat and strong, (wherein th oher two failed) as he will never be in danger more, to be calld to any accompt for the same. In good faith Sir (quoth the Lawyer) I thanke you heartily,Lawyer. for this pleast discourse upo Ed∣mund Dudleis tree of Common-wealth. And by your opinion, my Lord of Leycester is the most learned of all his kindred, and a very cunning Logitioer indeed, tat can draw for himselfe so commoiou conclusion, out of the perillous pre∣msss of his progenitors. No marvail (quoth the Gentleman) for that his L. is Master of Art in Oxford,Gentlman. and Chancelour besides of the same Vniversity, where he hth store (as you knw) of many fine wits and good Logi∣tioners at his commandement:Leycester Master of Art, and a cun∣ning Logitioner. and whre he lear∣neth not only the rules and art of cunning gathe∣ring: but for the very practize (as I hve touched before) seeing there is no one Colledge, or other
thing of commodiy wthin that place, where hence h hath o pled, whatsoever was possibly to be gthered, eher by art or violnce. Touhing Oxford (sai I) for that I am an Uiversty man my selfe,Scholar. and have both experience of Cmbridg, nd good acquaintance with di∣vers students of e other university. I can tell you enogh, bu  fine all tendeth to his conclu∣sion, tht b h Chancellorship,Leycesters abu∣sing and spoiling of Oxford. is cancelled al∣most all hpe of good in th Universiy: and by his ptcton, it is vry lik soone to come to dstrcto. And suly if there were no oher thig,The Lord Treasrer. to declar the odes and diffrnce betwixt him and our Chcelur, (hom he cannot beare, for at evy way h seth im, to psse him in ll honour an vertue) it were sufficient to be∣hold the prsent state of the two Universities, whreof thy are heads and governours. For our own, I will not sy much,Cabridge. lest I might pehaps seeme partill: but let th thing speak for it selfe. Consider the fruit of the Garden, and therby you may judge of th Grdiners diligence. Looke upon the Bishopricks, Pastoships, and Pulpits of England, and see whence principally they have recived their furniture for advance∣ment of the Gospell. And o the contrary side, looke upon the Semnaries of Papistry a Rome and Rhems, upon the Colledges of Jesuists, and other companies of Papists beyond the seas, and see where-hence thy are, epecially, fraught. The Priests and Jesuists here executed within the land, and other that remaine either in prson, or abroad in corners: are they not all (in a man∣ner) of that Universiy? I speak not to the disgrace of any good that remaine there, or that have issu∣ed out thnce into the Lords Vineyrd: but for
the most part there, of hi ur time, have they not either gone beyond he seas, or left their pla∣ces for discontentment in Religion, or else be∣come Servingen, or followed the bare name of Law or Physick, without greatly profiting there∣in, or furhering he service of Gods Church, or their Commonwealth? And wherehence (I pray you) ensueth all this, but by reason that the chiefe Governour thereof is an Atheist himselfe,The disorders of Oxford by the wickednesse of their Chancellor and useth the place onely for gaine and spoile? for herehence t commeh, that all good order and discipline is dissolved in that place, the fervour of study extinguished: the publique Lectures abandoned (I meane of the more part:) the Tavernes and Ordinary tables frequented: the apparell of Students growne monstruous: and the statutes and good ordinance both of the University and of every Colledge and Hall in private, brken and infriged t my Lords good pleasre, without respect ethr of oath, cu∣stome, or reason to the contrary. The heads and Officers are put in and out at his onely discretion: and the Scholars places either told, or dspsed by his letters, or by these of his servants and fol∣lowers: nothing can be had thre, now, with∣out present mony: it is as common buying and selling of places in that University, as of horses in Smithfield: whereby the good and ver∣tuous are kept out, and companions thrust in, fit to serve his Lord afterward, in all affaires that shall occurre. Leases.And as for leases of Farmes, Woods, Pastures, Personages, Benefices, or the like, which belong any way to any part of the University, to let or be∣stow, these, his Lord and his Servants have so flee∣ced, shorne, and scraped already, that there remai∣neth little to feed upon hereafter: albeit hee
want not still his  and intelligences in the place, to advertse him from time to ie, when ay new little morsell is offred.Leycesters in∣strumens. An the princi¦pall instruments which for this purpose h hath hd there before his, hv been two Physitians, Bayy and Culpiper, both knwne Papists a little while agoe, but now jst of Glens religion, and so much the fitter for my Lords humour: for his Lordship doth alwaies covet, to be furnished with certaine chosen men about , for ivers affairs: as thse two Galensts in the Universiy: De and Aen (two Aheists) for figuring and conjuring: Iuio the Italian, and Lopa the Jew, for posoning, and for the art of destroying children in womens bellies: Verneis for mudering: Digbies for At Diies house in War∣wick shie dame Lettice , and some oth such pieces of plea∣sure. Bauds: and the like in occupations which his Lordship exerciseth. Wherefore to returne to the speech where we began: most leare it is, that my Lord of Lyce∣ste hath meanes to gine and gther also by the University, as wl a by the country abroad. Wher¦in (as I am told) he beareth hmselfe so absolute a Lord, as if he were their King, and not their Chan∣cllour. Nay far more then if he wre the gene∣rall and prticular founder of all the Colledges and othr houses of the University; no man daring to contrary o interrupt the leas word or signifi∣cation of his will, but with hs extreame danger: which i a proceeding more fit for Phalris the ty∣rant, or some Governour in Trary, then for a Chancellour of a learned Universiy. To this answred the Lawyer,Lawye, for my Lords wrath towards such as will no stand to his judg∣ment and opinion, I can m selfe be a sufficient witnesse, who having had oftn occasion to deale for composition of mtters betwixt his Lordship and others, hve seene by experience, that al∣wayes
they have sped be, wo stood least in con∣tenion with him, whatsoever their cause were. For as a great and violent river, the more it is stopped or contraried, he more it riseth and swel∣leth bigge, and in the end, dejcteth with more force the hing tht made rsistance: so his Lrd∣ship being the great and mighy Potentate o this Realme,The perill of standing with Leycester in any thing. and accustomed now to have his will in all things, cannot beare to bee crossd or resi∣sted by any man, though it were in his owne ne∣cessay defence. Hereof I hav seene exmples in the causes of Snowden forest in Wales, of Denbighe, of Kil∣lingworth, of Drayton, nd others: where the paies that had nterest, or thought themselves wronged, had beene happy if they ad yeelded at the fist to hs Lordships plasure, wihout further question: for hen had they escaped much trouble, chrges, displeasure, and vexation, when by esi∣stance they incurred, to their great ruine, (and Poore men re∣sisting Warwicks inclosure at North hall wee hanged for h pleasure by Ley∣cesters auhority Gentlen.Great Tyranny. losse of life to some) and in the end were faine to submit themselves uno his will, wih far worse conditions then in the beginning were offered unto them: which thing wa pittifull indeed to bhold, but yet sh is my Lord disposition. A noble disposition (quoth the Gentleman,) tht I must give hm my oat, if hee demnd the ame, and that quickly lso, for feare lest i I stag∣ger or mke doubt therof, hee copell me to yeeld both coat and doublet, in penance of my stay. I have read of some such Tyrants abroad in the world: marry their end was alwayes according to their life, as it is very like that it will be also in this man, for that there is smal hope of his amend∣ment, and God passeth not over commonly such matters unpunished in this life, as well as in the life to come.
But I pray you si, sing mention is now made of the former oppessins, so much talked of throughout the realm, tha you will take the pains to explain the substnce therof uno me; for albeit in generall, every mn doh know he same, and in heart doe detest the tyranny threof; yet we a∣broad in the Countrey, doe do understand it so well and distinctly as you hat be Lawyers, who have seene and understood he whole processe of the same. The case of Kllingworth and Dnbigh (said the Lawyer) are much alike in matter and manner of proceeding,Lawyer. though different in time, place and importance.The Lordship of Denbigh and eicesters op∣pression used therein. Fr that the Lordshp in Dnbigh in Northwles, being given unto him by her Majesty a great while agoe, at the beginning of his rising, (which is a Lrdship of singular great importance in that Country, having (as I have heard) well neere 200. worshipfull Gntlemen freeholders to th same:) the tenants of the place, consider∣ing the prsen state of things, nd having learned the hungry disposition of ther new Lord; made a common purse of a thusand pouds, to present him withall, at his fist entrane: whch though he received (as he rfuseth nothng;) yet accoun∣ted he the sum of small effect for satisfction of his appetie; and therfore applied hmselfe, not onely to mke the utermost that he could by Leases, and such like wayes of commoditie; but also he wuld needs enforce the Feeholers to raise thir old rent of the Lodship, from two hundreth and fify pounds a yeere, or therea∣bouts (at which rate he had receivd the same in gif from her Mjesty,) nto eght or nine hundreh pounds by the yeere, For that he had found out (forsooth) an old record, (as he said) whereby he could prove, that in ancient time
long past, that Lordship had yeelded so much old rent: and therfore he would now enforce the present tenants, to mak up so muh againe upon their lands, whch they thought was against all reason for them to doe: but my Lord perforce, would have i so, and in the end compelled them to yeeld to his will, to the impoverishing of all the whole Countrey about. The Manor of Killingworth, and Leycesters op∣pression there.The like proceeding he used with the tenants about Kllingworth, where he received the said Lordshp and Castle from the Prince, in gift of twenty foure pounds yeerely rent or thereabout, hath made it now better then five hundreth by yeere: by an old record also, found by great for∣tune in the hole of a wall, as is given out (for he hah singular good luck alwayes in finding out re∣cords for his purpose) by vertue whereof, he hath taken from the tenants round about, their Lands, Woods, Pastures and Commons, to make himselfe Pakes, Chaces, and other commodities therwith, to the subversion of many a good family, which was maintained here, before this devourer set foot in that Countrey. But the matter of Snowden Forest, doth passe all the rest,The cause of Snowden forest most pitifull. both for cunning and cruelty: the tragedy whereof was this, he had learned by hs intelligencers abroad (whereof he had great store in every part of the Realme) hat there was a goodly ancient Forest in Norh wales, which hath almost infinite borderers about the same: for it lyeth in the middest of the Countrey, be∣ginning at the hils of Snowden (whereof it hath his name) in Carnarvanshire, and reaheth eve∣ry way towards divers other shires. When my Lord heard of ths, he entered presently into the conceit of a singular great pry: going to her Ma∣jesty, signified that her highnesse was often times
abused, by the incroaching of such as dwelt upon her Forests, which was neessary to be restrained; and therefore beseeched her Mjesty to bestow upon him he ncrochments only, which he should be able to finde out upon the Forest of Snowden, which was granted. And thereupon he chose out Commissioners fit for the prpose, and sent them into Wales, with the like Commission as a certaine Emperour was wont to give his Majestrates, when they departed from him to governe, as Suetonius writeth,An old tyranni∣call Commission Scitis quid velim, & quibus opus habeo. You know what I would have, and wht I have need of. Which re∣commendation, these Commissioners taking to hear, omitted no diligence in execution of the same; and so going into Wales, by such meanes as they used, of setting one man to accuse another; brought quickly all the Countrey round about in three or foure shires, within the compasse of Fo∣rest ground; and so entred upon the same, for my Lord of Leicsters. Whereupon, when the people were amzed, and expected what order my Lord himselfe would take therein: his Lord was so far off from refusing any part of that, which hi Com∣missioners had presented and offered him: as he would yet furher stretch the Forest byond the Sea, into the Isle of Anglesey,A rediculou de∣monstration of excessive avaries and make that also within his compasse and bounder. Which when the Commonlty saw, and that they profited nothing by their complaning and cryng out of this tyranny: they appointed to send some certaine number of themselves, to London, to mke supplication to the Prince: and so they did; choosing out for that purpose a dozen Gntlemen, and many more of the Com∣mons of the Countrey of Llin, to deale for the whole. Who comng to London, and exhibiting
a most humble suppliation to her Mjesty for redresse of their oppression: received an answer, by the procurement of my Lord of Leycester, that they should have justice, if the commonalty would returne home to their houses, and the Gentlemen remaine there, to solicite the cause. Which as soone as they had yeelded unto, the Gentlemen were all taken and cast into prison, and there kept for a great space, and afterward were sent downe to Ludlow, (as the place most eminent of all these Countries) there to weare papers of perjury, and receive other punishments of infamy. for their complaining: which punish∣ments notwithstanding, afterward upon great suit of the parties and their friends, were turned into great fines of money, which they were constrai∣ned to pay, and yet besides to agree also with my Lord of Leycester for their owne lands,A singular op∣pression. ac∣knowledging the same to be his, and so to buy it of him againe. Wherby not onely these private Gentlemen, but all the whole Countrey thereabout, was and is (in a manner) utterly undone. And the participation of this injury, reacheth so far and wide, and is so generall in these parts, as you shall scarce finde a man that cometh from that coast, who feeleth no the smart thereof; being either impoverished, beggered or ruinated thereby. Leycester ex∣treamly hated in Wales.Whereby I assure you that the hatred of all th Countrey, is so universall and vehement against my Lord; as I think never thing created by God was so odious to that Nation, as the very name o my Lord of Leicster is. Which his Lordship wel knowing, I doubt not, but that he will take hee how he go thither to dwell, or send thither his posterity. Gentleman.For his posterity (quoth the Gentleman) I sup∣pose
he hath little cause to be solicitour; for that God himselfe taketh care commonly, that goods and honours so gotten and maintained, as hi be, shall never trouble the third heire. Marry for him∣selfe, I confesse (the matter standing as you sy) that he hath reason to forbeare that Country, and to leave off his building begun at Denbigh,The end of ty∣rants. as I heare say he hath done: for that the universall ha∣tred of a people, is a perilous matter; and if I were in his Lordships case, I should often thinke of the end of Nero; who after all his glory,Nero, upon fury of the people was adjudged to have his head thrust into a Piloy, and so to be beaten to death with rods and thongs. Or rather I should feare the successe of Vitellius the third Empror after Nero,Vitellius. who for his wick∣ednesse and oppression of the people, was tken by them at length, when fortune began to faeh hm, and led out of his Palace naked, with hooks of I∣ron fastned in his flsh, and so drwn through the City with infamy, whre, loen in the streets with filth and ordure cast upon him, and a prik put under his chin, to the end he should not loke downe or hide hi fce, was brought to the banke of Tyber, and there, afer many hundred wounds received, was cast into the river. So implacable a thing is the furur of a mutitude, whn it is once stirred, and hath place of revege. And so heavy is the hand of God upon tyrants n this world, when it pleaseth his divine Majesty to take re∣venge of the same. I have read in Leaner, in his description of Ita∣ly, how that in Spoleto (if I be not dceived) the chiefe City of the Country of Umbria,A most terrible revenge taken upon a tyrant. there was a strange tyrant; who in the time of his prosperity, contemned all men, and forbare to injury no man that came within his claws; esteeming himself sure
enough for ever being called to render account in this life, and for the next he cared little. But God upon the sudden turned upside-downe the wheele of his felicity, and cast him into the peoples hands; who tooke him, and bound his naked body upon a planke, in the Mrket place, with a fire and iron tongues by him: and then made proclama∣tion, that seeing this man was not otherwise able to make satisfaction, for the publique injuries that he had done; every private person annoyed by him, should come in order, and with the hot-burning tongues there ready, should take of his flesh so much, as was correspondent to the inju∣ry received, as indeed they did untill the miserable man gave up the ghost, and after too: as this au∣thor writeth. But to the purpose: seeing my Lord careth lit∣tle for such examples, and is become so hardy now, as he maketh no account to injury and op∣presse whole Countries and Commonalties toge∣ther;Leycesters op∣pression of parti¦cular men. it shall be bootlesse to speake of his pro∣ceedings towards particular men, who have not so great strength to resist, as a multitude hth. And yet I can assure you, that there are so many and so pitifull things published daily of his ty∣ranny in this kinde; as doe move great compos∣sion towards the party that doe suffer, and hor∣rour aginst him who shameth not daily to offer such injury. As for example: whose heart would not bleed to heare the case before mentioned of Mster Robinson of Staffordshire;Master Robinson a proper yong Gentle∣man, and well given both in religion and other vertues; whose Father died at Newhaven, in her Mjsties service, under this mans brother the Earl of Warwick; and recommended at his death this his eldest Son, to the special protection of Lei∣cester
and his Brother, whose servant also this Ro∣binson hath bin, from his youth upward, and spent the most of his living in his service. Yet notwith∣standing all this, when Robinsons Lands were in∣tangled with a certaine Londoner, upon interest fors former maintenance in their service, whose title my Lord of Leicester (though craftily, yet not covertly) under Ferris his cloak, had gotten to him∣selfe: he ceased not to pursue the poore Gentle∣man even to imprisonment, arraignment, and sen∣tence of death, for greedinesse of the said living; together with the vexation of his brother in law Master Harcourt, and all other his friends, upon pretence, forsooth,Master Harcourt. that there was a man slaine by Robinsons party, in defence of his owne possession against Leicesters intruders, that would by violence breake into the same. What shall I speake of others, whereof there would be no end? as of his dealing with Mster Richard Lee,M. Richrd Lee. for his Manor of Hooknorton (if I faile not in the name:Ludowick Grvel) with Master Ludowick Grivell, by seeking to bereave him of all his lving at once, if the drift had taken place?George Witney. with George Witney, in the behalfe of Sir Henry Legh, for infor∣cing him to forgoe the Controlership at Wood∣stock, which he holdeth by Patent from King Heny the seventh? with my Lord Barkley▪ord Barkley. whom he enforced to yeeld up his lands to hs brother Warwick, which his ancestors had held quietly for almost two hundreh yeeres together? What shall I say of his intollerable tyranny upon the last Arhbishop of Canterbury,Archbshop of Caterbury. fr D¦ctor Iulio his ske, and that in so foule a matte? Vpon Sir Iohn Thomaton,Sir Iohn Throg∣matton. whom he brought pitifully to his grave before his time, by continu∣all vexations, for a peece of faithfull service done by him to his Countrey, and to all the line
of King Henry, against this mans Father, in King Edward and Queen Maries dayes? Upon divers of the Lanes,Lane. for one mans sake of that name be∣fore mentioned, that offered to take Killing worth-Castle? upon some of the Giffords,Gifford. and other for Throgmartons sake? (for that is also his Lords dis∣position, for one mans cause whom he brooketh not, to plague a whole generation, that any way pertaineth, or is allied to the same:) his endlesse persecuting of Sir Drew Drewy,Sir Drew Drewry and many other Courtiers, both men and women? All these (I say) and many others, who daily suffer injuries, rapines and opprssions at his hands, throughout the Realme, what should it availe to name them in ths place? seeing neither his Lord careth any thng for the same, neither the parties agrieved are like to attain any least release of affliction there∣by, but rather ouble oppression for their com∣plaining. The presentstate of my Lord of Leycester.Wherfore to return again wheras we began; you see by this little, who, and how great, & what manner of mn, my Lord of Leycester is this day, in the state of England. You see, and may gather, in some part, by that which hath bin spoken, his wealth, his strength, his cunning, his disposition. His wealth is excessive in all kinde of riches for a private man,Leicesters wealth and must needs be much more, then any body lightly can imagine, for the infinite wayes he hath had of gaine, so many yeres toge∣ther.Leycest. strength His strength and power is absolute and irre∣sistable, as hath beene shwed both in Chamber, Court, Councell and Country. His cunning in plotting and fortifying the same,Leycest cunning both by force and fraud, by Mines and countermines, by trenches, bulwarke, flaukers and rampiers▪ by friends, ene∣mies, alsies, servants, creatures, and dependents, or any other that may serve his turne; is very rare
and singular. His disposition to cruelty, murder, treason and tyranny:Leycesters dis∣position. and by all these to supream Soveraignty over other, is most evident and cleare. And then judge you whether her Maje∣sty that now raigneth (whose life and prosperity, the Lord in mercy long preserve,) have not just cause to feare, in respect of these things onely; if there were no other particulars to prove his aspi∣ring intent besides? No doubt (quoth the Lawyer) but these are great matters,Lawyer. in the question of such a cause as is a Crown And we have seen by example, that the least of these four, which you have here named, or rather some little branch contained in any of them, hath bin sufficient to found just suspition,Causes of iust feare for her Maiesty. distrust or jealousie, in the heads of most wise Princes, towards the proceedings of more assured subjects, then my Lord of Leycester, in reason may be presumed to be. For that▪ the safety of a state and Prince, standeth not onely in the readinesse and hability of resisting open attempts, when they shall fall out; but also (and that much more as Statists write) in a certaine provident watchful∣nesse, of preventing all possibilities and likeli∣hoods of danger of suppression, for that no Prince commonly, will put himselfe to the curtsie of another man) be he never so obliged) whether he shll retaine his Crowne or no: seeing the cause of a Kingdome, acknowledgeth nei∣ther kindred, duty, faith, friendship, nor so∣ciety. I know not whether I doe expound or declare my self well or no; but my meaning is, that wher∣as every Prince hath two points of ssurance from his subject; the one, in that he is faithfull, and lacketh will to annoy his Soveraigne; the other,
for that he is weake and wanteth ability to do the same:A point of neces∣sary policy for a Prince. the first is alwayes of more importance then the second, and consequently more to be ey∣ed and observed in policy: for that our will may be changed at our pleasure, but not our ability. Considering then upon that which hath beene said and specified before, how that my Lord of Leicester hath possessed himself of all the strength, powers and sinewes of the Realme, hath drawne all to his own direction, and hath made his party so strong, as it seemeth not resistable: you have great reason to say, that her Majesty may justly conceive some doubt, for that if his will were ac∣cording to his power, most assured it is, that her Majesty were not in safety. Scholar.Say not so, good sir, (quoth I) for in such a case truly, I would repose little upon his will, which is so many wayes apparant, to be most insatiable of ambition. Rather would I thinke that as yet his ability serveth not, eiher for time, place, force, or some other circumstance: then that any part of good will should want in him; seeing that not onely his desire of soveraignty, but also his intent and attempt to aspire to the same, is sufficiently declared (in my conceit) by the very particulars of his power and plots already set downe. Which if you please to have the patience, to heare a Scholars argument, I will prove by a principle of our Philosophy. A philosophicall argument to prove Leycesters intent of sove∣raignty.For if it be true which Aristotle saith, there is no agent so simple in the world, which worketh not for some finall end, (as the bird buildeth not her nest but to dwell and hatch her yong ones therein:) and not onely this, but also that the same agent, doth alwayes frame his worke ac∣cording to the proportion of his intended end: (as when the Fox or Badger maketh a wide earth
or den, it is a signe that he meaneth to draw thi∣ther great store of prey:) then must we also in reason thinke, that so wise and politick an agent, as is my Lord of Leicester for himselfe, wanteth not his end in these plottings and preparations of his; I meane an end proportionable in great∣nesse to his preparations. Which end can be no lesse nor meaner then supreame Soveraignty, seeing his provision and furniture doe tend that way, and are in every point fully correspondent to the same. What meaneth his so diligent besieging of the Princes person?The preparation of Leycestr de∣clare his inten∣ded end. his taking up the wyes and pas∣sages about her? his insolency in Court? his sin∣gularity in the Councell? his violent preparation of strength abroad? his enriching of his compli∣ces? the banding of his faction, with the abun∣dance of friends every where? what doe these things signifie (I say) and so many other, as you have well noted and mentioned before; but one∣ly his intent and purpose of Supremacy? What did the same things portend in times past in his Fa∣ther, but even that which now they portend in the Sonne? Or how should we thinke, that the Son hath another meaning in the very same actions, then had his Father before him, whose steps he followeth. I remember I have heard oftentimes of divers acient and grave men in Cambridge,How the Duke of Northumber∣land dissembled his end. how that in King Edwards dayes the Duke of Northumberland this mans Father, was generally suspected of all men, to mean indeed as afterward he shwed, es∣pecially when he had once joyned with the house of Suffolk, and made himselfe a principall of that faction by marriage. But yet for that he was po∣tent, and protested every where, and by all occasi∣ons his great love, duty, and speciall care, above all
others, that he bare towars his Prince & Coun∣try; no mn durst accuse him openly, untill it was too lte to withstand his power, (as commonly it falleh out in such affaires) and the like is evident in my Lord of Leycesters actions now (albeit to her Mjesty, I doubt not, but that he will pretend and protest, as his Father did to her Brother) especial∣ly now after his open association with the faction of Hutington; which no lesse impugneth under this mans protection, the whole line of Henry the seventh for right of the Crowne, then the house of Sufflke did under his Father the prticulr progeny of King Henry the eight. Gentleman.Nay rather much more (quoth the Gentleman) for that I doe not read in King Edwards raigne, (when the matter was in plotting nowithstand∣ing) that the house of Suffolk durst ever make open claime to the next succssion.The boldnesse of the titlers of Clarence. But now the house of Hastngs is bcome so confident, upon the strength & favor of their fautors, as they dare both plot, practice & pretend, all at once, and far not to set out their title, in every place where they come. Lawyer.And do they not fear the statute (said the Law∣yer) so rigorous in this point, as it maketh the matter treason to determine of titles? Gentleman.The abuse of he Statute for silence in the true suc∣cession.No: thy need not (quoth the Gentlema) see∣ing their party is so strong and terrible, as no man dare accuse them: seeing also they well know, that the procurement of that Statute, was oely to endanger or stop the mouthes of the true Suc∣cessors, whiles themselves in the meane space went about under hand, to establish their owne am∣bushment. Well: (quoth the Lawyer) for the pretence of my Lord of Huntington to the Crowne,Lawyer. I will not stand with you, for tht it is a matter sufficently known and seen throughout the Realme. As also
that my Lord of Leyceste is at this day a principall favourer and patron of that cause, albeit some yeers past, he were an earnest adversary and ene∣my to the same. But yet I have heard some frinds of his, in reasoning of these matters, dey stoutly a point or two, which you have touched here, and doe seeme to beleeve the same. And that is, first,Two excuses al∣leadged by Ley∣cesters friends. that howsoever my Lord of Leicester do meane to helpe his friend, when time shall serve, yet pretendeth he nothing to the Crowne himselfe. The second is. that whatsoever may be meant for the title, or compassing the Crowne after her Mjesties death, yet nothing is intended during her raigne. And of both these points thy alledge reasons. As for the first, that my Lord of Leycester is ve∣ry well knowne to have no title to the Crowne himselfe, either by discent in blood, alliance or otherwyes. For the second, that his Lord. hath no cause to be a Mlecontent in the present govern∣ment, nor hpe for more preferment, if my Lord of Huntington were King to morrow next, then he receiveth now at her Majsties hands; having all the Realme (as hath bin shewed) at his owne disposition. For the first (quoth e Gentleman) whether he meane the Crowne for himslf,Gentlemen. or for his friend, it importeth not much;Whether Ley∣cester meane the Crown siceely for Huntngton or for himselfe. seeing both wayes i is vident, that he meaneh to hve all at his owne disposition. And albeit now for the avoyding of envy, he give it out, as a crafty Fox, that he meaneth not but to run wih other men, and to hunt wth Huntington and oh hounds in the sme chase; yet is it not unlike, but that he will ply the Beare, when he coeth to divding of the pray, and will snatch the best prt to himselfe. Yea, and these slf same pe∣sons
of his traine an action, whom you call his friend, though in publque, to excuse his doings, and to cover the whol plot, they will and must deny the matters to be so meant: yet otherwise they both thinke, hope and know the contrary, and will not stick in secret to spek it, and among thmselves, it is their talke of consolation. The words of his speciall Councellour the Lord North,The words of th Lord North, to Master Pooly. are known, which he uttered to his trusty Pooly, upon the receit of a letter from Court, of her Majesties displeasure towards him, for his being a witnesse at Leycesters second mar∣riage with Dme Lettice (although I know he was not ignorant of the first) at Wanstead: of which displeasure, this Lord making fr lesse ac∣compt then, in reason he should, of the just of∣fence of his soveraigne,Pooly told this to Sir Robert Iermine. said: that for his owne part he was resolved to sinke or swimme with my Lord of Leycester, who (said he) if once the Cards may come to shaffling (I wll use but his very own words) I make no doubt but he alone shall beare away the Bucklers, The words of Sir Thomas Layton brother in law to my Lord.The words also of Sir Thomas Layton, to Sir Hen∣ry Nevile, walking upon the Taresse at Windsor are known, who told him, after long discourse of their happy conceived Kingdome, that hee doubted not, but to see him one day, hold the same office in Windsor, of my Lord of Leycester, which ow my Lord did hold of the Queene. Meaning thereby the goodly office of Constable∣ship, wih all Roylties and honours belong∣ing to the same, which now the said Sir Henry exerciseth only as Deputy to the Earle. Which was plainely to signifie, that, he doubted not but to see my Lord of Leycester one day King, or els his other hope could never possibly ta effect or come to passe.
To the same point ended the words of Mi∣stress Anne West, Dae Lettice sister,The words of Mistris Anne West sister unto this holy Coun∣tesse. unto the Lady Anne Askew, in the great Chamber, upon a day when her brothr Robert Kowles had dan∣ced disgratiously and scornfully before the Queen in pesence of the French. Which thing for that her Majesty tooke to proceed of wisin him, s for dislke of the strangers in presence, and for the quarrell of his sister Essex; it pleased her Majesty to check him for the same, with additio of a re∣proachfull word or two (full well deserved) as though done for despite of the forced absece from that place of honour, of the good old Gen∣tlewoman (I mitigate the wors) his sister. Which words, the other young twig receiving in deepe dudgen, brake forth in great choler to her forenamed companion, and said, Tht she no∣thing doubted, but that one day shee should see her sister, upon whom the Queene railed now so much (for so it pleased her to tearme her Maje∣sties sharpe speech) to sit in her place and throne, being much worthier of the same, for her qualities and rare vertues, then was the o∣ther. Which undutfull speech, albeit it were over-heard and condemned of divers that sate about them, yet none durst ever report the same to her Majesty, as I hve heard sundry Cour∣tiers affirme, in respect of the revenge which the reporters should abide at my Lord of Leycesters hands, whensoever the mter should come to light. And this is now concerning the opinion and secret speeches of my Lords owne friends, who cannot but utter their conceit and judgement in time and place convenient, whatsoever they are wlled to give out publikely to the contrary, for deceiving of such as will beleeve faire painted
words, against evident and manifest demonstrati∣on of reason. Three arguments of Leycesters meaning for himselfe before Huntington.I say reason, for that if none of these signes and tokens were, none of these preparations nor any of these speeches and detections, by his friends that know his heart; yet in force of plain reason, I could alleadge unto you three arguments onely, which to any man of intelligence, wuld easily perswade and give satisfacton, that my Lord of Leycester meaneth best and first for himslfe in this sut. Whih three arguments, for that you seeme to be attent; I will not stick to run over in all brevity. The first argu∣ent, the Nature of ambtion.And the first, is the very nature and quality of ambition it self, which is such, (as you know) that it never stayeth, but passeth from degree to degree and the more it obtaineth, the more it covereth, and the more esteemeth it selfe, both worthy and able to obtaine. And in our matter that now we handle; even as in wooing, he ht suth to a La∣dy for another, and obtaineth her good will, en∣tereth easily into conceit of his owne wothinesse thereby, and so commonly into hope of speedin himselfe, while he speaketh for his friend so much more in Kingdomes: he that seth himself of power to put the Crowne of another mans head, will qckly step to the next degree, which is, to set it of his owne, seeng that always the charity of such good men, is wont to be so order∣ly, as (according to he precep) it bginneth with it self first. Adde to this, that ambition is jealous, suspitious and fearfull of it selfe, especially when it is jyned with a conscience loden wth the guilt of many crimes, whereof he would be loth to be called to account, or be subject to any man that might by auhority take review of his life & actions, when it
should please him. In which kinde, seeing my Lord of Leycester hath so much to encrease his feare, as be∣fore hath beene shewed by his wicked dealings: it is not like, that ever hee will put himselfe to another mans courtesie, for passing his audict in particular reckonings, which he can no way answer or satisfie: but rather will stand upon the grosse Sum, and ge∣nerall Quietus est, by making himselfe chiefe Au∣ditour, and Master of all accompts for his owne part in this life, howsoever he do in the next: where∣of such humours have little regard. And this is for the nature of ambition in it selfe. The second argument may bee taken from my Lords particular disposition: which is such,The second argument. Leycesters particular disposition. as may give much light also to the matter in question: be∣ing a disposition so well liking and inclined to a Kingdome, as it hath beene tampering about the same, from the first day that hee came in favour.Leycesters disposition to tamper for a Kingdome. First, by seeking openly to marry with the Queenes Majestie her selfe, and so to draw the Crowne upon his owne head, and to his posterity. Secondly, when that attempt tooke not place, then hee gave it out, as hath beene shewed before, how that he was pri∣vily contracted to her Majesty, (wherein as I told you his dealing before for satisfaction of a stranger, so let him with shame and dishonour remember now also,I meane the noble old Earle of Pembrooke. the spectacle hee secretly made for the per∣swading of a subject, and Counsellour of great ho∣nour in the same cause) to the end that if her High∣nesse should by any way have miscarried, then he might have entituled any one of his owne brood, (whereof he hath store in many places as is knowne) to the lawfull succession of the Crowne, under co∣lour of that privy and secret marriage, pretending the same to bee by her Majestie: wherein hee will want no witnesses to depose what hee will.
Thirdly,The unduti∣full devise of Naturall issue, in the Statut of succession. when he saw also that this devise was sub∣ject to danger, for hat his privy contract might be denied more easily, then he able justly to prove the same, after her Majesties decease: he had a new fetch to strenghen the matter, and that was to cause these words of (Naturall issue) to be put in∣to the Statute of succession for the Crowne, against all order and custome of our Realme, and against the knowne common stile of Law, accustomed to bee used in Statutes of such matter: whereby hee might be able after the death of her Majesty, to make ligitimate to the Crowne any one bastard of his owne, by any of so many hacknies as he kee∣peth, affirming it to bee the Naturall issue of her Majesty by himselfe. For no other reason can bee imagined why the ancient usuall words of Law∣full issue should so cunningly bee changed into Naturall issue; thereby not onely to indanger our whole Realme with new quarrels of succession, but also to touch (as farre as in him lyeth) the Royall honour of his Soveraigne, who hath beene to him but too bountifull a Princesse. Fourthly, when after a time these fetches and de∣vices began to be discovered, he changed straight his course, and turned to the Papists and Scottish faction, pretending the marriage of the Queene in prison. But yet after this againe, finding therein not such successe as contented him throughly, and having in the meane space a new occasion offered of baite; he betooke himselfe fiftly to the party of Huntington: having therein (no doubt) as good meaning to himselfe, as his Father had by joyning with Suffolke. Marry yet of late, he hath cast anew about, once againe, or himselfe in secret, by trea∣ting the marriage of young Arbella with his Son,The marriage of Arbella. intitled the Lord Denbigh.
So that by this we see the disposition of this man bent wholly to a scepter. And albeit in right title, and discent of bloud (as you say) hee can justly claime neither Kingdome nor Cottage (conside∣ring either the basenesse or disloyalty of his Ance∣stours:) if in respect of his present state and power, and of his naturall pride, ambition, and crafty con∣veyance, received from his Father, hee hath lear∣ned how to put himselfe first in possession of chiefe rule, under other pretences, and after to devise upon the title at his leasure. But now to come to the third argument:The third argument. I say more, and above all this, that the nature and state of the matter it selfe, permitteth not,The nature of the cause it selfe. that my Lord of Leycester should meane sincerely, the Crowne for Huntington; especially seeing there hath passed betweene them so many yeares of dis∣like and enmity: which albeit, for the time and present commodity, bee covered and pressed downe: yet by reason and experience we know, that afterward when they shall deale together againe in matters of importance, and when jea∣lousie shall bee joyned to other circumstances of their actions, it is impossible that the former mis∣like should not breake out in farre higher degree, then ever before. As wee saw in the examples of the reconciliation,The nture of old reconci∣led enmity. made betwixt this mans Father, and Edward, Duke of Somerset, bearing rule under King Edward the sixt: and betweene Richard of Yrke, and Edmund Duke of Somerset, bearing rule in the time of King Hnry the sixt. Both which Dukes of Somerset, af∣ter reconciliation with thei old, crafty, and ambi∣tious enemies, were broght by the same to their destruction soone after. Whereof I doubt not, but my Lord of Leycester will take good heed, in joy∣ning
by reconciliation with Huntington, after so long a breach: and will not be so improvident, as to make him his soveraigne, who now is but his de∣pendent. He remembreth too well the successe of the Lord Stanley, who helped King Henry the sea∣venth to the Crowne: of the Duke of Buckingham, who did the same for Richard the third: of the Earle of Warwicke, who set up King Edward the fourth: and of the three Percies, who advanced to the Scep∣ter King Henry the fourth. All which Noblemen upon occasions that after fell out, were rewarded with death by the selfe same Princes, whom they had preferred. The reason of Machavell.And that not without reason, as Seignior Macha∣vell, my Lords Counsellour affirmeth. For that such Princes, afterward can never give sufficient satisfaction to such friends, for so great a benefit received. And consequently, least upon discontent∣ment, they may chance to doe as much for others against them, as they have done for them against others: the surest way is, to recompence them with such a reward, as they shall never after be able to complaine of. Wherefore I can never thinke that my Lord of Leycester will put himselfe in danger of the like suc∣cesse at Huntingtons hands: but rather will follow the plot of his owne Father,The meaning of the Duke of Northum∣berland with Suffolke. with the Duke of Suf∣folke, whom no doubt, but hee meant onely to use for a pretext and helpe, whereby to place himselfe in supreame dignity, and afterward whatsoever had befallen of the state, the others head could never have come to other end, then it enjoyed. For if Queene Mary had not cut it off, King John of Nor∣thumberland would have done the same in time, and so all men doe well know, that wee privy to any of his cunning dealings.
And what Huntingtons secret opinion of Leycester is, (notwithstanding this outward shew of depen∣dance) it was my chance to learne,South-house: from the mouth of a speciall man of that hasty King, who was his Ledger or Agent in London; and at a time falling in talke of his Masters title, declared that he had heard him divers times in secret, complaine to his Lady, (Leycesters sister) as greatly fearing that in the end, he would offer him wrong, and pretend some title for himselfe. Well (quoth the Lawyer) it semeth by this last point,Lawyer. that these two Lords are cunning practitio∣ners in the art of dissimulation: but for the former whereof you speake, in truth, I have heard men of good discourse affirme,The meaning of the D. of Northumber∣land towards the D. of Suffolke. that the Duke of Northum∣berland had strange devises in his head, for decei∣ving of Suffolke, (who was nothing so fine as him∣selfe,) and for bringing the Crowne to his owne Family. And among other devises it is thought, that hee had most certaine intention to marry the Lady Mary himselfe, after once hee had brought her into his owne hands) and to have be∣stowed her Majestie that now is, upon some one of his children (if it should have beene thought best to give her life, (and so consequently to have shaken off Suffolke and his pedegree, with con∣digne punishment, for his bold behaviour in that behalfe. Verily (quoth I) this had beene an excellent Stratageme, if it had taken place.Scholar. But I pray you (Sir) how could himselfe have taken the Lady Ma∣ry to wife, seeing hee was at that time married to another? O (quoth the Gentleman) you question like a Schollar.Gentleman. As though my Lord of Leycester had not a wife alive, when hee first began to pretend mar∣riage
to the Queenes Majesty. Do not you remem∣ber the story of King Richard the third, who at such time as he thought best for the establishing of his title;The practise of King Rich∣ard for dis∣patching hs Wife. to marry his owne Neece, that afterward was married to King Henry the seventh, how he caused secretly to be given abroad that his owne wife was dead, whom all the World knew to bee then alive and in good health, but yet soone afterward she was seene dead indeed These great pesonages in mat∣ters o such weight, as is a Kingdome, have privi∣ldges to dispose of Womens bodies, marriages, lives and deaths, as shall be thought for the time most convenient. A new Trium∣vir tween Leycester, Tal∣bot, and h Contesse of Shrvebury.And what doe you thinke (I pray you) of this new Tiumvirat so lately concluded about Arbell? (for so I must call the same, though one of the three persons bee no Vir, but Virago;) I meane of the mariage betweene young Denbigh and the little Daughter of Lenox, wheeby the Father-in-law, the Grand-mother, and the Uncle of the new designed Queene, have conceived to themselves a singular triumphant raigne. But what doe you think may ensue hereof? is there nothing of the old plot of Duke John of Northumberland in this? Lawyer.Marry Sir, (quoth the Lawyer) if this be so, I dare assure you there is sequell enough pretended hereby. And first, no doubt but there goeth a deep drift, by the wife and sonne, against old Abraham (the Husband and Father) with the well-lined large pouch. And secondly, a farre deeper, by trusty Robert against his best Mistresse: but dee∣pest of all by the whole Crew, against the designe∣ments of the hasty Earle;Huntington. who thirsteth a King∣dome with great intemperance, and seemeth (if there were plaine dealing) to hope by these good people to quench shortly his drought.
But either part, in truth, seeketh to deceive other: and therefore it is hard to say where the game in fine will rest. Well,Gentleman. howsoever that be (quoth the Gentleman) I am of opinion, that my Lord of Leycester will use both this practise and many more, for bringing the Scepter finally to his owne head:The sleights of Leycester for bringing all to him∣selfe. and that he will not onely imploy Huntington to defeate Scotland, and Arbella to defeate Huntington: but also would use the marriage of the Queene imprisoned, to de∣feat them both, if she were in his hand: and any one of all three to dispossesse her Majesty that now is: as also the authority of all foure to bring it to him∣selfe: with many other fetches, flings and friscoes besides, which simple men as yet doe not conceive. And howsoever these two conjoyned Earles,Scambling between Lecester & Hun∣tington at the upshot. doe seeme for the time to draw together, and to play booty: yet am I of opinion, that the one will be∣guile the other at the upshot. And Hastings, for ought I see, when hee commeth to the scambling, is like to have no better luck by the Beare, then his Ancestour had once by the Boare. Who using his helpe first in murdering the Sonne and Heire of King Henry the sixt, and after in destroying the faithfull Friends and Kinsmen of King Edward the fift, for his easier way to usurpation:Richard of Glocester, At. 1. Edw. 5. made an end of him also in the Tower, at the the very same day and houre, that the other were by his coun∣sell destroyed in Pontfret Castle. So that where the Goale and price of the game is a Kingdome, there is neither faith, neither good fellowship, nor faire play among the Gamesters. And this shall be enough for the first point: (viz.) what good my Lord of Leycester meaneth to himselfe in respect of Huntington. Touching the second, whether the attempt be
purposed in her Majesties dayes or no,2. That the conspirator meane in her Majesties dayes. the matter is much lesse doubtfull, to him that knoweth or can imagine what a torment the delay of a Kingdome is, to such a one as suffereth hunger thereof, and feareth that every houre may breed some altera∣tion, to the prejudice of his conceived hope. Wee see oftentimes that the childe is impatient in this matter, to expect the naturall end of his parents life. Whom, notwithstanding, by nature he is en∣forced to love: and who also by nature, is like long to leave this World before him: and after whose decease, hee is assured to obtaine his desire: but most certaine of dangerous event, if he attempt to get it, while yet his parent liveth. Which foure considerations are (no doubt) of great force to con∣taine a child in duty, and bridle his desire: albeit sometimes not sufficient to withstand the greedy appetite of raigning. oure consi∣derations.But what shall wee thinke, where none of these foure considerations do restraine? where the present Possessor is no parent? where she is like by nature, to out-live the expector? whose death must needs bring infinite difficulties to the enterprise? and in whose life-time the matter is most easie to be atchie∣ved, under colour and authority of the present Pos∣sessor? shall we thinke that in such a case the ambi∣tious man will over-rule his owne passion, and leese his commodity. As for that which is alleadged before, for my Lord in the reason of his Defenders:A thing wor∣thy to be no∣ted in ambiti∣ous men. that his present state is so prosperous, as hee cannot expect better in the next change whatsoever should be: is of small mo∣ment, in the conceipt of an ambitious head, whose eye and heart is alwayes upon that, which he ho∣peth for, and enjoyeth not: and not upon that which already hee possesseth, be it never so good.
Especially in matters of honour and authority, it is an infallible rule, that one degree desired and not obtained, afflicteth more then five degrees already possessed, can give consolation: the story of Duke Hamn confirmeth this evidently, who being the greatest subject in the World under King Assuerus,Hstor. 5. after he had reckoned up all his pompe, riches, glo∣ry, and felicity to his friends, yet hee said, that all this was nothing unto him, untill he could obtaine the revenge which hee desired, upon Madchaeus his enemy: and hereby it commeth ordinarily to passe, that among highest in authority are found the greatest store of Male-contents, that most doe endanger their Prince and Countrey. When the Percies took part with Henry of Boling∣brooke,The Pecies. against King Richard the second their law∣full Soveraigne: it was not for lack of preferment, for they were exceedingly advanced by the said King, and possessed the three Earledomes of Nor∣thumberland, Worester, and Stafford together, be∣sides many other offices and dignities of honour. In like sort, when the two Neviles tooke upon them to joyne with Richard of Yorke,The two Neviles. to put downe their most benigne Prince, King Henry the sixt: and after again in the other side, to put downe King Ed∣ward the fourth, it was not upon want of advance∣ment: they being Earles both of Salisbury and War∣wick, and Lords of many notable places besides. But it was upon a vaine imagination of future fortune, whereby such men are commonly led: and yet had not they any smell in their nostrils of getting the Kingdome for themselves, as this man hath to prick him forward. If you say that these men hated their Soveraigne,Leycestes ha∣tred to her Majesty. and that thereby they were led to procure his de∣struction: the same I may answer of my Lord living,
though of all men he hath least cause so to do. But yet such is the nature of wicked ingratitude, that where it oweth most, and disdaineth to be bound, there upon every little discontentment,The evill na∣ture of ingra∣titude. it turneth double obligation into triple hatred. This he shewed evidently in the time of his little disgrace, wherein hee no onely did diminish, vili∣pend, and debase among his friends, the inestima∣ble benefits hee hath received from her Majestie, but also used to exprobrate his owne good services and merits, and to touch her highnesse with in∣grate consideration and recompence of the same; which behaviour, together with his hasty prepara∣tion to rebellion, and assault of her Majesties Roy∣all person and dignity, upon so small a cause gi∣ven, did well shew what minde inwardly he bea∣reth to his Soveraigne,Lycesters speeches of her Majesty in the time of his disgrace. and what her Majesty may expect, if by offending him, shee should once fall within the compasse of his furious pawes: seeing such a smoke of disdain could not proceed, but from a fierie fornace of hatred within. And surely it is a wonderfull matter to consider what a little check, or rather the bare imagination of a small overthwart, may worke in a proud and disdainfull stomcke. The remembrance of his marriag missd, that hee so much pretended and desired with her Majestie,The causes of hatred in Ley∣cester towards her Majesty. doth sticke deeply in his brest, and stirreth him daily to revenge. As also doth the disdaine of certaine checks and disgraces received a sometimes, especially that of his last marriage: which irketh him so much the more, by how much greater feare and danger it brought him into at that time, and did put his Widow in such open phrensie, as shee raged many moneths after against her Majestie, and is not cold yet, but remaineth as it were a sworne enemy for that
injury, and standeth like a fiend or fury at the elbow of her Amadis, to stirre him forward when occasion shall serve.The force of female sug∣gestions. And what effect such female suggestions may worke, when they finde an hu∣mour proud and pliable to their purpose, you may remember by the example of the Duchesse of So∣merset, who inforced her Husband to cut off the head of his onely deare Brother, to his owne evi∣dent destruction, for her contentation. Wherefore,An evident conclusion that the exe∣cution is meant in time of her Ma∣jesty. to conclude this matter without further dispute or reason: saying, there is so much discovered in the case as there is: so great desire of raigne, so great impatience of delay, so great hope and hability of successe, if it be attempted under the good fortune and present authority of the com∣petitours: seeing the plots be so well laid, the preparation so forward, the favourers so furnished, the time so propitious, and so many other causes conviting together: seeing that by differing, all may be hazarded, and by hastening, little can be indangered; the state and condition of things well weyed: finding also the bands of duty so broken already in the conspiratours, the causes of mislike and hatred so manifest, and the solicitours to ex∣cution, so potent and diligent, as women, ma∣lice, and ambition, are wont to bee: it is more then probable, that they will not leese their present commodity, especially seeing they have learned by their Archi-tipe or Proto-plot which they follow, (I meane the conspiracy of Northumberland and Suf∣folke in King Edwards dayes) that herein there was some errour committed at that time,An errour of the Father now to bee corrected by the Sonne. which overthrew the whole; and that was, the deferring of some things untill after the Kings death, which should have beene put in execution before. For if in the time of their plotting, when as yet
their designements were not published to the world, they had under the countenance of the King (as well they might have done) gotten into their hands the two Sisters, and dispatched some other few af∣faires, before they had caused the young Prince to die: no dobut, but in mans reason the whole de∣signement had taken place: and consequently it is to be presupposed, that these men (being no fooles in their owne affaires) will take heed of falling in∣to the like errour by delay: but rather will make all sure, by striking while the iron is hot, as our proverbe warneth them. Lawyer.It cannot bee denied in reason (quoth the Law∣yer) but that they have many helpes of doing what they list now, under the present a favour, counte∣nance, and authority of her Majesty, which they should not have after her Highnesse decease: when each man shall remaine more at liberty for his su∣preame obedience, by reason of the statute provided for the uncertainty of the next successor: and there∣fore I for my part, would rather counsell them to make much of her Majesties life; for after that, they little know what may ensue, or befall their de∣signements. Gentleman.They will make the most thereof (quoth the Gen∣tleman) for their owne advantage, but after that, what is like to follow, the examples of Edward and Richard the second, as also of Henry and Edward the sixt, doe sufficiently fore-warne us: whose lives were prolonged, untill their deaths were thought more profitable to the conspiratours, and not lon∣ger.Her Maje∣stes life and death, to serve the con∣spiratours turne. And for the statute you speak of, procured by themselves, for establishing the incertainty of the next true successour, (whereas all our former sta∣tutes were wont to be made for the declaration and certainty of the same) it is with Proviso, (as you
know) that it shall not endure longer then the life of her Majesty, that now raigneth: that is, indeed, no longer then untill themselves be ready to place another. For then, no doubt, but wee shall see a faire Proclamation,A Proclama∣tion with halters. that my Lord of Huntington is the onely next heire: with a bundle of halters to hang all such, as shall dare once open their mouth for deniall of the same. At these words the old Lawyer stepped back,Lawyer. as somewhat astonied, and began to make Crosses in the ayre after their fashion, whereat we laughed;Papisticall blessing. and then he said, truly my Masters I had thought that no man had conceived so evill imagination of this statute as my selfe: but now I perceive that I alone am not malitious. For my owne part,The statute of concea∣ling the heire apparant. I must confesse unto you, that as often as I reade over this statute, or thinke of the same (as by divers occasi∣ons many times I doe) I feele my selfe much gree∣ved and afflicted in minde, upon feares which I conceive what may be the end of this statute to our Countrey, and what privy meaning the chiefe pro∣curers thereof might have for their owne drifts, a∣gainst the Realme and life of her Majestie that now raigneth. And so much more it maketh mee to doubt,Richard go∣ing towards Hierusalem, began the custome by Parliament, as Polidore noteth, Anno 10. of Richard the second, to declare the next heire. for that in all our records of law, you shall not find (to my remembrance) any one example of such a devise for concealing of the true inheritour: but rather in all ages, states, and times, (especially from Richard the first downeward) you shall finde statutes, ordi∣nances, and provisions, for declaration and mani∣festation of the same, as you have well observed and touched before. And therefore, this strange and new devise must needs have some strange and unaccu∣stomed meaning: and God of his mercy grant, that it have not some strange and unexpected event.
The danger of our Coun∣trey by con∣cealing the next heire.In sight of all men, this is already evident, that ne∣ver Countrey in the world was brought into more apparent danger of utter ruine, then ours is at this day, by pretence of this Statute. For whereas there is no Gentleman so meane in the Realme, that can∣not give a guesse more or lesse, who shall bee his next heire, and his Tenants soone conjecture, what manner of person shall be their next Lord: in the ti∣tle of our noble Crown, whereof all the rest depen∣deth; neither is her Majesty permitted to know or say, who shall be her next successor, nor her subjects allowed to understand or imagine, who in right may be their future Soveraigne: An intollerable injury in a matter of so singular importance. For (alas) what should become of this our native Countrey, if God should take from us her most ex∣cellent Majesty (as once he will) and so leave us destitute upon the sudden,Great incon∣veniences. what should become of our lives, of our states, and of our whole Realme or governement? can any man promise himselfe one day longer, of rest, peace, possession, life or li∣berty within the land, then God shall lend us her Majesty to raigne over us? Which albeit, wee doe and are bound to wish that it may bee long: yet reason telleth us, that by course of nature, it can∣not bee of any great continuance, and by a thou∣sand accidents it may be much shorter. And shall then our most noble Common-wealth and King∣dome, which is of perpetuity, and must continue to our selves and our posterity, hang onely upon the life of her Highnesse alone, well strucken in yeares, and of no great good health, or robustious and strong complexion? Sir Christopher Hattons Ora∣tion.I was within hearing some six or seaven yeares agoe, when Sir Christopher Hatton, in a very great assembly, made an eloquent oration (which after I
wene was put in print) at the pardoning and deli∣very of him from the gallowes, that by errour (as was thought) had discharged his peece upon her Majesties Barge, and hurt certaine persons in her Highnesse presence. And in that Oration he decla∣red and described very effectually, what inestima∣ble dammage had ensued to the Realme, if her Ma∣jesty by that or any other means should have beene taken from us. He set forth most lively before the eyes of all men, what division, what dissension, what bloudshed had ensued, & what fatall dangers were most certaine to fall upon us, whensoever that dole∣full day should happen: wherein no man should be sure of his life, of his goods, of his wife, of his chil∣dren: no man certain whether to flie, whom to fol∣low, or where to seeke repose or protection. And as all the hearers there present did easily grant that he therein said truth, and farre lesse then might have beene said in that behalfe, things standing as they doe: so many one (I trow) hath heard these words proceed from a Councellour, that had good cause to know the state of his own Countrey, entred into this cogitation, what punishment they might deserve then,Intollerable Treasons. at the whole State and Common∣wealths hands, who first by letting her Majesty from marriage, and then by procuring this Statute of dissembling the next inheritour, had brought their Realme into so evident and inevitable dangers? for every one well considered and weighed with him∣selfe, that the thing which yet only letted these dan∣gers and miseries set downe by Sir Christopher, must necessarily one day faile us all, that is, the life of her Majesty now present: and then (say we) how fal∣leth it out, that so generall a calamity as must needs overtake us ere it be long (and may, for any thing we know to morrow next) is not provided for, aswell as fore-seene.
Is there no remedy, but that wee must willingly and wittingly runne into our owne ruine? and for the favour or feare of some few aspirours, betray our Countrey, and the bloud of so many thousand innocents as live within the land? The miseries to follow up∣on her Maje∣sties death.For tell mee (good Sirs) I pray you, if her Ma∣jestie should die to morrow next (whose life God long preserve and blesse,) but if she should be ta∣ken from us, (as by condition of nature and hu∣mane frailty she may) what would you doe? which way would you looke? or what head or part knew any good subject in the Realme to follow? I speake not of the conspiratours, for I know they will bee ready and resolved whom to follow: but I speake of the plaine, simple, and well-meaning subject, who following now the utter letter of this fraudu∣lent statute, (fraudulent I meane in the secret conceipt of the cunning aspirours:) shall bee ta∣ken at that day upon the sudden, and being put in a maze by the unexpected contention about the Crowne, shall be brought into a thousand dangers, both of body and goods, which now are not thought upon by them who are most in danger of the same. And this is for the Common-wealth and Coun∣trey. The danger to her Maje∣sty b his statute.But unto her Majesty, for whose good and safety the statute is onely pretended to be made, no doubt but that it bringeth farre greater dangers then any devise that they have used besides. For hereby un∣der colour of restraining the claimes and tites of true successours, (whose endeavours notwithstan∣ding, are commonly more calme and moderate then of usurpers,) they make unto themselves, a meane to forster and set forward their owne conspiracy without controlement: seeing no man of might may oppose himselfe against them, but with suspiti∣on,
that he meaneth to claime for himselfe. And so they being armed on the one side, with their autho∣rity and force of present fortune, and defended on the other side, by the pretence of the statute: they may securely worke and plot at their pleasure, as you have well proved before that they doe. And whensoever their grounds and fouxndations shall be ready, it cannot be denied, but that her Majesties life lyeth much at their discretion, to take it, or use it, to their best commodity: (and there is no doubt but they wll,) as such men are wont to doe in such affaires. Marry one thing standeth not in their powers so absolutely, and that is, to prolong her Majesties dayes, or favour towards themselves, at their pleasures: whereof it is not unlike but they will have due consideration, least perhaps upon any sudden accident, they might be found unready. They have good care thereof I can assure you,Gentleman. (quoth the Gentleman) and meane noc to bee prevented by any accident, or other mishap what∣soever: they will bee ready for all events: and for that cause, they hasten so much their prepa∣rations at this day, more then ever before:The hast∣ning of the Conspira∣tours. by sending out their spies and sollicitours every∣where, to prove and confirme their friends, by delivering their common watch-word: by com∣plaining on all hands of our Protestants Bishops and Clergy, and of all the present state of our ir∣reformed Religion, (as they call it:) by amplifying onely the danger of Papists and Scottish faction: by giving out openly that now her Majesty is past hope of Child-birth; and consequently, seeing God hath given no better successe that way in two Wo∣men one after the other: it were not convenient (say they) that another of that sexe should ensue, with high commendation of the Law Salick in France,
whereby women are forbidden to succeed. Which speech, though in shew it be delivered against the Queen o Scots, and other of King Henr the seventh his lne, that discend of Sister: yet all men see that it toucheth as well the disabling of her Mjesty, that is present, as othrs to come: and so tendeth direct∣ly o Mturation of the principall purpose, which I have declae . Here said I, fo he rest which you speake of, be∣sides the Watch word,Schollar. it is common and every where reated in tlke among them: but yet for the Wch word it selfe (for that you name it) I thinke (Sir) many knw i not,The Watch∣word or the Conspira∣tours. it I were the first that told yo he stoy, as perchnce I was. For in truth I came to it by a rare hp (as then I told you) the thing being utered and expounded by a Baron of their owne faction, to another Noble man of the same degree and religion, though not of the same opinion in these affaires. And for that I am reque∣sted not to utter the second, who told it me in secret, I must also spare the name of the first, which other∣wise I would not; nor the time and place where he uttered the same. Lawyer.To this (said the Lawyer) you doe well in that: but yet I beseech you, let me know this Watch word (if there bee any such) for mine instruction and helpe when need shall require. For I assure you that this Gentlemans former speech of halters hath so terrified mee, as if any should come and aske, or feele my inclination in these matters, I would an∣swer them fully to their good contentment, if I knew the Watch-word whereby to know them. For of all things, I love not to bee hanged for quarrels of Kingdomes. This Watch-word is, (said I) Whether you be set∣led or no?Schollar. Are you atled. and if you answer yea, and seeme to un∣derstand
the meaning thereof: then are you knowne to be of their faction, and so to bee accompted and dealt withall for things to come. But if you stagger or doubt in answering, as if you knew not perfectly the mistery, (as the Nobleman my good Lord did, imagining that it had beene meant of his religion, which was very well knowne to be good, and setled in the Gospell) then are you discried thereby, ei∣ther not to be of their side, or else to be but a Punie not well instructed; and consequently,A great mi∣stery. he that mo∣veth you the question, will presently break off that speech, and turne to some other talke, untill after∣ward occasion be given to perswade you, or else in∣struct you better in that affaire. Mary the Noble man, whereof I spake before, perceiving by the demanding, that there was some mistery in covert, under the question: tooke hold of the words, and would not suffer the propounder to slip away (as he endeavoured) but with much intreaty brought him at length to expound the full meaning and purpose of the riddle. And this was the first occasion (as I thinke) whereby this secret came abroad. Albeit afterwards at the publique Communions, which were made throughout so ma∣many Shires, the matter became more common: especially among the stranxgers that inhabite (as you know) in great numbers with us at this day. All which (as they say) are made most assured to this faction, and ready to assist the same with great forces at all occasions. Good Lord (quoth the Lawyer) how many miste∣ries and secrets be there abroad in the world,Lawyer. where∣of we simple men know nothing, and suspect lesse. This Watch-word should I never have imagined: and for the great & often assemblies,Assemblies at Commu∣nions. under pretence of Communions, though of themselves, and of their
owne nature, they were unaccustomed, and conse∣quently subject to suspition, yet I did never con∣ceive so farre forth as now I doe:Strangers within the Land. as neither of the lodging and entertaining of so many strangers in the Realme, whereof our Artizans doe complaine every-where. But now I see the reason thereof, which (no doubt) is founded upon great policy for the purpose. And by this also I see that the house of Huntington presseth farre forward for the game, and shouldeth neare the goale to lay hands upon the same. Which to tell you plainly, liketh me but a little: both in respect of the good will I beare to the whole Line of King Henry, which hereby is like to be dispossessed; as also for the misery which I doe fore-see, must necessarily ensue upon our Countrey, if once the challenge of Huntington take place in our Realme.The perill of our Countrey if Huntingtons claime take place. Which challenge being derived from the title of laence onely in the House of Yorke, be∣fore the union of the two great Houses: raiseth up againe the old contention betweene the Families of Yoke and Lancaster, wherein so much English bloud was spilt in times past, and much more like to bee powred out now, if the same contention should bee set on foot againe. Seeing that to the controversie of Titles, would bee added also the controversie of Religion, which of all other differences is most dangerous. Gentleman.Sir (quoth the Gentleman) now you touch a matter of consequence indeed, and such as the very naming thereof maketh my heart to shake and trem∣ble. I remember well what Philip Cominus setteth downe in his History of our Countries calamity, by that contention of those two Houses, distinguished by the Red Rose and the White: but yet both in their Armes might justly have borne the colour of Red,The Red Rose & he White. with a fierie sword in a black field; to signifie
the abundance of bloud and mortality which ensued in our Countrey, by that most wofull and cruell contention. I will not stand here to set downe the particulars, observed & gathered by the foresaid author, though a stranger, which for the most part he saw himselfe, while hee lived about the Duke of Burgundy, and King Lewes of France, of that time: namely the pit∣tifull description of divers right Noble men of our Realme, who besides all other miseries,The misery of England by the contenti∣on betweene Yorke and Lanaster. were driven to begge openly in forraine Countries, and the like. Mine owne observation in reading over our Coun∣try affaires, is sufficient to make me abhorre the me∣mory of that time, and to dread all occasion that may ead us to the like in time to come: seeing that in my judgement, neither the Civill warres of Marius and Silla, or of Pompey and Caesar among the Romanes, nor yet the Guelphians and Gibilines among the Ita∣lians,Guelphians and Gibilne did ever worke so much woe, as this did to our poore Countrey. Wherein by reason of the conten∣tion of Yorke and Lancaster, were foughten sixteene or seventeen pitched fields, in lesse then an hundred yeares. That is, from the eleventh or twelfth yeare of King Richard the second his raigne, (when this controversie first began to bud up) unto the thir∣teenth yeare of K. Henry the seventh. At what time by cutting off the chiefe titler of Huntingtons house, to wit, yong Edward Plantaginet Earle of Warwick,Edward Plan∣taginet Earle of Warwick. Son and Heire to George, Duke of Clarence; the con∣tention most happily was quenched and ended, wherein so many fields (as I have said) were fough∣ten between Brethren and Inhabitants of our owne Nation. And therein, and otherwise onely about the same quarrel, were sla murdered, and made away, about nine or ten Kings, and Kings Sonnes; besides above forty Earles, Marquesses, and Dukes of name:
but many more Lords, Knights, and great Gentle∣men and Captaines: and of the Common people without number, and by particular conjecture very neare two hundred thousand.The Battell by Taster on Plme Sunday, An. 1460. For that in one Bat∣tell, fought by King Edward the fourth, there are recorded to be slaine on both parts, five and thirty thousand seven hundred and eleven persons, be∣sides others wounded and taken prisoners, to be put to death afterward, at the pleasure of the Conque∣rour: at divers Battels after, ten thousand slaine at a Battell. And in those of Barnet and Tukesbury, fought both in one yeare. The danger of Huntingtons claime, to the Relme, and to her Ma∣jesty.This suffered our afflicted Country in those dayes, by this unfortunate and deadly contention, which could never be ended, but by the happy conjunction of those two Houses tgether, in Henry the seventh: neither yet so (as appeareth by Chronicle) untill (as I have said) the state had cut off the issue male o the Duke of Clarence, who was cause of divers peril to King Henry the sevenh, though he were in prison▪ By whose Sister the faction of Huntinton at thi day, doth seeke to raise up the same contention a∣gaine, with farre greater danger both to the Ream and to her Majesty that now raigneth, then ever be∣fore. And for the Realme it is evident, by that it givet roome to strangers, Competitours of the House o Lancaster: better able to maintaine their owne titl by sword, then ever was any of that linage before tem. And for her Majesties perill present, it is no∣thing hard to conjectur: seeing the same title in th fore-said Earle of Warwick, was so dangerous an troublesome to her Grandfather (by whom she hol∣deth) as hee was faine twi to take arms in de∣fence of his right, against the said title, which was in those dayes preferred and advanced by the friend
of Clarence, before that of Henry: as also this of Hun∣tington is at this day, by his faction, before that of her Majesty though never so unjustly. Touching Huntingtons title, before her Majesty,Lawyer. (quoth the Lawyer) I will say nothing: because in reason, I see not by what pretence in the World, he may thrust himselfe so farre forth: seeing her Ma∣jesty is descendd, not onely of the House of Lan∣caste,How Hunting∣ton maketh hi tite be∣fore hr Ma∣jesty. but also before him most apparenty from the House of Yorke it selfe, as from the eldest Daughter of Kng Edwrd the fourth, being the eldest Brother of that House. Whereas Hunting∣ton claimeth onely by the Daughter of George Duke of Clarence, the younger Broher. Marry yet I must confesse, that if the Earle of Warwicks title were better then that of King Henry the seventh, (which is most false, though many attempted to de∣fend the same by sword:) then hath Huntngton some wrong at this day by her Majesty. Albeit in very truth, the The most of Hutingtons Ancests by who hee makeh ile, atained of Treason. ataints of so many of his Ance¦stours by whom he clamth, would answer him al¦so sufficiently in that behalfe, if his title were other∣wise allowable. But I know besides this,The fmous device f king Richard the third, lowed by Hutington. they have another fetch of King Richard the third, whereby he would needs prove hs elder Brother King Edwad to bee a Ba∣stard: and consequently his whole line, aswell male as female to be void. Which devise though it be ri∣diculous, and was at that time when it was first in∣vented: yet, as Richard found at that time a Doctor Shaw, that shamed not to publish and defend the same, at Pauls Crosse in a Sermon: and John of Nor∣thumberland my Lord of Lyceers Father found out divers Preachers in his time,Anno 1. Ma∣riae. to set up the title of Suf∣folke, & to debase the right of K. Henries daughter, both in London, Cambridge Oxford, and other places,
most apparently against all Law and reason: so I doubt not but these men would finde out also both Shawes, Sands, and others, to set out the title of Cla∣rece, before the whole interest of King Henry the seventh and his posterity,A point to be noed by her Majesty. if occasion served. Which is a point of importance to bee considered by her Majesty; albeit for my part, I meane not not now to stand thereupon, but onely upon that other of the House of Lancaster, as I have said. For as that most honourable, lawfull, and happy conjunction of the two adversary Houses, in King Henry the seventh and his Wife,The joyning of both hou∣ses. made an end of the shedding of English bloud within it selfe, and brought us that most desired peace, which ever since wee have enjoyed, by the raigne of their two most noble issue: so the plot that now is in hand, for the cutting off the residue of that issue, and for recalling backe of the whole Title to the House of Yorke againe; is like to plung us deeper then ever in civile discord, and to make us the bait of all for∣raine Princes: seeing there be among them at this day,The Line of Portugll. some of no small power (as I have said) who pretend to bee the next heires by the House of Lancaster: and consequently, are not like to give over or abandon their owne right, if once the doore bee opened to contention for the same, by disanulling the Line of King Henry the seventh: wherein onely the keyes of all concord remaine knit together. And albeit I know well that such as be of my Lord of Huntingtons party, will make small accompt of the Title  Lancaste, as lesse rightfull a great deale then that of Yorke, (and I for my part meane not greatly to avow the same, as now it is placed, being my selfe no favourer of forraine Titles:) yet indif∣ferent men have to consider how it was taken in
times past, and how it may againe in time to come, if contention should arise: how many Noble perso∣nages of our Realme did offer themselves to die in defence thereof:The old esti∣mation of the House of Lan∣caster. how many Oaths and Lawes were given and received throughout the Realme for maintenance of the same, against the other House of Yorke for ever: how many worthy Kings were crow∣ned, and raigned of that House and Race; to wit, the foure most Noble Henries, one after another; the fourth, the fift, the sixt, and the seventh: who both in number, government, sanctity, courage, and feats of armes, were nothing inferiour (if not superiour) to those of the other House and Line of Yorke, after the division betweene the Families. It is to bee considered also as a speciall signe of the favour and affection of our whole Nation unto that Family: that Henry Earle of Richmond,Henry Earle of Richmond. though discending but of the last Sonne, and third Wife of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, was so respe∣cted for that onely by the universall Realme: as they inclined wholly to call him from banishment, and to make him King with the deposition of Rich∣ard, which then ruled of the House of Yorke, upon condition onely, that the said Henry should take to Wife a Daughter of the contrary Family: so great was in those dayes the affection of English hearts to∣wards the Line of Lancaster, for the great worthi∣nesse of such Kings as had raigned of that Race, how good or bad soever their Title were: which I stand not here at this time to discusse, but onely to insinuate what party the same found in our Realme in times past; and consequently, how extreame dan∣gerous the contention for the same may be hereaf∣ter:The Line of Portugall. especially, seeing that at this day the remainder of that Title is pretended to rest wholly in a stran∣ger, whose power is very great. Which we Lawyers
are wont to esteeme as a point of no smal impor∣tance, for justifying of any mans title o a King∣dome. Scholar.You Lawyers want not reason in that Sir (quoth I) howsoever you want right: for if you will exa∣mine the succession of governements, from the be∣ginning of the Wrld untill this day, either among Gentile,The sword of grea frce o jutifie the ti∣tle of a king∣dome. Jew, or Christian people, you shall finde that the sword hah eene alwayes btter thn halfe the title, to get, estblih, or maintane a King∣dome: which maketh  h ore apalled to heare you discourse in such sort of new contentions, and forraine titles, accompanied wth such power and strength of the titlers, which cannot bee but infi∣nitely dangerous and fatall to our Realme, if once it come to acton; both for the division tht is like to be at home, and the variety of partes from a∣boad. For as the Prince who you signifie, will not faile (by all likelyhood) to pursue his title with all forces that hee can make, if occasion were offe∣red: so reason of state and policy will enforce o∣ther Princes adjoyning,Great dan∣gers. to let and hinder him therein what they can: and so by this meanes shll we become Juda and Isrel among our selves, one killing and vexing the othr with the sword: and to forraine Princes we shall be, as the Iland of Sa∣lamina was in old time to the Athenians and Mega∣tians: and as the Iland of Cicilia was afterward to the Grecians, Carthaginians, and Romans: and as in our dayes, the Kingdome of Naples hath beene to the Spaniards, French-men, Germans, and Venetians; That is, a bait to feed upon, and a game to fight for. Wherefore, I beseech the Lord, to avert from us all occasions of such miseries. And I pray you Sir, for that wee are fallen into the mention of these
matters, to take so much paines as to open unto me the ground of these controversies, so long now quiet betweene Yorke and Lancaster: seeing they are now like to bee raised againe. For albeit in generall I have heard much thereof, yet in particular, I either conceive not, or remember not the foundation of the same: and much lesse th state of their severall titles at this day, for that it is a study not properly pertai∣ning unto my profession. The controversie betweene the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster (quoth the Lawyer) took his actuall beginning in the issue of King Edward the third,The begin∣ning of the controvesie betwixt York and Lancaster. who died somewhat more then two hundred yeares agone: but the occasion, pretence, or cause of that quarrell, began in the children of King Henry the third, who died an hundred yeares before that, and left two Sonnes; Edward, who was King af∣ter him, by the name of Edward the first, and was Grandfather to Edward the third: and Edmond (for his deformity called Crookebacke) Earle of Lancaster, and beginner of that House, whose in∣heritance afterward in the fourth discent, fell upon a Daughter named Blanch, who was married to the fourth Son of King Edward the third, named John of Gaunt, for that he was borne in the City of Gaunt in Flanders, and so by this his first wife, hee became Duke of Lancaster, and heire of that House. And for that his Son Henry of Bolingbrooke (afterward cal∣led King Henry the fourth) pretended among other things, that Edmond Crookeback,Edmond Crook∣back beginner of the House of Lancaster. great Grandfather to Blanch his mother,Blanch. was the elder Sonne of King Henry the third, and unjustly put by the inheri∣tance of the Crowne,Iohn of Gaunt. for that he was Crook-backed and deformed: hee tooke by force the Kingdome from Richard the second, Nephew to King Edward the third, by his first Sonne; and placed the same
in the House of Lancaster,How the King¦dome was first brought to the House of Lancaster. where it remained for three whole discents, untill afterward, Edward Duke of Yorke descended of Iohn of Gaunts yonger brother, making claime to the Crowne by title of his Grandmother, that was heire to Lionel, Duke of Clarence, Iohn of Gaunts elder Brother, tooke the same by force from Henry the sixt, of the House of Lancaster, and brought it backe againe to the House of Yorke: where it continued with much trouble in two Kings onely, untill both Houses were joyned together in King Henry the seventh, and his noble issue. Hereby wee see how the issue of Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son to King Edward the third, pretended right to the Crowne by Edmond Crookebacke, before the issue of all the other three Sonnes of Edward the third, albeit they were the el∣der Brothers, whereof wee will speake more here∣after. Now Iohn of Gaunt though hee had many children,The issue of Iohn of Gaunt. yet had he foure onely, of whom issue re∣maine, two Sonnes and two Daughters. The first Son was Henry of Bolingbrooke, Duke of Lancaster, who tooke the Crowne from King Richard the se∣cond, his Unkles Sonne, as hath beene said; and first of all planted the same in the House of Lancaster: where it remained in two discents after him, that is, in his Son Henry the fift, and in his Nephew Henry the sixt, who was afterward destroyed, together with Henry Prince of Wales, his onely Sonne and Heire, and consequently all that Line of Henry Boling∣booke extinguished, by Edward the fourth of the House of Yorke. The other Son of Iohn of Gaunt, was Iohn, Duke of Somerst,The pedegree of king Henry the seventh. by Katherine Sfinsford, his third wife: which Iohn had issue another Iohn, and he, Margaret his Daughter and Heire, who being married to Ed∣mond
Tyder, Earle of Richmond, had issue Henry Earle of Richmond, who after was named King Hen∣ry the seventh, whose Line yet endureth. The two Daughters of John of Gaunt were mar∣ried to Portugall and Castile: that is,The two Daughters married to Portugall and Castile. Philip borne of Blanch, Heire to Edmond Crookeback, as hath beene said, was married to Iohn King of Portugall, of whom is descended the King that now possesseth Portugall, and the other Princes which have or may make title to the same: and Katherin borne of Constane, Heire of Castile, was married back againe to Henry King of Castile in Spaine, of whom King Philip is also descended. So that by this, wee see where the re∣mainder of the House of Lancaster resteth, if the Line of King Henry the seventh were extinguished: and what pretext forraine Princes may have to subdue us, if my Lord of Huntington either now,Forraine ti∣tles. or after hr Majesties dayes, will open to them the doore, by shutting out the rest of King Henries Line, and by drawing backe the title to the onely House of Yorke againe: which he pretendeth to doe, upon this that I will now declare. King Edward the third,The issue of king Edwar th 3. albeit he had many chil∣dren, yet five onely will we speake of at this time: Whereof three were elder then Jhn of Gaunt, and one yonger. The first of the elder was named Ed∣ward the blacke Prince, who died before his Fa∣ther, leaving one onely Sonne named Richard, who afterward being King, and named Richard the se∣cond, was deposed without issue, and put to death by his Cosin germain, named Henry Bolingbrooke, Duke of Lancaster, Son to John of Gaunt, as hath beene said; and so there ended the Line of King Edwards first Sonne. King Edwards second Sonne, was William of Hat∣fld, that died without issue.
His third Sonne was Leonell Duke of Clarence, whose onely Daughter and Heire called Phip, was married to Edmond Mortimer Earle o Marc: and after that, Anne he Daughter and Heire of Mor∣timer, was married to Richard Plantagiet Duke of Yorke, Son and Heire to Edmond of Langy, the first Duke of York: which Edmond was the fift Son of King Edward the third,Two Edmonds the two be∣ginner of the two Houses of Lancaste and Yorke. and younger Brother to John of Gaunt And this Edmond of Lanley may bee called the first beginner of the Huse of Yorke: even as Edmond Crookback, the beginner of the House of Lancaster. This Edmond Langley, then having a Sonne na∣med Richard, that married Anne Mortimer, sole Heire to Leonell Duke of Clarence, joyned two Lines and two Titles in one: I meane the Line of Leo∣nell, and of Edmond Langley, who were (as hath bin said) the third and the fift Sonnes to King Edward the third. And for this cause, the childe that was borne of this marriage, named after his Father Rich∣ard Plantaginet, Duke of Yorke, seeing himselfe strong, and the first Line of King Edward the thirds eldest Son to be extinguished in the death of King Richard the second:The claime and title of Yorke. and seeing William of Hatfield the second Sonne dead likewise without isse: made demand of the Crowne for the House of Yorke, by the title of Leonell the third Sonne of King Edward. And albeit hee could not obtaine the same in his dayes, for that hee was slaine in a Battell against King Henry the sixt at Wakefield: yet his Sonne Edward got the same, and was called by the name of King Edward the fourth. The issue of king Edard the fourth.This King at his death left divers children, as namely two Sonnes, Edward the fift and his Bro∣ther, who after were both murdered in the Tower, as shall be shewed: and also five Daughters: to wit,
Elizabeth, Cicily, Anne, Katherine, and Briget. Whereof, the first was married to Henry the seventh. The last became a Nunne, and the other three were bestowed upon divers other husbands Hee had alo two Brothers:The Duke of Clarence at∣tainted▪ by Parliament. the first was called George Duke of larence▪ who afterward upon his deserts (as is to be supposed,) was put to death in Callis, by commandement of the King, and his at∣tainder allowed by Parliamnt. And this man left behinde him a Sonne, named Edward Earle of Warwick, put to death afterward without issue, by King Henry the seventh, and a Daughter named Margaret▪ Countess of alisury, who was married to a meane Gentleman named Richar Poole, by whom she had issue Cardinall Poole, that died with∣out marriage;Huntington title by the Duke of Cla∣rence. and Henry Poole that was attainted and executed n King Henry the eight his time; (as also her selfe was) and this Henry Poole left a Daughter married afterward to the Earle of Hun∣tington, by whom this Earle that now is maketh title to the Crowne. And this is the effect of my Lord of Huntingtons title. The second Brother of King Edward the fourth, was Richard Duke of Gocester,King Richard the third. who after the Kings death, caused his two Sonnes to be murdered in the Tower, and tooke the Kingdome to himselfe. And afterward he being slaine by King Henry the seventh at Bosorth-field, left no issue behind him Where∣fore King Henry the seventh descending as hath bin shewed of the House of Lancaster,The happy conjunction of the two Houses. by John of Gaunts last Sonne and third Wife, and taking to Wife Lady lizabeth, eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth, of the House of Yorke: joyned most happily the two Families together, and made an end of all controversies about the title. Now King Henry the seventh had issue three Chil∣dren:
of whom remaineth posterity.The issue of King Henry the seventh. First, Henry the eighth, of whom is descended our Soveraigne, her Majesty that now happily raigneth, and is the last that remaineth alive of that first Line.The Line and Title of Scot∣land by Mar∣garet, eldest Daughter to King Henry he 7. Second∣ly, he had two Daughters: whereof the first named Margaret, was married twice; first to James King of Scotland, from whom are directly discended the Queene of Scotland that now liveth, and her Sonne: and King James being dead, Margaret was mar∣ried againe to Archihald Douglas Earle of Anguish: by whom shee had a Daughter named Margaret, which was married afterward to Mathew Steward, Earle of Lenx, whose Sonne Charles Steward was married to Elizabth Candish, Daughter to the pre∣sent Countesse of Shrewsbury, and by her hath left his onely Heire,Arb. a little Daughter named Arbella, of whom you have heard some speech before. And this is touching the Line of Scotland, descending from the first and eldest Daughter of King Henry the seventh. The Line and Title of Suf∣folke by Mary, second daugh∣ter to King enry the 7.The second Daughter of King Henry the seventh called Mary, was twice married also: first to the King of France, by whom she had no issue: and after his death to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, by whom she had two Daughters; that is, Francis, of which the Children of my Lord of Hartford do make their claime: and Elenor, by whom the issue of the Earle of Darby pretendeth right, as shall be declared. For that Francis the first Daughter of Charles Brando4 by the Queene of France, was married to the Mar∣quesse of Dorset, who after Charles Brandons death, was made Duke of Suffolke in right of his Wfe,The issue of Francis, eldest Daughter to Charles Bran∣don, Duke of Suffolke. and was beheaded in Queene Maries time, for his con∣spiracy with my Lord of Leycesters Father. And she had by this man three Daughters: that is, Jane, that was married to my Lord of Leycesters Brother, and
proclaimed Queene after King Edwards death,The issue of Francis eldest daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk. for which both shee and her husband were executed: Katherine the second Dughter, who had two Sonnes, yet living by the Earle of Hartford: and Mry the third Dugter, which left no Children. The other Daughter of Chals Brandon by the Queene of France called Elenor,The issue of Ele∣nor second daughter to Charles Bran∣don. was married to Georg Cliffrd Earle of Cumberland, who left a Daughter by her named Magre, married to the Earle of Darby, which yet liveth, and hath issue. And this is the title of the Huse of Suffolke, des∣cended from the second Daughter of K. Henry the seventh, married (as hath been shewed) to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke. And by this, you may see also how many there be, who do thinke their titles to be far before that of my Lord of Hunting∣ton, if either rght, lw, reason, or cosideration of home affaires may take place in our Realm: or if not, yet you cannot but imagine how many great Princes and Potentats abroad, are like to joyne and buckle with Huntingons Line for the preeminence: f once the matter fall againe to contention by excluding the Line of King Henry the seventh, which God forbid. Truly Sir (quoth I) I well perceive that my Lords turne is not so nigh as I had thought,Scholar.Huntington be∣behind many other titles. whe∣ther he exclude the Line of King Henry, or no for if he exclude tht, then must he enter the Combat with forraine titlers of the House of Lancaster: and if he xclude it not, then in all ap∣parance of reason and in Law to (as you have said) the succession of the two Dughters of King Heny the seventh (whih you distngush by the two names of Scotland and Suffolke) must needs bee as clearely before him and his Lne, that decended only from Edward the fourth his Brother, as the Queenes title that new reigneth
is before him. For th oth Scotland, Suffolke and her Majesty do hold all by one foundtion, which is the union of both Houses and Titles together, in King Henry the seventh her Majesties Grandfather. Gentleman.That is true (quoth the Gentleman) and evi∣den enough in every mans eye; and therefore no doubt: but as hat much is meant ginst hr Ma∣jesty, if oc4sion serve, s against th rest tht hold by the same itle. Albeit her Miesti4s state (the Lord be praised) be such at thi , as it is not safy to pretend so much against hr, as against the rest, whatsoever be meant. And that in ruth, more should be ment aginst her hghnes, the aginst all he rest: there is this reaon; for tat her Maje∣sty by hr present possession letteth more their desires, then all the rest ogether with their future pretences. But as I have said, it is not safety for them,The policy of the conspiratours for the deceiving of her Maiesty. nor yet good plcy to declare openly, what they meane aainst her Majesty. It is the best way for the pesent to hew downe the rest, and to leave her Majesty for the last low and upshot to their gme. For which cuse, they will eeme to make great difference at this day, betweene her Majesties title and the rest, that descend in likewise from King Henr, the se∣venth: avowing the one, and disallowng the other. Albeit, my Lord of Leicesters Father, preferred that of Suffolke, when  was, before this of her Mjsty, and copelle the whle Realme to sweare thereunto. Such is th varia∣ble policy of men, that serve the time, or rather that serve themselves, of all times, for their pur∣poses. Scholar.I remember (quoth I) that time of he Duke, and was present my selfe, at some of his Procla∣mations for that purpose: wherein my Lord his
Sonne that now liveth: eing then a doer, (as I can tell he was:) I marvile how he can deale so contrary now: preferring not onely her Majesties title bfore that of Suffolk (whereof I wonder less because it is more gainfull to him,Leycesters varia∣bility.) but al∣so another much further of. Bu you have signi∣fied the cause, in that the times are change, and other bargaines are in hand of more importance for him. Wherefoe leaving this to be conside∣red by others whom it concerneth, I beseech you, Sir, (for that I know, your worship hath beeene much conversant among their friens and favourers) to tell me what are the barres and lets which they doe alledge, why the house of Scoland and Suffolk descendd of king Henry the seventh his daughters, should not succeed in the Crowne of England after her Majesty, who ended the line of the same king by his son; for in my sight the matter appeareth vry plaine. They want not pretences of barres and lets a∣gainst them all (quoth the Gentleman) which I will ly downe in order,Gentleman. as I have heard them alledged. First,Barres pretended against the clam of Scotland and Suffolke. in the line of Scotland there are three persons as you know, that may pretend right, that is the Queen and her son by the first marriage of Margaret, and Arbella by the second. And against the first marriage, I heare nothing affirmed; but against the two persons proceeding thereof, I heare them alledge three stops, one for that they are strangers born out of the land, & con∣squently incapble of inheritance within the same;Against the Queen of Scot∣land and her sonne. another for that by a specil testament of king H. 8. authorised by 2. severall prliam. thy are excluded; 3 for that they are enemies to the reli∣gion now among us & therefore to be debarred. Against the second marriage of Magret with Achibald Douglas wheof Abella is descended,Against Arbella.
they alledge, that the said Archibald had a former wife at the time of that marriage, which lived long after: and so neither that marriage lawfull, nor the issue therof legitimate. The same barre they have against all the house and Line of Suffolke, for first they say, that Charls Bandon Duke of Suffolke, had a knowen wife a∣live wen he married Mary Queen of France, and consequently, that neither the Lady Frances nor Elenor, borne of that marriage, can be lawfully borne. And this is all, I can heae them say against the succession of the Counesse of Darby descended of Elenor.Against Darby. But against my Lord of Hartfords chl∣dren, hat came from Franes the eldest daughter, I heare them alledge two or three bastardies more besides this of the first marriage.Against the chil¦dren of Hart∣ford. For first, they affirme that Henry Marquesse Dorset, when hee married the Lady Frances, had to wife the old Earl of Arundels sister, who lived both then and many yeares after, and had a provision out of his living to her dying day· wherby that marriage could no way be good. Secondly that the lady Katherine, daughter to the said Lady Frances, by the Marques (by whom the Earl of Hartford had his children) was lawfully married to the Earle of Pembroke that now liveth, and consequently, could have no lawfull issue by any other during his life. 3ly. that the said Katherine wa never lawfully married to the said Earl Hartford, but bare him those children as his Concubine, which (s they say) is defined and registred in the Archb. of Canterburies court, upon due examination taken by order of her Majesty that now reigneth, and this is in effect so muh as I have heard them all aledge, about their affars. It is much (quoth I) that you have said, if it may be all proved.Scholar. Marry yet by the way, I cannot but smile to heare my Lord of Leyester allow of so many bastardies now upon the issue of Lady
Frances, whom in time past, when Iane her eldest daughter was married to his brother,Leycesters dea∣ling with the house of Suffolk. he advanced in legitimation before both the daughters of king Henry the eight. But to the purpose: I would gladly know what grounds of verity these allega∣tions have, and how far in truth they may stoppe from inheritance: for in deed I never heard them so distinctly alledged before. Whereto answeed the Gentleman,Gentleman. that our friend th Lwyr could best resove that, if it pleased hm to spake without his fee: though in some points alledged every other man (quoth he) that knoweth the state and common government of England, may easily give his judgement also. And i the case of bastardy,Bastardy. if the matter may be proved, there is no dfficulty, but that no right to inheritance can justly bee pretended:Forraine bith. as also (perhaps) in the case of forraine birth, though in this I am not so cunning: but yet I see by expe∣rience, that forrainers borne in other lands, can hardly come and claime inheritance in England, albeit, to the contrary, I have heard great and long disptes, but such as indeed passed y capa∣city. And if it might please our friend here pre∣sent to expound the thing unto us more clearly, I for my part would gladly bestow the hearing, and that with attention. To this answered the Lawyer, I will gldly,Lawye. si, tell you my minde in any thing that it shall please you demand: and much more in this mat∣ter, wherein by occasion of often conference I am somewhat perfect. The impedments which these men alledge against the succession of king Henry the 8. his sisters, are of two kinds, as you see: The one knowne and allowed in our law,Bastardie, lal stops. as you have well said, if it may be proved; and that is bastardy: whereby they seek to disable all the whole Line
and race of Suffolke: as also Arbella of the second and later house of Scotland. Whereof it is to small purpse to speak any thing here: seeing the whole controversie standeth upon a matter of fact onely to be proved or improved by records and witnes∣ses. Onely this I will say, that some of these ba∣stardies, before named, are rife in many mens mouthes, and avowed by divers that yet live: but let other men looke to this, who have most inter∣est therein, and may be most damnified by them, if they fall out true.The impedi∣ments against Scotland three in number. The other impediments, which are alledged onely against the Qeene of Scots and her , are in number three, s you re∣cite them: th is forraine birth, king Henries te∣stament, and Religion: whereof  am content to say somewhat, seeing you desire it: albeit there be so much published already in bookes of divers languages beyond the sea, as I am informed, con∣cerning this matter, as more cannot be said. But yt so much as I have heard passe among Law∣yers my betters, in conference of these affaires: I will not let to recite unto you, with this proviso and protestation alwayes,A protestation. that what I speake, I speak by way of recitall of other mens opinions: not meaning my selfe to incurre the statute of af∣firming or avowing any persons title to the crown whatsoever. Touching the first impediment of foraine birth.First then touching forraine birth, there bee some men in the world that will say, that it is a common and generall rule of our law, that no stranger at al may inherit any thing by any means within the Land: which in truth I take to be spo∣ken without ground, in that generall sense. For I could never yet come to the sight of any such common or universall rule: and I know, that di∣vers examples may be alledged in sundry cases to the contrary: and by that which is expresly set
downe in the seventh  ninth years of king Ed. the 4. and in the lventh nd fourteenth of Hen. th 4. it appearh plainy that  stranger my urchase lands in England,An Alien may purchase. as also herit by hs wife, if he marry an inheritrix. Wherefore this common rule  to bee restrane from that generality, unto proper inheritance only;The true Maxima against Ali∣en. n which sense I do easily grant, that our common Law hath been of ancient, and is at this day, that no person born out of the llegance of the king of England whose father & mthr were not of the same allegiance at the time of his birth, shall be able to have or dmad any heritage within the same allegiance, as heire to any person.The statute of King Edward whence the Maxima is ga∣thered. And this rule of our common Lw is gathered in these slf same words of a statute made in the 25. year of king Ed. the third, which indeed is the onely place of effect, that can be alledged out of our law against the inheritance of strangers in such sense and cases as we re now to treat of. And albeit now the commo Law of our Country do runne thus in generall,Reasons why the Scottish title is not letted by the Maxima against Aliens. yet will the friends of the Scottish claime affirme, that hereby that title is nothing let or hindred at all towrds the Crowne; and that for divers manifest and weighty reasons, whereof the prin∣cipll are these which ensue. First,The first reason. it is common and a generall rule of our English lawes, that no rule, Axome or Mxima of law (be it ever so generall) can touch or bind the Crown, except expresse mention bee made thereof in the same; for that the king and crowne have great priviledge and prerogative above the state and affaires of subjects, and great differen∣ces allowed in points of law. As for example,The rule of thirds. it is a generall & common rule of law, that the wife after the decease of her hus¦band,
shall enjoy the third of his lands: but yet the Queene shall not enjoy the third part of the Crowne, after the Kings death: as well ap∣peareth by experience, and is to be seene by law, Anno 5. and 21. of Edward the third;Tenant by cour∣tesie. and Anno 9. and 28. of Henry the sixt. Also it is a common rule, that the husband shall hold his wives lands after her death, as tenant by courtesie during his life, but yet it holdeth not in a Kingdome. In like manner, it is a generall and common rule, that if a man dye feased of Land in Fee∣simple, having daughters and no sonne, his lands shall be divided by equall portions among his daughters,Division among daughters. which holdeth not in the Crowne: but rather the eldest Daughter inheriteh the whole, as if she were the issue male. So also it is a common rule of our law,Executor. that the executor shall have all the goods and chattels of the Testator, but not in the Crowne. And so in many other cases which might bee recited, it is evident that the Crowne hath priviledge above others, and cannot be subject to rule, be it never so ge∣nerall, except expresse mention be made thereof in the same law: as it is in the former place and a statute alledged: but rather to the contrary (as after shall be shewed) there is expresse ex∣ception, for the prerogative of such as descend of Royall bloud. Their second reason is, for that the demand o title of a Crowne cannot in true sense bee com∣prehended under the words of the former statute,The 2 reason. The Crowne no such inhertance as is meant in the statute. forbidding aliens to demand heritage within the allegiance of England: and that for two respects. The one, for that the Crowne it selfe cannot be called an heritage of allegiance, or within alle∣giance, for that it is holden of no superiour up∣on earth, but immediately from God himselfe:
the second, for that this statute treateth onely and meaneth of inheritance by descent, as heyre to the same, (for I have shewed before that Aliens may hold lands by purchase within our Domini∣on) and then say they,The Crowne a corporation. the Crowne is a thing in∣corporate, and descendeth not according to the common course of other private inheritances: but goeth by succession, as other incorporations doe. In signe whereof it is evident, that albeit the King be more favoured in all his doings, then a∣ny common person shall be, yet cannot hee avoyd by law his grants and letters patents by reason of his nonage (as other infants and common heires under age may doe) but alwayes be said to be of full age in respect of his Crown even as a Prior, Parson, Vicar, Deane, or other person incorporate shall be, which cannot by any meanes in law bee said to be within age, in respect of their incorpo∣rations. Whih thing maketh an evident difference in our case, from the meaning of the former statute: for that a Prior, Deane, or Parson, being Aliens and no Denizens, might alwayes in time of peace demand lands in England, in respect of their cor∣porations, notwithstanding the said statute or common law against Aliens, as appeareth by ma∣ny booke cases yet extant: as also by the statute made in the time of King Richard the second, which was after the foresaid statute of King Ed∣ward the third. The third reason is,The . reason. The Kings issue excepted by name. for that in the former sta∣tute it selfe of King Eward, there are excepted expresly from this generall rule, Infantes du Roy, that is, the Kings off spring or issue, as the word Infant doth signifie, both in France, Portugall, Spaine, and other Countries: and as the Latine word Liberi (which answereth the same) is taken
commonly in the civill . Neither may we re∣straine the french words of that Satute Infants du Roy,Liberorum. F. de. verb. sign. to the kings children onely of the first degree (as some doe, for that the barrnnesse of our lan∣guage doth yeeld us no other word for the same) but rather, that therby are understood, as wll the nephewes and other discendants of the king or blood Royall, as his immediate children. For it were both unreasonable and ridiculous to imagin that king Edward by this statute, would go about to disinherit his own nphews, if h should have any borne out of his own allegiance (as easily he might at that time) his sons being mch abroad from England; and the black Prince, his eldest son having two children borne byond the seas: and consequently, it is apparent, that this rule or maxime set down against Aliens is no way to be stretched against the descendants of the king or of the blood Royall. Their fourth reason is, that the meaning of king Edward and his children (living at such time as this statute was made) could not be,The fourth reason The Kings mea∣ning. that any of their linage or issue might be excluded in law, from inheritance of their right to the Crowne, by their foraine birh wheresoever. For otherwise, it is not credible hat they would so much have dis∣persed their own blood in other Countries, as they did, by giving their daughters to strangers, & other means:The matches of England with foraigners. as Leone the kings third son was married in Millan, and Iohn of Gaunt the fourth son, gave his two daughters, Philip and Katherine to Portu∣gall and Cstle; and his neece Joan to the king of Scots: as Thomas of Woodstocke also the yon∣gest brother, married his two daughters, the one to the king of Spaine, and the other to Dke of Britaine. Which no doubt (they being wise Prin∣ces, and so neer of the blood Royal) would never
have done; if they had imagined that hereby their issue should have lost all claime and title to the Crown of England: and therefore it is most evi∣dent, that no such bar was then extant or imagin'd The fift reason is,The fift reason. Examples of forainers admited that divers persons born out of all English dominion and allegiance, both before the Conquest and since, have bin admitted to the succession of our Crown, as lawfull inhe∣ritours, without any exception against them for their foraine birth As before the Conquest is evi∣dent in yong Egar Etheling borne in Hungarie, and thence called home to inherit the Crowne, by his great unckle king Edward the Confssor,Flores hist. Anno 1066. with full consent of the whole Realm; the B. of Worcester being sent as Ambassador to fetch him home, with his father named Edward the out-law. And since the Conquest, it appeareth plainly in king Stephen and king Henry the second, both of them borne out of English dominions, and of Pa∣rents, that at their birth, were not of the English allegiance; and yet were they both admitted to the Crowne. Yong Arthur also Duke of Britain by his mother Constance that matched with Geffray king Henry the seconds sonne, was declared by king Richard his unckle,Pol. lib. 15. Flor. hist. 1208. at his departure towards Jerusalem, and by the whole Realme, for law∣full heire apparent to the Crowne of England, though he were borne in Britaine out of English allegiance; and so he was taken and judged by all the world at that day: albeit, after king Richards death, his other uncle Iohn,K. Iohn a tyrant most tyrannously took both his kingdome and his life from him. For which notable injustice, he was detsted of all men both abroad and at home; & most apparent∣ly scourged by God, with grievous and manifold plagues, both upon himself and the Realm, which yeelded to his usurpation. So that by this also it ap∣peareth,
what the practice of our Countrey hath beene from time to time in this case of forraine birth: which practice is the best intrpreer of our common English law: which dependeth especial∣ly, and most of all, upon custome: nor can he ad∣versary alledge any one example to the contrary. Their sixt, is of the judgement and sentence of King Henry the seventh,The 6. reason. The iudgement and sentence of K. Henry the seventh. and of his Councell: who being together in consultation, at a certaine time about the marriage of Margaret his eldest daugh∣er into Scotland: some of his Councell moved this doubt, what should ensue, if by chance the kings issue male should faile, and so the successi∣on devolve to the heyres of the said Margaret, as now it doth? Whreunto that wse and most pru∣dent Prince made answer: tht if any such event should be, it could not be prejudicial to Englnd, being the bigger part, but rather beneficiall for that it should draw Scotland to England: that is, the lesser to the more: even as in times past it happened in Normandy, Aquitaine, nd some o∣ther Provinces. Which answer appeased all doubts and gave singular content to those of his Coun∣cell, as Polidore writeth, that lived at that time, and wrote the speciall matters of that reigne, by the kings owne instruction. So that hereby wee see no question made of king Henry or his Coun∣cellors touching forraine birth, to let the successi∣on of Lady Margarets issue: which no doubt would never have beene omitted in that learned assembly, if any law at that time had beene estee∣med or imagined to beare the same. And these are six of their principallest reasons to prove, that neither by the words nor meaning of our common lawes, nor yet by custome or pra∣ctice of our Realme, an Alien may bee debarred fom claim of his interest to the Crowne, when
it falleth to him by righfull descent in blood and succssion.The 7. reason. The Queene of Scots and her son no Aliens. But in the particular case of the Queen of Scots and erson, they doe adde another rea∣son or wo: threby to prove them in very deed to be no Aliens: Not only in respect of their often and continuall mixture with English blood from the beginning (and especially of late, the Queens Grandmother and husband being English, and so her sonne bgoten of an English father) but also for two other causes and reasons, which seeme in truth of very good importance. The first is, for that Scotland by all Englishmen (howsoever the Scots deny the same) is tken and holden as sub∣ject to England by way of Homage; which many of their kings at divers times have acknowledged: and consequently th Queene and her son being borne in Scotland are not borne out of the alle∣giance of England, and so no forrainers. The se∣cond cause or reason is, for that the forenamed sta∣tute of forrainers in the 25 yeare of King Edward the third, is intitled, of those that are borne beyond the seas. And in the body of the said statute, the doubt is moved of children borne out of English allegiance beyond the seas: whereby cannot bee understood Scotland, for that it is a piece of the continent land within the seas. And all our old Records in England, that talke of service to bee done within these two countries, have usually these Latin words, Infraquatuor mria, or in French deins lzqutre mers, that is, within the foure Seas: whereby must needs be understood as well Sot∣land as England, and that perhaps for the reason before mentioned, of the subjection of Scotland by way of Homage to the Crowne of England. In respect whereof it may be, that it was accoun∣ted of old but one dominion or allegiance. And consequently, no man borne therein can bee ac∣counted
an alie to Engla. And this shal suffice for the first point, touching foragine Nativity. For the second impediment objected, whch is the testament of King Henry the eight,The second im∣pediment against the Q of Scots, & her son, which is K. Henry the . his testament. authorized by Parliament, wherby they affirm the succession of Scotland to be excluded: it is not precisely true that they are excluded, but onely that they re put back behinde the succession of the hous of Suffolk. For in that pretended Testament (which after shll be proved to be none indeed) King Henry so disposeth, that after his own children (f they shold chance to dye without issue) the Crowne shall passe to the heires of Frances & of Elenor, his nee∣ces by his yonger sister Mary Queene of France; and after them (deceasig also without issue) the succession to returne to the next heire againe. Whrby it is evident, that the succession of Mar∣gart Queene of Scotland, his eldest sister, is not excluded; but thrust back onely from their due place and order, to expect the remainder, which may in time be left by the yonger. Whereof in mine opinion, doe ensue some considerations a∣gainst the present pretenders themselves. Forain birth no impediment in the udgement of K. Henry the .First, hat in King Henries judgement, the for∣mer pretended rule of foraine birth, was no suffi∣cient impediment agaist Scotland; for if it had bin, no doubt but that he would have named the same in his alleaged testament, and thereby have utterly excluded that successiō. But there is no such thing in the testament. Secondly, if they admit this testament,The succession of Scotland next by the iudgement of the competitors. which alotteth the Crown to Scot∣land, next after Suffolk; then, seeing that all the house of Suffolk (by these mens assertions) is ex∣cluded by bastardy; it must needs follow, that Scot∣land by their own judgement is next, & so this te∣stament wil make against them, s indeed it doth in all points most apparantly, but only that it pre∣ferreth
the house of Suolk, before that of Scot∣land. And therefore (I think sir) that you mistake somewhat about their opinion in alleaging this testament. For I suppose, that no man of my Lord of Huntingtons faction, will alleage or urge the te∣stimony of this testament; but rather some friend of the house of Sfflk, in whose favour, I take it, that it was first of ll frged. It may be (quth the Gentleman) nor will I stand obstinatly in the contrary;Gentleman. for that it is hard sometime to judge of what faction each one is, who discoursth of these affirs. But yet I marvel (f it were as you say) wy Lycesters Father fer K. Edward death, made no mention therof in the favor of Suffolk, in the other testament which then he proclaimed, as made by K. Edward deceased, for preferment of Suffolk before his own sisters. The cause of this is vident (quoth the Lawyer) for that it made not sffiiently for his purpose:Lawyer. The Duke of Northumber∣land drift. which was to disinherit he two dughters of King Henry himselfe, and advance the house of Suffolk bfore them both. A notable change (quoh the Gntleman) that a title so much exalted of late by the Father,Gentleman. a∣bove all order, right, ranke and degree; should now be so uch debased by the Son, as thouh it were not worthy to hold any degree, but rather to be troden under-foot for plain bastardy. And you see by ths, how true it is which I told you before;The mutable dealing of the house of Dudley. that the race of Dudlies are most cunning mer∣chants, to make their gaine of all thngs, men and times. And as we have seene now two testments alleaged, the one of the Kings father, and the o∣ther of the kings sonne, and both of them in preju∣dice of the testators true successors: so many good subjects begn greatly to fear, that we may chance
to see sortly a third Testment of her Mjesty for the tituling of Huntington, and exurpation of King Henries blood, & tht before her Majesty can think of sickness: wherein I beseech the Lord I be no Prophet. But now, sir, to the foresaid Will and Testament of King Henry, I have often heard in truth, that the thing was counterfeit, or at the least not able to be proved: ad that it was discovered, rejected, and defaced in Queen Maries time: but I would gladly understand what you Lawyers esteeme or judge thereof. Lawyer.Touching this matter (quoth the Lawyer) it cannot be denied, but that in the 28. and 36 years of King Henries reign,The authority and occasion of King Henries testament. upon cosideration of some doubt ad iresolution, which the King himselfe had shewed, to have about the order of succssion in his owne children, as also for taking away all occasions of controversies in those of the next blood; the whole Parliament gave authority un∣to the said King, to debate and determine hose matters himselfe, together with his learned coun∣cell, who best knew the lawes of the Realme, and titles that any man might hve thereby: and that whatsoever succssion his Majesty should declare as most right and lawfull under his letters patents sealed, or by his last Will and Tstment right∣fully made and signed with his owne hand: that the sme should bee received for good and lawfull. Upon pretence whereof, soon after King Henries death, there was shewed a Will with the kings stamp at the same, and the names of divers witnesses, wherein (as hath beene said) the succession of the Crowne, after the king owne children, is assigned to the heyres of Frances and Elenore, Neeces to the king, by his younger Sister. Which assignation of the Crown, being as it were a meer gift in prejudice
of the elder sisters right (as also of the right of Frances and Elenor themselves who were omitted in the same assignation, and their heires intituled onely) was estemed to be against all reason, law, and nature,The King Testament forged. and consequently not thought to pro∣ceed from so wise and sage a Prince as K. Henrie was knowne to be: but rather, either the whole forged, or at least wise that clause inserted by o∣ther, and the Kings stamp set unto it, after his death, or when his Majesty lay now past under∣standing. And hereof there wanteth not divers most evident reasons and proofes. For first, it is not probble nor credible, that King Henrie would ever go about,The first reason. against law and rea∣son, to disinherit the line of his eldest sister, with∣out any profit or interest to himselfe: and there∣by, give most evident occasion of Civill war and discord within the Realm, seeing,Injustice and impro∣probabilit that in such a case of manifest and apparent wrong, in so great a mtter, the authoritie of Palament, taketh little effect, against the true and lawfull inheritr: as well appeared in the former times and contenti∣ons of Henrie the sixth, Edward the fourth, and Richard the third: in whose reignes, the divers and contrarie Parliaments made and holden, ∣gainst the net inheritor, held no longer with any man, then untill the other was able to make his owne partie good. So likewise,The ex∣ample of France. in the case of King Edward the third his succession to Fance, in the right of his mother, though he were excludd by the generall assembly and consent of their Parliaments; yet he esteemed not his right extinguished thereby: as neither did other Kings of our Countrie that ensued after him. And for our present case, if nothing else should have restrained King Henrie,
from such open injustice towards his eldest sister: yet this cogitation, at least, would have stayed him: that by giving example of supplanting his elder sisters Line, by vertue of a testament or pre∣tence of Parliament; some other might take oc∣casion to displace his children by like pretence: as we see that Duke Dudley did soone after by a for∣ged testament of King Edward the sixt. So ready Schollars there are to be found, which easily will learne such lessons of iniquity. Secondly, there be too many incongruities and indignities in the said pretended Will to proceed from such a Prince and learned councell as King Henries was.The second reason. In∣congruities and indig∣nities. For first, what can be more ridicu∣lous, than to give the Crowne to the heires of Francis and Elenor, and not to any of themselves? or what had they offended that their heires should enjoy the Crowne in their right, and not they themselves? What if King Henries Children should have dyed, whiles Lady Francis had been yet alive? who should have possessed the King∣dome before her, seeing her Line was next? and yet by this testament shee could not pretend her selfe to obtaine it. But rather having marryed A∣drian Stokes her horse-keeper,Adrian Stokes. she must have suffe∣red her sonne by him (if she had any) to enjoy the Crown: and so Adian of a Serving man and Master of Horses, should have become the great Master and Protector of England. Of like absur∣ditie is that other clause also, wherein the King bindeth his owne daughters to marry by consent and direction of his counsell, or otherwise to leese the benefit of their succession: yet bindeth not hi Neices daughters, to wit, the daughters of Francis & Elenor (if they had any) to any such condition. Thirdly, there may bee divers causes and ar∣guments
alledged in law, why this pretended will is not authenticall: if otherwise,The third reason.The pre∣supposed Will is not authenti∣call. it were certaine that King Henrie had meant it: first, for that it is not agreeable to the mind and meaning of the Parliament, which intended onely to give autho∣ritie for declaration and explication of the true title: and not for donation, or intricating of the same, to the ruine of the Relme. Secondly, for that there is no lawfull and authenticall Copie extant thereof, but onely a bare inrolement in the Chancerie, which is not sufficient in so weighty an affaire: no witnesse of the privie Councell or of Nobilite to the same: which had been conve∣nient in so great a case (for the best of the witnes∣ses therein named, is Sir Iohn Gates, whose mise∣rable death is well knowne:) no publike Notary, no probation of the will before any Bishop, or any lawfull Court for that pupose: no examination of the witnesss; or other thing orderly done, for lawfull authorizing of the matter. But of all other things this is most of impor∣tance: that the King never set his owne hand to the foresaid Will,The dis∣proving of the Wil by witnesses. The Lod Paget. but his stampe was put there∣unto by others, either after his death, or when he was past remembrance: as the late Lord Paget in the beginning of Queen Maries dayes, being of the Privie Councell, fist of all other discovered the same of his owne accord, and upon meere motion of conscience, confessing before the whole Councell, and afterward also before the whole Parlament, how that himselfe was privy thereun∣to, and partly also culpable, (being drawn therun∣to, by the instigation and forcible authority of o∣thers:) but yet afterward upon other more godly motions detested the device: and so of his owne free-will, very honourably went and offered the
discoverie thereof to the Councell.Sir Edw. Montague As also did Sir Eward Montague, Lord chiefe Iustice that had been pivy and present at the said doings, and one William Clarke,William Clake. that was the man who put the stampe unto the paper, and is ascribed among the oter pretened witnesses, confessed the whole premisses to be true, and purchased his pardon fo his offence therein. Whereupon Queen Marie and her Councell, caused presently the said Inrole∣ment, lying in the Chancerie to be cancelled, de∣faced and bolished. And sithence that time in her Majesties dayes that now liveth, about the 11. or 12. yeare of her reigne, (if I count not amiste) by occasion of a crtaine little booke spread abroad at that time vry scretly, for advancing of the house of Suf∣folke, by pretence of this Testament:A meeting together a∣bout this matter of the Nobi∣lity. I remem∣ber well the place where the late Duke of Nor∣folke, the Marqusse of Winchester (which then was Treasuer) the old Eales of Arundell and Penbrooe that now are dead, with my Lord of Penbrook that yet liveth, (as also my Lord of Ley∣cester himslfe, if I bee not deceived) with divert others, met together upon this matter: and after long conference about the foresaid pretensed will, and many proofes and reasons laid downe, why it could not be tue or authenticall: the old Earle of Penbrook protesting that he was with the King in his chamber from the first day of his sicknesse unto his last houre, and thereby could well assure the falsification thereof: at length it was moved, that from that place they should goe, with the rest of the Nobility, and proclime the Queen of Scotland here apparent in Cheap-side.M Lord of Lest. a∣gaine ply∣ double. Wherein my Lord of Leycester (a I take it was then as for∣ward as any man else: how bee it, now for his
profit, he be turned aside, and would turne back again to morrow next for a greater commodity. And albeit, for some causes to themselves best known, they proceeded not in the open publishing of their determination at that time: yet my Lord of Penbrook now living can beare witnesse that thus much is true: and that his father, the old Earle,The old Earle of Penbrooks admonition to the Earl his son, yet living. at that time told him openly before the o∣ther Noblemen, that he had brought him to that assembly and place to instruct him in that truth, ând to charge him to witnesse the same, and to defend it also with his sword (if need required) after his death. And I know that his Lordship is of that honour and Nobility, as he cannot leave off easily the remembrance or due regard of so worthy an admonition. And this shall suf∣fice for te second mpdiment, imagind to pro∣ceed of this supposed Testament of King Henrie the eighth. As for the third impediment, of religion,The thid impedi∣ment of re∣ligion. it is not generall to all: for that only one person (if I be not deceived) of all the Competitors in K. Henries Line can bee touched ith suspition of different Religion, from the present state of Eng∣land. Which person notwithstanding (as is well knowne) while shee was in govenment in her owne Realme of Scotland, permitted all lberty of Conscience, and free exercise of Religion to those of the contrary profssion and opinion, without restraint. And if she had not, yet doe I not see, either by prescript of law, or practice of these our times, that diversity of Religion may stay just In∣heritors from enjoying their due possessions, in a∣ny state or degree of private men: and much lesse in the claime of a Kingdome: which alwayes in this behalfe as hath been said before) is preferred in priviledge.
This we see by experience, in divers Countries and parts of the world at this day:Princes of Germany. as in Germa∣ny, where among so many Princes, and so divided in religion as they be: yet every one succeedeth to the state whereto he hath right, without resi∣stance for his religion. The exmples also of her Majesty that now is, and of her sister before, is evident, who being known to be of two different inclinations in religion,Qu. Mary Queen E∣lizabeth. and the whole Realme divided in opinion for the same cause: yet both of them at their severall times with generall consent of all, were admitted to their lawfull inheritance: excepting onely a fe The Dud∣leis Mon∣sieur. triors against the fr∣mer, who withstood her right, as also in her the right of her Maiestie that is present, and that not for Religion, (as appered by their owne confes∣sion after) but for mbition and desire of reigne, Monsieur, the Kings brother and heire of France, as all the world knoweth, is well acceptd, favou∣red, and admitted for successor of that Crowne, by all the Potestants at this dy of that Counry, notwithstanding his opinion in religion knowne to be different. And I doubt not, but th King of Navarre or Prince of Condy,King of Navarre Prince of Condy. in the contrary part would thinke themselves gretly injured by the stte of rance, which is dfferent from them in religion at this dy, if after the death of th Kig that now is, and his brother without issue, (if God so dispose) they should be barred from inhe∣riting the Crowne, under pretence onely of thei Religion. My Lord of Huntington himselfe also, is he not knowne to be of a different religion from th present state of Englnd?My Lord of Hun∣tingtons reigion. and rht, if he wee King to morrow nxt, he would alter the whoe government, order, condiion, and state of rligion, now used and established within the Realme?
But as I said in the beginning, if one of a whole family, or of divers families be culpable,The title of those that ensue the Queene of Scots. or to be touched herein; what have the rest offended thereby? will you exclude all, for the mislike of one? And to descend in order; if the first in K. Henries line, after her Majesty may be touched in this point, yet why should the rest be damnifi∣ed thereby? The K of Scotland her son, that next ensueth (to speak in equity) why should he bee shut out for his religion? And are not all the o∣ther in like manner Protestants, whose discent i consequent by nature, order, and degree. For the yong K. of Scotland (quoth I) the truth is, that alwayes for mine own part,Schollar. The yong King of Scotland I have had great hope and expectation of him, not onely for the con∣ceipt which commonly men have of such Orient youths, borne to kingdomes; but especially for that I understood from time to time, that his education was in all learning, princely exercises, and instru∣ction of true religion, under rare and vertuous men for that purpose. Whereby I conceived hope, that he might not onely become in time an honou∣rable and profitable neighbour unto us, for assu∣rance of the Gospell in these parts of the world; but also (if God should deprive us of her Maiesty without issue)▪ might be a meane by his succession to unite in Concord and Government the two Realmes together, which heretofore hath beene sought by the price of mary a thousand mens bloud, and not obtained. Marry yet now of late (I know not by what means) there  egun in mens hearts a certaine mislike or grudge against him, for that it is given out every where that he is inclined to be a Pa∣pist, and an enemy to her Majesties proceedings, which argueth him verily of singular ingratitude
if it be true, considering the great helpes and po∣tection which he hath received from her Highnes ever sithens he was borne. Gentl.And are you so simple (quoth the Gentleman) as to beleeve everie report that you heare of this matter? know you not, hat it is expedient for my Lord of Leycester and his faction, that this youth, above all other, bee held in perpetuall dis∣grace with her Majesty, and with this Realme? You know, that Richard of Gloucester hd never been able to have usurped as he did,The device to set out her Maje∣sty with the young King of Scotland. if hee had not first perswaded K. Edward the fourth, to hate his owne brother the Duke of Clarence, which Duke stood in the wy between Richard and the thing, which he most of all things coveted: that is, the possibilitie to the Crowne, and so in this case is there the like device to be observed. Fo truly, for the yong King of Scotlands reli∣gion, it is evident to as many as have reason, that it can bee no other of it selfe but inclined to the best; both in respect of his education, instruction, and conversation wih those of true religion: as also by his former actions, Edicts, Government, and private behaviour he hath declared. Marrie these men whose profit is nothing lesse, than tha he or any other of that race should doe well: doe not cease dayly by all secret wayes, drifts, and molestations possible, to drive him either to mis∣like of our religion, or else to incurre the suspiti∣on thereof, with such of our Realme, as otherwise would be his best friends: or if not this, yet for very need and feare of his owne life, to make re∣course to such other Princes abroad, as may most offend or mislke this stte. And for this cause, they suborne certaine busie fellowes of their owne crew and faction, per∣taining
to the ministerie of Scotland,The into∣lerable pr¦ceedings of crti i∣nistrs in Sotlnd aainst teir ig  subor∣nation of his ene∣mies in Engla. (but unwor∣thy of so worthy a calling) to use such inso∣lencie towards their King and Prince, as is not onely undecent, but intolerable. For he may doe nothing, but they will examine and discusse the same in Pulpit. If hee goe but on hunting, when it pleaseth them to call him to their preaching: if he make but a dinner or supper, when, or where, or with whom they like not: if he receive but a couple of horses, or other present from his frinds or kinsemen beyond the seas: if hee salute or use courteously any man, or messenger which com∣meth from them (as you know Princes of their noblity and courtesie are accustmed, though they come from heir enemies, as very often hath beene seene, and highly commended in her Majestie of England:) If he deale familaly with any Ambassdor which liketh not them: or finally, if hee doe say or signifie any one thing whatsoever that pleaseth not their humour, they wil presently as seditious Tribunes of the people, exclaime in publicke; and stepping to the Pulpit where the Word of the Lord onely ought to be preached, will excite the Communalty to discon∣tentation, inveying against their Soveraigne with such bitternes of speech, unreverend tearmes, and insolent controlements, as is not to be spoken: Now imagine what her Majesty and her grave councell would do in England, if such proceedings should be used by the Clergy against them. No doubt (quoth I) but that such unquiet spirits should be punished in our Realme.Schollar. And so I sd of late to their most reverend and▪Sir Patrik Adm on Archbish. of St. An∣drewes. worthy Prelate and Primate the Arch-bishop of St. Andrews, with whom it was my luck to come acquainted in London, whither he was come by his Kings ap∣pointment
(as he said) to treat certain affairs with our Q. and Councell. And talking with him of this disorder of his ministerie, he confessed the same with much griefe of mind, and told me, that e had preached thereof before the K. him∣selfe, detesting and accusing divers heads therof, for which cause he was become very odious to them and other of their faction, both in Scotland and England. But he said, that as he had given the reasons of his doings unto our Qu. so mea∣neth he shortly to do the same unto Monsieur Be∣za, and to the whole Church of Geneva, by sen∣ding thither the Articles of his and their dongs, proteing unto me that the proceedings and at∣tempts of those factious and corrupt men was most scandalous, seditious and perilous both to the K. person, and to the realm; being sufficien indeed, to alienate wholy the yong Prince from all affection to our religion, when he shall see the chiefe Professors thereof to behave them∣selves so undutifully towards him. Gentl. Treasons plotted a∣gainst the King of Scots.That is the thing which these men, his compe∣titors, most dsire (quoth the Gentleman) hoping thereby to procure him most evill will and dan∣ger, both at home and from England. For which cause also, they have practised so many plots and treacheries with his owne subjects against him; hoping by that meanes to bring the one in di∣strust and hatred of the other, and consequently the K. in danger of destruction by his own. And in this machination, they have behaved them∣selves so dexterously, so covertly used the man∣nage and contriving hereof, and so cunningly conveyed the execution of many things: as i might, indeed, seem apparent to the yong K. that the whole plot of treasons against his Realme,
and Person, doth come from England, thereby to drive him into jealousie of our state, and our state of him: and all this for their owne profit. Neither is this any new device of my Lord of Leicest to draw men for his own gain into dan∣ger and hatred with the state, under other pre∣tences. For I could tell you divers stories and stratagems of his cunning in this kind, and the one farre different from the other in device: but yet all to one end. I have a friend yet living, that was towards the old Earle of Arundel in good credit, and by that means had occasion to deal with the late Duke of Norfolk in his chiefest affaires before his troubles. This man is wont to report strange things from the Dukes owne mouth, of my L. of Leicesters most treacherous dealing towards him, for gaining of his bloud, as after appeared,Leycesters cunning device for overthrow¦ing the D. of Norf. al∣beit the Duke when he reprted the same, mistru∣sted not so much my Lords malice therein. But the sum of all, is this in effect: that Leicester having a secret desire to pull down the said Duke, to the end that he might have no man above himselfe, to hinde him in that which he most desireth; by a thousand cunning devices drew in the Duke to the cogitation of that marriage with the Queen of Scotland, which afterward was the cause or occasion of his ruine. And hee behaved him∣selfe so dexterously in this drift, by setting on the Duke n the one side, and also by in∣trapping him on the other:The impu∣dency of Iudas. as Iudas himselfe never plaid his part more cunningly when hee supped with his Master, and set himself so neer, as he dipt his spoon in the same dish, & durst be∣fore others, aske who should betray him? mea∣ning that night to doe it himselfe, as he shewed soon after supper, when he came as a Captaine
with a band of Conspirtors, and with a courte∣ous kiss delivered his person into the hands of them, whom hee well knew to thirst after his bloud. The very like did the Earle of Leycester with the Duke of Nofok for the at of treason, though in the parties btryed there were great difference of innocency. Nmely, at one time, when her Mjesty was at Basing in Hampshire, and the Duke attended there to have audience, with gret indiffency in himselfe to follow, or leave off his suit for marriage: (for that now he began to suspect, her Majesty liked not greatly thereof:) my Lord of Leycester came to him and counselled him in any case to persevere, and not to relent,Te spee∣ches of Ley¦cester o the Duke of Norf. assuring him with many oathes and proesttions, that her Mjesty must and should be brought to allow thereof, whether she would or no, and that himle would sele tht purpose with his blood Niher ws uto be suffered that her Maiesty should have her will herein; with many other like speeches to this purpose: which the Duke repeaed againe then presently to my said friend: with often laying his hand upon his bosome and saying; I have here which ssreth me sufficiently of te fidelity of my Lord of Ley∣cester;Leycest. cousenge of te Queene. meaning not onely the foresaid speeches, bu also divers lettes which he had written to the Duke of that effct, as likewise he had done to some other person of more importance in the Realme; which matter comming afterward to , he cousened most notably hr Majesty, by shewing her a reformed copie of the said Letter, for the Letter it selfe. But now how well he performd his promise, in dealig with her Majesty for the Duke or against
the Duke in this matter, her Highnesse can best tell, and the event it selfe shewed. For the Duke being admitted soon after to her Majesties speech at another place, and receiving a farre other an∣swer than he had in hop conceived upon Leyce∣sters promises, retyred himselfe to London,The Duke of Norf. flying into Norfolke where the same night following hee received Letters both from Leycester, and Sir Nicholas Thregmor∣ton, upon Leycesters instigation (for they wre at that time both friends and of a fction) that he should presently flye into Norfolk, s he did, which was the last and finall complement of all Lycest. former devices, whereby to plnge his friend o∣ver the eares in supiion and disgrace, in such sort as he should never be able to dw himselfe out of the ditch againe, as indeed he was not, but dyed in the same. And herein you see also the same subtile and Machivilian slight, which I mentioned bfore,Machivi∣lian slights of driving men to attempt somewhat, whereby they may incurre danger, or remaine in perpetuall sus∣pition or disgrace. And this practice h hath long used, and doth dayly, against such as he hath will to destroy. As for example, what say you to the device he had of late, to intrap his well deserving friend, Sir Christopher Hatton,Leycesters devices for the over∣throw of Sir Chri∣stopher Hatton. in the matter of Hall his Priest, whom hee would have had Sir Christopher to send away and hide, being touched and detected in the case of Ardent, thereby to have drawne in Sir Christopher himselfe, as Sir Charles Candish can well declare, if it please him, being accessary to this plot, for the overthrow of Sir Christopher: To which intent, and most de∣vilish drift, pertained (I doubt not) if the matter were duely examined, the late interception of let∣ters in Paris from one Aldred of Lyons, then in
Rome, to Henr. Vmpton, servant to Sir Christopher, in which letters, Sir Christopher is reported to be of such credit and speciall favour in Rome, as if he were the greatest Papist in England. What meaneth also these pernitious late dea∣lings against the Earle of Shrewsburie,Leycesters devices a∣gainst the Earle of Shrews∣bury. a man of the most ancient and worthiest Nobilitie of our Realm? what meane the practises with his nea∣rest both in bed and bloud against him? what meane those most false and slanderous rumours cast abroad of late of his disloyall demeanours towards her Maiesty and his countrey, with the great prisoner committed to his charge? is all this to any other end, but onely to drive him to some impatience, and thereby to commit or say some∣thing which may open the gate unto his ruine? Divers other things could I recite of his beha∣viour towards other noble men of the Realm, who live abroad in their countries much injured and malecontented by his insolency:Leycestes contmpt of the an∣cient No∣bility of England. albeit in respect of his present power they dare not com∣plaine. And surely, it is strange to see how little account he maketh of all the ancient nobilitie of our Realme: how he contemneth, derideth and debaseth them; which is the fashion of all such as mean to usup, to the end they may have none who shall not acknowledge their first be∣ginning and advancement from themselves. Not only usurpers (quoth the Lawyer) but all others who rise and mount aloft from base ly∣nage,Lawyer. be ordinarily most contemptuous, contumul∣tuous, and insolent against others of more anti∣quity And this was evident in this mans father, who being a Buck of the first head (as you know) was intollerable in contempt of others:New men most con∣temptuous. as ap∣peareth by those whom hee trod downe of the
Nobilitie in his time: as also by his ordinarie jests against the Duke of Somerset and others. But among other times, sitting one day at his owne table (as a Counsellor told mee that was present) he took occasion to talke of the Earl of Arundel,D. Dudlies jest at the Earle of Arundell. whom he had then not onely removed from the Counsell, but also put into the Tower of London, being (as is wel known) the first and chiefest Earle of the Realme. And for that the said Earle shewed himselfe somewhat sad and afflicted with his present state (as I marvel not, seing himself in prison, and within the compasse of so fierce a Beares paws) it pleased this good∣ly Duke to vaunt upon this Earles misery, at his owne Table (as I have said) and asked the noble men and gentlemen there present, what Crest or Cognizance my L. of Arundel did give? and when every one answered, that hee gave the white horse: I thought so (quoth the Duke) and not without great cause; for as the white Paul∣frey when he standeth in the stable, and is well provendred, is proud and fierce, and ready to leape on every other horses back, still neying, and prauncing, and troubling all that stand a∣bout him: but when he is once out of his hot stable, and deprived a little of his case and fat feeding, every boy may ride and master him at his pleasure: so is it (quoth he) with my Lord of Arundell. Whereat many marvelled that were present, to heare so insolent speech passe from a man of judgement, against a Peere of the Realme cast into calamity. But you would more have marvelled (quoth the Gentleman) if you had seene that which I did afterward,Gentl. which was the most base and ab∣ject behaviour of the same Duke to the same
Earle of Arundel at Cambridge, and upon the way towards London:The oft abiect be∣haiour of Duke Dud∣ley in ad∣verse for∣tunes. when this Earle was sent to apprehend and bring him up, as prisoner. If I should tell you how he fell down on his knees, how he wept, how he besought the said Earle to be a good Lord unto him, whom a little before he had so much contemned and reproached, you would have said that himselfe might as well be compared to this his white Paulfrey, as the o∣ther: Albeit in this I will excuse neither of them both, neither almost any of these great men who are so proud and insolent in their prospe∣rous fortune, as they are easily led to contemne any man, albeit themselves bee most contemp∣tible of all others, whensoever their fortune be∣ginneth to change: and so will my L. of Lei∣cester be, also no doubt at that day, though now in his wealth he triumph over all, and careth not whom,Schollar. or how many he offend and injure. Sir, therein I beleeve you quoth I) for wee have had sufficient tryall already of my Lords fortitude in adversity.Leycesters base beha∣viour in ad∣versitie. His base and abject be∣haviour in his last disgrace about his marriage, well declared what hee would doe in a matter of more importance His fawning and flatte∣ring of them, whom he hated most: his servile speeches, his feigned and dissembled teares, are all very well knowne:Leycstes deceiving of Sir Chr∣stopher Hatton. Then Sir Christopher Hatton must needs be enforced to receive at his hands the hnourable and great office of Chamberlainship of Chester, for that he would by any meanes regne the same unto him, whe∣ther he would or no: and made him provide (not without his charge) to receive the same, though his Lordship never meant it, as after wel appeared. For that the present pange being past,
it liked my Lord to fulfill the Italian Proverbe, of such as in dangers make vowes to Saints: Scampato il pericolo▪ gabbato il santo, the danger escaped, the Saint is deceived. Then, and in that necessity, no men of the Realm were so much honoured commended, & served by him as the noble Chamberlaine de∣ceased, and the good Lord Treasurer yet living:A pretie shift of my Lord of Leycester. to whom, at a certaine time, he wrote a letter in all fraud and base dissimulation, and caused the same to be delivered with great cunning in the sight of her Majesty; and yet so, as to shew a purpose that it should not be seen. to the end, her Highnesse might rather take occasion to call for the same and read it, as she did. For Mi∣stris Francis Hward (to whom the stratagem was committed) playing her part dexterously, offered to deliver the same to the Lord Trea∣surer, neare the dore of the withdrawing Chamber, he then comming from her Majesty: And to draw the eye and attention of her High∣nesse the more unto i, shee let fall the paper, before it touched the treasurers hand, and by that occasion brought her Majesty to call for the same: Which after she had read and considered the stile, together with the metall and constitu∣tion of him that wrote it, and to whom it was lent,Her Maie∣sties speech of Leyce∣str to the Tesue. her Highnesse could not but breake forth in laughter, with detestation of such absurd and abject dissimulation: sayng unto my Lord Treasurer there presnt: my Lord believe him not. for if he had you in like case, he would play the Beare with you, though at this present hee fawne upon you never so fast. But now Sir, I pray you goe forward in your speech of Scotland, for there I remember you
left off, when by occasion we fell into these di∣gressions. Gentl.Well then (quoth the Gentleman) to reture againe to Scotland (as you move) from whence wee have digressed: most certaine and evi∣dent it is to all the world, that all the broyles, troubles, and dangers procured to the Prince in that countrey, as also the vexations of them, who any way are thought to favour that title in our owne Realme,The dan∣ger of her Majesty by oppression of the fa∣vourers of the Scot∣tish title. doe proceed from the drift and complot of these conspirators. Which be∣sides the great dangers mentiond before, both domesticall and forraine, temporall, and of re∣ligion, must needs inferre great jeopardy also to her Maiesties person and present reign, that now governeth, through the hope and heat of the aspirrs ambition, inflamed and increased so much the more by the nearenesse of their desi∣red prey. For as souldiers entred into the hope of a rich and well furnished Citie, are more fierce and fu∣rious, when they have gotten and beaten downe the Bullwaks round about:A Similie true. and as the greedy Burglrer that hath pierced and broken downe man wals to come to a treasure, is lesse patient of stay, stop, and delay, when he commeth in sight of hat which he desireth, or perceiveth only some partition of wane skot or the like be∣twixt his fingers, and the cofers or monie bags: so thee men whn they shall see the succession of Scotland extinguished, together with all friends and favourrs thereof, (which now are to her Majesty as Bullwarks and wals, and great obstacles to the aspirors) and when they shall see onely her Maisties life and person, to stand be∣twixt them and their fierie desires (for they
make little account of all other Competitors by King Hnries line:) no doubt but it will bee to them a great prick and spurre to dispatch Her Majestie also: the nature of both Earles being well considered,Earle of Leycester. whereof the one killed his own wife, (as hath been shewed before) onely upon a little vaine hope of marriage with a Queene, and the other being so farre blinded and borne away with the same furious fume,Earle of Hunting∣ton. & most im∣potent itching humor of ambition, as his owne mother, when she was alive, seemed greatly to feare his fingers, if once the matter should come so neare, as her life had onely stood in his way. For which cause, the good old Countesse was wont to pray God (as I have heard divers say) that she might dye before her Majesty (which happily was granted unto her) to the en that by standing in her sonnes way (who she saw to her grief, furiously bent to weare a Crown:The old Countesse of Hun∣tingtons speech of hr sonne.) there might not some dangerous extremiy grow to her by that nearenesse: And if his owne mother feared this mischance, wht may her Majesty doubt at his, & his companions hans, when she only shall be the obstacle of all their unbridled and impatient deres? Cleare it is (quoth the Lawyer) that the neare∣nesse of aspirors to the owne,Lawyer.Neaenesse in compe∣titors doth incite thm to adven∣ture.Henr. Bul∣lingbook after King H. the 4 endangereth greatly the present possessors, as you have well proved by reason, and I could shew by divers ex∣amples, if it were need. For when Henrie Bul∣lingbrooke, Duke of Lancaster, saw not onely Ri∣chard the second to be without issue, but also Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, that should have succeded in the Crowne, to bee slaine in Ireland: though before (as is thought) he meant not to usurpe, yet seeing the possibility and
neare cut that he had, was inuited therewith to lay hands of his Soveraignes blond and dignity as he did.Richard Duke of Gloucester after King Richard the third. The like is thought of Richard, Duke of Glocester, that he nver meant the murther of his nephewes, untill he saw their father dead, and themselves in his owne hands; his brother also Duke of Clarence dispatched, and his onely sonne and heire arle of Warwick within his owne power. Wherefore seeing that it hath not pleased Al∣mighty God, for causes to himselfe best known, to leave unto this noble Realm, any issue by her most excellent Maiestie, it hath been a poynt of great wisedome in mine opinion,The great wiedome of her Ma∣jesty in con∣serving the next heires of Scot∣land. and of great safety to her Highnes person, state, & dignity, to preserve hitherto the line of the next Inheritors by the house of Scotland, (I meane both the mother and the sonne) whose deaths hath been so diligently sought by the other Competitors and had beene long ere this atchieved, if her Majesties owne wisedome, and royall clemency (as is thought) had not placed speciall eye upon the conservation thereof, from time to time. Which Princely providence, so long as it shal endure, must needs be a great safety and fortres to her Majesty, not onely against the claimes, aides, or annoyance of forraine Princes, wh wil not be so forward to advance strange titles while so manifest heires remain at home, nor ye so willing (in respect of policy) to elpe tha line to possession of the whole Island: but also against practices of domesticall aspirers (as yo have shewed) in whose affairs no doubt but these two branches of Sctland are great bocks, as also speciall bulwarks to her Majesties life and person: seeing (as you say) these copartners make
so little account of the other of that line, who should ensue by order of succession. Marry yet of the two,The K. of Scotlands dstruction of more im∣portance to the conspi∣rators, then his mothers I thinke the youth of Scotland be of much more importance for their purpose, to bee made away, both for that hee may have issue, and is like in time to be of more ability, for defence of his owne inheritance: as also for that he being once dispatched, his mo∣ther should soone ensue by one slight or other, which they would devise unwitting to her Ma∣jesty: albeit, I must needes confesse that her Highnesse hath used most singular prudence for prevention thereof, in placing her restraint with so noble, strong,The Earle of Salisbu∣ry disra∣cd by the competi∣tors. and worthy a Peere of our Realme, as the Earle of Shrewsburie is, whose fidelity and constancy being nothing plyable to the others faction, giveth them little contenta∣tion. And for that cause the world seeth how many sundry and divers devices they have used, and do use dayly to slander and disgrace him, and thereby to pull from him his charge committed To this the Gentleman answered nothing at all,Gentl. but stood stll musing with himselfe, as though hee had conceived some deep matter in his head  and after a little pause he began to say as followeth I cannot truly but much marvaile,Te vigi∣lant eye that her Maiesties  hd to the olatrall lie. when I do compare some things of this time and govern∣ment, with the doings of formr Princes, Pro∣genitors to her Majesty. Namely of Henrie the 7. and Henrie the 8. who had so vigilant an eye to the laterall line of King Edward the 4. by his brother of Clarence, as they thought it ne∣cessary, not only to prevent all evident dangers that might ensue that way, but even the possibi∣lities of all perill: as may well appear by the execution of Ed. Earl of Warwick before named
Son and heire to the said Duke of Clarence, and of Magaet his sister Countesse of Salisbury, with the Lord Henry Montague her sonne, by whose Dauhter the Earle of Huntington now claimeth.Persons executed of the huse of Claēce All which were executed for avoyding of inconveniencies, and that at such times, when no imminent danger could be much doubted by that Line, especially by the latter. And yet now when one of the same house and Line, of more ability and ambition, than ever any of his Ancestors were, maketh open title and claime to the Crowne, with plots, packs, and prepara∣tions to most manifest usurpation, against all or∣der, all law, and all rightful succession: and a∣gainst a special statute provided in that behalfe: yet is he permitted, bone out, favoured, and friended therein: and no man so hardy, as in defec f her Majestie and the Realme to con∣trle hi for the same. It may be that her Majestie is brought into the same oinion of my Lord of Huntingtons fide∣lity,The exam∣ple of Iuli¦us Caesas destruction. as Iulius Caesar was of Marcus Brutus, his dearest obliged friend: of whose ambitious pra∣ctises, and aspiring, when Caesar was advertised by his carefull friends; he anwered, that hee well knew Brutus to be ambitious, but I am sure (quoth he that my Brutu will never at∣tempt any thing for the Empire while Caesar li∣veth: nd after my death let him shift for the same among others, a he can. But what ensued? Surely I am loath to tell the event for ominati∣ons sake, but yet all the world knoweth that ere many moneths passed, this most noble and lement Emperour was pittifully murthered y the same Brutus and his partners in the pub∣lique Senate, when least of all he expected
such treason. So dangerous a thing it is to be se∣cure in a matter of so great sequell, or to trust them with a mans life, who may pretend prefer∣ment or interest by his death. Wherefore, would God her Majestie in this case might be induced to have such due care and regard of her own estate and royall person, as the weigh∣ty moment of the matter requireth: which con∣taineth the blisse and calamity of so noble and worthy a kingdome as this. I know right well,Too much confidence verie peril∣lous in a Prince. that most excellent natures are alwayes furthest off from diffidence in such people as proves love, and are most bounden by dutie: and so it is evident in her Maiestie. But yet surely, this confidence so commendable in other men, is scarce allowable oftentimes in the person of a Prince: for that it goeth accompanyed with so great perill. as is inevitable to him that will not suspect principally when dangers are foretold or presaged, (as commonly by Gods appoyntment they are, fr the speciall hand he holdeth over Princes affaires) or when there is probable con∣jecture, or just surmise of the same. We know that the forenamed Emperor Caesar, had not onely the warning given him of the in∣clination and intent of Brutus to usurpation, but even the very day when hee was going towards the place of his appoynted destiny, there was gi∣ven up into his hands a detection of the whole treason, with request to read the same presently,The exam∣ple of Alex∣ander the geat, bow hee was foretold his danger. which he upon confidence omitted to doe. Wee read also of Alexander the great, how hee was not onely forbidden by a learned man to enter into Babylon (whither he was then going) for that there was treason meant against him in the place, but also that he was foretold of Antipaters mis∣chievous
meaning against him n particular. Bu the yong Prince hving so well deserved of An∣tipatr, could not b brought to mistust the man that was so deae unto him: and by that meanes was poysoned in a banqut by three sons of An∣tipater, which were of most credit and confidence in the Kings Chamber. Here, truly, my heart did somewhat tremble with feare,Schollar. horror, and detstation of such events. And I said unto the Gentlemn: I beseech you Sir, to talke no more of these matters; for I cannot well abide to heare them named: hoping in the Lord tht there is no cuse, nor ever shll be, to doubt the like in England: especially from thse mn, who are so much bound to her Majesty,Lte exe∣cutions. and so forward in seeking out, and pursuing all such a may be tought to be dngerous to her Majesties peson, as by the undy late executions wee have have sen, and by the punishments every way of Papists we my perceive. Truth it is (quoth the Gentlemn) that justice hath bin done upon divers of late,Gentl. which conten∣teth me geatly, for the terrou and rstraint of o∣thers, of what sect or religion sover they be: And it is most necssary (doubtles) for the compres∣sing of patis, that gret vigilance be used in tha behalfe. But when I consider, that only one kind of men are touched heein: and that all speeh, re∣gard, doubt, distrust, nd watch is of them alone; without reflection of eye upon other mens doings or dsignements: when I see the double diligence and vehemency of crtaine instruments, which I like not, bent wholly to raise wonder and admira∣tion of the people feare, terrour, and attention to the dins, sayings, and meanings of one part or action alone, and of that namely and only which
these conspirators esteem for most dangerous and opposite to themselves:Fraud to be feared in pursuing one part or faction on∣ly.The com∣parison of Wolves and Rebels. I am (beleeve me) often tempted to suspect fraud and false measure: and that these men deale, as wolves by nature in other Countries are wont to do: Which going together in great numbers to assaile a flocke of sheep by night, doe set some one or two of their company upon the wind side of the fold a far off, who par∣ly by their sent and oher bruteling, which of pur∣pose they make, may draw the dogs and shep∣heards to pursue them alone, whiles the other doe enter and slay the whole flock. Or as rebels that meaning to surprize a Town, to turne away the Inhabitants from considering of the danger, and from defence of that place, where they intend to enter, doe set on fire some other parts of the Towne further off, and doe sound a false alarme at some gate, where is meant least danger. Which art was used cunningly by Richard D. of Yorke in the time of King Henrie the sixt,Richard Duke of Yorke. when he to cover his owne intnt, brought all the Realme in doubt of the doings of Edmond Duke of Somerset, his enemy.D. Dudly. But Iohn of Northamber∣land, father to my Lord of Leycester, used the same art much more skilfully, when hee put all England in a maze and musing of the Protector, and of his friends: as though nothing could be safe about the yong King, untill they were sup∣pressd: and consequently, all brought into his owne authority, without obstacle.A good rule of policy. I speake not this to excuse Papists, or to wish them any way spared wherein they offend: but onely to signifie that in a Countrey, where so potent factions bee, it is not safe, to suffer the one to make it selfe so puissant by pursuit of the other: as afterwards the Prince must remaine at the devotion of the
stronger: but rather as in a body molested and troubled with contrarie humours, if all cannot be purged, the best Physick is without all doubt to reduce and hold them at such an equality, as de∣struction may not be feared of the predominant. To this said the Lawyer laughing, yea marry Sir, I would to God your opinion might prevaile in this matter; for then should wee bee in other tearmes then now we are. I was, not long since, in company of a cetaine honourable Lady of the Court, who, after some speech passed by Gentle∣men that were present, of some apprehended, and some executed, and such like affires, brake into a great complaint of the present time, and there∣with (I assure you) moved all the hearers to griefe (as women you know are potent in stirring of affections) and caused them all to wish that her Majesty had beene nigh to have heard her words. The speech of a certain Lady of the Court.I doe well remember (quoth she) the first do∣sen yeares of her Highnesse reigne, how happy, pleasant and quiet they were, with all manner of comfort and consolation. There was no mention then of fctions in religion, neither was any man much noted or rejected for that cause: so other∣wise his conversation were civill and couteous. No suspition of treason, no talke of bloudshed, no complaint of troubles, miseries, or vexations, All was peace, all was love, all was joy, all was delight. Her Mjestie (I am sure) took more Re∣creation at that time in one day, than shee doth now in a whole week: and wee that served her Highnesse, enjoyed more contentation in a weeke, than we can now in divers yeares. For now, there are so many suspitions every where, for this thing, and for that, as we cannot tell whom to trust. So mny melancholick in the Court, that seem male-contented,
so many complayning or suing for their friends that are in trouble: others slip over the Sea, or retire themselves upon the suddaine: so many tales brought us of this or that danger; of this man suspected, of that man sent for up, and such lke unpleasant, nd unsavorie stuffe; as we can never almost bee merry one whole day toge∣ther. Wherefore (quoth this Lady) wee that are of her Majesties traine and speciall service, and doe not onely feele these things in our selves, but much more in the grief of her most excellent Ma∣jesty whom we see dayly molested herewith (be∣ing one of the best natures, I am sure, that ever noble Princesse was indued withall:) wee cannot but mone,More mo∣deration wished in matters of faction. to behold contentions advanced so far forth as they are: and we could wish most hearti∣ly that for the time to come these matters might passe with such peace, friendship, and tranquillity, as they doe in other Countryes, where difference in religion breaketh not the band of good fellow∣ship. or fidelity. And with this in a smiling man∣ner she brake off, asking pardon of the company, if she had spoken her opinion over boldly, like a woman. To whom answered a Courtier that fate next her: Madame,The speech of a Cour∣tier. your Ldiship hath said nothing in this behalfe, that is not dayly debated amongst us, in our common speech in Court as you know. Your desire also heein is a publick desire, if it might be brought to pss: for there is no man so simple, that seeth not how perilous these con∣tentions and divisions among us may bee in the end. And I have heard divers Gentlemen that be lead, discourse at large upon this argument: alleaging old examples of the Athenians, Lace∣demonians
Carthigenians,The perill of divisions & factions in a Com∣monwealth and Romans, who re∣ceived notable dammages, and destruction also in the end, by their divisions and factions among themselves, and spcially from them of their own Cities and Countries, who upon factions lived a∣broad with Forrainers: and thereby were always as fire-brands, to carry home the flame of Warre upon their Countrey. The like they also shewed by th long experi∣ence of all the great Cities and States of Italy: which by their factions and forucites, were in continuall gar-boyle, bloud-shed and miserie. Whereof our owne countrey hath also tasted her part, by the odious contention between the hou∣ses of Lancaster and Yorke: wherein it is marvai∣lous to consider, what trouble a few men often∣times, departing out of the Realme, were able to worke by the part of their fction rmaining at home (which commonly encreaseth towad them that are absent) & by the readines of forain Princes, to receive lwyes, and comfort such as are disconten in another state: to the end, that by their meanes, thy might hold an Ore in their neighbours boat: Which Prince that ae ngh borderers, doe alwayes above all other things most covet and dsire. This was that Courtiers speech and reason, whereby I perceived,The dange∣rous sequel of dissenti∣on in our Realme. that aswell among thm in Cout, as among us in the Ralme and Counry abroad, the present i convnience and dangerous sequell of this our home disention, is espyed, and consequently most English hearts inclined to wish the rmedy or pevention thereof, by some rea∣sonable modration, or re-union among our selves. For that the prosecution of these dffern∣ces to extraitie, cannot but after many wounds
and exulcerations bring matters finally to rage, fury, and most deadly desperation. Whereas on the other side, if any sweet qualifi∣cation, or small tolleration among us were ad∣mitted: there is no doubt, but that affaires would passe in our Realme with more quietnesse, safety and publike weale of the same, then it is like it will doe long: and men would easily be brought, that have English bowells, to joyne in the pre∣servation of their Countrey from ruine, bloud∣shed, and forraine oppression, which desparation of factions is wont to procure. I am of your opinion (quoth the Gentleman) in that, for I have seene the experience thereof,Gentl. and all the world beholdeth the same at this day, in all the Countries of Germanie, Polonia, Boe∣land,Examples of tollera∣tion in mat¦ters of reli∣gion. and Hungarie: where a little bearing of the one with the other, hath wrought them much ease, and continued them a peace, whereof all Eu∣rope besides hath admiration and envie. The first 12 years also of her Majesties reign, whereof your Lady of the Court discoursed of before,Germany. can well bee a witnesse of the same: wherein the commi∣seration and lenity that was used towards those of the weaker sort, with a certaine sweet dili∣gence for their gaining, by good means was the cause of much peace, contentation, and other be∣nefit to the whole body. Wee see in France, that by over much pressing of one part onely,The breach & reunion again in France. a fie was inkindled not many yeaes since, like to have consumed and destroyed the whole: had not a necessry mol∣lification been thought upon by the wisest of that Kings Councell full contrary to the will and in∣clination of som great personages, who meant perhaps to have gained more by the other:
and since that time we see what peace, wealth, and re-union hath ensued in that Country that was so broken, dissevered, and wasted before. And all this, by yeelding a litte in that thing, which no force can master, but exulcerate rather, and make worse: I meane the conscience and judgement of men in matters of Religion. The like also I could name you in Flanders,Flanders. where after all these broyles and miseries of so many yeares warres (caused principally by too much streyning in such affaires at the beginning) albeit the King bee never so strict-laced, in yeel∣ding to publike liberty, and free exercise on both parts: yet is he descended to this at length (and that upon force of reason) to abstaine from the pursuit and search of mens consciences, not only in the townes, which upon composition hee recei∣veth, but also where he hath recovered by force, as in Torney, and other places: where I am informed that no man is searched, demanded, or molested for his opinion or conscience, nor any act of Papi∣stry or contrary religion required at their hands, but are permitted to live quietly to God and themselves, at home in their owne houses: so they performe otherwise their outward obedience and duties to their Prince and Countrey. Which only qualification, tollerance, and moderation in our Realme (if I bee not deceived, with many more hat be of my opinion) woul content all divis∣ons, factions, and parties among us, for their continuance in peace: bee they Papists, Puritans, Familians: or of whatsoever nice difference or section besides, and would be sufficient to retaine all parties within a temperate obedience to the Magistrate and government, for conservation of their Countrey: which were of no small impor∣tance
to the contentation of her Majesty, and the weale publick of the whole kingdome. But what should I talke of this thing which is so contrary to the desires and designements of our puissant Conspirators?Moderati∣on impug∣ned by the conspira.Cicero. Cateline. What should Cicero the Senator use perswasions to Captaine Cateline, and his crew, that quietnesse and order were better than hurliburlies? Is it possible that our aspirors will ever permit any such thing, cause, or matter, to be treated in our state, as may tend to the sta∣bility of her Majesties present government? No surely, it standeth nothing with their wisedome or policy, especially at this instant, when they have such opportunity of following their owne actions in Her Majesties name, under the vizard and pretext of her defence and safety: having sowed in every mans head so many imaginati∣ons of the dangers present both abroad and at home: from Scotland, Flanders, Spaine, and Ire∣land: so man conspiracies,The Con∣spirators opportuni∣tie. so many intended murthers, and others so many contrived or con∣ceived mischiefes: as my Lord of Leicester assu∣reth himselfe that the troubled water cannot be cleared againe in short space, nor his baits and lines laid therein, easily espyed: but rather, that hereby, ere long, he will catch the fish he gapeth so greedily after: and in the meane time, for the pursuit of these crimes, and other hat he dayly will finde out, himselfe must remaine perpetuall Dictator. But what meaneth this so much inculcating of troubles, treasons, murthers, and invasions? I like not surely these ominous speeches. And as I am out of doubt, that Leicester the caster of these shadowes, doth look to play his part first in these troublesome affaires: so doe I heartily feare, that
unlesse the tyranny of this Leicestrian fury bee speedily stopped, that such miserie to Prince and people (which the Lord for his mercies sake turne from us) as never greater fell before to our miserable Countrey, is far nearer hand than is expected or suspectd. And therefore for the prevention of these cala∣mities, to tell you plainly mine opinion (good Sirs) and therewith to draw to an end of this our conference (for it waxeth late:Leycester to be called to account.) I would thinke it the most necessarie poynt of all for her Majesty to call his Lordship to account among other, and to see what other men could say against him, at length, after so mny yeares of his sole accusing, and pursuing of others. I know, and am very well assured, that no one act which her Majestie hath done since her comming to the Crowne (as shee hath done right many most highly to be commen∣ded) nor any that lightly her Majesty may doe hereafter, can be of more utility to Her selfe, and to the Realme, or, more gratefull to her faithfull and zealous subjects than this noble act of Iustice would be, for tryall of this mans deserts towards his Countrey. I say it would be profitable to her Majesty, and to the Realme, no onely in respect of the ma∣ny dangers befoe mentioned, hereby to be avoy∣ded, which are like to ensue most certainly, if his courses bee still permitted: but also for that her Majesty shall by this, dliver Her selfe from that generall grudge and griefe of mind, with great dis∣like, which many subiects, otherwise most faith∣full, have conceived against the excessive favour shewed to this man so many yeares, without de∣sert or reason. Which favour he having used to the hurt, annoyance, and oppression both of infinite
severall persons, and the whole common-wealh (as hath bin said:) the griefe and resentment thereof, doth redound commonly in such cases not only upon the person delinquent alone, but also upon the Soveraigne, by whose favour & au∣thority he offers such iniuries, though never so much against the others intēt, dsire or meaning. And hereof we have examples of sundry Prin∣ces, in all ages and Countries, whose exorbitant favour to some wicked subiect that abused the same, hath bin the cause of great dnger and ru∣ine; the sins of the favourite being returned and revenged upon the favourer. As in the Historie of the Grecians is declared, by occasion of the pittifull murther of that wise and victorious P. Philip of Macedony, who albeit,The death K Philip of Mace∣donie, and cause there of. that he were well assured to have given no offence of himself to any of his subiects, & consequently feared no∣thing, but conversed openly and confidently a∣mong them: yet, for that hee had favoured too much one uke Attalus, a proud nd insolent Courtier, and had born him out in certain of his wickednes, or at least not punished the same af∣ter it was detected and coplained upon: the parties grieved accounting the crime more pro∣per▪ and heinous on the part of him, who by office should do iustice, & protect other, than of he perpetrator, who followeth his own passi∣on and sensuality, let pass Attalus, & made their evenge upon the bloud & life of the K himself, by one Pausanias, suborned for that purpose,Pausias. in he marriage day of the Kings owne daughter. Great store of like examples may be repeated, ut of the stories of other countries, nothing be∣ng more usuall or frequent among all nations, han the aflictions of realms and kingdoms, and
the overthrow of Princes and great Potentates themselves, by their too much affection towards some unworthy particular persons: a thing in deed so common and ordinary, as it may wel seem to be the speciall Rock of all other, where∣at Kings & Princes doe make their shipwracks For if we look into the states and Monarchie all Christendoe, and consider the ruines tha have bin of any Princes or Ruler within the same: we shall find this poynt to have bin a great and principall part of the cause thereof and in our owne state and countrey, the matte is too evident.Kings of England o∣vetrwn by too much favouring of some particular men. For whereas since the Conque we number principally, three just and lawfu Kings, to have come to confusion, by alienatio of their subjects: that is, Edward the secon Rch. the second, and Henrie the sixt: this onl point of too much favour towards wicked per∣sons, was the chiefest cause of destruction in a thre. As in the first, the excessive favour t¦wards Peter Gaveston, and two of the Spencer▪ In the second,K. Edw. 2 the like extraordinarie, and indi∣creet affecion towards Robert Vere, Eurle o Oxford,K Rch. 2. and Marquesse of Dublin, and Thom Mowbray, two most turbulent and wicked me tat set the K. against his own Vncles & the no∣bility. In the third (being a simple and ho man) albeit no great exorbitant affection w seene towards any,K. Henr. 6. yet his wife Queen Marg¦rets too much favour and credit (by him n controled, towards the Marquesse of Suffolk that after was made Duke, by whose instin and wicked Counsell, she made away first t noble Duke of Gloucester, and afterward co∣mitted other things in great prejudice of t Realme, and suffered the said most impious a
sinfull Duke to range and make havock of all sort of subjects at his pleasure (much after the fashion of the Earle of Leicester now, though yet not in so high an extreame a degree: (this I say was the principall and originall cause, both before Go and man,Pol. lib. 23 hist. Angl. (as Polidore well noteth) of all the calamity and extreme desolation, which after ensued both to the King, Queene, and their onely child, with the utter extirpation of their family. And so likewise now to speak in our particu∣lar case, if there be any grudge or griefe at this day, any mislike, repining, complaint or mur∣mure against her Majesties government, in the hearts of her true and faithfull subjects, who wish amendment of that which is amisse, and not the overthrow of that which is well: (as I trow it were no wisedome to imagine there were none at all:) I dare avouch upon Consci∣ence, that either all, or the greatest part there∣of, proceedeth from this man; who by the fa∣vor of her Majesty so afflicteth her peole as ne∣ver did before him, either Gaveston, Spencer, Fere, or Mowbray or any other mischievous irant, that abused most his Princes avour within our Realme of England Whereby it is evident how profitable a thing it should bee to the whole Realme, how honourable to her Majey, and how gratefull to all her subjects, if this man at length might be called to his account. Si (quoth the Lawyer) you alleage great rea∣son,Lawyer. and verily I am of opinion, that if her Ma∣jesty knew but the tenth part of this, which you have here spoen, as also her good subjects de∣sires and complaint in this behalfe: she would well shew, that her Highnesse feareth not to
permit iustice to passe upon Leicester, or any o∣ther within her Realme, for satisfaction of her people, whatsoever some men may think and re∣port to the contrary, or howsoever otherwise of her owne milde disposition towards the per∣son, she have borne with him hitherto. For so we see that wise Princes can doe at times con∣venient, for peace and tranquillity, and publike weale: though contrary to their owne particu∣lar and peculiar inclination. As to goe no further then to the last example namd and alleaged by your selfe before: though Queen Margaret the wife of K Henrie the sixt, had favoured most unfortunately many yeares together,The pu∣nishment of William Duke of Suffolk. Wllam Duke of Suffolk (as hath bin said) whereby he committed manifold outrages, and afflicted the Realme by sundry meanes: yet she being a woman of great prudence, when she saw the whole Communalty demand justice up∣on him for his demerits, albeit she liked and lo∣ved the man still: yet for satisfaction of the people, upon so generall a complaint, shee was content first to commit him to prison, and af∣terward to banish him the Realme: but the pro∣vidence of God would not permit him so to e∣scape: for that he being incountred and taken upon the sea in his passage, he was beheaded in the ship, and so received some part of condigne punishment for his most wicked, loose, and li∣centious life. And to seeke no more examples in this case, & we know into what favour and speciall grace Sir Edmond Dudley, my Lord of Leycesters good Grandfather was crept, with King Henry the seventh, in the latter end of his reigne: and what intollerable wickednesse and mischiefe he
wrought against the whole Realme, and against infinite particular persons of the same, by the polings and oppressions which hee practised: wherby though the King received great tempo∣rall commodity at that rime,The punish¦ment of Edmond Dudley. (as her Majesty doth nothing at all by the present extortions of his Nephew:) yet for justice sake, and for meere cmpassion towards his afflicted subiects, that complained grievously of this iniquity: that most vertuous and wise Prince King Henrie was content to put from him this lewd instrument, and devillish suggestor of new exactions: whom his sonne Henrie that ensued in the Crown, cau∣sed presently before all other busines, to be cal∣led publickly to account, and for his deserts to leese his head: So as where the interest of a whole Realme, or common cause of many, ta∣keth place: the private favour of any one cannot stay a wise & godly Prince, (such as al the world knoweth her Maiesty to be) from permitting iu∣stice to have her free passage. Truely it should not (quoth the Gentleman) for to that end were Princes first elected,Gentl.The causes why Prin∣ces are cho∣sen, and do receive o∣bedience. and upon that consideration doe subiects both pay them tribute and obedience; to bee defended by them from iniuries and oppressions, and to see lawes executed, and iustice exercised, upon and towards all men with indifferency. And as for our particular case of my Lord of Ley∣cester, I doe not see in right and equity how her Maiesty may deny this lawfull desire and peti∣tion of her people. For if her highnesse doe per∣mit and command the Lawes dayly to passe up∣on thieves and murderers without exception, and that for one fact onely, as by experience we see; how then can it be dened in this mn,
who in both kinds hath committed more enor∣mous acts, then may be well recounted. Leycesters Thefts.As in the first, of theft, not onely by spoyling and oppressing almost infinite private men: but also whole Towns, Villages, Corporations, and Countries, by robbing the Realme with inordi∣nate licences, by deceiving the Crown with rac∣king, changing and imbezeling thn Lands, by a∣busing his Prince atd Soveraigne in selling his favour both at home and aroad▪ with taking bribes for matter of justice, grace, request, sup∣plication, or whatsoever sure else may depend up∣on the Court, or of the Princes authority: with seting at sale, and making open market of what∣soever her Mjesty can give, doe, or procure, be it spirituall or temprall. In which sort of traffick he committth more theft oftentimes in one day than all the way-keepers, cut-purses, conseners, pirates, burglares, or other of that art in a whole yeare, within the Realme And as for the second, which is murther, you have heard before somewhat said and proved:Leycesters murthers. but yet nothing to that which is thought to have bin in secret committed upon divers occasion at divers times, in sundry persons, of different calling in both sexes, by most variable means of killing, poysoning, charming, inchanting, con∣juring, and the like, according to the diversity of men, places, opportunities, and instruments for the same. By all which meanes, I think he hath more bloud lying upon his head at this day, crying vengeance against him at Gods hands, & her Majesty, than ever had private man in our Country efore, were he never so wicked. Wherein now, if we adde his other good beha∣viour, as his intollerable licentiousnesse in all filthy
kind and manner of carnality,A heap of Leycesters enormities that would be ready at the day of his triall. with all sort of Wives, Friends, and Kinsewomen: if wee add his iniuries aod dishonours, done hereby to infinite: if we adde his treasons, treacheries, and conspiracies about the Crowne; his disloyall behaviour, and ha∣tred against her Majesty, his ordinarie lying, and common perjuring himselfe in all matters for his gain, both great and smal; his rapes and most vio∣lent extortions upon the poore; his abusing of the Parliament and other places of justice, with the Nobility and whole Communalty besides; if we add also his open injuries which hee offereth dyly to Religion, and the Ministers thereof, by tithing them, and turning all to his owne gaine; together with his manifest and known tyranny practised to∣wards all estates abroad, throu bout all Shires of the kingdome; his dispoyling of both the Vniver∣sities, and dscouraging of infinite notable wits there, from seeking perfection of knowledge and learning, (which oherwise were like to become notable) especially in Gods word (which giveth life unto the soule,) by defrauding them of the price and reward proposed for their travail in that kind, through his insatiable Simoniacall contracts: if I say, we should lay together all these enormities be∣fore her Majesty, and thousands more in particu∣lar, which might and would be gathered, if his day of his triall were but in hope to be granted. I do not see in equity and reason, how her Highnesse sittg in throne, and at the royall sterne, as shee doth, could denie her Subiects this most lawfull request; considering, that every one of thse crimes apart, requireth justce of his owne nature; and much more all together ought to obtaine the same, at the hands of any good and godly Magistrate in the World.
No doubt (quoth I but that these considera∣tions must needs weigh much with any zealous Prince and much more with her most excellent Majesty whose tender heart towards her Realm and Subjects,Schollar. Her Ma∣iesties ten∣der heart towards the ealme. is very well known of all men. It is not to be thought also but that her Highnesse hath intelligence of divers of hese matters al∣leaged, though not perhaps of all. But what would you have her Majesty to doe? perhaps the consultation of this affaire, is not, what were convenient, but what is expedient: not, what ought to bee done in justice, but what may bee done in safety. You have described my Lord be∣fore to be a great man, strongly furnished and fortified for a events. What if it be not secure to bark at the Bear that is so wel britched? I speak unto you, but that which I heare in Cambrdge and other places where I have passed: where e¦very mans opinion is, that her Mjesty standeth not in free choyse to doe what her selfe best li∣keth in tht case, at this day. Gentl. Lycestrs dsire that men should thnike er Maiesty? to stand in fare of him.I know said the Gentleman) that Leicesters friends give it out every where that her Maiesty now s their good Lords prisoner, and that shee eithr will or mu be directed by him for the time to come, except she will do worse: Which thing his Lordship is well contented should bee spread abroad, and believed for two causes: the one to hold the people thereby more in awe of himself, than of their overaign: and secondly to daw her Majesty indeed by degrees to fear him. For considering with himelfe what hee hath done: and that it is impssible in truth that ever her Majesty should love him again, or trust him ater so many treacheries as he well knoweth are com to her Highnes understanding: he thinketh
that he hath no way of sure standing, but by terror and opinion of his puissnt greatnesse; wherby he would hold her Majesty and the Realme in thral∣dome, as his father did in his time before him. And then, for that he wel remembreth the true saying, Malus custo diuturnitatis, metus:Cicero in Officio. he mut provide shortly, that those which feare him, be not able to hurt him: and consequently you know what must follow, by the example of K. Edward, who feared Duke Dudley extreamly for that he had cut off his two Vncles heads,A rule of Machivell observed by the Dudlies and the Duke took order that he should never live to revenge the same For it is a setled rule of Machiavel, which the Dudlies doe observe: That. wher you have once done a great injury, there must you never forgive. But I will tell you (my friends) and I will tell you no ūruth,Leycester strong onely by her Ma∣iesties fa∣vour. for that I know what I speak here∣in, and am privie to the state of my Lord in this behalfe, and of mens opinions and affections to∣wards him within the Realme. Most certaine it is, that hee is strong by the present favour of the Prince (as hath bin shewed before) in respect wher∣of, he is dmitted also as chief patron of the Hun∣tington faction, though neither loved, nor greatly trusted of the same: but let her Mjesty once turn her coutenance aside from him in good earnest, and speak but the word only, that iustice shall take place against him; nd I will undertake with ga∣ging of both my life and little lands that God hath given me, that without ur or trouble, or any dan∣ger in the world, the Beare shall be taken to her Majesties hand, and fast chained to a stake,An offer made for taking and tying the Beare. with mouzell, cord, collar, and ring, and all other things necessry: so that her Majesty shal bat him at her pleasure, without all danger of byting, breaking loose, or any othr inconvenience whatsoever.
For (Sirs) you must not think, that this man hol∣deth any thing abroad in the Realme but by vio∣lence, and that onely upon her Majesties favour and countenance towards him. He hath not any thing of his owne, either from his ancestors, or of himselfe, to stay upon, in mens hearts or con∣ceits: he hath not ancient Nobility, as other of our realm have, wherby mens affections are great∣ly moved. His father John Dudley was the first noble of his line;Leicester what hee receiveth from his ancestors who raised and made himselfe big by supplanting of other, and by setting debate among the Nobilitie: as also his grandfather Ed∣mond, a most wicked Promoter, and wretched Pe∣tifogger, enriched himselfe by other mens ruines: both of them condemned Traitors, though diffe∣rent in quality, the one being a consener, and the other a tyrant, and both of their vices conjoyned, collected, and comprised (with many more addi∣tions) in this man (or beast rather) which is Ro∣bert, the third of their kin and kind. So that from his ancestors, this Lord receiveth neither honour nor honesty, but onely succession of treason and infamy. And yet in himselfe hath he much lesse of good, wherewith to procure himselfe love or credit a∣mong men, than these ancestors of his had; hee being a man wholy abandoned of humane vertue, and devoted to wickednes, which maketh men e∣dible both to God and man. In his father (no doubt) there were to be seen many excellent good parts, if they had been joyned with faith, honesty, moderation and loyalty.The com∣parison of Leycester with his father. For all the world know· that he was very wise, valiant, magnanimous, libe∣rall, and assured friendly where he once promised: of all which vertues my Lord his son hath nei∣ther shew nor shadow, but onely a certaine false
representation of the first, being craftie and sub∣tile to deceive, and ingenious to wickednesse. For as for valour, he hath as much as hath a mouse: his magnanimity is base sordidity: his liberality ra∣pine: his friendshp plaine fraud, holding onely for his gaine, and no otherwise, though it were bound with a thousand oathes; of which he ma∣keth as great account, as hens doe of cackling, but onely for his commodity: using them specially and in gryatest number, when most he meaneth to deceive. Namely, if he sweare solemnly by his George, or by the eternall God, then be sure it is a false lye: for these are observations in the Court: and sometimes in his owne lodging; in like case his manner is to take up and sweare by the Bible, whereby a Gentleman of good account, and one that seemeth to follow him, (as many do that like him but a little) protested to me of his knowledge, that in a very short space, hee observed him wit∣tingly and willingly to be forsworn sixteen times. This man therefore so contemptible by his an∣cestors, so odible of himselfe, so plunged,The weak∣nesse  Leycesr if er Ma∣jsty turne but her countece from him. over∣whelmed and defamed in all vice, so envyed in the Court, so detested in the Country, and not trusted of his owne and dearest friends, nay (which I am privie to) so misliked and hated of his owne servants about him, for his beastly life, nigardy, and Atheisme (being never seene yet to say one private prayer within his chamber in his life) as they desire nothing in this world so much as his ruine, and that they may be the first, to lay hands upon him for revenge. This man (I say) so broken both within & without, is it possible that her Ma∣jesty and her wise Councell should feare? I can never believe it, or if it be so, it is Gods permission without all cause, for punishment of our sins: for
that this man, if he once perceive indeed that they feare him, will handle them accordingly, and play the Beare indeed: which inconvenience I hope they will have care to prevent, and so I leave it to God, and them, craving pardon of my Lord of Leicester for my boldnes, if I have been too plain with him. And so I pray you let us goe to supper, for I see my seruant expecting yonder at the Gal∣lery doore to call us downe. To that, said the Lawyer, I am content with all my heart;Lawyer. The end and depar∣ture from the Galle∣rie. and I would it had beene sooner, for that I am afraid, lest any by chance have ovr∣heard us here since night. For my owne part, I must say, that I have not been at such a conference this seven years, nor meane to bee hereafter, if I may escape well with this; whereof I am sure I shall dreame this fortnight, and thinke oftner of my Lord of Leicester, than ever I had intended: God amend him and me both. But if ever I heare at other hands of these matters hereafter, I shall surely be quake britch, and thinke every bush a theefe. And with that, came up the Mistris of the house to fetch us down to supper, and so all was husht, saving that at supper a gentleman or two began again to speak of my Lord, and that so co∣formable to some of our former speech (as indeed it is the common talke at tables every where) that the old Lawyer begn to shrink and be appled, and to cast dry looks upon the Gentleman ou friend, doubting lest something hd been discove∣rd of our confeence. But indeed it was not so.
Pia et utilis Meditatio, desumpta ex libro Iobi. Cap, 20. HOc scio a principio, ex quo positus est homo supe terram, quod laus impiorum brevis sit, et gaudi∣um hypocritae ad insta puncti. Si ascenderit us{que} ad coelum superbia ejus, et caput ejus nubes tetigerit: quasi sterquilinium in fine perdetur, et qui eum vide∣rant, dicent ubi est? velut somnium avolans non inv∣nietur, transiet sicut visio nocturna. Oculus qui eum vi∣derat, non videbit, ne{que} ultra intuebitur eum locus su∣s. Filii eius atterentur egestate, & manus illius red∣dent es laborem suum. Ossa eius implebuntur vitiis a∣dolescentiae ejus, & cum eo in pulvere dormient. Pa∣is eius in utero illius vertetur in fl aspidum intrin∣secus. Divitias quas devoravit, evomet, et de venre illius extrabet eas Deus. Caput aspidum surget, & occidet cum lingua viprae. Luet quae fecit omnia, nec tamen consumetur. Iuxta multitudinem adinventio∣num suarum, sic et sustinebit. Quoniā cōfringens nu∣dabit pauperes: domum rapuit, & non aedificavit eam, nec est satiatas venter eius, & cum habuerit quae concupierit, possidere non poterit. Non reman sit de ci∣bo eius, & propterea non permanebit de bonis eius. Cū satiatus fuerit, arctabitur, aestuabit, & omnis dolor irruet super eum. Vtinam impleatur venter eius, ut immitat in ú (Deus) iā fuoris sui, & pluat super illum bellum suum. Fugiet arma ferrea, & irruet in arcum aereum. Gladius eductus & egrediens de va∣gina sua, & fulgurans in amaritudine sua: Omnes te∣nebrae absconditae sunt in occultis eius. Devorabit e∣um ignis qui non succenditur, affligetur relictus in ta∣bernaculo suo. Apertum it gemen domus illius, de∣trabetur in de furoris dei Haecest pars bominis im∣pii, à deo, & hereditas verborum ejus à domino.
A Godly and profitable Meditation, taken out of the 20. Chapter of the Booke of Job. The wic∣ked mans pomp.THis I know from the first, that man was pla∣ced upon earth, that the praise (or applause given to wicked men, endureth but a little, an the joy of an hypocrite is but for a momen Though his pride were so great as to mount t heaven,His joy. His pride. His fall. and his head should touch the skyes, ye in the end shall hee come to perdition as a dun¦hill, and they who beheld him (in glory befor shall say, where is he? he shall be found as a fl¦ing dreame, and as a phantasie by night shall  away. The eye that beheld him before, shall  more see him, nor yet shall his place (of honou ever more behold him. His children shall be wor¦out with beggeie,His chil∣dren. His old age and his owne hands shall r¦turne upon him his sorrow. His (ol) bones  be replenished with the vices of his youth, are they shall sleep with him in his grave.His bread. His brea in his belly shl be turned inwardly into the  of Serpents.His resti∣tution. The riches which hee hath devou he shall vomit forth againe, and God shll  them forth of his belly. He shall suck th head  Cocatrices, and the (venemous) ongues of add shall slay him▪His punish∣ment. He shall sustaine due punishme for all the wickednes that he hath committed,  yet shall he have end or consummation thereo Hee shall suffer according to the multitude of  his wicked inventions.His wic∣kednesse. For that by violence he hath spoyled the poore, made havock of his hou
and not builded the same. His womb is never sa∣tisfied, & yet when he hath that which he desired, he shall not bee able to possesse the same. There remaineth no part of his meat (for the poore:) and therefore there shall remaine nothing of his goods.His griefe. When his belly is full then shall he begin to be straitned, then shall he sweat, and all kinde of sorrow shall rush upon him.His affli∣ction. I would his belly were once full, that God might send out upon him the rage of his fury, and raine upon him his war. He shall flye away from Iron weapons, and run upon a bow of brasse. A drawne sword com∣ming out of his skabard shall flash as lightning in his bitternesse.His dam∣nation. All daknesse lye hidden for him in secret: the fire that needeth no kindling shll devoure him, and hee shall be tormented a∣lone in his tabernacle.His poste∣rity. The off-spring of his house shall be made open, and pulled down, in the day of Gods fury. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and this is the inheri∣tance of his substance from the Lord. FINIS.
LEICESTER'S GHOST. Printed, Anno Dom. MDCXLI.
LEICESTER'S GHOST. J That sometimes shin'd like the orient Sunne, Though Fotuns subject, yet a puissant Lord, Am now an object to be gaz'd upon, An abject rather fit to be deplor'd Dejected now that whilome was ador'd: Affected once, suspected since of many Rejected now, repected scarce of any. My Spirit hovering in the foggie aire Since it did passe the frozen Stygian flood, Vnto great Britines Empire did repaire; Where of ELIZA's death I understood, And that the heavens carefull of Englands good Rais'd up a King, who crowned with loves peace Brought in new soyes & made old griefes to cea Thus from the concave vaults of starlesse night Where neither sunne nor moone vouchsaf to shire My wretched Ghost a length is come to light By charers granted from the powers divine Snake-eating envie, ô doe not repine At honous-shdow, doe not bite the dead, My pride is past, my pompe from th'earth is fle My Princely birth, my high enobled state My somtime-dreadfull frownes now none regard; My great good-turnes to many done of late With gratefull hearts, now few or none reward My fame is blotted out, my honour scar'd; My monuments defac'd, my reliques torne Yea, vassiles doe my Excellency scorne.
Ah silly peasants, as each Greeian boy, Would brave stout Hector being dead and cold, That whilome was the piller of old Troy, Whose presence living they durst scarce behold, Now since you see me dead you grow so bold, As to controle my acts, whose lookes did daunt The proudest Peeres that liv'd in Troynvant. A time there was, when stately Beares could clime, And in that time, was I a stately Beare; Who climb'd so fast and in a little time, That my high mounting other beasts did feare My fortunes, by their downfals I did reare: I now rejoyce, whilst others I made mourne, And serv'd the time to make time serve my urne. I was the off-spring of a Princely Syre He too well knew by his clime-falling pride Like Delalus hee taught me to aspire; Wee both did flie▪ he fell, I did but slide; Like in attempts, yet unlike chance we tryed: Hee by a Queene did dye, and as that chanc'd, I by a Queene did live, and was advanc'd. For Lady lane by him a Queene proclam'd Was soone supprest, Queene Mary got the Crowne, Which as her proper right she boldly claim'd, My Father striv'd in vaine to keepe her downe, And for that lost his life, I my renowne, Till sacred Cynthia to the Kingdome came, That gave new life to my lat dying fame. That Peerelesse Queene of happie memoty That late like Debora the Kingdome swaid, Now triumphs in the Iasper coloured skie With starre-embrodered vesture rich arrayed; Shee, shee restor'd my honours then decay'd When treason did attaint my Fathers bloud, And drown'd our Princely race in Lethes floud.
Then Iupiter was in my Horoscope And Cinthia blest me with her faire aspect, What might not then my youth and courage hope When me my Soveraignes favour did protect, O what may not a Princesse grace effect When Majestie on hopelesse men doth smile Whose joyes did seeme to perish in exile. Even when Queene Maries tragick Raigne did end My comick fortunes in their prime begun That tim when Cinthia's brightnesse did extend To lighten this darke Land whose splendant Sunne Was in Eclipse and sorrowes streame did runne I like the glorious day-starre did appeae With faire uprise, to grace this Hemispheare. Since Brute first sway'd all this united Land No Subject firmer held his Soveraignes grace, My will imperiall for a Law did stand, Such was my Princes pleasure, such my place, As Momus durst not offer me disgrace; What man did smile when Leisters brow did frowne Whose wit could guide, though never get the Crown Whilst in this glorious Ocean I did swim To high preferment divers men I brought, Which since have fought my Honours Lamp to dim, Yea such as I before advanc'd of nought Against my person treacheries have wrought, Thus honours doe oft-times good manners change, And men grown rich to anciēt friends grow strange. I grieve to thinke, I did such men advance And raise their base lines to a stately pitch Vnder the shadow of my countenance The substance of the Earth did make them rich, What fury did their sences thus bewitch, Or was it some ill Spiit that possest them? To seeke my ruine, whose large bounty blest them.
Thus they in vaine my downefall did conspire Like dogs that at the Moone doe fondly barke And did but burne themselves like Aetna's fire, Or like grim Owles did wonder in the darke Contem'd of me that mounted like the Larke, Or that rare bird that builds her nest on high In Cedar Trees whose tops affront the skie. When I commanded who durst countermand Were not meane subiects, subject to my beck, What man of worth my pleasure did with-stand, What simple swaines could doe, I did not wreake I gave the mate to those that gave me chck By the Queenes helpe and threatning lookes I rul'd the pawnes, the Bishops, Knighs, & Rooks. Thus did I play at Chesse and wonne the gme Having the queene my puissance to support, The Bishops for ambition did me blame The pawnes affirm'd I wan by much extort The Rooks & Knights foūd draughts to ma my sport, Had not some stopt me with hir timely check, I might have given them chek without their nek. My braine had wit, my tongue was eloquent Fit to discourse or tell a Couly tale My presence portly brave Mgnificent, My words imperious, stout, substantiall My gestures loving, kind, Heroicall; My thoughts ambitious, proud, and full of ie, My deeds were good or bad as times require Some of my foes that bare me deadly hate, That had to them chiefe Offices assign'd, And were my fellow Consuls in the State ealous still of my aspiring mind Gave me this praise though otherwise vnkind, That I was wondrous politique and wise, A States-man that knew how to temporise.
Some othes tooke me for a zealous man Becaue good Peachers I did ptronize, And many thought me a Precisian But God doth know, I never was precise I seem'd devout in godly exercise: And by Religions shew confirm'd my might But who dust say, I was an hypocite. As Nima when he fist did seeke to draw The Roman people undrneath his yoke, Touchng Relgion he ordain'd a Law And fyned he with Nimph Egeria spoke That him to thi good motion did provoke: Whereby as if it were with heavens consent He brought his men to civill government. So when I came in hgh affaires to deale Of sound Religion I did make a show And by pretence of hot and ferven zeale In wealth and faction I moe strong did grow For this by practice I did plainly know; That mn are apt to yeeld to any motion Made by a mn that is of pue devotion. Yet could I straine my Conscience for a need, For though I seem'd an earnest Protestant For gine I favour'd Papist so indeed, Some held me for a newter, and I grant To serve my turne I would turne Puritant: Thus by Religion, honour some doe winne And this faie cloke oft covers filthy sinne. Like as the ayre-sucking-Chamelion Can him transforme to any hue save white; So men can turne to any fashion Save to that forme which is sincere and right, For though he may delude the peoples sight, It is in vaine before God to dissemble Whose power the Divel know, & knowing trem
Was I the onely man that hath offended In making holinesse a cloake for sinne? The Frenchmen for religions sake pretended Their civill Warres of late time did begin, But yet ambition chiefly drew them in, Ye mad ambition, and desire of gaine Makes endlesse broyles betwixt the States & Spain Of promises, I was so prodigall, So kind, well spoken, and so liberall, That to some great Divine as it might fall Perhaps I promised a Bishoprick, But in performance I was nothing quick; Thus with faire wods, mens humours oft I fed Whilst hope this while a good opinion bred. To learned Schollers I was something franck Not for the love that I to leaning bore, But either to get praise or pick a thanke Of such as could the Muss aide implore To consecrate my name for evermore; For he is blest that so befriended dyes Whose praise the Muss will immortalize. You that desire to have your fame survive When you within your graves intomb'd shall lye, Cherish those sacred Sisters while you live For they be daughters of Dame memory Of he thunding Monarch of the sky: They have the gift to register with pen Th' eternall fame or infamy of men. The Students of the Vniversity Oxford whereof I was the Chancellor, That Nurse of science and Philosophy Knowing the greatnesse of my wit and power Did honour me as the faire springing flower; That in the Princesse favour highly grew Whom she with showrs o gold did of bdew.
At my command both Dee and Allen tended By Magick Art my pleasure to fulfill These to my service their best studies bended, And why they durst not disobey my will, Yea whatsoever was of secret skill In Oxford or in Cambridge to be sold I bought for love, for feare, or else for gold. Doubtlesse the most renown'd Philosophers As Plato and Pithagoras have sought To learne the Hierogliphick Characters And secrets which by Magick skill are wrought, Such as th'Egyptians, sewes, and Chaldees taught: Th'art's not ill if men doe not abuse it, No fault so bad, but some men will excuse it. Lopus and Iulio were my chiefe Physitians, Men that were cunning in the Art to kill Good Schollers but of passing ill conditions, Such as could ridde mens lives yet no blood spill, Yea and with such dexterity and skill Could give a dram of poyson that could slay At end of the yeare, the moneth, the weeke or day▪ I never did these wicked men imploy To wrong my Prince or my true loving friend But false deceitfull wretches to destroy And bring them to an vnexpected end Let them looke to it that did most offend, Whose names are Registred in Pluto's scroules, For I will never answer for their soules. Knights and Esquires the best in every shire Did waite on me in England up and downe, And some among them did my Livery weare My smiles did seeme to promise them renowne, But dismall haps insu'd when I did frowne As when the starre Arcturus doth appeare Of raging Tempests Sea-men stand in feare.
As for the Souldiers and the men of warre At home in service some I did retaine, Others I sent abroad not very farre At my commandment to returne againe, These I with cost did secretly maintaine That if ought chanced otherwise then well, I might haue sent my foes to heauen or hell. Likewise I brought the Lawyers in some awe, The worthy students of the Innes of court, That then applied them to the common Law, Did yeeld to me in matters of import, Although sometimes I did the Lawe extot, And whether right or wrong, my cause once heard, To plead against me made great Lords afeard. So the Lord Barkley, lost good lands by me, Whereof perchance at fist he did not dreame, Might many times doth overcome the right, It is in vaine to strive against the streame, When he that is chiefe subiect in the Realme, Vpon his Princes favour rests him bold, He cannot or he will not be controld. Thus by the Queene my puissance was upheld, And for my foes I euer was too strong, The grace I had from her all feare expeld, I might wrong others, but not suffer wong, So many men did unto me belong, Which on my favour chiefely did depend, And for my sake both goods, and land would spend. The best esteemed Nobles of the land. On whose support the publique state relied, Were linckt with me in friendships faithfull band, Or else in kindred nerely were allied, Their perfect loues and constant hearts I tried, The inferior sort at our devotion stood Ready to execute what we thought good.
The Earle of Warwicke my owne loving brother My sisters Husband th'Earle of Huntington, The bounteou Earle of Bedford was another Of my best friends belov'd of every one Sir Henry Sidneys power in Wales well knowne▪ And there the Earle of Pembroke chiefe of all Of kine my iend what ever thence might fall In Barwic my wives Vncle had chiefe power The Lord of Hunsdon my assured fiend, In Ireland the Lord Grey was Governour, Gernsey and Iersey, likewise did depend Vpon such men, as did my will attend: Hopton my man Lieutenant of the Tower Was prompt to doe me service at an houre. Sir Edward Horsey in the Isle of Wight And noble Sir George Cy next bore sway, Men of great courage and no little might To take my part in any doubtfull fray In London the Recorder Fleetwood lay: That often us'd good words that might incense The Citizens to stand in my defence. The Premises did likewise take my part As I in private quarrels oft have tryde, So that I had the very head and heart The Court and City leaning on my side, With flattery some, others with gifts I plyd, And some with threats, stern looks & angry words. I wonne to my defence with Clubs and Swords. Thus I by wisedome and fine poilicie, Maintain'd the reputation of my life, Drawing to me the flowre of Chivalrie To succour me at need in civill strife Men that lov'd change in every place were rife: And all the realme was wt my power possest Think what this might have wrought but judge the best.
Like Claudius Marcellus drawne through Rome In his faire chariot which with Trophees deckt, Crowned with Garlands by the Senates doome, Whom they five times their Consul did elect That from their foes he might their lives protect: When he wih conquest did his Country greet Loaden with spoyles lay prostrate at his feet. So did I ride in tryumph through chiefe townes As if I had beene Vice-roy of this Land, My face well grac'd with smiles, my purse with crowne Holding the reynes of honour in my hand, I managed the state, I did command: My lookes with humble majesty repleat, Made some men wish me a Kings royall seat. Thus waxt I popular to purchase fame To me the common peoples knees did bow, I could my humour still so fitly frame To entertaine all men to outward shew With inward love, for few my heart did know: And that I might not seeme puft up with pride Bare-headed oft through Cities I did ride. While some cry'd out, God save you gracious Lord, Lord how they did my fame hyperbolize My words and gestures did so well accord As with their hearts I seem'd to simpathize, I charm'd their eares and did inchant their eyes: Thus I was reckoned their chiefe Potentate No poller but a piller of the stte. Then I was call'd the life and th'heart o'th'Court And some I wot wisht I had beene the head, I had so great a trayne and such a port, As did the pompe of Martimer exceed, Who as in th'English Chronicles we read, When second Edward lost his Kingly rights Was waited on at once with nine-score Knights.
That Earle of March and Roger Mortimer, Rul'd the young King, queene mother, and the Peeres I Robert Dulley Earle of Leicester, Did sway in court and all the English steeres, His rule was short, mine flourisht many yeares He did his life with ignominy loose, I lived and triumpht o're my proudest foes. As the Image of great Alexander dead, Made king Cassander tremble at the sight, Spying the figure of his Royall head, Whose presence sometime did the world affright, Or like as Caesrs Monarchising spright, Pursued false Brutus at Philipps field, Till he that slew his Liege himselfe ws kild. So view yee petty Lords my Princely ghost, I speake to you whose hearts be full of gall, I whilst I liued was honour'd of the most, And either fear'd for love of great and small, Or lov'd for feare of such as wisht my fall, Behold my shadow representing state, Whose person sometime did your pride abate. Weigh what I was, knights, gentlemen, and Peeres, Whē my death threatning frowns did make you quake As yet they have not passed many yeares, Since I your plumes pluckt, iofty crest's did shake Then tell me Sirs, for old acquaintance sake, Wax yee not pale to heare of Leisters name, Or to backebite me blush ye not for shame. You say in dealings that I was unjust, As if true Iustice ballance yee could guide, Had I dealt justly I had turnd to dust Long before this, your corps swolne vp with pride, Which now surviving doe my acts deride, My fame yet liues though death abridgd my daies, Some of you di'd that over-liu'd your prayse.
Are there not some among you Parasites, Time-servers, and observers of no measure, Prince-pleasers, people-pleasers, hypocrites, Dambd Machiavilians giuen to lust and pleasure, Church-robbers, beggers of the Princes treasure, Truce-breakers, Pirats, Athiests, Sicophants, Can equity, dwell heere where conscience wants. And yet you thinke none justly deales but you, Divine Astrea vp to heauen is fled, And turnd to Libra, there looke up and view Her ballance in the zodiacke figured, Iust Aristides once was banished, Where liues his match whom enuy did pursue- Because men thought he was to just and true. Yee say, ambition harbourd in my braine, I say ambition is no heynous sinne To men of state, do stately thoughts pertaine, By baser thoughts what honour can he win, Who ever did a great exploit begin, Before ambition moved him to the deed And hope of honour, urg'd him to proceed. Themistocles had never put to flight, Zerxzes huge host, nor tam'd the Persians pride, Nor sad King Tarsus got by martiall fight, The Romane spoyles with conquest on his side, If first ambition had not beene their guide, Had not this humor their stout hearts allure, To high attempts their fame had beene obscure. The Eagle doth disdaine to catch poore flyes, The Lyon with the Ape doth scorne to play, The Dolphin doth the whirlpoole low dispise, Thus if Birds, Beasts, and Fishes beare such sway, If they would teach vnderlings to obey, Much more should men whom reason doth adorne, Be noble minded and base fortunes scorne.
Admit I could dissemble wittily, This is no grievous sinne in men of state; Dssembling is a point of policie Plaine dealing now growes stale and out of date: Wherefore I oft conceal'd my private hate Till I might find fit time though long I stay'd To wreake the wrath that in my heart I layd. Th'old Proverbe is, plaine dealing is a jewell, And he that useth it a Begger dyes, The world is now adayes become so cruell That Courtiers doe plaine Cuntry-men despise, Quicke wits and cunning heads doe quickly rise. And to be plaine, yee must not plainly deale That office seeke in Court or Common-weale. Now Aristippus is in more request That knew the way to please a Monarchs mind, Then that poore cynicke swad that us'd to jest At every idle knave that he could find, To unkind friends yee must not be too kind: This is a maxime which to you I give, Men must dissemble or they cannot live. Yee say, I was a coward in the field, I say it fits not such a noble wight To whom his Countrey doth the title yeeld Of Lord-Lieutenant with full power and might To venture his owne person in the fight: Let others dye, which as our vassailes serve While heaven for better haps our hopes preserve. How soone did Englands joy in France diminish When th' Earle of Salisbury at Orleance By Gun-shot stroke, his honour'd life did finish; When Talbt that did oftentimes advance The English ensignes in disgrace of France, Was at the last invironed and slaine Whose name the French-mens terror doth remaine
And what a fatall wound did Rome receive By Crassus death whom faithlesse Parthians slew, How did the Senate for Flamnius grieve And for Aemilius death, and his stout crew, Whom Haniball at Cannes dd subdue: Cut oft an arme, yet life the heart may cherish Cut of the head and every part will perish. Ipcrates th'Athenian us'd to say, Vaunt-currers are like hands to bauell prest The men of armes are feet whereon to stay, The footmen as the stomach and the best, The captaine as the head above the rest: The head once crasd troubleth all the parts, The Generall slaine doh kill ten thousand hearts. Therefore a Lrd Lieutenant should take care That he in safety doe himselfe repose And should not hazard life at every dare, But watch and wad, so Fbius tir'd his foes When rash Mintus did the conquest lo: If such in open danger will intrude It is fond rashnesse and not fortitude. Yee say, I was lascivious in my love And that I tempted many a gallant Dame, Not so content, but I did also prove To winne their handmaids if I lik'd the game, Wh si yee know, love kindls such a flame As if we may believe what Poets pen It doth inchant the hearts of Gods and men. Iove lov'd the daughter of a jealous sie Danae a maid immured within a tower, Yet to accomplish th'end of his desire He metamorphiz'd to a golden shower Fell in the lap of his faire Paramour: And being tearm'd a god did not disdaine To turne to man, to beast, ad showre of raine.
Deere Lords, when Cupid throwes his fiery dars Doth none of them your tender bodies hit, Doth Citherea never charme your hearts, Nor beauty try your quintessentiall wit Perhaps you will say no, fie 'tis unfit, Now by my Garter, and my Geoge to oot, The blind God surely hits, if he doth shoote. Whereas ye doe object my Magick charmes, I sought to winne faire dames to my desire, 'Tis better so then strive by force of Armes For forced love will quickly backe retire If faire meanes cannot winne what we requie: Some secret tricks and sleights must be devised That love may even from Hell be exercised, To you dull wit it seemes impossible By drinkes or charmes this worke to passe to bring▪ Know then that Giges were invisible By turning the sigill of his Ring Toward his palme and thereby slew the King, Lay with his wife of any man unseene Lastly did raigne by marrying with the queene. King Salomon for Magick naturall Was held a cunning man by some Divines, He wrote a booke of Science naturall To bind ill Spirits in their darke confines He had great store of wives and Concubines, Yet was a Sacred King, this I inferre The wisest man that now doth live may erre. Also yee say, that when I waxed old When age and time mispent had made me dry, For ancient, held in carnall Lust is cold, Natures defect with Art I did supply And that did helpe this imbecility, I us'd strong drinks and Oyntments of great price, Whose taste or touch might make dead flesh arise
To this I answer: that those fine extractions, Drams and electuaries finely made, Serv'd not so much to helpe veneriall actions, As for to comfort nature that's decaid: Which being with indifferent judgment weigh'd, In noble men may be allowed I trust, As tending to their health, not to their lust. What if I drinke nothing but liquid gold, Lactrina, christal, pearle resolv'd in wine, Such as th'Egyptians full cups did hold, When Cleopatra with her Lord did dine; A trifle, care not, for the cost was mine? What if I gave Hippomenes to drinke To some fair Dames, at smal faults you must wink▪ Ye say I was a traytor to the Queene, And tht when Monsieur was in greatest grace, I being out of favour, mov'd with spleene, To see a Frenchman frolique in the place, Forth toward Barwick then did post apace, Minding to raise up a rebellious rout, To take my part in what I went about. That I was then a traytor I deny, But I confesse that I was Monsieurs foe, And sought to breake the league of amity, Which then betwixt my Prince and him did grow, Doubting Religion might be changed so, Or that our Lawes and customes were in danger▪ To be corrupt or altered by a stranger: Therefore I did a faction strong maintaine, Aginst the Earle of Sussx, a stout Lord On Monsieurs side, and then Lord Chamberlain, Who sought to make that nuptiall accord, Which none may breake, witnesse the sacred Word But thus it chnced, that he striv'd in vaine To knit that kot which heaven did not ordaine.
Thus did ye mis-interpret my conceis, That for disloyalty my deds did blame, Yet many men have laid their secret baits, T'intrap me in such snares to work my shame, Whom I in time sufficiently did tame; And by my Soveraignes favour bore them downe, Proving my selfe true Liegeman to the Crowne. Thinke yee I could forget my Soveraigne Lady, Tht was to me so gracious and so kinde? How many triumphs for her glory made I? O I could never blot out of my minde, What Characters of grace in her have shin'd. But some of you, which were by her pefer'd, Have with her bones almo her name inter'd. When she was gone, which of you all did weep? What mournfull song did Pilomela sing? Als! when she in deaths cold bed did sleep, Which of you all her dolefull knell did ring? How long wll yee now love your crowned King, If you so soon forget your old Queen dead, Which foure and fourty yeares hath governed? Yee say, I sought by murder to aspire, And by strong poyson many men to slay, Which as ye thought might crosse my high desire, And loud my long expected golden day, Perhaps I laid some blocks out of my way, Which hindred me from comming to the Bower, Whre Cynthia shin'd like lamps in Pharohs tower. Alas! I came not of a Tygers kinde, My hands with bloud I hated to defile; But when by good experience I did finde, How some with fained love did me beguile, Perchance all pitty then I did exile; And as it were against my will, was prest To seek their deaths that did my life detest.
Lo then, attend to heare a dolefull tale Of those whose death ye doe suppose I wrought, Yet wish I that the world beleeve not all That hath of me by envious men been wrought, But when I for a Kingly fortune sought, O pardon me, my slfe I might forget, And cast downe sme, my state aloft to set. My first wife fell downe from a paire of staires, And brake her neck, and so at Comner dy'd, Whilst her true servants led with small affaires, Unto a Fure at Abingdon did ride, This dismall hap did to my wife betide; Whether yee call it chance or destiny, Too true it is, sh dd untimely dye. O had I now a showr of teares to shed, Lockt in the empty circles of my yes, All could I shed in mourning for the dead, That lost a spouse so young, so faire, so wise, So faire a corps so foule a coarse nw lies, My hope t'have married with a famous Queene, Drave pitty back, and kept my teares unseene. What man so fond that would not lose a Pearle To finde a Diamond, leave brasse for gold: Or who would not forsake a gallant gitle, To win a Qeen, great men in awe to hold, o rule he tate, and of none be control'd? O but the stps that lead unto a hrone, Ae dngerous for men to tread upon. Te Cardinall Chatillion was my foe, Whose death peradventure did compact, Because he let Queen Elizbeth to know My false report given of a former act, How I with her had made a precontract. And the great Princes hope I bar'd thereby, That sught to marry with her Majesty.
The Prelate had bin better held his tongue, And kist his holy Fathers feet in Rome: A Masse the sooner for his soule was sung; But he might thanke me, had he staid at home, Or late or never he to heaven had come: Therefore I sent him nimbly from the coasts, Perhaps to supper with the Lord of hosts. When death by hap my first wives neck had crackt, And that my suit unto the Queene ll sped, It chaced that I made a post contract, And did in sort the Ldy Sheffld wed, Of whom I had two goodly children bred: For the Lord Sheffeild died as I was sure, Of a Catarie, which physicke could not cure. Some thinke th rhume was artificiall, Which this good Lord befo his end did take: Tush, what I gave to her was naturll, My plighted troth yet some amends did make, Though her at length, unkinde I did forske; She must not blame me, for a higher reach Made my sure promise finde a sudden breach. The valiant Earle whom absent I did wrong, In breaking Hymeneus holy band; In Ireland did protract the time too long, Whilst some in ngland ingled under hand, And at his coming homeward to this land He dyed with poyson, as they say, infected, Not without cause, for vegeance I suspcted: Because this fact notorious scandall bred, And or I did his gallant wife abuse; To salve his sore when this brave Lord was dead, I for my selfe did this faire Lady chuse, And flesh is fraile, deare Lady me excuse; It was pure love that made me undertake, This haplesse recontract with thee to make.
Now in Joves pallace that good Lord doth sup, And drink full bowles of Nector in the skie. Hunnies his pge, that tasted of that cup, Did onely loose his hire, and did not dye; True-noble Earle, thy fame to heaven doth flye. He doth repent his fault, and prdon crave, That marr'd thy bed and too soon made thy grave. Thou didst behinde thee leave a matchlesse Sonne, A peerelsse paterne for all princly peeres, Whose spaks of glory in my time begun, Kindled wth hope flm'd highly in few yeeres, But death him struk, and drown'd this land in teares; His Sonne doth live true imge of him dead, To grace this soil, whre showers of tears were shed. Thy were to blame that said the Queen should marry With me her Hors keeper, for so they call'd me. But thou Throgmarton whch his tale didst carry From France to England, hast more shrply gall'd me, Sith my good Qeene in office high extold me; For I was Mster of her Highnesse Horse, I scorne thy words, which did my hate inforce. But tell me then, how didst thou lik thy fare, When I to supper last did thee invite? If I did rid thee of a world of care, By giving hee a Salet, gentle Knight, With gastly lookes doe not my soule affrght▪ Lester I was, whom England once did dread, But now I am like thee Throgmarton, dead. My Lord of Sussex was too cholerick, That call'd me traitor and a traitors sonne; But I serv'd him a fine Italian trik; Had not I done so, I had bin undone; Now marke the end, what conquest hath he won? A litle scruple that to him I sent, Did purge his choler, till hs life was spent.
He was a gallant Noble man indeed; O but his life did still my life decrease: Therefore I sent him with convenient speed, To rest amongst his ancestors in peace: y rage was pacifi'd at his decease. And now I come t'imbrace his love too late, Him did I love, whom living I did hate. I came to visit as I chanc'd to walke My Lady of Lenox, whom I found not well, I took her by the hand, hd private talke, And so departed, a short tale to tell: When I was gone, into a flux she fell, That never ceast her company to keep, Till it had brought her to a senslesse sleep. I dream'd she had not many dayes to live; And this my dreame did shortly fall out true, So as her Ghostly Father I did give Some comfort to her soule: for well I knew That she would shortly bid the world adiew. Some say I gave such physick as did spill her; But I suppose that mere conceit did kill her. Some will object perhaps, I did pretend To meet the Earle of Ormond on a day, In single fight our quarrell for to end; But did command my servant Killygray, To lye in ambush that stout Lord to slay. But heaven did not consent to work his spoile, That was the glory of the Irish soile. Perhps I doubted that I was too weake, And loath I was he should the conquest win: If in this cause I did my promise breake, I hope men will not count it for a sin; Is it not god to sleep in a whole skin? When Hannibal could not prevaile by blowes, He used stratagems to kill his foes.
If I the death of Monsieur Simiers fought, When he from France Ambssadour was sent, I had just cause to seeke it as I thought; For towards me he bore no good intent; Had he not fled betimes, perhaps I ment T'have sent him in embassage for my pleasure To the black king that keeps Avernus treasue. For when no man about the Court durst speak, That I the Lady Lettice married, This pratling Frenchman first the ice did breake, And to the Quene the fact discovered; Which not without just cause the anger bred: Thus th'ape did play his part control'd of none, When he espi'd the Beare from home was gone. One Salvadore an Italian borne, Having once wtht with me till mid'st of night, Was found slaine in his bed the next day morne: Alas poore man I ru his wofull plight, That did in nothing but in sinne deight: Had he to honest actions bent his wit, He might have longer liv'd and scap'd this fit. But what reward should such a man expect, Whom gold to any lewdnesse could entice, Ones turne once serv'd, why should we not reject So vilde an instrument of damned vce? What if he were disptched in a trice? Was it not better this mans blood to spill, Then let him live the world with sinne to il? I doubted lest that Dughty would bewray My counsell, and with othrs party tke; Wherefore, the sooner him to rid away, I sent him forth to sea with Captaine Dk, Who knew how t'entertain him for my sake; Before he went his lot by me was cst, His death was plotted, and perform'd in hast.
He hoped well; but I did so dispose, That he at Port St. Iulian lost his head, Having no time permitted to disclose The inward griefes that in his heart were bred: We need not feare the biting of the dead: Now let him goe transported to the seas, And tell my secrets to th'Antipodes. My servant Gates did speed as ill or worse, To whom I did my close intents impart, And at his need with money stuft his purse, And wil'd him still take courage at his heart; Yet in the end he felt the deadly smart: He was inveigled by some subtle witted, To rob; so he was taken and committed. Of pardon I did put him still in hope, When he of felony was guilty found, And so condemn'd, till his last friend the Pope Did him uphold from falling to the ground. What hope of grace where vice did so abound. He was beguil'd like birds that use to gape At Zuxes table for a painted grape. Yet I did to the man no injury, And gave him time and leasure to repent, And well he knew he had deserv'd to dye, Therefore all future mischiefe to prevent, I let him slip away with my consent: For his reprivall, lke a crafty Fox, I sent no pardon but an empty Box. Else as unfaithfull Banester betraid The Dke of Buckinghm his Master deare, When he of Richards tyranny afraid, Fled to his servants house for succour there:
So might my man for gaine, or forc'd for feare, Have brought my corps with shame unto my grave, By too much trusting on a paltry knave. Me seems at me great Norfolkes Duke doth frowne, Because he thinkes I did his death contrive, Perswading some he aimed at the Crowne, And that by royall match he meant to strive A kingdome to his Lordship to revive. Alas good Dke! he was too meek and milde, And I too faithlesse that his trust beguil'd. For that I found his humour first was bent To take the Scots captived Queen to wife, I gg'd him on to follow his intent, That by this meanes I might abridge his life, And she a crowned Queen to stint all strife, First finding Scotland lost, to England fled, Where she in hope of succour lost head. O blessed Spirits, live yee evermore I heavenly Sion, where your maker reignes, And give me leave my fortunes to deplore, That am fast fetterd with sins iron chaines. Mans most sweet joys are mixt with some foul pains. And doh he live of high or low degree, In life or death that can from woe be free? Ah now my tongue growes weary to recite Such mssares as have been here exprest, Whose sad remembrance doth afflict my spright, Me thinkes I see legions of soules to rest In Abrahams bosome, and my selfe opprest. The burden of my sinnes doe weigh me downe, At me the fiends doe laugh, and Angels frowne.
My crimes I grant were geat and manifold, Yet not so heynous as men make report, But flattering Parasites are growne so bold That they of Princes matters make a sport, To please the humors of the vulgar sort: And that poore peevish giddiheaded crue, Are prone to credit any tale untrue. Let those that live endeavour to live well, Left after death like mine their guilt remaine; Let no man thinke there is no Heaven or Hell, Or with the impious Sadduces maintaine That after death no flesh shall rise againe: Let no man trust on Fortunes fickle wheele, The guerdon due for▪ ne I partly feele. Know that the Prince of heavenly Saraphins, When he 'gainst his Creator did rebell, Was tumbled downe for his presumptuous sinne; Sathan that once was blest like lightning fell From the highest heaven, to the deepest hell: And all those Angells that his part did take, Have now their portion in the burning lake. Of mighty heapes of treasure I could vant, For I reapt profit out of every thing, I could the Prince and peoples hearts inchant. With my faire words and smooth fac'd flttering, And out of drosse pure gold I oft did wring: For though the meanes to win be oft unmeet, The smell of lucre ever smelleth sweet. So I somtimes had very much good hap Great suites of my dread Soveraigne to obtaine, Prodigall fortune powr'd down from hr lap, Angels of gold as thick as drops in raine. Such was my luck to finde the golden veine; Likewise with me it seemed nothing strange, Both tents and lands oft with my Prince to change.
I had another way t'inrich my selfe By geting licences for me alone, For Wine, Oyle, Velvet, Cloath, and such like pelfe, By licences to alienation, By raising rents, and by oppression: By claiming Forrests, Pastures, Commons, Woods, And forfeiture of lands, of life and goods. By this strong course also I greatly thrived Jn falling out with my deere Soveraigne, For I the Plot so cunningly contrived, That reconcilement soone was made againe, And by this meanes great gifts I did obtaine: For that I might my bags the better fill, I beg'd great suites as pledge of new goodwill. Besides somtimes I did encrease my store, By benefit that I from Oxford tooke, Electing heads of houses heretofore, I lov'd their money, and they lov'd their booke, Some poorer though more learned I forsooke: For in those daies your charity was cold, Little was done for love, but much for gold. Doubtlesse my Father was a valiant Peere In Edwad the sixt daies when he was sent, Gainst Rebells that did rise in Norfolke shire. And after that when he to Scotland went, Under the Lord Protectors Regiment; By notable exploits against the Sot, Eternall glory to himselfe he got. Truly ambition was his greatest fault, Which commonly in noble hearts is bred, He thought the never could his slate exalt Till the good Dke of Sumerset was dead, Who by my Fathers meanes did lose his head: So ill the race of Dudlies could endure The Seymors lives which did their fame obscure.
When once King Edward  the butt had shot, My Father, sayd, your Grace shoots neere the mark, Th King repli'd, but not so neere I wot, As when you shot my Vncles head off quite: The duke my Father knew the King said right, And that he ment this matter to debate If ere hee liv'd to come to mans estate. It seemes my Father in times past had been A skillfull Archer, though no learned clerke, So strage a chance as this is seldome seen, I doe suppose h shot not in the dark, That could so quickly hit so faire a mark: Nor have I mst my aime, nor worse have sped, When I shot off the Duke of Norfolks head. Now when the Duke of Somerset was dead, My Father to the French did Bulloigne sell, As plesd him the King he governed, And from the privy counsell did depell Th'earles of Southampton, and of Arundell: Thus whilst he ruled and controuled all. The wise young King extreamly sick did fall. Who having languisht long, of lfe deprived, Not wthout poison as it was suspected; The counsell through my Fathers meanes conrived That Suffolks Daugther should be Queen elected, Th Sisters of King Edward were rejected: My brother Guifor to Iane Gray was wedded, Too high preferr'd that was so soone beheaded. This Ldy Iane that once was tearmed Queeen, Greatr in fame then fortune, was put downe, Had not King Henries Dughters living been, Mght for her vertues have deserv'd a rowne; Fortune at once on her did smile and frowne: Her wedding garment for a Princes meet Was quickly changed for a winding sheet.
For I was iump of Julus sars minde That could  one suprio Lord endure, Nay I to guide my Sveraigne was inclin'd, And bring the common people to my lure, Accounting that my fortune was obscure, And that I lived in a wofull plight If any one eclipst my glorious light. The love to reigne makes many men respect Neither their friend, their kinded, nor their vow, The love to reigne makes many men neglect The duty which to God and man they ow, From out this fountaine many mischeifes flow: Hreof examples many may be read In Chronicles of th' English Princes dead. This humor made King Hrold break his oath Made unto William Duke of Normandy: This made King Rufus and young Beauclak both Their elder Brother Robert to defie, And Stephen to forget his loialty To Mawa the Empresse, and to hold in scorne The faithfull oath which he to her had sworne. This made young Henry crowned by his sire, Against his Father Warfare to maintaine: This made King Iohn the kingdome to aspire, Which to his Nephew Arthur did pertaine, And him in pison hardly to retaine: And this made Buingbrook t'usurp the Crowne, Putting his lawfull Soveraigne Richard downe. This made Edward the fourth at his returne From Burgundy, when he to Yorke was come, To break the oath which he had lately sworne, And rule the Realme in good King Henries roome; This made the Tyrant Richard eke to doome His Nephewes death, and rid away his wife, And so in bloud to end his wretched life.
A prety plot in practie I did put, Either to take a Queene without delay, Or when the cars were shuffled and well ut, To chuse the King and cast the knaves away; He should be cunning that great game would play; Ill luck hath he that no good game can make, When Princes play and crownes lye at the stake. First I assayed Queene Elizabeth to wed, Whom divers Princes courted, but in vaine; When in this course unluckily I sped, I sought the Scots Queenes mariage to obtaine; But when I reapt no profit for my paine, I sought to match Denbigh my tender childe To Dame Arbella, but I was beguil'd. Even as Octavius with Marke Anthony, And Lepidus the Roman Empire shar'd, That of the world then held the soveraignty, So I a new Triumverat prepar'd, If death a while yong Denbighs life had spar'd, The grandame, uncle and the faher in law, Might thus have brought all England under awe. In the low Countries did my fame soare high, When I was sent Lievtenant generall, The Queenes proud foes I stoutly did deny, And made them to some composition fall, There I maintained port majesticall; In pompe and triumph many dayes I spent, From noble then my name grew excellent, Then was my heart in height of his desire, My minde puft up with suquedry and pride: The vulgar sort my glory did admire, Even as the Romans Ave Caesar cri'd, When the Emperour to the Senat house did ride; So did the Flemings with due reverence, Like thunder say, God save your Excellence.
Few Subjects before me obtain'd this stile, Unlesse they were as Viceroyes of this land: The name of Lordship seem'd too base and vile, To me that govern'd such a royall band, And had a Princes absolute command: Who did not of my puissance stand in awe, That might put him to death by martiall law? Loe, what a title hath my honour got, And Excellency added to my name? Can this injurious world so quickly blot A name so great out of records of fame, Covering my glory with a vale of shame? Or will it now contemne me being dead, Whom living even with feare it honoured? The towne of Densborough I did besiege, Which did on composition hortly yeeld: I did good serve to my gracious liege, Till by ill councellours I was beguil'd: For such as were my Captains in the field, To whom at length chiefe charge I did commit, Seduced me to many things unfit. When Sir Iohn Nrris counsell I refused, Whose perfect skill in feats of armes I knew, By Rowland Yorkes device I was abused, Whereon some losse soone after did ensue; Deventer towne and Zutphen sconce I rue, By Yorke and Stanley without many blowes, Were tendred to the mercy of the foes. And that which to my heart might more griefe strike, Happened the death of that renowned Knight, My Nephew Sidney, neere Coleston dike Receav'd his deadly wound though fortunes spight, I sent no frsh supply to him in fiht; I was not farre oft with a mighty host: So with his losse of life some fam I lost.
The Court in him lost a brave Courtier; The Countrey lost a guide, their faults to mend; The Campe did loose an expert Souldier; The City lost an honourable friend: The Schooles a patron, their right to defend: The Court, the Countrey, the Schools & City, For Sidneys death still sing a mournfull dity. Now while my princely glory did abound, Like rich Lucullus I great feasts did make, And was for hospitality renown'd: The use of armes I quickly did forsake; An easier taske I ment to undertake: I tooke no joyes in wounds and broken pates, But to carouse and banquet with the States. Not Heliogabalus, whose dainty fare, Did all the Roman Emperours feast exceed In cost and rarenesse, might with mine compare, Though he on braines of Ostriches did feed And Phenicopteines, nd that instead Of oyle he us'd his lamps with blme to fill: Such was the pleasure of this tyrants will. To me Count Egmounts daughter did resort, Of such brave Dames as Flanders still did yeeld; That it did rather seeme I came to court A gallant Lady, then to pitch a field; For I did lay aside the sword and shield: At cards and dice I spent the vacant dayes, And made great feasts, instead of martial fraies But whilst in games and love my time I spent, Seeming secure, as though I car'd for nought: My messengers abroad I daily sent, As instruments of my stll working thought, Whereby my purpose oft to psse I brought, And compasse what before I did devise, At such a time as no man will surmse.
Thus great attempts I oft did enterprise, Like a Magician hat with some fine wile Dazles the sight of the spectators eyes, And with illusions doth their sense beguile, Such policies my cunning did compile, That I before mns eyes did cast a mist, While I perform'd such matters as I list. Ye hat like apes doe imitate my deeds, Hoping thereby like favour to obtaine; Know that so high a spiit never breeds In a blunt peasant, or unnurtured swine, But in my heart imperious thoughts did reigne: No flematick dull milk-sop can aspire, But one compact of th'element of sie. He daily must devise some stratagm, He must be rich, stout, liberall, and wise, The humours of base men he must contemne, He must be gracious in the peopls eyes, He should be furnisht with rare qualities, With learning, judgement, policy and wit, And such like parts as for the time are fit. For every forward fellow is not borne To be a Scipio or a Maximus, Unlesse that wisedome doth his state adorne, Or valour make his life more glorious, Though he be base of birth like Marius, Yet he by vertues aid aloft may come, Like him that was seven times Consull in Rom. Ventidius name at first was meane and base, Till he the Parhians host had overthrowne, And Ciero came not of noble race, Borne at Apinia a poore county towne, Yet he mad armes give place unto the gowne. And Rome by his great wisdome freed from spoil. Call'd him the father of their native sole.
Perhaps young Courtiers larne something to sing, To skp or dance before their Mistris face, To touch like Opheus some inchanting string, To run at ilt, to jet with stately pace, Or by some fine discourse to purchase grace, But cannot manage the affaires of State, Which best belongs to each great Potentate. Listen to me ye lusty Souldiers, That in such favour high attempt to grow, Experience bred in me this manly yeares, Hath taught me cunning which you doe nt know, Some precepts here I doe intend to show: And if my Syren song please not great Peeres, Then my they with Ulysses stop ther eares. Trust not a friend that is new reconcil'd, In loves faire shew he may hide foule deceit, By hm ye unawares may e begul'd, Reveale to none your matters of great waight, If any chance to know your lewd conceit, Suspected to bewray your bad intent, He ought to suffer death and banishment. Caligula the scourge of fmous Rome, Wish all the Romanes had onely one head, That when he list to give their fatall doome, He might with one great blow strke all them dead, So should he never need thir hte to dread: Even sch a mischiefe I wsht to my foes, That many men might prish with fw blowes. But unto those that doe your favour seeke, And by your helpe hope their low states to raise, You must be coureous, bountifull, and meeke: Caesar by clemency won greatest praise. And was esteem'd the mirrour of hs dyes. For it belongs to men of great estate, To spare the poore, and rich mens mindes abate.
It's ill to be a rub upon that ground Whereas the Prince the alley meanes to sweep, Their owne conceits they fondly doe confound, That into high attempts doe boldly creep, And with their shallow pares oe wade to deep, To hinder what their Soveraigne doth intend, Or to controule what they cannot mend. Calisthenes much torment did sustaine, Because great Alexanders pride he checkt, Grave Seneca choosing his death ws sline By Nero's doome, whos faults he did correct: Use not too shrpe rebuke, but have respect Unto the persons, when great men doe evill, The vengeance leave to God, or to the devill. Be not too haughty, pride rocureth hate, And meane mens hate may turne to your disgrace, Nor too familiar be in high estate, For that will breed contempt among the base, Observe a meane whih winneth man much grace: Speake well to all, trust none, use well your foes, For this may purchase love where hatred growes. And if that you doe fere your frind should chance To mount too highly in the Princes grace, Hi praise to heaven then stick not to advance, Say that the charge he beareth is too base, And that his worth deserves farre better place, So may you by this praise rid him away, And so supply his place another day. Sy he will prove a terror in the field, This private life doth much obscure his fame, More fit to beare great Ajax sevenfold shield, Then like Sardanapalus court a dame, He idlely lives at home, it is a shme. His very presence may his foes appall, Let him be sent Lieutenant Generall.
Now if he chance to perish in some fight, I was not your worke, but the chance of warres, Or thus you may excuse your selves by fleight, Bming he influence of the angry starres, Th thus by death his future fortune barres, A (sighing) we are sory, you may say, That this brave man would cast himselfe away. But if in feats of armes he have no skill, If he be learned▪ wise, and eloquent, By praising him thus may you have your will, Procure him in ambassage to be sent Far off, lest he returne incontinent, As to the mighty Chm, or Prestor Iohn, And triumph in his roome when he is gone. Let no man think I exerci'd the ghost Of this great Peere that sleepeth in the dust, Or conjur'd up his spirit to this cost, To presse him with despaire, or praise unjust: I am not partiall, but gve him his due, And to his soule I wish eternall health: Ne doe I think all written tales are true, That are inserted in his Commonwealth: What others wrote before, I do survive, But am not like to those incenst with hate, And as I plainly write, so doe I strive To write the truth, not wronging his estate: Of whom it may be said, and censur'd well, He both in vice and vertue did excell. Iam{que} opus exegi, Deus dedit his quoque finem FINIS.
