M1644 11164735 46473
Englands Warning: That is, Three Remarkable VISIONS OF Stephen Melish, An Inhabitant of Breslaw, the chief City in Silesia. Englished in the Year, 1664. Imprinted at London, in the Year, 1664.
To the Reader. IF the Rule where to try Prophets by, given by God himself (Deut. 18.21) is still in force, then no doubt but Stephen Melish hath not brought forth his Prophesies by the will of man, but as it is written; Holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Now it is evident accordingly, as to the matter of the fact, that very many of those Prophecies of the said Melish have been fulfilled in Ger∣many and thereabouts, as he, that may confer with them the things past afterwards, will not deny. See the Annotations to each one of his Visions, printed beyond Seas in the Latin and in the German tongue. Why would then any body detract them Divine Authtrity, and not ra∣ther be bound to respect them as the Counsel of the Lord of Hosts, sent unto those that are concerned in it, as to the end of their Preservation and Welfare? Therefore, if, like as the Counsel and Secresie of Kings and Princes shall be kept in silence; so on the contrary the Work of God must be prai∣sed, revealed or made manifest: The duty of every one that fearth the Lord, requires of him to do accordingly, and not to keep, from those at the least that are concerned, any Counsel of him, who doth nothing but he revealeth his Secrets unto his Servants the Prophets, to wit, the Lord God, Amos 3.7.
ENGLAND'S WARNING; That is, the 115th VISION of Stephen Melish, June the 15th. 1664. THis night I had a wonderful Vision, but I do not know whe∣ther I was asleep or awake: I was brought out of the Sub∣urbs into the City, in broad day-light; but as soon as I was entered into it, there it was night presently, and there ap∣peared an horrible sight in the Sky towards the East: And some bo∣dy, I knew not who, said unto me, Where are now those Incredulous? let them come forth and look upon the wonderful things of God, what they may portend. And as soon as he was yet a speaking, there came out of the Stars some bloody Rods, like unto Brooms; their handle tur∣ned downward, and the points upward, flames and sparks of fire sparkling forth of them; and he said unto me, Let the Burgomasters and Aldermen, with other chief men, and the Citizens, or at least some of thy Friends, be called for, to be Witnesses. But with all my bauling and loud crying, I could make no body to stir, except the Watchmen of the City, that were walking hither and thither tremblingly. Then I came to stand in the Market-place, and went on with a most clamo∣rous voice, to cry what I could; for he commanded me, Cry aloud for a Witness against them, or write it: But I had nothing where to write upon, and it was exceeding dark, and all were asleep every-where. Then he hat spoke to me like a man (but I could not know him by his countenance, nor by his speech, yet I saw him) commanded the Drums to be beaten. But all the noise of the Drums could make no body awake. Let the Trumpets be sounded forth, said he, both through the Streets, and upon the Towers; but all was in vain. Then I saw that fiery Rod (standing in the East, just where the Sun rises in this month) turned into fire, and two other Fires, on both sides, ascending up∣ward in the midst of the Sky; Woods, Villages and Cities being kindled by them, no body appearing or stirring to quench that Burn∣ing, or to remove any thing of theirs out of it, or at the least to save themselves by flight. I seeing all this with horror, began to quake
and tremble the more, because I knew not what would become of all that: But the man said to me, As for thee, fall not into a fright; fear God, and admonish thy house of Repentance daily, for to escape what shall come swiftly. But I asked him: Sir, when is such a thing to come up∣on us? Tell me, and I'll tell to others. Answer was returned; Thou also, hast thou forgot that great Prodigy (on the Sun) that hath been seen through all Christendom, and beyond? And likewise of many o∣ther Prodigious Signs over so many Lands, Cities, Villages, Towns, that have been seen so often, to the end all should be left without excuse. That on the Sun did happen ten years ago, when from the ninth hour till beyond mid-day the Sun was taken over with darkness, and recovered his light, from the East Westward, like unto a Sickle. For lo, 1. The Sickle from the East is coming to mow down the moyety of Christians of the whole Europe, betwixt the South and the West. 2. But afterwards he shall become a par∣taker also of that Sun-light. 3. The Rod of the East shall strike both Pi∣ous and Impious; yet these unto destruction, and those for a tryal. The Fires thou hast seen, are the Plagues of the angry God, whom no body can withstand, nor escape those Plagues. The Darkness, and deep dead-sleep, signifies their uttermost security, which men of this day are fallen into, like unto Pharoah; the more God threatneth with punishment, and sheweth his scourges, the more they become obstinate, mocking at all things. The Kings and Princes are asleep, the Magistrates are asleep, all the People without and within the City are asleep, being altogether very secure in their sins; and saying, Such-like Signs have also been of old, so they are now, and will be after us too. But hearken to what I say: The Miracles are the Word of God, and the daily Obtestations of his Punishments. Thy Voice are the true Ministers of the Churches, and their Writs, that do denounce the terrible Judgments of God. 4. The Drums and Trumpets are the Wars, that now begin of the one against the other, to the end all might be left without excuse. Now the eleventh hour is come, and the twelfth hour too, in which the Lord will pour forth his Anger upon the Apostates from the Truth, and upon the Impious Pharoahs, those cruel Rackers both of the Bodies and Souls, that kill with the Sword, and with the venemous Doctrine of Satan together; and upon all that fear men more than God; and upon the Secular Power, that abuseth the Sword (given unto protection of the good ones) to root out the Church, and to revenge themselves to their own ends: and upon all unjust partial Judges, looking for Money, and setting aside their Consciences; And upon all Simoniacous,
Luxurious, Sluggish Priests; and upon the whole Multitude, both in the City and in the Countries, given over to Treachery, Betraying, Murder, Robbery, Pride, Gluttony, wherewith they shorten their lives themselves. And so I, being admonished of all this, was not to keep silence any longer, but to write this, and to publish it. After this I came to my self again, and the Clock struck One, and soon after it struck Two, (or the second hour) and presently it waxed day. This makes me to conceive a good hope, that God, after a sharp chastisement will shorten the time, and make out of the first and se∣cond hour but one. All the day before, I was very much troubled, as not knowing how it was with me, as if some evil would befal me: Yet I did recommend my self to the Lord, and fell asleep, from the eighth hour until the tenth; from thence I counted all the hours fol∣lowing, even as being not asleep, but awake; feeling all my senses as lively as any man out of sleep can do, seeing and hearing all. And therefore I arose, walk'd up and down in the Chamber, and cryed thus shrilly, that my folk did hear me, yet not knowing what it signified. So then this my Dream (in case it was a Dream) conti∣nued from the eighth to the second hour. As concerning that Eclipse of the Sun (in the year 1654. Aug. 12) and its natural constitution or reason, I confess my self to be igno∣rant therein, not knowing any thing of it. But the man said expres∣ly, The tenth hour was past already, and the eleventh was approaching: Yet these two last should pass away quickly, that so the Sun of Righ∣teousness may receive again his shining. The Lord God Almighty help to it for his Mercy-sake. And this is now that remarkable Vision, which I, according to Commandment, forthwith have written down, and send unto thee, dear Friend of God, to the end that thou mayest make it known, and not to hide it from any that fear the Lord, to stir up, if it might still be, any that would awaken out of the sleep of sin, lest the fault fall upon us. He that will receive our Admonition, let him receive it; he that will despise it, let him despise it, viz. them that are wise and just by themselves. The 116th VISION, June 20. 1664. As concerning that Fiery Rod, together with the twofold Collate∣ral Fire, I saw, that it moved from the East through the South, into
the West, from whence did arise an exceeding thick smoak, rouling as it were, into the North; whence arose an exceeding great Com∣motion of the Nations. They fell so fiercely incensed one against another, that it was a terror to look upon them: they dealt not one with another like Christians, but like as wild barbarous Nations, bended upon mutual destruction: yet I knew not what Nations they were, because they were not named, and by their speech or lan∣guage I could not discern them. This onely I assuredly know and write, that the said Fire did stay in the West, and still it was ex∣ceeding dark every where, which made the Fire grow hotter and hotter, even as if the whole World should be inflamed: Neverthe∣less, men were asleep very deeply, and no body any more was to awake them; and although some did awake as it were, and looked upon that fire in the West, yet they took no notice of it, because they all had drunk of the Cup of Malignity, Enviousness, Fury, and Blood∣thirstiness, whereof they were made so drunk, that there was no pos∣sibility, in what Clamour, sound of Trumphets, and noise of Drums soever, that could make them awake to consider the issue of all such doings, in case no body would give over and leave off Persecution and dispatching of others. After, I heard Lamentations of such as were grieved, for that they had drunken out of the Cup of the Esau∣vitish Dragon, whereof the Land was thus desolated, the King thrust out, the People destroyed, the Lords and Pillars of the Land fallen down, the Pious achers killed or banished, the Children scattered throughout the streets, there they lay, and none was that did help it; never such a VVar hath been like unto this in the West. O would to God the King might be awake, and take Counsel to prevent this ut∣termost destroying Burning and Inflamation! Above that, I have seen one of the Northern Kings, especially the King in Denmark, standing in the Flame, as it were scorched, who will be thrust also cut of his Kingdome, and his Cities with the key of the Sea (the Sound) fall into the power of the VVestern Part, unless he look to i, because that black Smoak will spread forth its sparks of Fire in the North too; but the North VVind will soon scatter them that y may be quenched; for the Esauvitish contri∣vances will  shortly be manifested, therefore let them well look about, and not permit that the Southern and VVestern oppress their Neighbours betwixt the VVest and North; for when the Hol∣landers
(though they have bound themselves a rod upon their back) should be oppressed, then the Northern also will have business enough. VVould to God that I might be found a Liar in foretelling these Plagues to the World, which the Lord of Heaven hath been pleased to manifest, not only by the Scriptures, and so many Prophets raised up, and other Pious men, but also by me, poor little one; yea by so many Signes in the Skie, Earth, Sea, given forth to forewarn us: Al∣though I was constrained thereto, yet I believe, and am resolved to dye upon it, that God speaketh truth, and is faithful to what he pro∣miseth, and a Revenger of wickedness; yea, because he is merciful also, his Mercy slows from him before the execution: The like is to be seen in Lot and Jonah. But this it is, there be many that ha∣ving stiff necks and uncircumcised hearts, will rather hear and fol∣low the counsel of the Devil, or Devilish counsels, than the Coun∣sel of God; and no other counsel there is left then to cast our selves in the bottomless pit of the Mercy of God, for to escape the Flame of the Anger of God, who even now goeth about to consume the world with Sword and Pestilence. The 117th VISION, June 26. 64. After I had passed three dayes with Prayers and Sighs unto God, in consideration of the approaching of so great an Anger, Beseeching him he would turn from his Anger, and grant his People before the worlds end, a friendly Peace. I fell of a sudden in a heavy disease of the body, but in far greater anguish of my soul, insomuch that I was crying aloud, Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favoura∣ble no more? Hath God forgotten to be gratious? Hath he in anger shut up his tender Mercies? and the inward distresses of my soul was so exceeding horrid, that there was left no comfort in the least: And this lasted a whole day, insomuch that I knew not on what side to turn me, being as a man left destitute of all kind of Patience. Then the Devil came too and tempted me, endeavouring to quench that small confidence also, that I might have left in me towards God. My Mother, my Wife, my Children, they all stood round about me astonished, and weeping, no counsel nor consolation they could give me, and I looking upon them was therewith the more afflicted,
seeing I must be gone and leave them in beggarliness; for there was nothing but very Death to be expected. They overcharging me, with that I had not disposed of my house, nor put in order the least thing. In few words, the tormenting pain of my soul did so increase, that I fell to roar like a Lion, clamouring with a great voice, said: On your knees, and cry unto the Lord, that he succour me. By and by my anguished Soul felt some ease; and so I lay there, like an out∣wearied wrestler, as wet as swimming in the water, until the fifth hour after noon. The next morning I found my self much better, nevertheless feeling throughout all the veins and bones of my right hand and side of the whole body sensible smarts, untill the fifth day; then being asleep, an ancient Man came to me, by me never seen before nor known, and spake to me very comfortably, Thy Dolours Anguish and tormenting Pains within and without, signifie the Dolours of the People of God, that are now at hand: Be thou not astonished at the representation of such within thee by the Lord of Heaven, who now shall assault and invade the whole World because of the sins of men; and of their intolerable Pride and Forgetfulness of God; for their sins have tran∣scended the Clouds and cry for revenge: And the Lord looking down sees but very few that repent, therefore such Plagues are a coming upon them, that they will clamour like as thou hast clamoured. And thou hast well done, that thou hast not yeelded unto such Temptations: Give the Glory and Praise to God. To all Christians I therefore do appeal, having felt in me such unspeakable pain, praying them all with what humbleness soever I can; And again, I intreat you, yea, I intreat you a third time by the Lord God; by our precious Redemption, by the Bloodshed of Jesus Christ, and by the Gifts of the holy Ghost that every day we are par∣takers of; and by that out-poured Love, crying in our hearts with unspeakable sighs, Abba, Father; and by the Mercifulness given to you from the Lord, and by your Conjugal-Love betwixt Man and Wife, and by the Fatherly Love betwixt Father, Mother and Chil∣dren; and by all those Benefits given unto you and yours every day, for your Livelihood, for the Conservation of your Cities and Coun∣tries ye are Inhabitants of, to the end, to serve the Lord the Inha∣bitant of Heaven, I beseech you once more to the uttermost; Re∣pent, and be converted to the Lord at this very instant, lest it may
be too late after those evils are already come. Prevent those evils, I request you, that are a rouling towards you, lest a late dislike or regret (I see at a distance) come suddenly upon you, because ye have hearkened unto the Voice of the hellish Dragon and his Offi∣cers. O England! remember how thou art distracted within thy self, more inclined to thy uttermost Destruction rather than Conservati∣on: Therefore I, the most little worm of all, beseech you, first, the Western King, that he desist to hear the Voice of the said Dragon, and his Officers; let him rather hear the Voice of God: let him desist from Provision of War, to destroy Cities, and Peoples, and Commonwealths; and to shed that Christian blood, which hath been redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ. In case he will do so, and let the War alone, it shall be fulfilled, that which I have written and still write, That the Lord Jesus will enlarge him great Victo∣ries, which he shall obtain and see very shortly. Also in like man∣ner I entreat and obtest, by the Lord God, all wise Counsellors, and those of Love-burning-Lamps of the People of God, even as being the Pillars and Workmen of God's House, to consider of what evil must follow in case no body takes care to quench this horrid (by it self) unquenchable Fire; And how it cannot be extinguished, ex∣cept by the mercifulness of God, that can be obtained, when we turn to serious Repentance, and growing together again in mutual Cha∣rity. Is it not the Devil's work, who by us (in Germany) hath kin∣dled a Fire, whereunto we have brought the Wood, and poured up∣on it the Oyl of our Sins? Let it then be your Example, and make haste to prevent your Evil by Repentance. O ye Wise and Discreet Ones, weigh diligently how this Fire by us hath been kindled, by those Black Four-cornereds, who seeing they must fall here, endeavour to prepare themselves a Retreat and Re∣fuge in some other place, (as prudent sons of the world) viz. in the Western parts, by God's permission: for they say, Neither shall we be there very safe. Yet what shall we do? We will put into Con∣fusion and Disorder the Nations, and make them bustle one against another, to overthrow and destroy themselves mutually, that after they have rooted out themselves, we may oversow all with our seed. O strange! how great is the craftiness, how great is the grudg-bearing malignity of that Dragon! and how great is our blindness, that we
have not taken heed, how that by his contrivances so many Pillars of the Church have been overthrown, so many prudent Judges de∣jected and turned out, and there is no end of turning out still: For just now they endeavour to bring to pass, that you Statesmen, Merchants, Tradesmen, and the poor plain Country-folk betwixt your selves, and with your neighbours, that bring you sustenance, and whatsoever is needful and necessary for your use and imploy∣ment, might fall out with one another, into a mutual slaughter and overthrow, to waste and ruine your own Land and Country. But this is not all: They work also, that the Kings of the Neigh∣bourhood might joyn battel, especially those towards the North, whither that black Smoke went, carrying along with him fire-sparks of a new Inflamation. Ah! beware, O ye chief Powers and Com∣manders, ye Kings and Princes! Think, what will remain after the Fire is gone, but Ashes and Dust? Ah! will ye not check that rising Fire, thus exceeding great, that it is like to chase all throughout whole Europe, and to inflame every-where? By the Mercifulness of God, once more, I beseech you; and by the safety both of you and yours, be moved with Compassion towards your little Children, that cannot as yet discern between their right hand and their left, that at the least they might be saved. Look how that boyling Sea of the Wicked One's, belching out dirt and mire, doth feel its undoing, by the approaching Anger of God, and the Dragon sees that his time will be short. Remember the words of Christ our Lord, that when Nation shall arise against Na∣tion, and Kingdom against Kingdom, then Doomsday draws near; and what at that time we are commanded to do, viz. that we shall lift up our heads, to look upon the Work of God. Look there how those Black Four-cornered run up and down! for their Conscience is awakened like as a waving Sea. Let them have no place by you, nor their persons and their suggestions neither. In case ye will not hear this Counsel, then Anguish and Dolours will oppress you; after which, time of repentance, nor Patience, nor hope of the Grace of God you shall have any more; but a burning fire of the Anger of God, that ye now refuse to avoid, shall consume you. But O that I could perswade you to prevent it! nay, I sigh, that the Mercifulness of God may prevent you. Amen.
For as concerning me, I had no rest within me until I had written this, lest the fault fall upon my back, like as upon Jonah, unwilling to be obedient unto God. Stedfastly I pray, that unto thee, O Gods People, might be given the Grace of Repentance, to prevent the An∣ger of God, by returning to a true Regret and mutual Love. Alas, more Signs and Prodigies shall very shortly shew unto you God's Anger, that is kindling the World with all kind of Plagues. To you that have begun to prevent the said Anger of God, Be constant in your purpose: Faithful is the Lord who hath promised: Heaven and Earth will pass away sooner than his VVord. And although that Fire flameth already over you, and Anguishes and Dolours have surroun∣ded you at this very time; yet now turn out from that malignant Dragon, the LORD is by the way to succour you. And I testifie, that notice hath been given unto you, that the LORD hath already let in a stormy Wind into the Red Esauvitish Sea, insomuch, that now they are disquiet in their Conscience, and see, that their abiding here will not be very long more, and the time is at hand, that all who know them, or see them, shall either betray or kill them. However alas! the Chief Powers have been warned enough, that the Sword hath not been given unto them, to kill, but to defend God's Peo∣ple; Yet they alwayes have shewed themselves to be dumb and deaf. Now the Evil comes that is appointed for them: they en∣deavour to escape and prevent it, and will by force put the cause of it upon those of ours most subtilly, according to the Dragon's in∣stinct and inspiration. All Wars are of the Devil's counsel, and blown up by those Esau∣vitish crafts; yea, this Turkish War too; and so, that same now shall begin in the West, to shed blood and waste the Land. Take for in∣stance Hungaria, where they have begun a Reformation with force, whatsoever might become of it, and they matter not if the King∣dom should become Tributary to the Turk, let them but obtain what they aim at, viz. the Destruction of the Religion. But alas, ye are afar off, the Lord from Heaven will never permit you to root out his People, rather will he stir up a wild Nation, that shall waste all with Sword and Fire. Tell the King in ENGLAND how wisely the HOLLANDERS have begun to act their Cause against him! having deliberated about
compassing their Design, to fall down at the Feet of the LORD ALMIGHTY, and to put their hope in the Center of his Merciful∣ness, rather than in their Strength. Therefore however they are to be chastized, like as true Sons of David, yet they shall not scape Scot. free, that multiply their Scourges against the Chastened of the Lord. Moreover, let him weigh diligently (the Englander) that he is not in vain joyned in Alliance with Portugal, but to help him, as being brought under by force, Yet in time to come a glorious Realm, to recover and settle their antient Liberties, like as also in other Realms. But would to God that the Realms of Hungaria and Polonia had accepted of the Peace proffered unto them by the Turks, they would not have been cast into the fire they burn in now. But so it happeneth, where Pride bears the Rule, and fulness of bread, that from thence ariseth great sins and devilish contrivances, with persecutions: Therefore it must be accomplished: With what mea∣sure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Those wild Nations must make a Hurliburly, to take punishment of such as would not acknowledge the day of their Visitation: The Ruine and Desola∣tion of the Land is and will come. They would abolish the Word of God, but they shall be abolished themselves, yea even now it is upon them. Isa. 49, v. 11 to 18. THE END.
