M1818 12926854 95531
FORMS OF PRAYER FOR EVERY Day in the Week, MORNING and EVENING. Composed for the use of PRIVATE FAMILIES. By John Meriton D. D. Rector of St. Michael Cornhill London, and Lecturer at St. Martins in the Fields. LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Robert Boulter, at the Turks Head in Cornhill, 1682.
THE PREFACE. THat all Men are obli∣ged to worship God by praising and pray∣ing to him, is so evident by the light of natural Reason, as well as the Revelation of Scripture, that none can question it, but they whose Immoralities and improved Debaucheries, have laid such a foundation of
Atheism as makes them incli∣nable to deny the Being of God, and loath to acknow∣ledge their dependance upon him, lest this should involve them in the dreadful conse∣quence of their being account∣able to him. And that men ought dayly to pay this Ho∣mage and Tribute of Praise and Prayer unto God, as they stand linked in the relations of Fami∣lies, though all readily grant, that are sensible of the Sins there committed that need his Pardon, of the many Tempo∣ral and Spiritual blessings either wanted and to be sought athis Hands, or injoyed, and to be thankfully acknowledged, yet the too common neglect of Family Prayer is (it's to be feared, and he must have a very easie and credulous charity that can be otherwise minded) not only one of the many instances of the de∣cay of Piety and Religion, but one of the provoking Sins that cry aloud, to Heaven for ven∣geance. It is no doubt by ma∣ny totally omitted from an in∣sensible stupidity, & an irreligi∣ous, profane disregard of God and their Duty; but by others not a few (as was well and cha∣ritablysuggested by the Good Man that earnestly pressed me to this undertaking) only from a consciousness of their inabi∣bility decently to perform it. Now that this might be neither a feigned pretence nor a real hinderance: But that they that like Joshua are willing and re∣solved to serve God with their Families, might have Materials of Devotion ready at hand; As the Water near the Road, offered it self to the Eunuch willing to be Baptized, I have for the help of such as can read, complyed with my Friends desire, and composeda Form of Weekly Prayers, Morning and Evening. And though their length will not, I hope, be complained of by any whose leasure may allow, and whose Affections can vigo∣rously attend one quarter of an hours solemn and religious Address to God: Yet in con∣sideration of others multiplici∣ty of Business, and that flatting and depression of Spirits that may follow from it; all the Prayers are printed in many distinct Paragraphs, that some of the Confessions or Petitions or both may easily, and with∣out disturbing their Devotion,be pass'd over and the Prayer thereby so contracted as to suit their convenience: And I de∣sire they would rather do so than wholly omit the Duty, for better a short Prayer than none at all.
Lord's Day Morning. ALmighty, most high and holy, Lord God, who art the glorious Creator, Preser∣ver, and Gover∣nour of all things in Heaven and in Earth, and most wor∣thy to be praised, and honoured by all Creatures; And with in∣finite kindness and compassion hast redeemed lost, and undone Sinners, by thine only beloved
Rom. 4. ult. Son, whom thou hast deliver∣ed to death for their offences, and raised again for their justi∣fication, and so thou art forever to be loved, and delighted in, obeyed, and worshipped, praised and honoured by thy redeemed ones. We thy poor Creatures and Children are here before thee this Morning, humbly sensible of this our great and bounden duty, and of our own inability, without the assistance of thy Grace to perform it. And in a deep sense both of our duty and in∣sufficiency, we desire to offer up our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to thy Divine Ma∣jesty, our mighty Creator, and most merciful Redeemer, and humbly desire that thou would∣est sanctifie and prepare both our Souls and Bodies by the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, that we may present unto thee ac∣ceptable thank-offerings.
We acknowledge, O Lord, that besides the sins of our Cal∣lings & common Imployments, and even those of the Week last past, whereby we have greatly offended thee, the sins of our holy duties, and our profanati∣on of this thy holy day, have given thee a just provocation to withdraw the grace of thy good Spirit from us, and leave us to the ignorance and vanity of our own minds, the wan∣drings and distractions of our thoughts, the earthliness and sensuality of our affections, the hardness, impenitency and un∣belief of our hearts: And then by all the duties of thy Wor∣ship and Service we should disho∣nour thee, and by offering the Sacrifices of Fools, increase our own guilt before thee.
But we humbly beseech thee, most merciful Father, forgive us all our past offences, that they may not stand as a partition Wall between thy Majesty and us to hinder either thy Grace from coming down upon us as Rain upon the tender Herb, or our Prayers from coming up before thee as Incense.
Fill every one of our hearts with awful thoughts of thee, as a God that searchest hearts, and art throughly acquainted with our most secret imaginations, dispositions and purposes; and because thou art a God of purer Eyes than to behold iniquity, Let us worship thee with an ho∣ly worship; so as to fear thy Goodness, and love thy Justice, to delight in thy Mercy, trust and rely upon thy Power andFaithfulness, to admire, praise and imitate thy Holiness. In the publick Duties and Ser∣vices of this thy Day, help us so to joyn with the Assembly of thy Servants, that our hearts may be inflamed with a love of thee, and delight in thee, and in the vigour and fervency of devout affections, we may to∣gether glorifie thy holy and great Name, set forward our own edification, and comfort, and advance in those ways of holiness that lead to everlasting happiness: And seeing in great mercy and compassion to our Souls thou art pleased to con∣tinue to us thy Sabbaths, and the use of thine ordinances, which by our many and great sins we have long since forfeited, Let us not, like Children sitting in
Mat. 11. 16. the Market-place, trifle away the precious opportunities and means of Grace and Salvation. Help us seriously to consider, when we are in thine House, the Habitation of thine Holiness, Psal. 26. 8. and the place where thine Ho∣nour dwelleth, the glorious Majesty, and spotless perfect pu∣rity of that God with whom we have to do, and let us behave our selves in thy sacred and dreadful presence, with that re∣verence, and holy fear, that hu∣mility, and lowliness of mind, that simplicity, and godly since∣rity, that heavenly mindedness, and purity of affection, that firm constancy of resolution to devote our selves to thee, by our hearty obedience to thy Laws, as it becomes dust and ashes, vile Creatures that dwell
in houses of Clay, when they worship and do homage to that Sovereign Majesty, the Throne of whose Glory is in the high∣est heavens. Let us hear thy holy Word, that shall be read and preached to us, as the Oracles of God, and those Divine Messages which thou hast sent us from Heaven to guide us in the ways that lead thither. Let us heark∣en to it with diligent attention, imbrace it with holy and hea∣venly affections, rejoycing in the Promises, dreading the threat∣nings, loving and practising the commands of it, let us receive it with meekness and mix it with Jam. 1. 21. Faith, that it may be an ingraf∣ted Heb. 4. 2. word to the salvation of our Souls. And as the Rain
Isa. 55. 10, 11. cometh down, & the Snow fromHeaven, and returneth not thi∣ther, but watereth the Earth, and maketh it bring forth Fruit, and bud, that it may give seed to the Sower, and bread to the eater; So let not thy Word, that goeth forth out of thy mouth, return to thee void, but accomplish that which thou pleasest, and prosper in the thing whereto thou hast sent it. Help us to pray in faith and fervency, let all our petitions be addressed to the Throne of thy Grace, in the prevailing name of thy dear Son, and by the effi∣cacy of thy holy Spirit, the Spi∣rit of Supplication: And that the Prayers that we shall this day send up to Heaven may find a gracious acceptance with thee, Let the holy Ghost make inter∣cession
Rom. 8. 26. in our hearts, by ex∣citing holy, humble, earnest and hearty desires, and let our blessed Redeemer make in∣tercession in Heaven, and sweet∣en all the displeasing unsavori∣ness of our Flesh, with the Per∣fume Rev. 8. 3. of his Incense.
Let us give thanks unto thee with our whole hearts, and let all that is within us magnifie and praise thy Name, as for all thy mercies to our Souls and Bodies, for this Life and a bet∣ter, so especially for our Re∣demption, by the precious death and Sufferings of thy Son, and finishing that glorious work, by the raising him from the Dead. Raise up our Souls, O Lord, to the highest pitch of hearty thankfulness in the re∣membrance and sense of those inestimable benefits, that re∣doundto us and thy whole Church from this great and al∣sufficient Redeemer. And help us so to sing praises to thee and to the Lamb that sits with thee up∣on thy Throne, that by praising thee on Earth, we may tune and prepare our hearts for those glorious and triumphant Praises, that in Heaven will be the busi∣ness and happiness of thy Saints, to all Eternity. Let us so carry our selves this whole day, as remembring thou hast separated and sancti∣fied it to thine own service, and made Religion, which is the great Work of every day, the more proper and peculiar im∣ployment of this.
Let us therefore make a diffe∣rence betwixt the thoughts, the words, the practises of otherdays, and this which thou hast set apart to different purposes, and so sanctifie this day of holy Rest, and make it our delight, that we may be sanctified and fitted for that perpetual Rest that remains for thy People, and satisfied with those Rivers of Psa. 16. ult. Pleasures, that are at thy Right Hand for evermore.
Bless, we beseech thee, thy whole Church, and that part of it especially which thou hast planted in these Kingdoms. Par∣don our many Sins, and remove far away from us whatever may provoke thy displeasure, unsettle our foundations or di∣sturb our peace. Let thy Ser∣vant, our Sovereign Lord the King, find favour in thine Eyes, So bless Him in His Person, in His Counsels and Enterprizes,that upon his Head His Crown may long flourish, and His Go∣vernment be a publick Blessing to these Kingdoms. Govern those that govern under Him in Church and State, and let all His Subjects in their several Or∣ders and Stations, do what lies in them, to the healing of our wide Breaches, the restoring of Christian Love and Charity, the establishment of Truth and Eph. 4. 3. Righteousness, and keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.
Let all afflicted ones in what kind soever, find thy gracious hand ready for their relief and succour, and by the more im∣mediate working of thy holy Spirit, supply the want of thy publick ordinances to all that desire them, and are by Impri∣sonment,Banishment, Sickness or any other hinderance deprived of them, & let us that by thy spe∣cial favour, are blessed with the rich and in estimable priviledge injoying them, carefully im∣prove them to a growth in Grace, and the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to an increase of Faith and all godliness, till we come to the full and perfect happiness of an immediate injoying thee without them in thy heavenly and everlasting Kingdom, by thy dear Son Jesus Christ our ever blessed Redeemer, through whose Merit and Mediation, and in whose Form of Words, we are bold to call thee Father, saying,
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Lord's Day Evening. EVer blessed, and gracious Lord God, and in Jesus Christ our loving and merciful Father, and most liberal and open-handed Benefactor, from whose favour, and kindness, we have all the good things that we receive in this Life, and the hopes of a better to make us everlastingly happy in the next. We thy poor Servants acknow∣ledging our manifold unworthi∣ness of the least of thy mercies, and the guilt of those sins, whereby we have made fre∣quent forfeitures of them, are here before thee, to offer up to thee our Evening Sacrifice of hearty praise and thansgivings
for all those blessings that with a most free and unwearied bounty thou hast been pleased to confer upon us, and conti∣nue to us.
Thy hand hath formed us in the Womb, given us Life, and Breath, and Being, and having brought us into the World, be∣stowed on us many convenien∣cies of Life, that have made our Being in the World easie and delightful to us: Thine, O Lord, is our health and strength, our ease and liberty; thine the Air we breath in, and the Earth we tread upon, thine our Food and our Raiment, the Sun that shines to give us Light, and the Rain that falls to give us plenty, thine the use of our Limbs, and thine the exercise of our Under∣standing and Reason. And webless thy Name for all those outward and temporal blessings, the multitude whereof, (such is thy goodness) makes us unable to recount them, and whose dayly repetition, that should heighten our esteem of them, and thankfulness for them, makes us (such is our folly and weakness) too apt to underva∣lue them. But above all we adore, and with our highest and heartiest praises, desire to magnifie thy rich and free Grace for spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ Jesus our Lord, that tend to the renewing us after thy likeness in this life, and the sa∣tisfying of us with it in the life to come. We bless thee for that inesti∣mable gift, the Foundation of
all others, the Son of thy dear∣est love, and everlasting delight, whom in a tender compassion to our Souls, thou hast sent in∣to the world to be our Redeem∣er and Saviour, that when we had by our sins ruined and un∣done our selves, and were so lyable to thy severe displea∣sure and insupportable venge∣ance, that no creature in Hea∣ven or Earth could deliver us from it, it pleased thee in thine infinite goodness, to find out, and in thy mercy to afford us in him an admirable and un∣thought of way of recovery. Now, O Lord, we know thou lovest us, and hast a favour and good will towards us, seeing thou hast not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from us.
Ever blessed be thy Name,that thy Son, who is God over all, blessed for ever, took upon him our humane Flesh; that while he lived here upon Earth, he instructed us, both by his heavenly doctrine and exempla∣ry life, that he gave himself to Death as the price of our Re∣demption, that he compleated that great work, in his power∣ful and glorious Resurrection, wherein he conquered and tri∣umphed over all the powers of darkness, and hath begotten us again to a lively hope of an in∣heritance incorruptible, unde∣filed,
1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. that fadeth not away, re∣served in Heaven for us. We praise thee, that, when he had wrought a perfect Righteousness for us upon Earth, he ascended up to Heaven, & sits at thy right hand to represent and plead iton our behalf, by his prevailing intercession; that when he as∣cended up on high, he led cap∣tive those spiritual enemies that held us in captivity, and for the Eph. 4. 11. edification of his Church gave gifts unto Men, Apostles and Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. That thou hast Psal. 119. 10 given thy holy Word to be a Lamp to our Feet, and a Light to our Paths, and when many Nations sit in Darkness and the Regions of the Shadow of
Luk. 1. 78, 79. Death, the day spring from on high hath visited us, to guide our Feet into the way of Peace. We give thee our humble and hear∣ty thanks, that thou still keepest open the doors of thy Sanctua∣ry, that for our unfruitfulness thou mightest have shut and barred against us, and notwith∣standingour vile unworthiness, thou graciously admittest us to Communion with thy Self in thy publick Ordinances, the Reading and Preaching of thy Word; Prayers to and Praises of thy Name, and the partici∣pation of thy holy Sacraments, wherein thou dost lively repre∣sent the Death of thy Son, and to all worthy Receivers dost firmly assure and convey the precious benefits of it, and bind them to walk answerably to them.
And we further thank thee with enlarged hearts, O our heavenly Father, for all the pro∣mises of thy Covenant, which thou hast sealed with the Blood of thy Son; and given unto us that we might by them be the more encouraged in an holy 2 Cor. 7. 1. obedience, cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and perfecting holi∣ness 2 Pet. 1. 4. in thy fear, be made par∣takers of the Divine Nature. We can never enough mag∣nifie thy mercy and goodness that thou hast made our duty to be a part of our happiness, and that it is not only necessary but best for us to love and fear, trust and serve, obey and ho∣nour thee, and that we are not only bound to be sober and temperate, meek and patient, just and charitable, but much better by being so.
And what thanks can we ren∣der to thee, who in considera∣tion of our weakness and slug∣glishness to the performance of our duty, hast not only set be∣fore us the lively and encou∣ragingexamples of thy Saints and Martyrs, but assisted and en∣abled us by the grace of thy ho∣ly Spirit, that our sufficiency 2 Cor. 3. 5. hath been of thee, who of our selves have not been sufficient to think a good thought, and for the Reward of those Graces and Duties that are the Fruits of thy Spirit working in us, hast promised such a glory and hap∣piness in the world to come, as surpasses not our desires only, but our thoughts and concep∣tions?
We further glorifie thy great Name, O Lord, that thy rich and free Grace hath been the only motive to the bestowing all thy Mercies upon us, guilty and wretched sinners, that our unworthiness hath not hindred the streaming forth of thygoodness, but thy goodness hath born away before it all consideration of our unworthi∣ness; And O how admirable in themselves, and how obliging to us are all those favours and kindnesses, which not only without our merits, but not∣withstanding our deserts of wrath and vengeance, thou hast conferred upon us, bold and provoking Rebels! We are, O Lord, as thy Crea∣tures, infinitely below thee, but as Sinners we have foolishly op∣posed and set our selves against thee; we have broken thy holy Laws, abused thine abundant Mercies, slighted the tenders of thy Grace, dishonoured and cru∣cified afresh our great and mer∣ciful Redeemer, resisted and grieved thy holy Spirit, profa∣ned
and polluted thy Sabbaths and Ordinances, that are both the Pledges and means of thy Grace and Favour. And were there no other Sin upon our ac∣count, but of these thy days and the holy duties of them, they might for ever fill our Faces with shame, and lay us under thy wrathful displeasure.
We have come unprepared to thy solemn worship, and with unhallowed hearts entred the Sanctuary and approached the presence of the most holy God, we have been heedless and unattentive hearers of thy holy Word, remembring little of what we have heard, and pra∣cting less of what we have re∣membred; we have been flat, and unaffected in offering up thy praise, and our hearts havebeen earthly, dull and distracted in our Prayers, how often have we turned our Backs upon thy holy Table judging, our selves unworthy of the precious be∣nefits that are there tendered; or if we have not altogether neglected the sacred Ordinance, we have not, as we might have done, grown in the graces and the comforts of thy holy Spirit by it. How seldom have we been seriously exercised in Meditati∣on, and either so recollected thy Mercies, as to become sen∣sible of our obligation by them, or so thought on our ways, as Psal. 119. 59 to turn our feet unto thy Testi∣monies.
Forgive us, O Lord, we pray thee all our past offences, and as the best assurance of our for∣giveness,let us not so offend any more. Graciously guide us into the ways of truth and holiness, and that we may al∣ways fear thee, let us set our selves continually in thy pre∣sence, and so observe and stand in aw of thine all-seeing Eye, that all our evil thoughts, words and actions may be scattered by it. Let us dye with Christ in the crucifying of our Flesh, with its affections and lusts, and rise with him to a life of holy and new obedience; that as Christ being raised from the dead Rom. 6. 9. dieth no more, so being risen with him, we may wilfully sin no more, but run the race of thy Commandments, till at length we receive the prize of a glorious and incorruptible in∣heritance.
Extend thy mercy and good∣ness to all the Sons of Men, and let the Kingdoms of the World, that are ignorant of thee and thy Salvation, behold the light of thy glorious Go∣spel, and become obedient to the Scepter of thy Son. Bless thy whole Church, scat∣ter the Mists of Ignorance and Errour, heal the breaches of Schism and Division, quench the Wildfire of Strife and Con∣tention; cleanse the Spots of Pro∣faneness, and Superstition that defile and deform it; and make thy Sion the Beauty and the joy of the whole Earth.
Be gracious to these sinful Nations, forgive those many and great sins, that have pulled down thy heavy Judgments up∣on us, and still provoke theemore and more to punish us, and particularly pardon, we pray thee, our wicked and scan∣dalous profanation of this thy day, our unthankfulness for the light of thy blessed Gospel, and walking unsuitably to the principles of that holy Religion that hath been of a long time publickly taught and professed among us. Wash us through∣ly
Psal. 51. 2. from our Iniquities, and cleanse us from our Sins, and grant that by unity, and chari∣ty, and holiness of life, we may glorifie thy great Name, evi∣dence the truth of our Christi∣anity, and adorn the Gospel of God our Saviour. Continue thy Gospel among us, defeat and overthrow the evil designs of bloody and deceitful Men that would pervert the truth ofit, by mixtures of Superstition and Idolatry; and let all that Psal. 40. 16. love thy Salvation, say continu∣ally, let the Lord be magni∣fied. Guide and guard, bless and protect thine Anointed Servant our Soveraign Lord, King Charles; let his days be many, his Counsels wise and religious, his enterprizes successful, his Reign happy to himself and all his Subjects: Cloath his Enemies with shame, and upon his head
Psal. 132. 18. let his Crown flourish, let the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church further the edification of it, by soundness of Doctrine, and holiness of Life; and Ma∣gistrates cherish, and defend it by the encouragement of all virtue and goodness, and the punishment and suppression ofall vice and ungodliness; and let all men follow after peace and holiness, without which Heb. 12. 14. none shall see the Lord. Refresh and support the Sons and Daughters of Sorrow, and in the multitude of their Psal. 94. 19. thoughts within them, let thy comforts delight their Souls. Be gracious and favourable to us that are here before thee, forgive us all our Sins and re∣member not against us those iniquities that have this day polluted our holy offerings; de∣fend and protect us this night, from all those dangers and mis∣chiefs that might overtake us, and let us find safety under the shadow of thy wings; refresh our frail Bodies with a quiet and moderate rest, and help us in the renewed strength of it,
vigorously to serve thee in a faithful discharge of the duties of the next day; and all our days let us live to thee, that in the end of them we may live with thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who hath taught and commanded us when we Pray, to say; OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Monday Morning.
O Most mighty, Lord God, and merciful Father, the Author of our Being, both Bo∣dies and Souls, and the Giver of every good Gift, that may tend to the benefit and happi∣ness of both our Souls and Bo∣dies, we thy poor and most, unworthy Servants are here be∣fore thee this Morning, thank∣fully to acknowledge thy great goodness, in all the blessings we injoy, for this Life and a better, humbly to implore thy mercy in the free pardon of all our Sins, and earnestly to beg the grace of thy holy Spirit, that we may faithfully discharge the du∣ties of pardoned Sinners, andanswer the Obligations thou hast laid upon us by thy mani∣fold blessings. We bless thy holy and great Name, as for all Spiritual and Temporal blessings bestowed on us through thy Son, so particu∣larly for all the ordinances of the Gospel and the priviledges of thy House yesterday injoyed, and for the safety and quiet rest, and refreshment of the last Lam. 3. 22. night; acknowledging it to be of thy mercies that we are not consumed, and because thy compassions fail not, for hadst thou rewarded us after our Ini∣quities, we had long since been incapable of any the least bles∣sing, and had been punished with utmost and everlasting mi∣sery.
We confess, O Lord, therehath on thy part been nothing wanting that might work in us a Conformity to thy Will, but there hath wanted on ours, a care to please thee and a fear to offend thee, a love and delight in thee, and a stedfast purpose to give up our selves to the obe∣dience of thy heavenly Laws: And which hath made us more remiss and negligent, we have not firmly believed the excellent and glorious things thou hast promised upon a compliance with thy Will, nor the fearful and insupportable punishments, which thou hast threatned to our disobedience. We have with great folly over desired, over loved, over trusted to, and over delighted in the things of this World, which cannot profit us, nor in the least promote ourspiritual interest, or eternal hap∣piness, whilest we have been Mat. 6. 33. careless and negligent in seek∣ing thy Kingdom and righte∣ousness, though for our incou∣ragement to do that in the first place, thou hast graciously pro∣mised that all the conveniencies of life shall be added unto us. How have vain transitory pro∣fits and pleasures drawn off our hearts from the love of thee, who alone canst make us happy, and from a delight in thy Laws, in the keeping of which there Psal. 19. 11. is great reward? We have with too great care pampered our vile bodies and made provision Rom. 13. 14. for our flesh, to fulfil the lusts of it, and with too little provi∣ded for our Souls, and secured their happiness in the future state.
We have misimployed the Talents intrusted with us, in the service of Sin, and abused to thy dishonour, our time, and opportunity of doing good; our health and strength, our ease, and liberty, our credit and plenty, the members of our Bodies, the faculties of our Souls, which being received from thy bounty, should all have been improved to thy glory; nor have we remem∣bred the great day of reckoning, wherein we must give an ac∣count of our Stewardship, and Luk. 16. 2. be no longer Stewards.
We acknowledge, O Lord, that we are guilty Sinners, un∣able to help our selves, and un∣worthy that thou shouldst help us; our own consciences con∣demn us, and thou mightest1 John. 3. 20 much more condemn us, for thou knowest more by us than we do by our selves, and art greater than our consciences. But, O God, be merciful to us, and spare us, in the multitude of thy tender compassions: Thou that hast promised pardon and forgiveness to all repenting Sin∣ners, work in us, we beseech thee, a serious and unfeigned repen∣tance, and let us thereby obtain remission of Sins: And by a true and lively faith in our Lord
Rom. 3. 24, 25. Jesus Christ, whom thou hast set sorth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, justi∣fie us freely by thy Grace, and let not any of our sins be charg∣ed upon us to our condemna∣tion. But let us by his Merits and Righteousness be so deli∣vered from the guilt of them,that we may serve thee in righ∣teousness Luk. 1. 75. and holiness before thee, all the days of our life: And grant that as Christ dyed for us, that were dead in sin, and under a sentence of death for it, we may not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him which 2 Cor. 5. 15. dyed for us and rose again. Guide our Feet into those ways of righteousness and peace, temperance and sobrie∣ty, mercy, meekness and cha∣rity, that are well-pleasing to thee, and guard us against the temptations of the World, the Devil and our own naughty Hearts, that we never depart from them. Let a continued sense of thine Omnipresence and all-seeing Eye, make us upright and sincere, in the discharge of every duty; careful and vigi∣lant
for the avoiding of every sin, firm and constant in the re∣sisting every temptation; let us so set thee alway before us, that thou being at our right hand, Psal. 16. 8. we may not be moved. Heb. 13. 9. Keep us stedfast in thy truth, and when many are carryed about with divers and strange Col. 2. 7. doctrines; let us be more and more rooted and stablished in the faith, by bringing forth the fruits of righteousness. And 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. add to our faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to god∣liness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity; v. 8. that these things being in us, we may not be barren, and un∣fruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, but an entrance may be mini∣stred v. 11. unto us abundantly into his everlasting Kingdom. Let the whole race of man∣kind find favour in thine eyes, and let the glorious light of the Luk. 1. 79. Gospel of Salvation shine upon them that sit in darkness, and the regions of the shadow of death. Let the people praise Psal. 67. 3. thee, O God; let all the people praise thee; call home the Jews, thine ancient people, accom∣plish the promised fulness of the Gentiles, that the whole Church may be in Christ, as one Sheep∣fold under one Shepherd.
O be gracious and favoura∣ble unto Sion, and build up the decayed and ruinous Walls of thy Jerusalem. Free thy Church from all Heresie, Prophaness,Schism, Superstition and Ido∣latry, and whatever is displea∣sing in thy sight, and a blemish of the blessed Gospel of God, her Saviour. Keep the Vine∣yard which thy right hand hath planted, from all its enemies that would pull up the Hedges thereof, and lay it waste; water Isa. 27. 3. it every moment, lest any hurt it, keep it night and day. Bless these Kingdoms of Eng∣land, Scotland and
Ireland, for∣give those many and crying Sins that might make us desolate without Inhabitants, and let e∣very one of us that have added to the great weight of wicked∣ness, and made it heavy enough to sink us into utter ruine, turn from the evil of our ways, and by an hearty repentance, and real reformation stand in thegap, and stop those Judgments that are gone forth against us, and entering in at our wide breaches to destroy us: Amend us by thy just severities and merciful salvations, and let both thy punishments and preserva∣tions of us, lead us into the ways of righteousness. Bless with thy richest bles∣sings our Sovereign Lord the King, preserve him, as thou hast done wonderfully heretofore, from the malice and subtlety, the mischievous Plots and Combinations of his Enemies, and let him so remember the deep distress out of which thou hast drawn him, and the high authority wherein thou hast placed him, that in all his acti∣ons & designs, he may promote thy honour and glory, and all
1 Tim. 2. 2. that are under him may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty. Let the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church, further truth and holiness by their life and Doctrine; and civil Magistrates discountenance and suppress all wickedness; and encourage vir∣tue and goodness, and not bear the Sword in vain. And let all from the highest to the lowest, so carry themselves, as that thou mayest be glorified, true Religion advanced, the Gospel of Christ honoured, and Truth and Peace may be established a∣mong us.
Let all that are Sick, pained, or impoverished, distressed ei∣ther in Body or Mind, find thy gracious hand to sweeten and sanctifie their Afflictions,and in thy good time to deli∣ver from them. Bless us, O our God, that are here before thee, direct, assist and prosper us in all that we this day set our hand unto; and let us not undertake any business, but what thou hast warranted by the rules of Righteousness, and upon which we may de∣sire and expect thy blessing: Guide us by thy Counsel, till Psal. 73. 24. thou bring us to thy Glory, by Christ Jesus our only Lord and Saviour, who in compassion to our Infirmities hath taught us thus to pray;
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Monday Evening. BLessed and holy Lord, God, who madest all things by thy Power, and rulest all things by thy Providence, and fillest all places by thy presence, art about our Bed, and about Psal. 139. 3. our Path, and spyest out all our Ways; we thy poor Creatures most heartily beseech thee that thou wouldest fill every one of our hearts with an awful sense of thee, and an humble sinceri∣ty in our approaches to thee, that laying aside all guile and hy∣pocrisie, we may draw near thee Heb. 10. 22. with a true heart and worship thee, that desirest truth in the in Joh. 4. 24. ward part, in Spirit and in Truth.
We thankfully acknowledgeour dependance upon thee, and that our lives, and all the com∣forts of our lives are the effects of thy bounty and goodness thy hands have both made and fashioned us in the Womb, and brought us into the World, and ever since we saw the Light, thou hast all along opened thine hands, and filled us with variety of good things; though for our many and great sins thou mightest have left us na∣ked and miserable, and brought upon us all the punishments, that the threatnings of thy holy and righteous Law have made justly due to the Transgressors of it; and had thy ways been as the ways of a Man are, or thy thoughts towards us like unto our thoughts, we had long since been past the Thank-offer∣ing
of Praise, the benefit of Prayer and the hope of Pardon; for our trangressions have been multiplied against thee; and our Iniquities have gone over Psal. 38. 4. our Heads, as a burthen too hea∣vy for us. The corruption of our na∣ture is opposite to thy holy Law, that requires no less holy prin∣ciples than holy practises, and by the transgressions of our lives, we have broken it in thought, word and deed.
We confess, O Lord, with sorrow and shame, our igno∣rance of thy will, and in many things our acting contrary to the knowledge we have had of it, our pride, earthliness and hy∣pocrisie; our injustice, uncha∣ritableness and sensuality; our inordinate self-love, eagerness inthe pursuit of worldly things, and indifferency in matters of Religion; our impenitency and unbelief, the hardness of our hearts, notwithstanding all the ways and methods thou hast taken to soften them; our un∣thankfulness for all thy mercies, our incorrigibleness under all thy chastisements, our unfruitful∣ness under the means of Grace, our unfaithfulness under all our vows and promises, and resolu∣tions of service and obedience. We have sinned against a clear revelation of thy Will, and a∣gainst the greatest obligations to compliance with it, against the expressions of a tender kind∣ness in thy multiplyed mercies, and the evidence of a righteous severity in thy justly deserved chastisements; we have sinnedagainst thine inviting promises and dreadful threatnings, a∣gainst the frequent warnings of thy Word, the renewed moti∣ons and powerful convictions of thy Spirit, and the precious blood of thy dear Son; we have sinned against the light of our understandings, against our pro∣mises and purposes of obedi∣ence, against the checks of our own consciences; we cannot re∣count the number of our sins, they are so exceeding many, nor set in order the aggravating cir∣cumstances, whereby they are become exceeding sinful. But, O Lord, have mercy up∣on Psal. 51. 1. us, according to thy loving kindness: according to the multitude of thy tender mer∣cies blot out our transgressions; Help us to forsake our sinful
Isa. 55. 7. thoughts and crooked ways, and by unfeigned repentance to return unto thee, that thou mayest have mercy on us and abundantly pardon us. Speak peace to us, most mer∣ciful Father, through the death and sufferings of thy dear Son, who gave up himself in Sacri∣fice to expiate the guilt of our sins, and by that precious ran∣som to buy off the punishment that was due to our transgres∣sions; O sprinkle our consci∣ences with that blood of sprink∣ling that speaketh better things Heb. 12. 24. than the blood of Abel; work in us a true and lively faith, that we may be justified and have
Rom. 5. 1. peace with thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ: For though we have no righteousness of our own that we dare plead to thestrictness of thy Law, and the severity of thy Justice, thou hast treasured up an alsufficient righ∣teousness in thy Son; that be∣lieving in him we may be par∣doned, and through his stripes be healed. And let thy pardoning mercy be accompanied with thy pu∣rifying grace, that we may be both delivered from the guilt and punishment of our sins, and cleansed from the filth, and im∣purity of them. And as our Lord Christ dyed unto sin to condemn it in the flesh, let us dye unto sin to crucific it in ours, that it may never reign in our mortal bodies, that we Rom. 6. 10, 11, 12. should obey it in the lusts there∣of. Help us, heavenly Father, to put off the old man, which is
corrupt according to deceitful Eph. 4. 22, 23, 24. lusts, and to put on that new man which is created after thine own image, in righteousness and true holiness, and as by the natural birth, we have in sin and corruption born the image of the first Adam, that was made a living Soul, so let us by the spiritual birth, in sanctification and holiness, bear the image of the second Adam, that was made a quickning Spirit. Give us a new Ezek. 36. 26, 27. heart, and put within us a new Spirit; take away the stony heart out of our flesh, and give us an heart of flesh; put thy Spi∣rit within us, and cause us to walk in thy Statutes, that we may keep thy Judgments and do them. Wean our hearts from an excessive and inordinate love of
all the things of this World, and let us never place our hap∣piness in the pomps and plea∣sures, the profits and honours, or any transitory injoyments of this Life, where we are told not only in thy Word, but by our own experience, it is not to be found; but let us weep, as though we wept not, and 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. rejoyce as though we rejoyced not, and buy as though we pos∣sessed not, and use this World as not abusing it, because the fashion of this World passeth a∣away.
Let us never adventure upon sin with the foolish and deceit∣ful hopes of getting any thing by it, but let our minds be in∣fluenced with the great and cer∣tain truth of what our Saviour hath taught us, that the gainingof the whole World, can be 16. 26. no recompence for the loss of our Souls. Let the great and strict account, that we must ere long make be often in our se∣rious thoughts, and the course of our Lives be thereby so or∣dered that we may think of it with a joyful expectation, and never allow our selves to do, to speak or think any thing, that may make the thoughts of the day of Judgment a terrour to us. Let us so obey the Laws of our great Lord and Saviour, and follow the steps of his example, that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we may lift up our heads with joy, and appear with Col. 3. 4. him in glory.
Show forth the favour and loving kindness of a Father, to all the Children of Men, and asthou hast made them capable of eternal life and happiness, make known unto them the way of thy Salvation that leads unto it. Let the Sun of Righte∣ousness arise with healing in his Mal. 4. 2. Wings, and dispel the darkness of Heathenish and Mahometan Superstition and Idolatry, that the Kingdoms of the Earth may become the Kingdom of thy Son.
Bless thy whole Church, and let the company of the Faith∣ful that thou hast incorporated and knit together as one Body in thy Son, by thy Grace be de∣sended, and preserved, enlightned and instructed, ordered and go∣verned, purged and sanctified, and let the Ordinances of Christ be so administred, and his Laws observed, as may become theSpouse and Body of thy Son. Be merciful, O Lord, to the sinsul Nation wherein we live, and let neither our abuse of thy mercies, nor our hardning our selves under thy Judgments, bring upon us that ruine that they have justly deserved. Lord thou hast been favourable to the Land, in that thou hast of∣ten rescued us from the destru∣ction that was due to our Sins, and hast blessed us with the long continuance of thy Gospel, that was no way due to our walking so unworthy of it. Oh let that infinite mercy that hath hither∣to spared us, and interposed betwixt us and thy desolating vengeance, forgive our iniqui∣ty and turn away the fierceness of thine anger.
Heal our back-slidings andheal our breaches, take away Hos. 14. 2. all our iniquity, receive us gra∣ciously and love us freely, to us belongeth confusion of Face, Dan. 9. 8. 9. but to the Lord our God be∣long mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled a∣gainst thee. Continue thy mercies, our peace and our plenty, and above all the truth of thy Gospel and purity of Religion, Cause us to fear thee and thy goodness, and let thine infinite wisdom find out a way to bring us out of those woful confusions, from which to be delivered is above the contrivances of our wisdom. Bless with the blessings of the right and left hand, of this life, and a better, thine Anointed Ser∣vant, and our Sovereign Lord King
Charles; let his Reign bereligious, peaceable, long and prosperous; so rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, that he may ever seek thy honour and glory. And let all that are Governours under him, in Church or State, exercise their power for the punishment of 1 Pet. 2. 14. evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. Be merciful to all afflicted ones, to our Friends and Rela∣tions, to all that have wronged us; forgive our Enemies, O Lord, and help us to forgive them, as we expect to be forgi∣ven both of them and thee. We humbly commit our selves to thy merciful protecti∣on this night, defend from all danger, our persons, our dwel∣lings, our possessions, refresh us with a quiet and healthful sleep,
and with the health and strength of our Bodies, and the vigour of our minds, let us serve thee all our days, till at the end of them we receive the end of our Faith, the salvation of our Souls, through thy dear Son, our alone Saviour, Jesus Christ, in the merit of whose righte∣ousness, and intercession we fur∣ther pray:
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Tuesday Morning. GReat and glorious Lord God, who art infinite and incomprehensible in all perfections, art cloathed with Glory and Majesty, and dwel∣lest in that light that no mortal creature can approach and live, we thine unworthy servants, humbly sensible of our infinite distance as creatures, and our abominable vileness as Sinners, are here before thee this mor∣ning to offer up our prayers and praises in the Name and Mediation of thy Son. In our selves we have no confidence to appear before thee, for we are as dry stubble, and thou a con∣suming fire, but in thy beloved
Son, our ever blessed Redeemer and Intercessor we have access with confidence, who hath o∣pened Heb. 10, 19, 20. an entrance into the Ho∣liest by his Blood, and conse∣crated a new and living way to the Throne of thy Grace, through the Veil of his Flesh, that we coming to thee, in his precious and prevailing Name, Heb. 4. ult. may obtain mercy and find grace to help in our time of need.
We are guilty Sinners and want pardon, we are defiled Sinners and want cleansing, we are weak Sinners and want strengthning, we are foolish Sin∣ners and want to be instructed in the ways of thy Word, and wandring Sinners that want to be brought back into them, but though our case be all necessity,thy glorious attribute is Al-suf∣ficiency, and thy grace and mercy, thy wisdom and power, is ready to supply all our wants Phil. 4. 19. according to thy riches in glory by Christ Jesus. We admire with all thankful∣ness, thy great patience and long-suffering towards us, that thou hast hitherto spared us, and not speedily brought upon us that punishment and misery that our sins have righteously deserved, of which we can give no account, but that thou art merciful, because mercy pleases thee, and shewest compassion, because thou delightest in com∣passion: but such is thy good∣ness, thou hast not only spared but bountifully supplyed us, and given us all things richly to in∣joy, that belong to life and god∣liness:
thou feedest and cloath∣est us, preservest and defendest us, hast safely brought us through the darkness and the dangers of the last night to the light of another day; for these and all the blessings of this life, we praise thee, but we much more magnifie and adore thine inconceiveable goodness and love in giving us thy Son to redeem us from wrath and con∣demnation, and thy holy Go∣spel to conduct us in the way to eternal life. And we cannot without confusion of face, re∣flect upon the shameful and dis∣ingenuous returns we have made of thine abundant and undeserved kindnesses, that when thou hast nourished and brought up children, we have rebelled a∣gainst Isa. 1. 2. thee.
Thy holy Laws we have broken in sinful thoughts, words and actions, though thou hast therein commanded us no∣thing but what is in it self just, and reasonable, and what is su∣table to our dependance upon thy holy Majesty, we have not carried our selves as it becomes us, to thee, in holiness and godliness; to our neighbours in righteousness and charity; to our selves in temperance and sobriety; but have followed af∣ter, and fulfilled the sensual ap∣petites and inclinations of our own hearts, and instead of ser∣ving thee, our God, have ser∣ved divers lusts and pleasures.
We have known that our vile bodies must ere long lye down in the house of dust and rottenness, and yet we havepampered them to fulfil the lusts of our flesh; and that our immortal Souls must last an E∣ternity of Happiness or Misery, and yet we have neglected lay∣ing up in store for them, an Happiness in the future State▪ Joh. 6. 27. And while we have laboured for the meat that perishes, we hav neglected that which endure unto everlasting Life. We hav little considered the great en of our coming into this world▪ and as little laid to heart wha will become of us when w shall go hence and be no mor and as though we were to dy as the Beasts dye, we have liv too much as the Beasts live.
In our selves, O Lord, w have no hope, but in the mu¦titude of thy tender mercies w cannot despair, and thoug we have deserved wrath and vengeance, and have nothing of our own to plead, why we should escape it, we are great∣ly encouraged to sue to thine offended Majesty for pardon and forgiveness, by that Procla∣mation which thou hast made Exod. 34. 6, 7. of thy glorious Name, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness, and truth, keeping mercy for thou∣sands, and forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and because thou hast said thou wilt not clear the guilty, take away our guilt by a sincere hearty re∣pentance, and a true and lively faith in the merits, and righte∣ousness of thy Son. Let all our sins be more bit∣ter and burthensom in the re∣view
of them, than they have ever been pleasant and delight∣ful in the commission of them, and grant, gracious Lord, that e may be so sorrowful for sins, as to loath them, so them, as to take up firm Resolutions against them, and so resolve, as that by the powerful assistance of thy holy Spirit, we may never renew the practice of them, and having done ini∣quity, Job 34. 32. we may do so and of∣fend no more. Wash and cleanse our sinful Souls, from their guilt and fil∣thiness in that fountain of thy dear Sons most precious blood, Zech. 13. 1. which thou hast set open for sin, and uncleanness, and by the grace of thy holy Spirit, subdu∣ing and mortifying our sins in us, convince and satisfie us that
thou hast pardoned them: cre∣ate in us clean hearts, O God, Psal. 51. 10. and renew right spirits within us. And as we call thy Son, Je∣sus Christ, our Saviour, and hope to be for ever happy in the light and injoyment of him in Heaven, let us make him our example, and purifie our selves even as he is pure. 1 Joh. 3. 3. Make us as he was, holy and humble, meek and merciful, pa∣tient and charitable, heavenly minded and self-denying: let's be zealous for thy glory, con∣tented with our present condi∣tion, satisfied with all the wise allotments of thy providence, and make it our meat and drink to do the will of our heavenly Father; and in all things where∣in he was a most lively and ad∣mirable
pattern for our imita∣tion, seeing we profess our selves Christians, and say we a∣bide 1 Joh. 2. 6. in him, let us walk as he also walked. Settle and root in our hearts a stronger and more firm be∣lief of thy holy Gospel, and so fix our thoughts and affections upon that unseen happiness, that our Saviour in our name and place is possessed of; that nothing here below may either allure or affright us from our duty or make us remiss, cold and negligent in it, but we may be zealous of good works, and with fervency of spirit alway serve that gracious Lord, from whom we expect the reward of a glorious and immortal in∣heritance.
Fill every one of our heartswith a quick and a constant sense, an humble and awful dread, an ardent and intire love of thee, together with an active and vigorous delight in thee, and a vigilant and circumspect care universally, and in the whole course of our lives, to please and approve our selves to thee. Let us never adven∣ture to commit any sin, as a lit∣tle one, because it will offend and dishonour thee, the great and infinite Majesty of Heaven, and deserve the eternal punish∣ment and misery of an im∣mortal Soul.
Keep us by thy grace from every evil way; and those sins especially to the which we may be most inclined, and easily pre∣vailed upon by custom or ex∣ample; the naughtiness and ge∣neralcorruption of the age we live in, our Callings, our com∣pany or our constitution, so that laying aside every weight, Heb. 12. 2. and the sins that easily beset us, and running with patience and perseverance the race that thou hast set before us, we may at length obtain that prize of our High Calling, which thou hast prepared and promised in Christ Jesus our Lord.
And in his Name we humbly recommend to thy compassion and goodness, all the Sons of Men that dwell upon the Face of the Earth, beseeching thee that thou wouldst make known thy Will to them, and help them to practise according to what they know, and whatever affliction or calamity may lye upon them in mind, body orestate, let them by thy mercy and clemency, be supported un∣der them, and in thy due time be delivered from them. Shew favourable regards of care and kindness towards thy Church, engrave her upon the Palms of thine Hands, and let Isa. 49. 16. her Walls be continually before thee. Appoint Salvation for the Walls and Bulwarks of the Na∣tion wherein we live, pardon our many crying sins, avert thy deserved, feared Judgments, heal our back-slidings, and heal our breaches, continue thy Gospel, and grant that we may walk worthy of that inestimable fa∣vour.
Bless our dread Sovereign with the blessings of thy right and left hand, let his Govern∣mentbe happy and peaceable, long and prosperous, and a publick blessing to all that are under it, and grant that all sub∣ordinate Governours in Church, in State, may faithfully use their power to the discouragement of Vice and ungodliness, and the promoting and supporting peace and good order, truth, righteousness and holiness: and let all men by a serious repen∣tance and a through reforma∣tion of their ways, strive to save the Land from those confusi∣ons and miseries, into which they have plunged it by their manifold offences. Comfort all that mourn, give them beauty for ashes, and the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and let all that groan under thy heavy hand triumph in thy sal∣vation.
Be with us thy servants, this day, and let that good provi∣dence that hath this night pre∣served and refreshed us, direct, assist and bless us in all our ways, and keep us from the dangers and mischiefs, the sins and offences, the snares and temptations that we might o∣therwise fall into. Let us be in thy fear all the day long, and so order our lives, as if it were the last day we had to live in this world, that as in the evening we shall be one day nearer our death, we may be nearer eternal life and happiness; grant us all these our requests, most gracious Father, and what∣ever else thou knowest to be needful for us, for the sake of thy dear Son, in whose Name and Words, by his own directionwe further implore thy merciful goodness; OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Tuesday Evening. ALmighty and most merci∣ful God and Father, the Maker and Governour of all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and exalted in thy glorious per∣fections, above the thoughts and services, the praises and ac∣knowledgments of the highest and best of them, thine under∣standing is infinite, and thou seest the hearts and ways of all the sons of men, thy holiness is infinite, and thou hatest all the sin and iniquity thou espi∣est in them, thy power infinite, & thou canst easily punish them for the sins that provoke and displease thee, and
yet thine infinite mercies thou pardonestthe sins of all that by sincere re∣pentance, and a through a∣mendment of their ways return to thee. We thy poor Servants in a deep sense of our guilt and wretchedness, and the strong en∣couragements of thy declared mercy and goodness, humble our Souls at thy Foot-stool, be∣seeching thee to have mercy up∣on us, and through the righte∣ousness of thy dear Son, whom thou hast given to be a propi∣tiation, and price of redempti∣tion for us, to pardon our ma∣ny and great transgressions, whereof we are guilty before thy Majesty, in thought, and word, and deed, and whereby we have deserved to be punish∣ed with overlasting destruction, from thy presence, by thy glo∣rious power.
Hadst thou, O Lord, taken advantages against us, or been forward to pour out that wrath and vengeance that we have been forward to provoke, we had not now been begging thy mercy, or cherish'd with the hopes of it, but had in vain la∣mented the bloody and severe effects of thine incensed Ju∣stice. We are not only by Nature the Children of Wrath, but have in the course of our Lives actuated the sinful, corrupt principles of our Nature, and gone astray from thy holy, just and good Laws, that thou hast given to be the rule and mea∣sure of our actions: and though both as thy Creatures, thy Ser∣vants, and thy Children, thou hast laid upon us the greatest
obligations to obedience, and a dutyful complyance with thy Will, yet have we in the eager and violent pursuit of our lusts Psal. 2. 3. broken thy bonds asunder, and cast away thy cords from us. We have professed the pure and holy Religion of thy Son, but have shamefully dishonour∣ed him and his Religion, by im∣pure and unholy practises, and
2 Tim. 2. 19. naming the Name of Christ, we have not departed from ini∣quity: we have given up our Names to him in Baptism, and solemnly vowed obedience to the Laws of his holy Gospel, but we have started aside, like broken Bows, and walked in the imaginations of our own hearts, and fulfilled our vile and foo∣lish lusts, as if there were no God to be served, no Soul to be saved, no Hell to be feared, no Heaven to be expected, and as if the Name of Christians would have carryed us to Hea∣ven, we have done those things that many Heathens would have blushed at and been a∣shamed to have practised; so that this might be our con∣demnation, which of all other is the most grievous and insup∣portable, that Light is come in∣to the World, and we have lo∣ved Darkness rather than Light, Joh. 3. 19. because our deeds have been evil.
So many, and undeserved, have been thy mercies towards us, so kind and unwearied the expressions of thy bounty, that all our disobedience is by a shameful and odious ingrati∣tude become exceeding sinful,and we cannot without sorrow of heart and confusion of Face, reflect upon our wearying thee with our sins, when thou hast loaded us with thy benefits. But we beseech thee, O most merciful Father, in the tender∣est compassions of thy sound∣ing bowels, look down upon us, and for thy Names sake (the most powerful argument and such as uses to prevail) O Lord hear, O Lord spare, O Lord forgive: by a serious and hear∣ty repentance, and a true and lively Faith in thy Son, make us fit partakers of thy pardon∣ing mercy.
Though our deserts are thine indignation and vengeance, the merit of his righteousness is re∣mission and forgiveness, though we have affronted thy Justice,he hath satisfied it, though we have incensed thy wrath, he hath appeased it; the chastisement of Isa. 53. 5. our peace was upon him; O let the merit of his righteousness be upon us. And because the holy Jesus, together with the guilt and pu∣nishment of sin, alway delivers from the power of it, and they that are Christs, crucifie the Gal. 5. 24. flesh with its affections and lusts, by the subduing and mor∣tification of our sins, convince and comfortably satisfie us that thou hast pardoned them, and by thy sanctifying grace, help us to cleanse our selves from 2 Cor. 7. 1. all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in thy fear: sanctifie us whol∣ly,
1 Thes. 5. 23. and let our whole spirit, and soul, and body be preservedblameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Quicken us, holy Father by the spirit of life and holiness, to run the ways of thy Com∣mandments, and as thou hast given our blessed Saviour to be Head of thy Church, and anoint∣ed him with an unmeasured fulness of thy Spirit, that he might communicate and im∣part it to the Members of his Body, let some drops of that holy Oil fall down upon us, that was so plentifully poured upon the Head of our High Priest, and out of his fulness, let us receive Joh. 1. 16. Grace for Grace; and so renew the Image of his Holiness in our Souls, that as his true Chil∣dren we may shew forth all the Features and Lineaments of our heavenly Father.
And because we are not suf∣ficient of our selves, to avoid any evil, or perform any good, be graciously present with us to preserve us from the one, and assist us in the other. Make us perfect in every good work, to do thy will, working in us that which is well pleasing in Heb. 13. 21. thy sight through Jesus Christ. Make us wise to Salvation, and seeing our days are very few and uncertain, and repen∣tance both necessary and out of our own power, let us not put it off till to morrow, not know∣ing what a day may bring forth, nor deceive our selves with vain purposes of parting with our Sins hereafter, when this very night our Souls may be
Luk. 12. 20. taken from us; But seeing the Heavens and the Earth at 2. Pet. 3. 15. length, and our selves ere long, must be dissolved, let us be di∣ligent, that we may be found of thee in peace, without spot, and blameless. Bless thy whole Church scat∣tered far and near over the Face of the Earth; pour out upon it the Spirit of Truth and Holiness, and grant that all that confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and live in unity and godly love; be thou that art the Lord and Lawgiver of thy Church and People, their Pro∣tector and Saviour from all their Enemies, thou art our Psal. 44. 4. King, O God, command deli∣verances for Jacob.
Be gracious and favourable to these Nations, many and heinous are the sins wherebywe have provoked thy Majesty, great and heavy the Judgments that hang over us for those Sins; pardon we most humbly be∣seech thee our Sins, and avert those Judgments, thou that sit∣test between the Cherubims shine forth; before England, Scot∣land and Ireland, stir up thy Psal. 80. 1, 2. strength, and come and save us. And though we of this Na∣tion have deserved to be over∣thrown with an utter destructi∣on; and for ever cast out of thy sight, as a loathsome and a∣bominable thing; for thy good∣ness, O Lord, pardon and spare, reform and amend, compose and settle, heal and establish us, in the multitude of thy tender mercies.
Give us not up to the mis∣chiefsand desolations that we have deserved, and thine and our Enemies have designed, nor suffer those that hate us proud∣ly to insult and triumph over us. Bless with all blessings of this life and the next, thine anoint∣ed Servant our Sovereign Lord the King; direct him in such ways as are pleasing to thee, and protect him from all dan∣gers that may at any time threaten him. Let all subordi∣nate Ministers Ecclesiastical and Civil, be so assisted by thy Grace and holy Spirit, that Religion and Godliness, Peace and Order, Love and Unity, Truth and Righteousness may be established and encoura∣ged
1 Pet. 2. 1. among us, and let all sorts of men, laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, keep the unity Eph. 4. 3. of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. Comfort the afflicted and di∣stressed in Mind, Body or E∣state, recompense the kindnesses of our Friends seven fold into their Bosoms, forgive our Ene∣mies, and help us so to forgive them, that we may comforta∣bly hope for our own forgive∣ness. Keep us, O Lord, from the evils and dangers, that, without thy protection might this night befal us, refresh and strengthen our frail Bodies with a mode∣rate, quiet and peaceable rest, and let the strength of this nights healthful repose, be re∣turned to thee in the next
days faithful service, that as e∣very day we are nearer our death; we may be nearer an immortal Crown of Life and Glory, which thou hast pre∣pared and promised to them that Love and Fear thee, through Jesus Christ, who, by his Righteousness and In∣tercession, hath given us the liberty and confidence to say.
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Wednesday Morning.
HOly and heavenly Father, thou art infinite in Pow∣er and Wisdom, in Holiness, Truth and Goodness, abundant in Mercy to all that call upon thee in truth, all thy Works in Heaven and Earth shew forth thy praise; the glorious Angels, and the glorified Spirits of just Men, being themselves honour∣ed in the honouring of thee, e∣verlastingly triumph in the cele∣bration of thy divine & incom∣prehensible perfections; to praise and magnifie thy great and holy Name, is both the duty and priviledge of the Sons of Men, to whom thou hast given un∣derstandings in some measureto conceive thy glorious excel∣lencies, and tongues to declare them. We thy poor and unworthy Servants, humbly offer up to thy divine Majesty, the tribute of our hearty praises, and ado∣rations of thine infinite Power and Justice, Wisdom and Holi∣ness, Truth and Faithfulness, and bless thee with our whole Souls, for all those blessings for our Souls and Bodies, our pre∣sent and future happiness, which are the effects of thy bounty and goodness.
We thank thee, O Lord, for our health and strength, our li∣berty and peace, the Bread we eat and the Raiment we put on, that thou hast delivered us from Pains and Sicknesses, and those grievous pressures and calami∣ties,wherewith others, better than our selves, are sorely affli∣cted, that thou hast the last night preserved us from dangers and refreshed us with sleep, and bestowest upon us all the sup∣ports and conveniencies of Life, and above all, that thou hast redeemed us from Hell and Damnation, by the precious Blood of thy dear Son, that by his Gospel thou hast brought to light life and immortality, and encouraged our hopes of them, by thy precious and faithful promises. Lord what is Man that thou art so mindful of him? What are Sinners that thou shewest such favour unto them? Thy mercies conferr'd upon us are admirable, as we are thy Crea∣tures that can no way oblige
our Almighty and Independent Creator, and much more so as we are Sinners, that have offen∣ded and provoked our most righteous Sovereign Lord and Lawgiver. Ever since we came into the World, we have been over∣spread with a contagious Le∣prosie and loathsom Disease, and have added the iniquities of practise to our natural pol∣lution, and more defiled our selves by chusing our own crooked ways, and fulfilling the imaginations of our naughty hearts.
We have many times given scandal to others, by our open and observed miscarriages, and cast a blemish and reproach upon that holy Religion where∣of we have made profession;so as to have made it worse thought on by its Enemies, and with great folly we have some∣times adventur'd to commit those Sins in our private retire∣ments, which we would have been ashamed that men should have taken notice of, though we have well known that the Psal. 139. 12 light and darkness are both a∣like to thee, and that no secre∣sie can hide from thine all-see∣ing Eye.
We have been too careless of avoiding temptations to Sin, and have run into those snares, that by taking heed to our feet, we might have avoided; we have neglected the means of mortifying our Lusts, watchful∣ness, Prayer and Fasting, which through thy blessing might have been effectual to that bles∣sedpurpose, and instead of strongly and resolutely opposing we have cowardly and treache∣rously complied with, furnished and animated thine and our Enemies, making provision for Rom. 13. 14. our Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof: and though we have been well assured that our lives and all our present earthly in∣joyments that support and sweeten them, are but of a short and momentany continuance, we have laboured & been solli∣citous Joh. 6. 27. for the meat that perishes and neglected that which en∣dures to everlasting Life.
How often have we deafned our Ear to the calls of thy Go∣spel? And made light of both the invitations of thy gracious promises, and the terrors of thy dreadful threatnings? How of∣tenhave we hardned our hearts against the motions of thy holy Spirit? How often to satisfie our lustful appetites, have we broken through the convictions of our own consciences? And to vio∣late thy holy and good Laws, have offered violence to the dictates of our own minds? We judge our selves, O Lord, and acknowledge we have justly deserved all that wrath that might make us everlasting∣ly miserable, and made our selves liable to those threatned punishments, which we can nei∣ther escape nor endure; but O our merciful Father, do not thou condemn us, we are a∣shamed and confounded in the sense and remembrance of our transgressions, comfort us, O Lord, we beseech thee, with a
sense of thy pardoning mercy, in our blessed and all-sufficient Redeemer. Help us by a sincere and hear∣ty repentance, to return to thee, from whom in our own crook∣ed and perverse ways we have gone astray; Let the time past of our lives suffice us to have 1 Pet. 4. 3. wrought the wills of the flesh, and seeing we have already by the frequent commissions of sin too much offended thee, and endangered our Souls, let us not by the repeated and con∣tinued practice of it, heighten the offence and add to our guil∣tiness. Let the Blood of thy dear
1 Joh. 1. 7. Son Jesus Christ cleanse us from all sin, and through his precious Sacrifice and meritorious suffer∣ings, that was pure and perfect∣ly innocent, discharge and ac∣quit us that have been foul of∣fenders. Let thy holy Spirit sanctifie and renew us after thine own Image, in righteousness and true holiness, and as we hope to be pardoned, by the preci∣ous death of Christ, grant that crucifying our Lusts upon his Cross; we may follow the ex∣ample of his holy Life, and in all holiness and humility, meek∣ness and charity, zeal for thy Glory and submission to thy Will, patience, heavenly mind∣edness and self-denial, content∣ment and the contempt of this World, we may walk as Christ walked, and be filled with all Phil. 1. 11. the fruits of righteousness, which are through him unto thy praise and glory.
Help us to live by faith in thy promises, in all varieties of thy providence, let this be our great support and comfort, that thou hast said thou wilt never Heb. 13. 5. leave us nor forsake us, and in all difficulties and temptations, let this be our great care, that we do not leave nor forsake thee, But sanctifie the Lord God 1 Pet. 3. 15. in our hearts, and with a zea∣lous faithfulness endeavour to please and approve our selves to thee in all our ways; and seeing we call on the Father, who, without respect of persons judges according to every mans work, let us pass the time of our sojourning here in fear: 1 Pet. 1. 17. And give diligence to make our calling and election sure, that
2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. we may never fall either into scandalous sins or insupporta∣blemiseries, but an entrance may be ministred to us abun∣dantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Sa∣viour, Col. 3. 4. and when Christ who is our life shall appear, we may also appear with him in glory. Shew thy favour and good∣ness to all mankind, and grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by thy go∣vernance, that thy Church may joysully serve thee in all godly quietness, and being delivered from the Plots and Combina∣tions, the Oppositions and Per∣secutions of its Enemies, may alway walk before thee in truth and holiness, and all that pro∣fess the Gospel of our Lord Je∣sus, may hold fast his pure and heavenly Doctrines, and express
the power of them in their lives. Bless this sinful and provo∣king Nation, wherein we live, pardon our many great and crying sins, heal our wide breaches, unite our divisi∣ons, compose our distractions, and remove from us whatever may provoke the Eyes of thy Jealousie and Glory, and de∣prive us of thy long continued temporal and spiritual blessings, and lay us open to thy dread∣ful and desolating Judgments.
Send thy blessed Spirit into our hearts, a spirit of wisdom and knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, a spirit of truth and holiness, of peace and unity, of righteousness, moderation, meekness and charity, and in∣stead of loading one anotherwith slanders and scandals, foul reproaches and bitter censures, help us to bear one anothers Gal. 6. 2. burdens, and so fulfil the Law of Christ. Bless our Sovereign Lord King Charles with the choicest of thy blessings, fill his heart with wisdom and piety, with a mighty sense of the great Trust thou hast committed to him, and the great obligations thou hast laid upon him, with courage and resolution to sup∣port and promote Righteous∣ness and true Religion. And grant that all in places of Power and Authority may exert, and use it for the punish∣ment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, as it becomes them that have re∣ceived their Power from thee,
and are accountable for it unto thee. Order all publick Affairs to thy glory, and the comfort and encouragement of all that fear thee. Support and comfort all those whom thou hast fed with the Bread of Tears and mingled their drink with weeping. And we humbly beseech thee for a blessing upon our selves, as thou hast preserved us this night, direct, assist, and prosper us in all the affairs and enter∣prizes of this day, and let us all the day long be in thy fear, re∣membring thou observest, and thou wilt judge us: and let a sense of this preserve us from all sin, and quicken us to the doing of whatever may be pleasing in thy sight, through our blessed Re∣deemer, who, when we pray, hath taught and commanded us to say;
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Wednesday Evening. BLessed Lord God, the high and lofty One, that inha∣bitest Isai. 57. 15. eternity, whose Name is Holy, who dwellest in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and hum∣ble Spirit. We wretched and miserable sinners, most humbly beseech thee to look down upon us from the habitation of thy Holiness, and glory in the multitude of thy tender mercies; and work in us that humble and contrite Spirit, that is so pleasing and accept∣able in thy sight, that our hearts, hardned by the deceitful∣ness of Sin, may be softned by the effectual working of thy Grace.
By commanding us to call upon thee, thou hast made Prayer our Duty, and by pro∣mising to hear us when we Pray, thou hast made it no less our priviledge: in obedience to thy command, and in the in∣couragement of thy Promise, we are here before thee, to of∣fer up our Evening Sacrifice of Prayer, desiring thee both to prepare our Hearts to Pray, and bow down thine ear to hear. We are not of our selves suf∣ficient to perform any duty, to bear any burden, to resist any temptation, to mortifie any lust,
2. Cor. 3. 5. To think one good thought, but all our sufficiency is of thee: thou, O Lord, canst pardon our Sins, supply our wants, heal our di∣stempers, enlighten our blind∣ness, soften our hardness,strengthen our weakness, we have no whither to go but un∣to thee, nor can we come to thee but in thine own Power: into such a wretched condition have our Sins, brought us, that we are both unable to help our selves, and unworthy that thou shouldst help us; but our com∣fort is, that thy Grace doth not use to find Sinners worthy, but make them so, nor dost thou shew favour and kindness to them, because they please thee, but because thou art pleased with thine own Mercy and Goodness.
Our Iniquities, we acknow∣ledge, have been many and great, a sinful nature, as a cor∣rupt Fountain, hath sent forth polluted streams in the thoughts, words and actions of our Lives,and we have often offended a∣gainst thy holy Laws, and ex∣pressed the enmity of our car∣nal minds. Though all thy Laws are in themselves most equal, just and good, and thou hast both encouraged our obedience by the gracious promises of thy favourable acceptance, and an eternal recompence; and af∣frighted from sin by threatning it with everlasting punishment, yet lightly esteeming thy Pro∣mises and contemning thy threatnings, we have troddn thy holy Laws under our Feet, and broken through the re∣straints, wherewith ou hast hedged us in from finding our own ways.
Our pride and earthliness, our unbelief & unthankfulness, our hypocrisie, sensuality andhardness of heart, witness a∣gainst us to our faces, and give us great cause to blush and be confounded, to mourn and grieve in the sense of them. Who of us hath had that due sense of thy holiness, power and goodness, thine omnipresence and all-seeing Eye, as to be thereby driven from our Sins, or quickned to the exercise of Virtue and Godliness? Who of us hath been so affected with that Grace that hath appeared bringing Salvation, as to deny un∣godliness and worldly lusts, and make it our study and business to please and approve our selves to thee? Who of us hath so felt the burthen, and tasted the bit∣terness of our sins, as to loath and leave them with dislike and abhorrency? Who of us hath
been so delighted in thy love, as to return thee our hearty love in a sincere and uniform obedi∣ence? Who of us hath so firm∣ly believed the rewards and pu∣nishments of the future state, as to press toward the mark for the obtaining the prize, and make hast to escape and flee from the bottomless Pit and burning Lake? The zeal and earnestness that we should have shewn in matters of Religion, we have expressed in following our worldly interests, and that cold∣ness and indifferency that would have been well bestowed upon the little and short lived bene∣fits of the present Life, hath at∣tended the performance of our holy duties.
We have in some measureknown our Masters Will, and yet have done our own, and to please our corrupt and flesh∣ly Appetites, have done what we have well understood to be dis∣pleasing in thy sight. Though thou hast often commanded us to repent, and turn from our evil ways, and we have been convinced that to hear thy Voice to day, is both our duty and our wisdom, we have de∣murred by lingring delays, and not cast off our Sins by a speedy repentance.
We are ashamed, O Lord, of this our folly, and beseech thee so to awaken and assist us by thy Grace, that we may not re∣ceive it in vain, nor longer de∣lude our own Souls with the deceitful purposes of a future re∣pentance, but let us make hasteto hearken to thy loud and ear∣nest 2 Cor. 6. 2. Calls, now while it is the accepted time, and the day of Salvation. And let thy pardoning mer∣cy freely forgive all our Sins, thy Grace having by true re∣pentance made us meet parta∣kers of that inestimable benefit: So set them before our face, as that we may mark and consider them, mourn for and confess, loath and forsake them; and so cast them behind thy back, as not to observe them with a wrathful countenance, or pu∣nish them with a justly deserved vengeance. By the precious blood of thy dear Son, that immaculate Lamb, that was offered to take away the Sins of the World,
Psal. 51. 2. Wash us throughly from our Iniquities, and cleanse us from our Sins, and through his per∣fect righteousness let the free gift come upon us unto justifi∣cation Rom. 5. 18. of Life. Deliver us, we pray thee, as from the guilt and damnation of Sin by his precious Sacrifice so from its power and domini∣on by his sanctifying Spirit, and though like a Leprofie in the Walls of an infected house, Sin will remain in us while we are in the world, let it not reign Rom. 6. 12. in our mortal Body, that we should obey it in the lusts there∣of. But as the Flesh in us lu∣steth against the Spirit, let thy Gal. 3. 17. Spirit in us resist and subdue the lusts of the Flesh.
Let not an inordinate love of the allurements, and intangling vanities of this World quenchor weaken in our Souls that entire and most hearty love that is due to thee and heavenly things, nor distracting cares for the conve∣niencies of the Body, eat out and destroy the care of our Souls, nor hinder a timely pro∣vision for their future and eter∣nal happiness. But for as much as our stay here below is very short, and the time of our de∣parture hence into an everla∣sting state very uncertain, let us with fear and trembling, ear∣nestness and diligence, work out our own Salvation, and carry our selves with upright and in∣offensive Consciences toward thee and all men whilst we are in the World, as we shall wish to have done when we come to leave it.
Help us to run the race ofholy obedience, meekness and patience, charity, contentment, constancy and perseverance, to fight a good fight, finish our course, and keep the faith, that we may receive a Crown of righteousness, which the righte∣ous Judge shall at the last day
2 Tim. 4. 7. 8. give unto all them that love his appearing: And let the con∣templation of that glory and happiness, and the well-ground∣ed hope of our attaining it, make us diligent and faithful in the discharge of our duty, watchful against all fleshly defilements, patient and cheer∣ful under all crosses and trou∣bles, cold and indifferent to all the profits and pleasures of this Life, and let our whole conver∣sation on Earth be such as may become the Heirs of an heavenly,glorious and eternal inheri∣tance: that when our earthly 2 Cor. 5. 1. house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, we may have a build∣ing of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Hea∣vens, and be found meet to be Col. 1. 12. partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light. Look in mercy upon all the Sons of Men, and cause the light of thy Gospel to guide their feet into the way of peace, that are wandring in the darkness of sensuality, profaneness, super∣stition and idolatry, and shew them thy Salvation.
Bless thy whole Church throughout the World; pre∣serve it from the offences and reproachful scandals of its pro∣fessed Friends, and from the op∣pressions and persecutions of itsopen and declared Enemies: Let thy continual care keep and cleanse thy Vineyard, that it may abound in the Fruits of Righteousness. Be merciful to this Nation where we live, pardon the Sins that cry aloud for vengeance, heal the breaches that threaten its ruine, and avert those dread∣ful Judgments that hang over our heads; and as thou hast all along often saved us from the destructions & miseries that our daring wickednesses might have pull'd down upon our heads, give us cause more and more to magnifie thy mercy, and tri∣umph in thy Salvation. Bless our Lord the King with Wisdom and Courage, a zeal for thy glory, and a continual care of promoting Righteous∣ness
and true Religion; and let all under him in places of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, make it their business to further Righteousness and Peace, and the good of Souls: and let all sorts of men follow after peace, without which they cannot see happiness on Earth, and holi∣ness, without which they shall not see thy Face in Heaven.
Be thou a present help for the relief and succour of all that are in a suffering condition, and let that good providence that hath defended, directed and assisted us in the dangers, the occurrences and businesses of the day, so protect and re∣fresh us with sleep this night, that in the morning we may be more fit to serve thee, and live to thy praise in Christ Jesus ourLord, through whom, we be∣seech thee to accept our per∣sons, pardon our sins and hear our Prayers, when we say, OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Thursday Morning. MOst gracious God, and merciful Father in Je∣sus Christ, the Author of our Being, and the Fountain of all those good things that may make us happy in this World and that which is to come, we thy poor Creatures, vile and provoking Sinners, in the sense of our own guilt fly to thy mercy to pardon us; in the sense of our weakness fly to thy might to strengthen us; in the sense of our own ignorance and folly, fly to thy wisdom to instruct and counsel us; in the sense of our manifold wants and necessities, fly to thy fulness and all-sufficiency to supply us.
We acknowledge, O Lord, that our nature is not only cor∣rupt and sinful, overspread with a Leprosie and loathsome Disease, that might make us for ever abominable in thy pure Eyes; but our practises have been contrary to thy holy and righteous Laws, both in the do∣ing what thou hast forbidden us, and the leaving undone what thou hast commanded us; we have followed after and ful∣filled our own Lusts, and yield∣ed to them a vile and slavish subjection, as to our Lords and Lawgivers, whilst we have re∣fused and been weary of thy Service, as a slavery, which is perfect freedom.
We have forgotten thee, our God, and turning aside to ly∣ing vanities, have sinned againstthee in every state and condi∣tion of our lives; in our health we have seldom thought how soon we might be cast upon a sick Bed, and in our sickness have been unprepared for death, that might have been the issue of it; in our prosperity we have been secure and sensual, wanton, proud and unthankful, and in our adversity we have repined and murmured with impatience and discontentment, and when our folly hath per∣verted our ways, our hearts Pro. 19. 3. have fretted against the Lord.
We have suffered our selves to be prevailed upon by the pleasures and profits of this Life, those deceitful baits of the Flesh, that having for a while gratified our sensual inclination, have left the sharp and wound∣inghook of fear and disquiet in our consciences: And though thou hast graciously forewarn∣ed us, that our most pleasant Lusts will be bitterness in the latter end, and the wages of Sin Rom. 6. 23. is nothing less then death, and eternal misery, yet by our un∣belief and carnal affections, and the present seeming advantages of Sin, we have been drawn in∣to Sin; and not frighted from it by its future mischiefs and pu∣nishments.
Thou hast sent thy Son into the World to redeem and save us from our Sins, to make known thy Will, and publish to us his holy and good Laws, that we should govern our thoughts, our words and actions by them; but we have by our dis∣obedience, vilely cast away hisScepter, and disown'd the au∣thority of his Laws; notwith∣standing our professions to Tit. 1. 16. know and believe him, we have by wicked works denyed him, and naming the Name of Christ, 2 Tim. 2. 19. we have not departed from Ini∣quity. We have so resisted and grieved thy holy Spirit, who hath earnestly pleaded with us to cast off our Sins, and return to our Duty, that he might in displeasure withdraw from us, and forbearing his blessed mo∣tions, and leaving us destitute of his gracious assistance, might give us up to the blindness of our own minds, the unbelief and impenitent hardness of our hearts, and suffer us to go on in our own ways, till our con∣dition were wholly hopeless, and
without possibility of recovery, we had sinn'd our selves into eternal misery. Awaken, O Lord, we pray thee, our sleepy Consciences, and so throughly convince us of the great evil of Sin, and those fearful punishments that follow it, that we may in good earnest and without the least delay, flee from it, by a most serious and hearty repentance; and return unto the Lord our God, from Hos. 14. 1. whom we have fallen, and gone astray by our Iniquities.
Through the sufferings and precious death of thy Son, be reconciled and speak peace to us, though our offences are ve∣ry foul and heinous, and our best righteousness cannot en∣courage us to look up with confidence to thine offendedMajesty, yet in the righteous∣ness of our blessed Mediator, we both pray and hope to be forgiven, being by thy self as∣sured, that thou hast given him a great and all-sufficient Redeem∣er for the Atonement of great Transgressors, and exalted him Acts 5. 31. to be a Prince and a Savi∣our, to give repentance and remission of Sins. For our sakes, and in our stead, he en∣dured the punishments that himself had not deserved, he Isa. 53. 5. was wounded for our Trans∣gressions, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, O let us through his Stripes be healed. Help us, being delivered from wrath and condemnation,
Matt. 22. 37, 39. to love thee the Lord our God, with all our heart, and ourNeighbour as our selves, and let's evidence our love to thee by keeping thy Commandments, 1 Joh. 5. 3. and our love to our Neigh∣bour by forbearing and forgi∣ving reproving and admonish∣ing, counselling, comforting and relieving him, and perfor∣ming all acts of charity and kindness to him. Let us herein exercise our Acts 24. 16. selves to have always a consci∣ence void of offence toward thee, and toward men: enligh∣ten our understandings with the knowledge of thy Will, in∣flame our affections with a de∣lightful love of it, and so con∣form our wills unto thine, that we may readily do what thou wouldst have us do, and cheer∣fully suffer what thou wouldst have us suffer. Give us that
Jam. 3. 17. wisdom which is from above, that is first pure, to fit us for the happiness of another life, and then peaceable, to give a relish to the injoyments of this: and let us so imploy our selves in the affairs and businesses of this World, as to make Religion our great business, and present Rom. 12. 1. our Bodies and Souls a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto thee, which is our reasonable Service.
Help us to subdue our inor∣dinate desires, and all sinful pas∣sions, and when at any time we are tempted to the breach of thy Laws, with courage to resist the temptation, not daring to sin against thee our gracious Fa∣ther and righteous Judge; and whatever Talents thou intrust∣est to our management, health,strength or credit, our time, E∣states, the seasons of Grace, and opportunities of doing good, let us husband and improve them with that wisdom and faithfulness that become them, that must ere long give an ac∣count of their Stewardship.
And because through the weakness of our mortal nature, we can do no good thing with∣out thee, grant us the help of thy Grace, that in keeping thy Commandments, we may please thee both in will and deed, and in our several Callings, whether they be publick or private; our several Conditions, whether of prosperity or adversity; our se∣veral Relations, whether of Hus∣bands or Wives, Parents or Children, Masters or Servants, Neighbours and Friends, wemay perform the Duties that those Callings, Conditions and Relations require of us: And Mat. 5. 16 let our light so shine before Men, that they seeing our good Works, may glorifie thee, our Father which art in Heaven. Whilest we are in the way let us quickly agree with our
Mat. 5. 25. Adversary, and give diligence that by a sincere repentance, and an upright universal obedi∣ence we may be found of thee in peace, and prepared to ap∣pear before the Judgment-Seat of Christ, when he shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and weighing our thoughts, words and actions, in impartial Bal∣lances, shall render to us accor∣ding to our works: and let the consideration of that account leave such awful impressions inour hearts, as both to hinder the doing of whatever may make the thoughts of it terri∣ble to us, and cause us to wait for our Lord with our Loyns Luk. 12. 35. girt, and our Lamps burning, that at his return we may en∣ter with him into everlasting habitations. Let thy merciful hands be o∣pened toward all the Sons of Men, whom thy hands have made; and with a more espe∣cial kindness be gracious and favourable to Sion; keep thy Church and Houshold, continu∣ally in thy true Religion, and leaning upon the hope of thy heavenly Grace, let them ever∣more be defended by thy migh∣ty Power. Bless this sinful and unworthy Nation; pardon all our Sins
that cry aloud in thine Ears for vengeance, purely purge a∣way Isa. 1. 25. our dross, and take away all our Tin; deliver us from the destructions we have deserved, and perpetuate thy Gospel and true Religion among us, from generation to generation. Let the Life and Health, the peace, honour and safety of our Soveraign Lord, be precious in thy sight, and let all that go∣vern under Him in Church and State, maintain and encourage Truth and Peace, Religion, Righteousness and all goodness: and grant that all under their Authority may lead quiet and Tim. 2. 2. peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.
Succour and relieve all in any suffering condition, recom∣pence the kindnesses of ourFriends and Benefactors seven∣fold into their Bosom; forgive and help us heartily to forgive all that may have offered inju∣ry and unkindness to us. Look down upon us in mer∣cy that are here lifting up our hands and hearts to thee; we bless thee for the peace, safety and refreshment of the last night, beseeching thee, so to guard us through the hazards, and guide us through the af∣fairs of this day, that we may glorifie thee, grow in Grace, and go forward in the way that leads to everlasting Life and happiness, through our Lord Je∣sus Christ, according to whose direction and command we further pray;
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Thursday Evening. ALmighty and everlasting God, the wise and righte∣ous Governour of all things in Heaven and Earth, who dost whatsoever thou pleasest, and whatever thou dost is well and wisely done, because thou dost it: we thine unworthy Ser∣vants, whom thy hands have made, and ever since supported and supplyed, beseech thee in mercy to look down upon us, that in a sense of our own vile∣ness are here humbling our selves at thy Foot-stool acknow∣ledging it thy mercy and long∣suffering, that we are intrusted with one opportunity more, to implore thy pardon and for∣giveness.
Thou might'st have destroy∣ed us, the polluted Off-spring of disobedient Parents, as soon as ever we came into the world, and ever since we were capable of breaking thy Laws, we have added sin unto sin, and heapt transgression upon transgressi∣on. We have trifled away that time, that thou hast allotted us to make provision for an hap∣py Eternity, in the pursuit of pleasure and profit, transient and momentany vanities, and have waged and maintained War against thee in those sea∣sons of Grace, thou hast afford∣ed us for the making our peace: thy patience and long-suffering that should have led us to re∣pentance, we have perverted to fleshly purposes, and a more
presumptuous and impenitent progress in Sin. We have over-cared for, o∣ver-loved, over-desired and o∣ver-delighted in the good things of this World, and inordinate∣ly placed our affections upon earthly and temporary injoy∣ments, which thou hast fitted to such things as have in them an heavenly, spiritual and ever∣lasting excellency: How grie∣vously and how justly might'st thou plague us with the desires of our own hearts, and punish us by giving us our portion in this Life?
As thou hast multiplied thy Blessings we have multiplied our Inquities, and transgressed those holy and good Laws which thou hast given us as the rule of our carriage towardsthee, our selves and others, and wherein thou hast com∣manded us nothing but what tends to the perfection of our nature, and the promoting of our happiness. We have little regarded thy design in sending us into this World, which was that we should serve and please, obey and honour thee, our great Cre∣ator and gracious Benefactor, and as little laid to heart the strict account that we must shortly render of all our ways and works, before thy exact and impartial Tribunal, when we shall go hence and be here no more.
We have turn'd a deaf ear to thy counsels, quencht the motions of thy Spirit, misim∣proved thy mercies to makethem the materials of pride, and a wanton sensuality, reje∣cted the tenders of thy Grace, and hardned our hearts under the correction of thy Rod; And if thou, Lord, shouldst mark our Iniquities, who of us, Psal. 130. 3. O Lord, could stand?
How justly mightst thou de∣prive us of all the blessings that we have forfeited? And make us feel the smart and severity of that vengeance that thou hast threatned? Thou mightst inflict pains and diseases in our Bodies, and pursue us with ter∣rours, and the fearful foretasts of wrath in our consciences; thou mightst remove thy Go∣spel, which we have abused, and withdraw thy Spirit whom we have grieved; thou mightst give us up to the lusts of our 81. 12. own hearts, that we should walk in our own counsels, till we had filled up the measure of our Sins, and ripened our selves to be cut down for ever∣lasting punishment. But with thee there is mercy Psal. 130. 4. and forgiveness that thou mayst be feared, and we may be par∣doned: work in us we beseech thee, that deep contrition and through repentance, which wherever it is wrought, is fol∣lowed by forgiveness, and through faith in the blood of thy dear Son, who hath made peace by the blood of his Cross; let us be justified and reconci∣led, and rejoyce in thee, having Rom. 5. 11. received the Atonement.
Sanctifie us in Soul, Spirit and Body to thy Service, en∣lighten our minds with theknowledge of thy Will, incline our wills to the obedience of it, purifie our affections to a love and delight in it, purge our consciences from dead Heb. 9. 14. works to serve thee the living God, and as we have yielded our Members Servants of un∣righteousness unto Iniquity, let us yield them the Servants of Rom. 6. 19. Righteousness unto Holiness. And because we are in this World beset with many Snares and Temptations; let us be so∣ber 1 Pet. 5. 8. and vigilant, and walk cir∣cumspectly,
Eph. 5. 15. not as Fools but as Wise, shunning all appearance of evil, and avoiding whatever may be an occasion to the Flesh, suffer us not at any time so to be led into temptation, as that the sollicitations of Satan, the Al∣lurements of this vain World,or the suggestions of our own carnal and treacherous hearts, should draw us into those sinful ways that are displeasing to thee, and destructive to our Souls, but being alway sensible of how great importance and necessity it is, to work out our Phil. 2. 12. Salvation with fear and trem∣bling, how short a time is allot∣ted to us: How many and powerful Enemies are combi∣ned to hinder us: How glori∣ous the Reward is that is pro∣mised: And how dreadful and insupportable the punishment that is threatned, Let us make hast to escape the wrath to come, and with all our might endea∣vour to lay hold of eternal Life, pressing toward the mark for Phil. 3. 14. the prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.
1 Pet. 1. 17. And seeing we call on the Father, who without respect of persons, judges according to e∣very mans work, let us pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, and never allow our selves the commissions of any known Sin, nor the omission or neg∣lect of any known Duty.
Enable us by thy holy Spirit to subdue and govern our un∣ruly passions, to resist and crush the first motions of Sin in our earthly members, faithfully to trade the several Talents thou putst into our hands, regularly to fill up all the relations where∣in thou hast placed us, patient∣ly to bear all our burdens, cheerfully to injoy all our bles∣sings, and thankfully to return them to thee in thy service and praise, and so wisely to im∣proveall thy providences, both of bounty and severity, that in our lowest adversity we be not dejected with anxiety and un∣belief, and in our highest pro∣sperity, our hearts be not lifted up with pride to forget thee the Lord our God, but in all things the glory of thy great Name may be advanced, and the spiritual profit of our Souls, and their growth in grace may be promoted and furthered. Cherish and increase in us all sincere, though feeble motions towards a more perfect and uniform obedience to thy Will, and having begun a good work in any of us, complete and fi∣nish
Phil. 1. 6. it until the day of Jesus Christ: help us to love thee more entirely, to serve thee more diligently, to trust in theemore fully, to live to thee more exactly, to please thee more a∣bundantly than we have hither∣to done, that in a dying hour our Sins and Follies may not strike us with horror and per∣plexity, but our Souls may be filled with sweet and comforta∣ble reflections upon those ways that have been pleasing to thee, that our God, & our Consciences may smile upon us, and speak kindly to us, when all the things of this World are forsaking us, and we are passing into an eter∣nal state. Use us, O Lord, whilest we live, as Instruments of thy Glory in all holiness, and as Vessels of Glory, fill us when we dye, with everlasting happi∣ness. Let all the Sons of Men whom thou hast made capable
of thy grace and favour be made partakers of it: Relieve them that are any way distres∣sed, and enlighten them with the knowledge of thy Gospel that sit in darkness. Beautifie Mount Sion the joy of the whole Earth, with thy Salvation, deliver thy Church from ignorance and error, pride and hypocrisie, strife and con∣tention, schism, prophaneness, tyranny, superstition and idola∣try, and let there be none to offend or oppress in thy Holy Mountain. Be gracious and merciful to this sinful and divided Nation, though our Sins be as scarlet, let them be white as Snow, though Isai. 1. 18. they be red like crimson, let them be as Wool: Establish thy Religion in the truth and
purity of it, and let it be made beautiful by the religious lives and practices of them that pro∣fess it. Let the King joy in thy Psal. 21. 1. strength, O Lord, and exceeding∣ly rejoyce in thy Salvation, bless him with length of days and safety from dangers, direct him by wise Counsels to just, ho∣nourable and successful Enter∣prizes; let all subordinate Au∣thority be exercised to the beat∣ing down of Vice, and the ex∣altation of Religion and Righ∣teousness, and dispose all that are under Authority to a pious obedience unto thee, a peace∣able subjection to them that thou hast set over them, not only for wrath, but for consci∣ence Rom. 13. 5. sake, and to mutual kind∣ness and a brotherly love of one another.
We come unto thee, holy Father, for a blessing upon our selves, beseeching thee to take our Bodies and Souls, our Habi∣tation and Possessions, into the safe custody of thy watchful Providence, that no evil befal Psal. 91. 10. us, nor any plague come nigh our dwelling, repair the decays of our frail Bodies by a quiet and refreshing rest, and let us lay out our strength and vigour in thy service, to thy praise and honour, and the giving up our account with joy, at the appear∣ing of our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ, in whom, as the High Priest of our Profession, we offer up all our Prayers and Praises, and through whom a∣lone we hope to be heard and accepted, when praying, we say;
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Friday Morning. O Lord, the great and holy Dan. 9. 4. God, that keepest Cove∣nant and Mercy, to them that Psal. 145. 18. love thee, and art nigh to all that call upon thee in truth and sincerity, though thou hast thousands of holy and blessed Spirits, and ten thousand times ten thousands dayly Ministring about thy Throne, and art not at all better'd by their pure and spotless Services, yet thou hast gracious and compassionate re∣gards to the Prayers of weak and sinful Creatures, that dwell in Houses of Clay, thou openest thine Eyes to take knowledge of their condition, bowest thine Ear to hearken to their Cryes, movest
thy Bowels to pity their infir∣mities, and stretchest forth thine hand to relieve their wants. We poor Creatures and guil∣ty Sinners are here fallen down at thy Footstool, adoring thine infinite perfections of holiness and wisdom, power, truth and goodness, and beseeching thee mercifully to look upon our fol∣lies and frailties, to supply our bodily and spiritual necessities, to lift up the light of thy coun∣tenance upon us, and turn a∣way thy Face from our deserts of vengeance, to answer which purposes, we have none in Hea∣ven Psal. 73. 25. but thee, none in Earth that our Souls can desire in compa∣rison of thee.
We dare not, we confess, look up to Heaven with any confidence of being acceptedfor our own worthiness, as being conscious that we have grie∣vously offended that holy, just, and Almighty Majesty that is there seated on the Throne of his Glory; nor are we worthy to tread upon the Earth, or in∣joy the fruits and benefits of it, where we have acted our wick∣ednesses in the sight of Heaven. We were not only conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Ini∣quity, but we have conceived Sin, and brought forth Iniquity, Num. 32. 14 and are risen up in our Fathers stead a generation of sinful men; to kindle and in crease the anger of the Lord against us.
We have followed after our own imaginations, and fulfilled the motions of our own Wills which have been opposite and contrary to the declarations ofthine, though there hath been the greatest reason we should receive Law from thy Mouth as our Almighty Creator, So∣vereign Lord, and merciful Re∣deemer.
How barren and unfruitful have we been in thy Vineyard, though thou hast caused the Clouds to drop down their moisture upon us, and watered us with the plentiful showers of thy Word, and the fructifying dew of thy holy Spirit, that should have made us fruitful in all good works? How have we neglected the Seasons of Grace? And when thou hast called us to a speedy and present repen∣tance, the answer of our hearts hath been, we will repent to morrow, as if we could live as long as we listed, and had pow∣erin our selves to turn to thee when we listed. We bewail, before thee, the blindness of our understandings, the stubbornness of our wills, the vanity of our thoughts, the earthliness of our affections, we have hated what thou lovest, and loved what thou hatest, and the good things which thou hast allowed us to love mode∣rately, and in subordination to thee, we have followed with eager and unbounded appetites, and embraced with our highest and best love: we have not carryed our selves as it becomes those that are Strangers and Pilgrims upon the Earth, and profess to seek a better heaven∣ly Countrey, but lived as if we were at home, and expected nothing better than what is
to be here injoyed, as if the happiness of this Life would never end, and that of the next would never begin. O Lord, be merciful to us, and in the multitude of thy ten∣der mercies be reconciled to us through thy Son, and blot out all our Iniquities: give us hear∣tily to repent of all our forepast Sins and Follies, and so to re∣ceive Christ Jesus the Lord, as Col. 2. 6. to walk in him: And whatever thou denyest us, grant us a full pardon through our dear and all-sufficient Redeemer, whom thou hast set forth to be a Pro∣pitiation Rom. 3. 25. through Faith in his Blood. And let the time past of our
1 Pet. 4. 3. Lives suffice to have wrought the wills of the flesh, judging that Christ dyed for us, that we 2 Cor. 5. 15. should not henceforth live un∣to our selves, but unto him which dyed for us, and rose a∣gain: Col. 1. 10. help us to walk worthy of thee unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; give us we pray thee a Psal. 111. 10 good understanding, not only to know, but to do thy Com∣mandments, and by growing 2 Pet. 3. 18. in Grace, let us increase the knowledge of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ.
Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, what∣soever things are pure, whatsoe∣ver things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, let us think on, and follow these things, andnever be slothful in the weigh∣ty matters of thine honour, and the everlasting interest and happiness of our Souls, but di∣ligently follow those that have been followers of thee, and have Heb. 6. 12. through faith and patience in∣herited the promises. And because we are weak in our selves, and insufficient to perform our duty, to subdue our lusts, to improve our bles∣sings, or bear our burdens, to resist and conquer our spiritual enemies, to stand our ground in the fight, or recover our selves from our falls, let thy grace and holy spirit strengthen Eph. 3. 16. us with might in our inward man, and make us more than Rom. 8. 37. conquerors through him that hath loved us.
Cause us in the first place to Mat. 6. 33. seek thy Kingdom and righte∣ousness, and as those that are Col. 3. 1. risen with Christ, to seek the things that are above, not look∣ing at the things that are seen, 2 Cor. 4. 18. for they are temporal; but at the things which are not seen, for they are eternal: Let our Mat. 6. 20. treasure be laid up in Heaven, where Moth and Rust corrupt not, and where Thieves break not through, nor Steal, and let our hearts be where our trea∣sure is.
Guide us continually in all the ways of wisdom and righ∣teousness, and defend us against all temptations that might with∣draw us from them; help us to go on our way rejoycing, and working righteousness, and per∣form our several duties to thee and all men, with such cheerful∣nessand constancy, as not to be weary of well-doing, but by a religious abstinence, and mo∣derate use of bodily refresh∣ments, let our flesh be so sub∣dued to the Spirit, that we may ever obey thy godly motions, and in a course of righteous∣ness and true holiness run to the end of the race which thou hast set before us, and be made par∣takers of that glorious prize which thou hast promised to all them that by a patient con∣tinuance in well-doing seek for Rom. 2. 7. glory and honour, and immor∣tality.
And let the prospect and bles∣sed hope of thy heavenly King∣dom, make us upright and faith∣ful, active and diligent, content∣ed and cheerful in every con∣dition of life, humble and pati∣ent,stedfast and resolved, self∣denying, and heavenly minded, till thou bringest us to the pos∣session of those inconceiveable joys, and makest us to drink of the Rivers of Pleasure, that are at thy right hand for ever∣more. Do good with us, we pray thee, to the whole world, and let all that bear the image of thy power and wisdom be made partakers of thy favour and kindness, let the Nations that know thee not, be deliver∣ed from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. and translated into the King∣dom of thy dear Son.
Be gracious in an especial manner to all whom thou hast called to the knowledge and o∣bedience of his Gospel, forgive, gracious Father, and showrdown thy blessings upon the inhabitants of this sinful Land; let us prepare to meet thee by an hearty and universal re∣pentance, and so prevent those judgments that seem to be ar∣rayed, and marching forward to our destruction. Give Salvation to our King, Psai. 144. 10 and preserve thy Servant from hidden Treacheries and the hurtful Sword; direct all pub∣lick Counsels to thine honour, the promoting of true Religion, the establishment of Righteous∣ness and Peace, and the com∣fort of all them that heartily love and fear thee, and let all that love thy Salvation, say Psal. 40. 16. continually, the Lord be mag∣nified. Comfort all that in any kind suffer adversity, let thy holy
Spirit refresh them as with new Wine, whom thou hast given Tears to drink in great mea∣sure, and let that good provi∣dence that hath been our pro∣tection and repose this night, defend us from all the dangers and temptations, direct and prosper us in all the designs and enterprises of this day, and by a faithful discharge of our du∣ty, bring us nearer to the glo∣rious reward of Eternal Life, which thou hast promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whose Name and Words, we further commend our selves and others to thy grace and mercy, say∣ing.
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Friday Evening. MOst blessed Lord God, the Father of Mercies, our hope and present help, our strength and our Salvation, the over-flowing and inexhaustible Fountain of all Good, we thy poor Servants, in an humble and thankful sense of thy great goodness, and emboldned by the invitation of thy gracious promises, present our selves be∣fore the Throne of thy Grace, to offer up our supplications, and thanksgivings through the Mediation of thy dear Son, in whom thou hast given us access Eph. 3. 12. with confidence, through the Faith of him.
We are most unworthy inour selves to receive blessings, or offer praises, but worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive ho∣nour and glory, and blessing, and thanksgiving, as for thy di∣vine perfections which we can∣not comprehend, so for thine abundant kindnesses towards us, which we can neither deserve nor number. Thou didst frame and fashi∣on us in the Womb, by thy wisdom and power, and hast maintained and provided for us by thy goodness and bounty, ever since thou hast brought us into life and being; giving us richly all things to injoy, not only the necessaries, but conve∣niencies of Life, whereby it hath been made easie and plea∣sant to us.
But above all from the bot∣tomof our hearts we praise, a dore and magnifie thy transcen∣dent wisdom & superlative love in that inestimable benefit of our Redemption, by the bitter sufferings and bloody Death of thy dear Son, that when we had lost and undone our selves, were lyable to wrath and eter∣nal misery, when we lay wel∣tring in our own blood, and there was no Eye to pity, no Hand to relieve us, thou re∣deemedst us in such a way as no creature had wisdom to contrive, worthiness to under∣take, or power to effect. We praise thee O Lord, that thou hast in thy Gospel mani∣fested this great and admirable Salvation, made thy goodness to pass before us, and fully and plainly instructed us in our du∣ty;
that in performing the one we might be made partakers of the other; that thou hast afforded us the means of Grace, thy Word and Sacraments, op∣portunities of thy publick Wor∣ship, the motions and assistances of thy holy Spirit, that thou hast quickned our obedience by the hopes of a glorious re∣compence. Give us, we pray thee, a due sense of all thy mercies, and withdraw not thy loving kind∣ness from us; if our worthiness had been to procure these mer∣cies, they had never been put into our hands and if any thing but thy goodness were to con∣tinue them, we could never hold them; our own wicked∣ness might correct us, and our
Jer. 2. 19. back-slidings reprove us, for wehave sinned and done very foo∣lishly. We have perverted and pol∣luted our ways, and professing Tit. 1. 16. to know thee, have in our works denyed thee, we have called thee our Father, but have not loved and honoured thee, as Children, our Master, but have not feared and obeyed thee as Servants, our Friend and Benefactor, but have ex∣pressed our enmity against thee in wicked works; we have
2 Tim. 2. 19. named the Name of Christ, but not departed from Iniquity, vowed allegiance to thee in our Baptism, but have broken thy Bonds asunder, and cast away thy Cords from us, and as if the temptations of the World and the Devil would not have e∣nough prevailed to defile anddestroy us, we have tempted our selves, and been drawn a∣way of our own lust and en∣ticed. Jam. 1. 14.
We have not had that sense of thy Love, as to love thee with all our hearts; that sense of thy Mercies, as with those Cords of kindness to be drawn to thy Service; that sense of thy displeasure, as to fear offending thee; that sense of Sins filthi∣ness and deformity, as to hate and flee from it with our whole Souls; nor have we had that belief of Heavens Glory and Happiness, as by a fruitfulness in good works to press toward it with all our might; that active and vigorous diligence that should have been used to promote the spiritual good of our Souls, and secure their im∣mortalinterest, we have with great folly misimployed in pur∣suing the pleasures and profits of this World, and in assuring those fickle and slippery vanities, that are not capable of a long, or certain continuance. O Lord have mercy upon us, miserable offenders, and help us so to repent of all the Sins we have committed, as never more to commit the Sins of which we have repented, and work in us a true and a lively faith in thy dear Son, our blessed Re∣deemer, who is both God and Man, that God and Man may be reconciled, and through the blood of his Cross, grant us re∣pentance and remission of Sins, and by that precious Blood, sprinkled upon our Consciences,
Heb. 9. 14. purge them from dead Works,to serve thee the living God. Wash our hearts from wick∣edness Jer. 4. 14. that we may be saved, and let not vain thoughts lodg within us, help us so to govern our Tongue, that unruly Mem∣ber, that no corrupt communi∣cation may at any time proceed out of our Mouth, but that Eph. 4. 29. which is good to the use of edi∣fying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers: and let all our actions be directed by thy Word, and designed to thy Glory.
That delight and satisfaction that we might vainly, and to no purpose seek, in sensual plea∣sures, and the impure gratifica∣tions of the Flesh, let us seek and find in the ways of holiness, and a dutiful compliance with thy Will, that in loving and keepingPsal. 119. 165. thy Law, we may have great peace, and nothing may offend us: and in the midst of all the troubles and confusions of the World, we may rejoyce in our reconciliation with thee, and in the harmony and peaceful re∣ports of our own consciences. Bless us in our Callings and Imployments, that we may nei∣ther Pro. 30. 8. 9. abound in Riches, lest we be full and deny thee, nor be pinched with extream want, lest we be tempted to the evils that attend an impoverished State, but in thy wise and good providence, carve out to us such a convenient share of worldly good things, health and strength, riches and reputation, that we may faithfully serve thee, and be cheerfully helpful to our brethren. Let thy love
and holy fear so intermix with and sweeten all our earthly in∣joyments, that we may eat our Eccl. 9. 7. Bread with joy, and drink our Wine with a merry heart, be∣cause thou acceptest our works. In every condition of Life be thou our Guide, and our Sup∣port, help us to love and re∣joyce in thee above our highest and best comforts, and under our crosses, with patience and cheerfulness to resign up our selves to thy wise and righte∣ous providence, and with a stedfast faith to rely upon thy gracious and faithful promises. Let our conversation be with∣out Heb. 13. 5. covetousness, and make us content with such things as we have, because thou hast said, thou wilt never leave us, nor forsake us: by all the changes
we meet with in this World, prepare us, O Lord, for our last and great change, when we shall leave it; that death our last E∣nemy may be to us neither dan∣gerous nor dreadful, but a sweet and desireable passage to a bles∣sed, and glorious immortality. And in these our Prayers we commend (allied by a common Brotherhood) all Mankind to thy Grace and Favour, heal the Sick, ease the pained, relieve the Oppressed, supply the Impove∣rished, feed the Hungry, cloath the Naked, comfort the Discon∣solate, cause them that are dis∣quieted in Conscience to Re∣joyce, spread forth the know∣ledge of thy Son into all the dark corners of the World, that Isai. 49. 6. he may be thy Light and thy Salvation unto the end of the Earth.
Let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy Church, and be∣cause it cannot continue in safe∣ty without thy succour, pre∣serve it evermore by thy help, and goodness. O be gracious and favoura∣ble to the Land of our Nativity, forgive all our crying Sins, a∣vert thy threatned and ap∣proaching Judgments, cleanse our defilements, heal our divi∣sions, stablish us in truth, righte∣ousness and peace, perpetuate thy Gospel and Ordinances, the pledges of thy love and kind∣ness, and grant that we may al∣way walk worthy of those in∣estimable benefits. Bless, preserve, direct and prosper our Sovereign Lord the King, in all his thoughts, words and works, let him ever seek thy
honour and glory, and study to preserve thy People committed to his charge, in wealth, peace and godliness. Let the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church by their heavenly Doctrine and exemplary Lives, their diligent labours, vigilant care, and pru∣dent carriage, adorn the Gospel, silence gainsayers, and win ma∣ny to righteousness: and let Magistrates by an equal and in∣different administration of Ju∣stice, uphold Religion and Vir∣tue, and suppress Vice and Un∣godliness; and grant that all under Authority may follow af∣ter Peace and Holiness, obeying those that are over them for conscience sake, loving and for∣bearing one another, leading quiet and peaceable Lives in all godliness and honesty.
Follow us with thy mercy and loving kindness this night, and let thy good providence, that neither slumbers nor sleeps, defend and protect us, that no danger or disturbance in the in∣termission of our own thoughts, care and reason, harm or an∣noy us: And so repair our de∣caying spirits by a quiet and peaceful rest, that we may serve thee with healthful bodies and cheerful minds, the next day, and all our days, till thou bring∣est us to that blessed state where eating, and drinking, and sleep∣ing shall be no more, but we shall be eternally happy in prai∣sing and injoying thee through thy dear Son, our ever blessed Redeemer, through whose Me∣rits alone we hope to be heard, and in whose words we further pray;
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Saturday Morning. O Eternal Lord God, the great Creator and Pre∣server of Heaven and of Earth, and our most merciful Father in Christ Jesus, Look down, we beseech thee, from Heaven, up∣on us vile Dust and Ashes, and grant that when we call upon thee with our Lips, our Hearts may not be far from thee. We do humbly acknowledge the great sinfulness and corrup∣tion of our Natures; the blind∣ness of our Minds, the pervers∣ness of our Wills, the disorder and depravedness of our affecti∣ons, and the vanity of our thoughts. We acknowledge that we are by nature the Chil∣dren
of Wrath, and that there is no sound or clean part in us. We do farther confess, that we have by many actual sins made our selves more the Chil∣dren of Wrath than we were by Nature. We confess our sins of omission as well as com∣mission, our sins against Thee, our Brother and our own Souls. We have many ways offended thee in thought, word and deed: And if thou shouldst mark Iniquities, we were not able to stand before thee.
We have sinned against light and knowledge, after the great∣est of thy Mercies, under suffi∣cient means of Grace, after ma∣ny and solemn Vows of better obedience. We have not been awakened out of our sinful andcareless Life by the greatest of thy Judgments; but have sin∣ned after the convictions of our own Consciences, and the ex∣perience of the evil of depart∣ing from thee, after many con∣fessions and many repetitions. We have grieved thy Spirit, defaced thy Image, mispent our precious time, trifled in the great concernments of Eternity, and in great measure received the grace of thee our God in vain. We humble our selves before thee, O God, and desire to be vile in our own Eyes, as we have made our selves so in thine. Enter not into Judg∣ment with thy Servants, O Lord, for no Flesh shall be ju∣stified in thy sight. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us for
Jesus Christ's sake, who is the Propitiation for our Sins, and ever lives to make intercession for those who come unto God by him. Grant that he may not be an empty Name and Title to us, but that he may bless us in turning us from our Iniquities, and may give us Repentance as well as forgiveness of Sins. And we most humbly be∣seech thee to give us thy holy Spirit; purisie and cleanse our Hearts, and help us that we may fear, love and desire thee above all things. Make us like unto thee, and help us that we may chearfully do and suffer thy whole Will. Supply all our wants, sanctifie all thy dealings to us, direct us in our difficul∣ties and enable us against our Sins.
Deliver us, O Lord, from e∣very evil thing, from hardness of Heart, and contempt of thy Word: keep us from being tempted above what we are a∣ble, and enable us by thy Grace against the assaults of the De∣vil, the Temptations of the World and the Flesh, and make us at the last partakers of Ever∣lasting Life. Be merciful, we pray thee, to the whole World: enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, and let the whole World be filled with the knowledge of thee, and of thy Son, as the Waters cover the Sea. Bless thy whole Church: re∣form whatever is amiss in the belief or lives of Christians: Grant that all who name the Name of Christ may depart from all Iniquity.
Be gracious to these King∣doms. Pardon our Sins, pity our Distractions, heal our Breaches, unite us to one ano∣ther, reconcile us all to thy Di∣vine Majesty, and defend us a∣gainst our Enemies. Especially we pray thee to bless the King: endue his Heart with all the Graces of thy holy Spirit, defend Him against all His Enemies; bless Him in His Royal Relations, and teach His Sena∣tors wisdom. Bless all the Governours and Instructors of thy Church, and grant they may all in their se∣veral places answer the end of their Institution and Appoint∣ment.
Pity all that are afflicted. Comfort them that mourn, vi∣sit the Sick and Weak, havecompassion on them who lye a dying, and take them not out of this Life before they are fit∣ted for a better Life than this. Bless all our Friends with all the Blessings of this and of a better Life. Forgive our Ene∣mies, convert and turn their hearts. We bless thee for all thy Mercies to us, both of this and a better Life: above all we bless thee for Jesus Christ, hum∣bly beseeching thee, so to af∣fect our hearts with the sense of thy Mercies, that thy good∣ness may lead us to Repen∣tance: And all we beg for Christ his sake, who hath taught us, when we pray, to say;
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men.
Saturday Evening. MOst gracious and ever blessed Lord God, and our most merciful Father in Christ Jesus, we that are less than the least of thy mercies, desire in all humility to come into thy presence, and beseech thee for Christ's sake, to have a regard unto us. We do acknowledge before thee, our lost and undone con∣dition without thy great mer∣cy towards us: we have grie∣vously offended thee in thought, word and deed: been unthank∣ful for thy Mercies, incorrigi∣ble under thy Judgments, and very unprofitable under the means of Grace. We humble
our selves before thee for the Sins of our whole Life; and par∣ticularly for the Sins of this day, with all the circumstances of aggravation, with which they have been attended. Pardon us, O Lord, we hum∣bly pray thee, for the sake of Jesus Christ who came into the World, to seek and to save that which was lost. Give us a true faith in him, and work in us a sincere and hearty repentance never to be repented of. And, we pray thee, assist us by thy Grace, that we may for the time to come, walk before thee in newness of Life.
Enlighten our Minds, rectifie our Wills, sanctifie our Affecti∣ons and purifie all the thoughts & intentions of our Hearts. Make us fit Temples for thy holy Spi∣ritto dwell in, and grant that he who is in us may be great∣er than he who is in the World. Be with us under all our Tryals and Temptations, and prepare us for all events of things. Sanctifie all thy di∣spensations to us, and give us Wisdom and a saving Knowledge of thee and of thy Son. Make us humble and lowly, heavenly minded and pure in heart, patient un∣der every trouble, contented in every condition, and re∣signed to thy holy and heaven∣ly Will.
And because the way of Man is not in himself, we humbly pray thee to direct and guide us in the way that we should go. Take care of our Affairs, pro∣sperall our Undertakings which are agreeable to thy heavenly Will; help us that we may live Righteously, So berly and Godly in this present World. Cast out of our mind every thing that is displeasing to thee: discharge our Hearts of all Pride, Ambition, Covetous∣ness, Malice, Vain Conceit of our Selves. And grant that we may not be overcome by the Temptations of the Devil, the World and the Flesh: And that we may not go out of this World with false hopes and expectations about us. Prepare us, we pray thee, for our latter end. When our Heart and Flesh shall fail us, be thou the strength of our Heart
and our Portion for ever: And suffer us not at our last hour for any Pains or Agonies of Death to fall away from thee: make us willing and ready to leave this World, whensoever it shall please thee to call us hence. Be merciful to the whole race of Mankind: Advance the King∣dom of Christ in the World; Let the People praise thee, O God, let all the People praise thee. Especially be merciful to thy whole Church; Bless these Kingdoms, and settle us upon the Foundations of Righteousness, of Truth and Peace. Bless with the choicest of thy Blessings, our Sovereign Lord the King. Protect His Royal Person, bless His Government,
let His days be many and His Reign prosperous. And bless His Royal Relations, and suc∣ceed His Counsellors, and all in Authority under Him, and grant that under Him we may live quiet and peaceable Lives, in all godliness and ho∣nesty. Bless all that minister in holy things, and grant they may gain many unto Righte∣ousness. Have compassion upon the Afflicted, upon the Oppres∣sed and the Poor, upon Wi∣dows and Fatherless, upon all that are persecuted for Righ∣teousness sake, upon the Sick and the Weak, upon all that are troubled in mind, and at the point of Death: Be merciful to them all accord∣ing
to their several necessi∣ties. We beseech thee to be mer∣ciful to our Friends and to for∣give all our Enemies.
We bless thy holy Name for all thy mercies to us and to all the World; for thy preserva∣tion of us this day, for the means of Grace and the hope of Glory. We bless thee above all for Jesus Christ, we praise thee for the clear revelation of thy Will the Promise of thy Spirit, the time and space of Repentance which thou art pleased to continue to us; for any measure of Health and Strength, the many Mercies which we injoy, and which o∣thers want, and which we have been unthankful for. Write a Law of thankfulness upon ourHearts, we humbly pray thee, and grant that we may be bettered by all thy Mercies. Take us, we pray thee, into thy protection this night, san∣ctifie and prepare our Hearts for all the solemn Duties and Services of the next Day, and grant all our Requests for Christ's sake, in whose words we further call upon thee.
OƲr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. A∣men. FINIS.
