M549 12771027 93666
THE JUST GENERAL A Tragi: Comedy, Written by Major COSMO MANUCHE LONDON, Printed for M. M. T. C. and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at their Shop at the Middle Temple gate in Fleetstreet, 1652.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JAMES Earle of Northampton, and ISABELLA. his Most vertuous Lady, all encrease of health and Prosperity. Right Honourable, THis Critical Age, visibly disco∣vers, to what disadvantage I must thrust this poor Play into the world; so that I am forc't to lay hold on discetion (the great∣est part of valour) for my defence. For although I well know they may finde fault with my wit, I am sure they can not condemn my judgment in (humbly) chusing your Honours Patrons to these poor (friendless) Sicilians, which when sheltered under your wings, will (though not from malice) yet be free (in mercy to themselves) from their venting it. Right Honourable, it is onely your pardons I beg, which (out of that propensity to goodness, which is natural in you) I doubt not of; as of your encouragement to enable me more ser∣viceable in a larger manner, to confirm, that I must live, and dye your honours most humble and most faithful servant. COS. MANUCHE.
The Prologue intended for the Stage. Enter Prologue and Critick severally. Prolo. CRitick forbear the Stage, what do you here? Crit. I come to judge your Play, not for to jeere. Prolo. Although you know to judge, yet fancy rules Which makes the best of Criticks knowing fooles. Crit. Prologue you censure boldly, and condemn The able Critick 'mongst the Wou'dbe men. Who to describe from us, asks no more skill Then to observe, how 'twixt each Act they will Twirle on the toe, picking their teeth, and dance Then, sometimes whistle Ala mode de France. The Play being done, they on each other look To read in one another's faces how it took. None daring (though suppos'd valiant) for to say It was well Acted, or 'tis a good Play. When one non Guilty of abilitie To judge, akth his Friends advise, when he Antickly answers (faith) with little paines He could write better, yet ne'r break his braines▪ To which, his Lady with an easie Faith And little judgment, answereth, and saith, Such foolish fellowes as have writ before Should you but write (dear friend) would ne'r write more▪ At which he smiles, and cryes fie, fie, there be No question some can write as well as he. Which she must doubt, whil'st he denies it so As if he knew 'twere truth, but would not know These art your Critck Wou'dbes raile at the Poet For writing sense (poor soules) and they not know it. When we, where there's a fault proclaim't 'tis true, But never do't till judgement finds it due. Distinguish then 'twixt Wo'udbe wits, and us That dare do Justice, though miraculous. Prologue farewel, if you deserve applause, The knowing Critick shall maintain your cause. Exit Crit. Prolo. To the audience. Now unto you that dare be just, and judge Without partiality, we shall not grudge To be chid gently, and shall study mend Such faults as you shall say our Author pen'd. If 'has writ nonsense, thus he bid me say, He writ by'ch spirit, just as the (Brethren pray
Prologue. To the READER. REader, least you mistake, and like my play, Know 'tis the first I wrote, and how that may Your wits disparage (faith) I'le leave to you That best know (in such cases) what to do. In spight of Malice venture I dare thus far, Pack not a Jury, and I'le stand the Barr.
The Names of the Persons presented. Amasius — A young King in love with Aurelia. Bellicosus — General of his Army. Delirus — Son to the General, in love with Artesia. Sebastian — An old decayed Lord, father to Aurelia Antonio. Noble Persons attending the King. Cornelius. Noble Persons attending the King. Eugenio. Noble Persons attending the King. Fabius — Servant to the General. Ferdinando — Servant to Sebastian. Dul. Goldcalf— Heir to a rich Usurer. Snap. ali. Sunkloe—A decayed Gentleman, servant to Goldcalfe. Captain Thunder. Pretenders to be cashiered Officers. Lievt. Cannon. Pretenders to be cashiered Officers. Ensign Drake. Pretenders to be cashiered Officers. Strephon —An inconstant Shepheard. Amintor — A constant Shepheard. Aurelia — The Kings Mistresse, Daughter to Seba∣stian. Artesia — A proud rich Lady, daughter to a deceased Lord called Endimion Bellira — Woman to Aurelia, and Sister to Snap. Dorothy Dreswel. Woman to Artesia. Executioner. The SCENE Sicilie.
THE JUST GENERAL. ACT. I. SCENE I. Enter Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenio. Antonio. TI's certain truth, the Letters, this day, from our Valiant General (to our young King) affirm A Cessation Of Arms, on both fides, For these three moneths. Cornel. Can you guess the reason, Our General having (as is supposed) much the Advantage, should he give them battle. Eugen. Believe it, our General Hath to much honesty, mixt with knowledg, to Condescend, to any thing can prejudice Our King and Country. Anton. He's a man, no one loves vertue can suspect, I hear his Letter hath struck a drooping melancholy In the King. Cornel. Ti's truth, but the cause was not our Generals actions But his Councel, who (as ti's talkt) diswades him from Loving the fair Aurelia: as a match too far beneath him. Eugen. Ti's probable, for questionless he loves her much, And pitty ti's the vertuous fair one hath not dowry Equal her birth, and merit. Anton. Which if she had, I know no reason, but she might Make a wife, for any he that's mortall— The King Flourish: Enter King, Sebastian Ferdinando; and guard King. Sebastin: me thinks, thou droop'st as if thy spirits Were with thy fortunes lost: both might be rais'd Again, would but the subject please to let His King command.
Sebast. He ill deserves the name of subject that should Refuse to obey your just commands. King. O Sebastian, What appears just to us, not season'd To the palat of the giddy headed multitude, To them's unjust. 'Tis not what we, but what they will that must. Wher's Aurelia thy fair daughter? Ferdinand. So please your Majesty, the Lady Artesia and she, Wait in the presence. King. Go call them in: Gallants, you hear our Army is— Exit Ferd. Like to have a eaing me, the General hath my Consent, for a three moneths Cessation. Anton. Sir. the General (we know) Can nothing act but what must visibly appear (To men of reason) much advantagious, to your Self, and Country. Enter Aurelia, Artesia, Ferdinando. King. We doubt it not. How doth the fair Artesia— Kisses her What not yet in love? me thinks our Courtiers Are grown dull, but 'tis Delirus (son to our Noble General) is the man: Have I Not gue'st unhappily? Artesi. That's as it proves Sir. King. May it prove well as I wish it. Artesi. And may your Majesty in your love prove happy. King. So wishes my Aurelia: if I mistake not — Kissesher Artesi. My Aurelia: See, see, he kisses too close, as Contracted lovers, when fore't to part.— aside King. Aurelia: harbour not within thy Ivory breast, that Traytor to thy beauty, Melancholy; he's an ill guest, Not to be rooted out (if settled) but with a certain Ruine of that fair fabriek. Ther's not (within The compass of my power) that thing, thy vertue Can command, I will not carefully see perform'd, By my chast love I will. Aurel. Royal Sir, low as the earth, I thank you, you,— She Kneels That can pitty in distress, a thing not worth Your noble thoughts. King. Arise, Aurelia: Reach me a chair there— Takes Aurelia by the hand. Aurel. Artesia, stay. Artesi. When you are Queen perhaps I may obey— Artesia offers to be gon. King. Call back Artesia. Artesia, what desert Your friends? come we must have your opinion too,— Ferdinando goes off Artesia returns. Reach another chair here. Aurelia, sit. Aurel. Pardon great Sir, the humblest of your handmaids. King. Come sit I say, when you are Queen; Artesia Will obey, and as I am your King I do expect No lesse from you.
Aurel. Great Sir, the practice of my obedience, Shall be my joyful study. King. Show it in this, sit down. Aurel. Your will, shall be my law. King. Gentlemen, pray tell me (you that are Landlords To the Commonwealth) what creature living (Dares own me for his King) can justly envy At the favours, I bestow on this fair Virgin— What all silent? Antonio, What say you? Anton. Sir, I should be loath to stand ingaged, for that many Headed beast (the commonwealth) yet confidently Dare say, ther's not, a Noble breast, would not (With me) rejoyce to see, such vertue match't. Artesi. This is gross flattery— aside King. Artesia, what say you? Artesi. Sir, I am so far from diveing into the thoughts of Others, I hardly know my own. King. But I can shrewdly guess them, and ne're cast a figure.— Exit all but King. All leave us, but wait in the next room. What are we Princes, bove other men, more then in, Our care? I do remember (blest be his memory) My Royal Father, would lay his hand upon my head And say, boy, wed not thy self to pleasure, 'tis An insinuating evil; which once imbrac't, and of Thy heart possession got will ulcerate the body, And if not timely cured, may infect the soul. 'Tis care, not pleasure, must preserve thy crown Which if thoud'st have, upon thy head, sit fast Study to know thy subjects, and so rule Not to be thought too wise, not yet their fool. It was good councel, which to my best of power, Ile labour To finde out, and follow; here Bellicosus (our General) Writes, my love to fair Aurelia is generally known What if it be? and that considering her birth, and Beauty, she may deserve my pitty not my bed, And that the event may prove dangerous to act, What the subject may make his pretence of quarrel: (I had best have the banes of matrimony, aske in Every Parish Church in my dominion, with the hands Of the Parson, and Church-wardens, for the approbation, Of the lawfulnesse of my choyce) but Bellicosus, Is honest, and carefully instructs us for the best, as One whose gray haires, pleads an insight, in those State affaires, my unexperien't youth, nere understood. Besides, it was my Fathers charge, on his sick Bed, I should 'bove all, take his advice,
As one, neer us in blood Whom he hath found, intirely faithfull to his Crown. 'Tis ill to loose a subject, hardly to be found. You' powers above instruct my tender youth Love her (by all the Gods above) I do more then My life; Nor can I find a posibility, to spend The remnant of my days, on this frail earth, In peace, without I do injoy the fair Aurelia for my wife, what though she be poor In what our earthly fools adore, more then There Gods, she hath, in her Chast breast Virtue enough, for to redeem, forth from Captivity, 'bove half the world. Court drosse, that love it Aurelia I am thine As much from thee, entales thy vertue mine. — Exit. Enter Mr. Dull Goldcalfe in an Antique dress. and Snap his man. Gold. But Snap do'st thou still continue thy dissolution That there is, things mortall, and in Coats, like Women, that can deserve my imbraces. Snap. Pardon me, Sir, I spoke not in the plural number. Gold. Plurall, Snap; what's that Snap. Why plurall signifies; more then one, Plurall, may be many Gold. Plurall, many, I shall remember plurall, an excellent Word, what is that one, thou would'st make happy In my acquaintance. Snap. She is a Lady, Nobly born; of a high Spirit, And heir to great Estate Gold. Let her be as Nobly born as she will, I care not a pin And for her high spirit, her's that shall take it down— Points to his sword. What may her state be, say you. Snap. Some five thousand pounds, per annum. Gold. Snap, I understand you well, per annum Is by some kinswoman of hers, is't not so Snap. Sir, you mistake per annum is meant Five thousand pound a year Gold. A very trifle Snap, but because she is thy friend And I fear thou hast acquainted her with my good Parts, I may be mercifull, and pitty her. Snap. I thank you Sir, I hope, she will deserve it Gold. It may be so Snap; what may her name be Snap. The Ladies name is Artesia Daughter, and heir to the Late deceased Lord Endimion Gold. Heir me no heirs, when will her father dye Snap. He hath been Coffind under ground this twelve-moneth Gold. Nay then he may be dead, but Snap, you might have Told me so.
You know her lodging. Snap. I do Sir, Gold. Some time to day Il'try her wit. Snap. You will find her, well worded, and discreet. Gold. For that Snap; I shall word with her, I believe, and For discretion, those that know me, know I have My share, Snap; hath not my Taylor done his part How do I look. Snap. Singular well Sir, for ill' be sworn their's none looks Like you. Gold. Snap; I do believe thee hark in thine ear— They whisper. Enter Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenio. Corneli. 'Tis without question, he intends to make the fair Aurelica, his Queen. Anto. 'Tis doubtless so, And though the Generals letter Some what displeas'd him, I find his resolution fixt Which hath strangely wrought, an unaccustomed Mirth in him. Euge. By all the Gods, I joy in it Corneli. He loves not vertue, doth not. In the name of— Spyes Goldcalfe. Jupiter, what may yon' monster be If a Baboon, he's of the largest size I ever saw Eugeni. We know the beast, his name is Dul. Goldcalfe— Gold∣calfe struts by One (however ill bestowed) The fates have pleas'd To showre down wealth in abundance, I wonder much Sebastians fortunes, being sunck, he begs not This same fool oth' King, He hath an Estate Few Noble men in our Land, can purchase With their own Anto. Now by the gods, it were but Justice, lets move it to The King, Sebastians Noble mind will never Condescend to do it Corneli. By Jupiter, Il' joyn it'h motion, Engenio, thou Knowest the Guilded calfe Prethe accost him, I long to see How his inside doth, with his out agree Gold. Snap; They have spyed me, And come to do me reverence. Eugeni. Mr. Dull Goldcalfe; your most undoubted friend I shall desire you take acquaintance, of this my Noble friend, I am confident he will deserve Your love. Gold. It may be so Corneli. Noble Sir, Although a stranger to your worth, Yet the Noble Character fame gives of you, hath Encouraged me, to become, an humble suitor, you Would vouchsafe, to list me amongst, those happ
Mortalls, you dain to stile your servants. Gold. Snap; This is a large Complement, Not suddenly to be answered Snap. 'Tis stale and out of fashion. Gold. Say you so? Sir though I understand by my man Snap; your complement be stale and out of Fashion, yet for this Gentlemans sake (I honour With the name of friend) your suit is granted Corneli. Right Noble Sir, I thank you Eugeni. And I in his behalfe. Anto. Mr. Dull Goldcaulse, the confirmation of your Health, is joy to me. Gold. Noble Antonio, I give you plurall thanks, And gentlemen, I am glad I met you, I must Trouble you on friday next to my wedding, Snap; where shall it be? Snap. For that we shall contrive Eugeni. Please you to make us happy, in your brids name And place of being, we shall be proud to waite on you. Gold. Tell my friends her name, I have forgot it, I never Saw her yet gentlemen Anto. How ner'e saw your bride, and yet your match so neer Gold. No faith not I, but Snap; will shew me where She is, anon. Eugeni. Snap; pray what may this creature be, that can Deserve so high, and rich a match, as this my Nob'e friend. Snap It is the Lady Artesia, daughter, and heir to the Late deceased Lord Endimion. Gold And yet Snap; you told me he was dead Eugeni. Noble friend he is Gold. Say you so, 'twas more then I understood Eugeni. And Snap; hath done you justice, she is the only Match, for wealth, and beauty, our country doth afford Gold. You will not fail to come then Anto. Name but the place, and wee'l attend you Gold. Snap; wee'l have it at the Cake-house Behinde the Hospitall Snap. Not for the world Sir, a Lady of her birth and breeding Keep her weedding at a Cake house, 'twould be avile Disparagement to you both Gold. Why Snap; my father (I have heard him say) Kept his wedding there, and he thought himself As good a man, as she. Snap, Tis true Sir, but now the fashions altered Gold. Where lyes the fashion now Snap. Her house will be the only place
Gold. Gentlemen, at her house a friday. I will about It straight, Snap shew me the way— Exit Gould, and Snap. Snap. I waite your worship. Anto. He scapes well, with tossing in a blancket, if he Dare attempt this, her high spirit, will have no mercy on him. Eugeni. 'Tis but the prologue to the misery, he is like to endure His ignorance will be his daily punishment. Corneli. By Jupiter, I neither hear, nor in my travels Ever saw his fellow, in other shape then in Long coats, and bells, what is his man, he seems To be a cunning knave. Eugen. The man hath better blood runs in his veins, then His ridiculous master, and questionless, aimes at his Private ends, in this same borrowed shape Of servingman. Cornel. May he prosper in it, more then a bare subsistence, For the fool's to much, come Gentlemen 'tis time We did attend the King. Anton. Then lead the way.— Ex. Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenius. Enter Artesia, sol. looking in her glass. Artesi. This is no flattering glass: if true, my judgment Cannot find, Aurelia's face, five thousand pounds A year, more beautiful then mine. I have been Much flattered, if this face speak, not it self the Best it'h Court; And at that rate, I have sufficently Tyraniz'd over my poor Idolaters, mong'st whom I must find out one, that must gladly act, what Ever I prescribe, Artesia must not, cannot see Aurelia in the Throne of Majesty And I a poor neglected looker on, My fortune, and my beauty Speak me (aloud) I do deserve the best. And shall a beggers brat, skip or'e my head, and I, when 'tis to late, whine out my griefes, and Say I might have done. Aurelia, you may be Queen of Faries, or of some petty Island in the Other world, This is to hot for thee, thy eyes strike fire When throughly quencht, mine then, will blaze the higher. What monster have we here — Enter Gould, and Snap. Gold. Snap. I perceive the Lady is at leasute, by being alone Prethe remember my service to her, and tel her I Will finde some other time to wait on her. Snap. By no means Sir, you shame your self for ever if You speak not to her; could you have found a Better time then when she is at leasure.
Gold. Sast thou me so Snap; Hem, hem, Lady: Would it were out. Artesi. Would what were out? Gold. Nay ther's it; I cannot tell that; Snap; tell her my name, and riches and that I love her, for my good parts they'l speak for themselves. Snap. This you must do your self; Or be for ever shamed. Artesi. Sir, have you any thing to say to me? Snap. Now, now, now.— to Gold. Gold. Lady my name is Mr. Dull Goldcalfe, of an Ancient family; my father, was above fourscore When he dyed; his arms is a sleeping calfe, You may see them Lady in every Tavern window, I have heard my father say they cost him Forty shillings, my Estate is infinite; for my parts Judg you, if you have any wit. Artesi. So much, I have, I think I know your business, You come to proffer your self to be my jester. Snap. She paies him home— Aside Gold. No i'l be sworn Lady, Snap; can tell I am in earnest, Artesi. Sirra I am indispos'd, to entertain a fool, But if you dare be troublesome, i'l have you cudgeld out of doors. Gold. Why Lady, take you me for a fool And a coward. Snap. Else she mistakes abominably — aside Gold. If you do Lady, I can dispence wirh my conscience Choose my side, and with my mony buy a Colonels Place, entertain half a score casheer'd, Officers that shall be at my command, Can I not Snap, Snap. But when their monyes done, (you feed Them with) they will command you. Gold. To give them more mony, i'st not so snap? Snap. Very right. Gould. But Snap, because they shall command but seldom I'l give them swinging sums at a time, ther's divers Of my kinsmen have don't before me Lady, how do you like my way? Artesi. So well, that if you do not find it out quickly I'l make my foot man show it you by the head And shoulders. Gold, Thanks Noble Lady, Snap and I know The way very well, no ceremonie Lady to your servant; But you mistake me Lady, I mean the
Way of being (for your preferment) a Colonel, For no disparagement to you Lady, I have Heard that Colonels are no Coblers, nor Tinkers, but companions for Princes, Be they not Snap? Artesi. This Ass is troublesome. Well Sir I have considered of it, and when You are a Cobler or a Tinker, (I mean a Collonel) you shall expect a Further answer from me— Exit Artesia. Gold. Hay Snap, was it not well done to make My self a Colonel? I had ne're carried The peevish ape else. Snap. Most excellent well contrived. Now Sir, that she may understand that you are a Very Colonel, for so you suddenly must be; I speedily will endeavour to find out some of These Officers you speak of, on whom I must spend freely, and after you have Furnish't them well with mony (which you Must do) ther's not a vintner, nor Ale-house keeper In the City, but within three dayes After receipt, will with cap in hand salute Your Officers, as thus. Save you Noble Captain; Save you Noble Lievetenant, how fares it with Your Noble and truly valiant Colonel Goldcalfe. Ten dayes will ripen your Fame to that perfection, that not a Parrot, nor starling in the City, but will prattle Colonel Goldcalf. This to your Lady known, (As soon 'twill be) you need not Doubt her favour. Gold. O rare Snap; about it straight, Thou shalt have money store. And Snap; Because she shall not understand I am a Usurer, as was my scraping father, I'l summon in all my principal mony, Hang use, we'l find use for't Shall we not Snap? Snap. Admirable use (Noble Colonel.) Gold. Sa'st thou me so boy? her's half a piece For that, how rarely it sounds, (Noble Colonel) Come away Snap; I long to be confirm'd a Colonel Exit Goldcalf and Snap. Enter Aurelia sol. Aurel. The king, is sure, too full of Noble thoughts, to Play upon my present misery, and to believe those Favours he bestowed (so publickly) on me, as real, as
Spoken they appear'd; would amaze one that deserves No better then my self. You gods give me, a worthy Patience to undergo, what ere' you lay Upon me. Noble Antonio, — Enter Antonio Wellcome, what newes from Court? Anton. Most Excellent Lady, by (me unworthy) The King commends his best of love to your faire self, Who sadly knowing, fortune hath blindly dealt With you, and doubting your present supplies, Hath sent you a thousand pounds, which he Commands you to dispose of, as what he hath Pronounc't, your own. Aureli. I humbly thank his Majesty. Ferdinando— Enter Ferdinand. Ferdinand. Madam. Aureli. Lay by that bag. Ferdinan. Madam I shall— Exit. Ferdina. Aureli. Your burthen (Antonio) hath heat you, I hope it is not in respect of me, You use this Ceremony.— Meaning, being uncovered. Antoni. Madam, it is a reverence, my loyalty commands, To her, my King, intends his Queen. Aureli. Fye Antonio, This speaks you aright Courtier But to me, the poorest of your friends, It was too much. Anto. Madam, I ever shall acknowledg the Court The place hath brought me up, Yet never look't on flattery with other eyes, Then those that saw it monstrous, It is my judgment, not my will that ers, if I mistake The King. Aureli. Which sure you do Antonio, and easie may Confess it, as what's your Princes daily exercise, (His charity) your judgments known too sound, To entertain a thought, The King whose state and vertue, can Command the worthiest she, His own and neighbouring Princes Country Doth afford: can cast his eyes upon a Wretched thing fortune is pleas'd to frown on, My poor deserts, examnin'd by my self; And known, can swell my humble thoughts, Up to no higher pitch then to be known his Grateful creature, and when my prayers, for Him and duty to his Majesty I neglect, May I be blasted, as one not worthy day light. Anton. And may his envy burst him, that looks with Grudging eyes, on your prefer'd deserts.
Aurel. Thanks good Antonio. And to the King, My duty; and my thanks▪ as heartily as I pay The gods in my devotion. Anton. And may you be, No more nor less then what I wish to see; So blessings attend your goodness.— Exit. Aurel. How rare doth honesty at Court appear, Yet is not strange, when vertuous Princes stee'r.— Exit. Enter Sunklow, alias Snap, and Bellira his sister. Sunk. Come, you are too fondly peevish, and Must be rul'd, you know our fortun's sunck Beyond recovery, (but by this means) Have I with early care and pains, Made it my study to contrive (most for your good) in This neglected shape of slavery, a way to raise Our low sunk house, And must you out of a Self wil'd nicitie, refuse that which your betters Gladly would imbrace (and joy to compass) What freely I have offer'd, to throw into your armes. Consider, and be wise, for rather then I'l act the fool, To my own ruine, and others mirth, I'l leave my Country, never to return, where You may live to say, you had a friend — Offers to go, And brother. Belli. O Gentle Brother; stay, hear me but speak, You would not tye me to a thing, I shall be sham'd To own, a gilded monster, one that the people never call A man, but when he buyes the title. Come, you do But this to try me. I know you are too full of Noblenesse To engage me to a miserie, I cannot hope for end of, But with the losse of life; be merciful in your Commands, and i'l obey. Sunk: How have you spent your time, hath not your Court experience, nor education in the Common wealth, Taught you to understand, he wants for no good parts, That hath enough to purchase tongues at his command? Besides, when valour (although not in himself) But once is known, to curb the daring Talker, He may as freely passe the muster-role of Gentry As he, that yesterday Commenc't at Paris. Come, you must and shall be rul'd, or loose a friend, More pretious, then most Brothers You know Gold-calf young, and easie wrought upon, Apt (yet enough) to take any impression your more solid Judgement shall find fit to mould him in. No whining, But consent, the rest shall be my care to see perform'd. Come, come, your speedy answer; 'Tis the last I'le urge.
Belli. Things of this high concernment, require some time Of study, which I shall urge you grant. Sunk. Be speedy, as what much concerns our businesse And think, what women would refuse so rich a fool; The world goes well with woman, when they rule. — Exit. Belli. To such as do desire it. All I can think, or say, Studie, or not, I find I must obey.— Exit. ACT. II. SCENE I. Enter Dorothy Dreswel sol. as from sleep. Dorothy, HEY, ho, I have had the most sweetest, pleasant'st Comfortabl'st dream, That ever woman wak't from. Beshrew their noise, that put me out on't, Me thought I could have spent—all this morning in't; Venus assist us we may dream, For we have but little comfort waking; Waiting call you it? yes we are waiting women, We may wait long enough, ere these Courtiers will do a poor soul a good turn. Yet, Why do I rail at them? They are but men, flesh and blood, And can do no more then they can do. It is our unmercifull Ladies, that give the poor souls No breath, nor time to recrute. What hopes can we have then? Yes, Ferdinando, the Lord Sebastians man, Begins to promise something; Yet he com's on too, just like a posse Captain With his forlone, Vpon a breach he hath been beaten from; But time and experience may increase his valour. And see to my wish, he is here.— Enter Ferdinando. Ferdin. Fair Mistris Dorothy, I kiss your hand. Dorot. You may make more bold, and be more welcome Sweet Ferdinando. Ferdin. Fair one, you have invited me to a bliss, Exceeds what men call joyes on earth. Dorot. 'Tis all you Courtiers can do, to dissemble With our sex. Ferdin. Number not me, amongst the prophaners Of such beauty, I must for mercy sue to: if I may Hope to enjoy, what you fair self, hath only to dispose of.
Dorot. You will not finde me proudly Coy, 'Tis love in love (they say) makes all the joy. Ferdin. This kiss, The happy prologue to our ensuing bliss. The business (I gladly snatcht to wait on your Fair self) was to commend my Ladies service To the fair Artesia: please you to let her Vnderstand so much. Dorot. Sweet Ferdinando, I shall, as one your Imployment hath made proud.— Exit. Dorot. Ferdin. If you be proud, the devil shall Lime you for me; was there ever such a piece of (Second-hand formality) wrapt up in silk? The Goat, and sparrow's chast to her, Il' have her married to a Regiment of Swiss, The Eldest company will but awake her luste; Nor shall the youngest find reason to despair She'l not hold out, she's return'd quick.—!— Enter Dorot. Dorot. My Lady (seemingly) thanks the fair Aurelia, and doth return her service, but so Coldly, as if she intended not to deserve Wages for it. Ferdin. 'Tis strange my onely joy, (for so I now Shall make bold to call you) can you guess the cause? Dorat. Why truely yes, (I shall not doubt your secrecy) Ferdin. Not if you think I love; Racks cannot Force reveal, when you command a silence. Dorot. Then know, my Lady hates Aurelia, More then she loves to be admired. Ferdin. And that's enough. By what strange means Hath she deserv'd it? Dorot. Her envy for the favours, the King (Is pleas'd) bestow on her, while she (As she conceives) is slighted. Ferdin. 'Tis probable, And what you have pleas'd To impart, is with my love lockt here.— Points to his heart. This kiss. Time calls away,— Kisses her. When Cupid knows 'tis here, my heart bids stay,— Exit Ferdin: Dorot. Blessings go with thee; despair not wench. My dream some pleasure brought A reall wake's beyond a sleeping thought.— Exit. Dorot. Enter Delirus Sol. From the camp. Artesia not at Court? with her my business lyes, What ever to my father I pretend. 'Tis well the King pickt out Aurelia for his Choise, my jealous heart first at the sound He loved, began to faint.
Enter Anto. Eugeni. Anto. Delirus, welcome to Court We hope the valiant General (your Noble father) Enjoys his health. Deli. He do's; and by me saluts you both As his best of friends. Anto. We thank him, and wish victory may Crown his actions. Deli. You make him happy in such noble friendship. Pray Gentlemen how fares it with our vertuous King? The camp generally speaks him in love, In which they wish him prosper. Eugeni. So we do all, as you in your fair Choice, Artesia Deli. Truly Eugenio, I should be proud for To be known her servant, (would she accept the Service.) And do confess it were a happiness, I know none greater could I deserve her favour, which She well knows I am too unworthy of. Eugeni. A souldier Delirus, and doubt the Conquest. Men that would seem to know, Reports she loves you. Deli. Eugenio report's their own. I shall believe it too, when (truth 'tis known Enter Artesia. Anto. See where she comes, a confirmation To your wisht success, Crown your desires — Exit. Anto. Eugeni. Deli. Content wait on Artesia, fairest of thy sex — Kisses her. Artesi. Delirus welcome, how faire Our friends i'th camp. Deli. As men, whose swords your beauty Sharpens; resolvedly well. Artesi. Sure you mistake Delirus, you mean The Kings Mistris, the faire Aurelia. Deli. Madam; The King looks not with My eyes, he is young, and possible may erre in's Tender judgment. would he be tryed by votes, His double voice would hardly carry it. Artesi. You have a smack ot'h Court yet; Delirus this savours not ot'h Camp; Do they dissemble there too? Deli. My faithfull love speak for me, I understand it not. Artesi. Do you love me then? Deli. So well, I must not live, if you Refuse to accept it. Artesi. But. Deli. But, what Maddam? If a piece of duty,
Within the compass of my poor power, hath Been by me neglected, let me but know Wherein I have offended, and I'l redeem it, Though with the loss of life. Artesia, I take you at your word. And know, I can Return so much of love again, I equally will ingage it'h Hazard, dare you (with me) joyn, to revenge My wrongs? till righted, I have vow'd A single life Deli. Else may my blood turn cold as Iberian Ice; And may my name be (through all after Ages) Blasted with coward. Artesi. Enough, I dare not doubt the non performance, Of whats so firmly bound, yet least you startle, I Must enjoyn your secresie, Deli. Which I (by all the Gods) vow to perform. Artesi. Then know, it is the King hath wrong'd me, Dare you now right me. Deli. Protect me all you powers; the King; pray speak— He starts. That I may understand you. Artesi. Then thus, the love he bears Aurelia, too loudly is Proclaim'd not to be known by you, who not content (In publick to acknowledg) must in the face of all the Court, Make me, his scornful mirth, whil'st every savcy flattering groom, Derides my sufferings, as one, that not deserv'd Common commiseration: you now have understood my Greife, and if your love burn with that fervent Flame, you have with protestation here profest, I shall expect you Act, what I prescribe, and you Engag'd (by oath) stand bound for to perform Deli. Why do I shake? you have an Angels shape, Proclaims you vertues storehouse; there cannot then proceed, Forth from a Mine of vertue, a bastard issue. I know you are as good as faire, and in that Confidence, stand prepar'd, to put in execution, What you vouchsafe command. Artesi. The King then must not live. Deli. The gods forbid it, my blood begins to chill, The very name of King, hath struck an icy coldness Through my veins, my sinews shrink, and strength (Like an ungrateful servant) deserts me in My misery. O yet be merciful; and let this piece Of life I hold, appease your anger, and Redeem my King Artesi. You have shown your love, vallour, and strength Of protestations in your fear. I did but this to try You, suppose t'had been a subject wrong'd me.
Deli. O that again, and but the knowledg of a name, You'd have destroy'd, and by our loves 'tis done. Artesi. 'Tis Aurelia. Deli. A simple woman, poor maid, I am thy murtherer. Artesi. A souldier Delirus, and so tender conscienc'd, Think what 'tis you enjoy (my love) no beggars fortune With it; besides I'l take you off from being Executioner, which if enjoyn'd you were bound For to perform by Oath. Ferdinando servant To old Sebastian, is poor, and vehemently Courts my woman, who with the promise Of her love and gold to boot, you easily may Tempt, for to perform the deed, either By poyson, or as you both shall else contrive. What hopes can you expect, I can enjoy a peace Within my self, when she is Queen, that at the Hopes of rising, dares publickly affront me? You cannot love, and yet refuse to right me. I must acknowledg. I have not boasted much of Love to you, yet dare confess, Had you been wrong'd like me, my tears bear— Pretends to weep. Witness for me; I should have righted you Though life had been ingag'd. Deli. As I will thee, urge it no more, 'tis done; Dry those fair eyes. This kiss confirms she sleeps, Aurelia dead Our joyes at full, leap to our marriage bed. — Ex Ambo Enter Snap, Captain Thunder, Lievetenant Cannon, and Ensign Drake. Snap. You understand your charge. Thund. At full. Snap. Then see you do perform't with care, As you expect to cate again. Thund. Thou man of Mars we shall, recrutes Must then acrew the trifling summ's exhausted we Received Not a denier, our linings can produce. Snap. Already gone, all on the gut or have you victuall'd For this week, fearing a siege of Bailiffs; pray let Me understand what you must spend a day, I May prepare to furnish you, my Ignorance May make me erre. Cannon. Nobly spoken, and to the purpose, Thou man of metall. Captain our usuall rates declare. Capt. Lieutenant, I understand you, you mean When loaden with the spoyl, we did return victors From Poland. Ensig. Or when that powerfull arm (with Our assistance) fell on the rear of th' Swisse;
In which great slaughter we seas'd ten thousand Pounds, then but a trifle. Lieu. Or, Snap. Or when you spoke truth, which no man Can remember. Come, come, no noise, nor blustering— Snap stopps the Lievtenants mouth. Here, I understand you well, and shall (if you dare Talk such words;) but when I licence you, return You with your leaguer pipes to the chimney-corner, Where when your doxyes nim the pocket small, You then perhaps may drink again, and then Betwixt each draught, recount your valourous acts To oyster wives, who can admire them, and Weep at every arm or leg, you phillip from the Foe, sighing parentheses at your sad Catastrophe, Why you worms, poor as Carthusian munks, That borrow titles, to fright Tapsters from their reckonings, And dare usurpe titles of honour you never understood, Could you hope with your con'd speeches ever to possess, me With belief, that you were valiant; or ever fought, But when engag'd for reckonings with your Host, Or with the boyes for to redeem your Ladyes From the pumpe, which you protect not out of love, But lively-hood; and though the sin of theft You love, as what you live by, yet dare you not Attempt your selves, more for fear of beating then The law. But thrust your females into danger, Who once a moneth do pennance under last for Your maintenance. What, all silent? Lieutenant, faith What might your last great victory in Poland Be worth to you? Ensign; speake, what brave a Acheivements lately. Cap. Thou man of knowledg, we do recant, Nor will we more the History of war repeat. Lieu. Victorious Sir, we are your captives, Command and we'l obey. Snap. Then to your holes again; all is forgot, Your bodies Il' see vampt; which if you dare But pawne, Il' finde a baliffe shall Command In chiefe, mean time her's to subsist,— Gives them mony. Till further order you receive; and as you do Expect supplies from me, be carefull in the Husbanding of this, adieu— Exit. Snap. Capt. Heroick Sir, Your bounty hath chain'd us to Your commands, we are your moving creatures.— Ex. Om. Enter Sebastian Ferdin. Sebast. Breathe there in Christian shape, Such monsters? Ferdinando, be carefull in your relation,
The'yr things you utter of a high concernment; Suppose Artesia monstrous as you make her, Delirus hath a noble soul, and surely would not Aid her in a fact, but to repeat is horrid; Besides Aurelia (poor Girl) ne'r understood What 'twas to injure any thing had life. Ferdin. O Sir, your noble soul (too innocent to Vnderstand the guilt in their foul breasts) will Not give leave to think; what pride and envy harbour. My service (though far unworthy your Acceptance) after this ten years tryall (I hope) Cannot beget suspition of a truth; I soundly can Maintain. Behold this— Pulls out a purse. Purse full of Delirus gold, by him put in this Hand to murther your Aurelia. Sebast. Protect her you just powers, Why did'st thou take it? Ferdin. To save her life, which else had been In hazard. Had I refus'd to undertake the Murther, my single testimony would have appear'd My shame, as not believed, when he should Please deny it; and some distressed wretch tempted With gold, have been her executioner. Schast. Thy bare testimony, is yet all can be Alledged against them. Ferdin. Her woman with me is brib'd, who as they Vainly think I fondly dote upon, who I must Have in marriage (for sooth) into boote; Who should I urge to witness against the Murtherers, she might be brib'd gainst me. Sebast. Thou faithfullest of servants, preserver Of our lives, my wretched state unable to Requite thee, produces tears of sorrow.— He weeps, The gods reward thy trust, and may they bountifully Shower their blessings on thy head. Ferdin. My Honoured Lord, dry those aged Eyes, for my reward his great, in your Acknowledging me your creature; it was but mercy To my self, to keep my self from sin. Honoured Sir, Think what's to be done, in what so Much concerns you. Sebast. The thought of so much wickedness, Captives my reason, I know not what to think, or Do; what do'st thou think most fit? Ferdin. Since you are pleas'd command my Poor advice, my duty binds me thus. The Favour our virtuous King hath deign'd to shower
On your faire daughter, hath been great, And what may swell to yet stands doubtfull. Could you (with the consent of her) unknown To the Court, for a small time conveigh her to so me place Of safety; the King would then (as needs you Must pretend no knowledg of her being) express That love as yet is but suspected; the which When known, as your grave wisdome shall direct, our Course we'l steere, besides my attendance on her In disguise makes for my safety. And if so Great and honourable a charge may be committed To me unworthy, I shall with care and duty Express my joy to imbrace it. Sebast. Ferdinando, I should ungratefull be, For to suspect neglect of care of her, thou hast preserved From death; take her into thy charge, she is Still Aurelia; who knows not how to disobey, Whatever I command. Blessings light on you both, you prosper must, Where ther's so good a child, a man so just— Ex. Ambo. Enter Delirus Sol. Deli. How black and ugly to my self do I My self appear? methinks my hands looke Bloody; and my friends stare on my face with that Vnaccustomed earnestness, as if they saw my Guilt. 'Tis but my foolish fancy, a factious spirit Within me that rebells, which I'l suppress. How many thousand in our kingdome quaffe Vp this cup, that never starte in sleep. And yet Methinks sometimes I hear the innocent faire on, With milky hands held up for mercy Pleading. Artesia too (the price of blood) Who I must love if live; she yet as faire Appears as Sainted innocence, sure 'twas but Justice in her, and no fault at all. Then am I Quit, when we too are but one. Enter Artesia. See where she comes, no Angel but of light, Durst ere assume that shape. Justice it self, Must quit me for a fact, the gods would have Committed, to have enjoyed that Saint. What man that is but mortal would refuse my guilt, But for to touch that lip? My Artesia, I bring You joy; Aurelia's not long liv'd Artesi. My dear Delirus, is it done? Deli. Few hours will confirm it, the slave Bit greedily at the golden bait, and cunningly Contriv'd her death, as thus. He as his custome is,
trusted to guard Aurelia in her private walks, Drills her to the sea side; where drown'd, he straight way ships for flight. Artesi. 'Tis to my wish; but from my woman, This must be kept close, she dotes on him, And must not know his flight. Deli. Aptly considered, her death once known Our long'd for joyes draw neer. Sweetest faire one, I must a little leave thee, and to Court; from whence I hope to bring thee news, she's lost; This kiss, farwell.— kisses her. Artesi. Pray make no stay. Deli. When thou command'st 'twer sin, not to obey— Ex. Deli. Artesi. How vainly hope, fond fools deludes: Delirus, thou art contracted my instrument, not yet My husband; where ther's a Prince, I cannot love A subject; Aurelia dead? Delirus stands too deep ingaged (Although his passion boyl) to dare an injury to me. And then, (who knows,) but that the King may cast his eyes On me; my wealth and beauty, (if I mistake not) will put Him to his travels to out-match them. That spirit's poor, and weak that judgement's seen, Who lives a subject that may be a Queen.— Exit Enter Snap, Gold. Gold. Snap. 'Tis strange; I do nothing but dream Of that Lady, I would I were a Colonel we might be Married: When shall I see my Officers? Snap. I have appointed some of them to wait upon you Here, I wonder at their stay, I hope they'r not Engag'd in fight; which should they be in Some unlucky quarrel, The streets would bleed. Gold. Will they fight so Snap; they'l not be angry with Me, that give them mony I hope. What are their names? how must I call them? Snap. You must observe their Titles, as I present them To you; the Captain (however, through the fortune Of the wars, brought low) is Nobly born and Must your kinsman be, as one that's neer allyed unto The fair Artesia, your beautious Mistriss; whom you (with Great respect must use) as the onely man, should She prove coy, can make you happy in her marriage; For know, she fortifies her self upon his judgement, And must approve her choice. Gold. Honest Snap; how I love thee; then he sai's I shall Have her? If he do, he shall want nothing. Snap. Sir, I have procur'd you his consent; and know
He could not want, would his great spirit give him Leave to spend some of his Couzens thousands; Which as she's a woman, he scorns to do. And to the Furtherance of your business, know you are much in's Favour, he will accept your mony. Gold. Which Snap, he shall not want while I have any; and so I'l tell him. Snap. 'Twer an affront, your life would hardlie satisfie; For know, what ere (by me) you let him have, Should he perceive that you but notice took on't; his fury would be great, and he in scorn return your mony, besides The certain loss, of your faire Mistriss. Gold. Sai'st thou me so Snap; why then I'l not say A word on't. Snap. By no means Sir; I think I hear them comming. Enter Lievtenant Cannon, Ensigne Drake. holding Captain Thunder, with their swords drawn Lievtenant. Renowned Captain, the slaughter (you have Made is great, and furie may be slack't. Captain. Now by my fathers Ghost (who when alive) The Tamer of the Eastern world, let go your hold, Or mercy I forget. And shall the son of Mars be bark't at, By the whelps of Lilly, and not destroy the fry? Snap. Sir, speak to the Noble Captain, You may appease his fury. Gold. Pray Sir, let me entreat you put up your Sword. Capt. Sir you have prevail'd,— Puts up his sword. Your breath hath from the jaws of death, Redeem'd the caitiffes, which else had slept. Gold. Sir I thank you, pray how fell you out? Capt. Lievtenant, my breath is hot, declare To this (my Noble friend) the matter. Liev. Then mark, for thus it chanc't: My ever to be renowned Captain, from Visiting his Cozen, (a vertuous Lady your Worthy self is pleas'd to honour with the name of Mistris) her coach being— Gold. Hum, Hum. Otherwise imployed, on foot made hither; When in the street (and not far hence) some scattered Troops, of Curiassiers chanc't to pass by, an Officer it'h Reare, (whether by chance) or at My Captain is unknown, held up his finger to his Nose; which soon my Captain seeing, (not Us'd to such affronts) straight drew his sword, And with a blow glanc't from his Armour, kil'd his horse.
Snap. The Officers horse you mean, That held his finger up. Liev. The very same; when on the ground, My Captain scorning to take advantage on His foe, gave him fair leave to rise, VVho being up presum'd to draw, (which dear He paid for); for with the loss of his sword Hand, he was forc't retreat; my Captain being Merciful, was pacified with this. His bloody Sword, not being fully sheathed, when back, A Troop return'd threatning (alowd revenge) But had you seen, (how then) like lightning, my Captain Flew about him, you would have thought, the god Of warr, had then descended from his throne. For to destroy the world; my Captain by the multitude Engag'd, we to his rescue drew; who we, Through lanes of scatterred limbs redeem'd, and as you saw Brought off, impatient we withheld him From further pursuit of the foe. Snap. VVith what a confidence the impudent rogue Delivers his invention. — aside Capt. Lievtenant, no more, the skirmish is not worthy mention, Sir your attention hath been great to what deserves but Little, I shall be honour'd in your acquaintance as One, my fair Cozen Artesia, is proud to call her Servant: Pray take some notice of these Gentlemen, However fortune plaies the whore with them, You'l find them men of metal. Snap. If of any, 'twill be of his own— aside Gold. Gentlemen, I am proud to be your friend. Liev. As we to acknowledg our selves to be your Vassals, Noble Colonel. Capt. Noble Cozen, for shortly I must call you so. Gold. Good Captain no more of fighting If you love me, I shall ne're hold out another Conquest. Capt. The Drums shall beat no more, nor Trumpets Sound of warr, what think you of the Spanish Grape? Shall we to the Tavern go my valiant Colonel? Where we will toss your mistriss in good Canary. Gold. Valiant Colonel, he has it right. Captain I'l wait on You, but Gentlemen there will be no fighting? Capt. Who drawes his steel's; my foe. Gold. Nay Gentlemen; if there should, you see I am Not unprovided; but Noble Captain let not your Cozen,— Points to his sword. Know I am given to quarelling. Capt. He sleeps, that dares pronounce it. Colonel pray lead the way. A feast my stomach, better fits, then fray.
Snap. Miraculous! he has uttered truth— Aside. Gold. Come Snap. Ensigne command your Lievtenant to follow— Ex. Om. Enter Antonio, Cornelius, Eugenio. Eugen. 'Tis above wonder, where she should be, If dead she would be found; and if alive, I know no cause of discontent, she had To quit the Court. Anto. It is a thing, ther's not two heads in all the Court, 'Gree in one thought. Some that that the King is Privy to her retirement; others that she's made away, But on what grounds, they know not, and every one their Verdict spends, while none knows where she is. Cornel. That which, to me most strange appears, is That her father, the lord Sebastian; (inrag'd With sorrow) utterly disclaims the knowledg of Her being; but that which much suspition breeds, is That Ferdinando is missing too, who questionless (if Alive) must know how she's disposed of; the Fellow too, ever accounted entirely Faithful to his master. Eugen. What course is taken in the Search of her. Anton. To all parts messengers dispatch'd; Noble Delirus, Welcome, Is faire Enter Delirus. Aurelia heard of? Deli. Nor will be I think. Gentlemen good day to you. The King is close retyred into his closset, nor will Admit to speak with any. Cornel. If so, 'tis then without dispute, he knows not Of her being. Deli. 'Tis bu'zd (but upon what intelligence I know not) That shee was seen neer the sea side, some that She's fled with Ferdinando; others that Pirats seas'd Her, but both improbable; the harbour being So neer, and yet none know it. Enter King. King. Gentlemen, a nobler imployment (at such a time As this) would more become you all. All leave us— Ex. All but King, The faire Aurelia gone, and none knows whether? Yes, there is some that knows—it must be so. I am confirm'd in't, This is our Generals plot. 'Tis he is King, and he shall rule; he had no way but This, to gain it with his credit; sure he would Not murther her, he lives not that can do't, and Look her in the face. The Courtiers cannot all be
Ignorant of this, (but I may find a time to pay Them for their Loyalty) Poor harmless maid, thy Virtue all good men should protect, hath been Thy ruine. You gods above (the just protectors Of my childhood) give me a manly patience to Vndergo what you are pleas'd to inflict upon me I must dissemble griefe, how ere unfit to act Another part. Aurelia, Thy King must now Turn wanderer; for by those gods whose aid I crave, Il' leave no ground unsearcht, while life supports My fainting limbs, till I'm confirmed thou art alive Or dead. If living 'Im rewarded, but if dead That grave injoys thy body, is my bed. ACT. III. SCENE I. Enter Anto. Euge. Cornel. Anto. THese stormes presage no good. The Generall now arrived at Court, Whose business with the King requires hast; Delirus VVith confidence conveighs him to the King his Closet; where when arrived, instead of King They found a letter with his own hand writ, directed To the General. what the contents are, is unknown To any but himself, but his distracted looks Speak them not pleasing. The Gods prevent VVhat I much fear. Cornel. 'Tis to be fear'd indeed; this strange conveiance of Aurelia we sadly may lament; for questionless he Loved her much, but where he should abscond Himself, or go without assistance of some 'ith Court, Is more then ordinary strange. The gods instruct His youth, and bring to light the authors of these troubles. Euge. Amen; Nor is there mis't (a man) it'h Court, we can conceive the King would make Privie to any secret design of his; it is impossible He should be far or long unheard of; But see, Here comes the Generall. Enter General Delirus Fabius. The General reading to himself the King his letter. Gener. The gods assist me, what ridl's this? Gentlemen. Antonio your eare, The rest I Shall intreat forbear the room.
Antonio; The King I ever— Ex. All but the General, and Anto! Have observed, hath loved you much, nor Hath it been without your just desert. Pray peruse That letter, it must be he (if any) the King— Anto. Reads to himself. Imparts his secrets to— Aside. Anto. My Lord. I understand it not, more Then that Aurelia being strangely shuffled out O'th way o'th sudden, where none will seem to know, Hath caus'd his discontent. Gen. Aurelia; (the gods protect her innocence) I hope she is not murthered. Anto. My Lord, I hope so too, for sure Ther's not (on earth) a soul so black, Can act the murtherer. Gen. Forbid it all you powers, knows not the Lord Sebastian of her being? Anto. His griefe and close retyrement, Confirms him ignorant. Gen. I am amaz'd with horrour; Antonio prethe Read out, for sure my aged eyes mistake, Or else I fain would think so.— Anto. Reads to him the Kings letter. Amasius. Anto. My Lord, we received yours, dated The fifteenth of this instant; but were to weak in Judgment to understand your plot. Which the obscureness of our travell confirms, takes well; Some small pretence of sorrow for my departure, May make good your title. I am in health, And shall return ere long: In the mean time, Remember I had a father loved his subjects well. If you have spar'd the life of poor Aurelia, use Her as one, on whose well doing my life depends. Gen. Rash and uncharitable young man, My tears in pitty— Weeps. For thy folly shall Plead me guiltless. Have I With sweat and blood (proud of the toyl) this Thirty years and upward; when this unhappy Kingdome with fear and conquest almost spent, Redeem'd thy totering state from swift approaching Slavery, when every eye proclaim'd their fear, And every down cast look despair. Raised thy low sunck fortunes to such a height, Thy (then victorious foe) now trembles to behold? And must I now have treason and murther Lay'd to my charge for my reward. Antonio thou art honest, one that the flattering Court could ne'r bring (yet) 'ith fashion;
Prethe tell me, have I deserv'd this black, Vngratefull charge? Anto. My Honoured Lord, may I become a scorn To vertue, if ought of these sad accidents I know; nor can I guess from whence the Rise should come, more then the discontent Your letter brought with it. Gen. Protect me innocence; my letter were Your partaker, made of the contents. Anto. Onely my Lord, your mild disswasion From Aurelia's love. Gen. Curse on the time I mov'd him in't; But 'tis no time to talk. Antonio, by the Dear and tender love thou bear'st the King, Labour his search in what thou may'st. Patience assist me, thy need I ne'r more wanted, Our speedy course must be to lay the ports. The gods direct us for the best, and may he be Accurst for ever sought this miser: Anto. My Lord, in what you please Command, I ever shall obey— Exit. Enter Aurelia Ferdin. Disguised as shepheards. Aureli. Ferdinando, what place is this? Ferdin. Madam, The village neer is called Felix. The country (we are in) the faire vally, the Only seat for shepheards, and pastorall delights our Country yields. Aureli. That little of the world my youth hath Travell'd through, never yet discovered to my Sense a place of so much beauty. The Guiltless here (perhaps) may walk, protected With their innocence, free from Artesia's Envy. My doubtfull thoughts will Hardly give me leave to credit, Artesia Meant me so much harm. Truly I ever loved Her well, and can forgive her, would she yet be good. Ferdin. O Madam, your cleer vertue, Vnspotted with the thought of sins of that High nature, pleads ignorance in the trade the Vicious husband.— Enter Amint. Sol. Here comes a shepheard with a sad asspect Lyes on the ground. So please you Madam step aside unseen, We will observe— They step aside. Amint. And must Amintor, poor Amintor, Only be the object of Cleoras scorn. My harmless Sheep bleating bewail my mone. And every Shepheardess but she,
In pitty can bewail my misery. But 'tis Amintor's fault, whose slow pac't Courtship seldome conquers love. He must be bold, and active in imbraces, that gaines desire, While I with bashfull dulness quench the fire. Why do I blame the faire Cleora? when bashfull Fear in me, may possibly in her beget the like Suspect. Forgive me faire Cleora, that uncharitably Condemn my Judg, before ther's sentence given: But Il' repent, and let the faire one know, How much of love (though dare not speak) I owe.— Enter Streph. Cupid, assist me as I thee obey, If that offend, what then must be the way. Streph. Hey day, what stuff's here: This should be The pittiful Amintor by his sad complaints. 'Tis he; Amintor, what not yet contracted to Cleora? 'Tis much she should continue coy, And you Court her at this distance. In the name of Cupid how long hast thou lost Thy witts, thou worshipper of weather-cocks. Come, come, listen to my good counsel, that shall Convert thy Pagan Idolatry.— Strephon sits down by Amintor Streph. Cease Amintor, cease for shame, Let not dotage blast thy name. Love but as I do, dote on none, A woman's worthless when she's known. Love this faire face to day, to morrow t'other; When that's enjoy'd, think where to finde another. Amin. Tell me master of your Art, You that can comand your heart. So to love; (if love it be) You profess to every she. How Courtlike you can swear each face you see Though forty in one day, still Captives thee. Streph. I had rather swear for to enjoy, Then Captiv'd be, by one that's coy. Man naturally freedom loves, Leave chastity to Turtle Doves; For he's as blind as love, that fetter'd lyes; Beauty when men are fond will tyranize.
Amint. Could'st thou but unswear an oath, As freely as thou breakst thy troth; Or could'st thou but as constant be, In ought else, as in inconstancy: You then might painfully confesse with me, You love too much, for min's Idolatry. Streph. When fading beauty shall disguise My free born heart to Idolize; I then perhaps, may pitty thee, As partner in thy misery. Variety of dishes is my fare, That face I ne're yet saw, when seen is rare. Amint. Think'st thou I'l pitty crave of thee Or ruine love, varietie▪ No Strephon; no, thy change of fare, Diseases breed; sad looks, despaire: Whilst I triumphantly despise thy charms, And laugh at thee, in my Cleora's armes. Streph. Amintor thou art lost, good counsel is Cast away upon thee: did ever man complain Of cruelty on her, that hardly knows Thou lov'st? or if she do, 'tis but at second Hand. Rise and repent, and I'l be merciful and Court her for thee; or if of late you are so valiant grown, You dare alone venture the thing (you call a vertue) Your chastitie, with Cleora: go and whine Out in some sad madrigal your dotage; Which she'l in scorn deride, Had'st thou my Confidence, she were thy Bride. Amin. Away thou lewd prophaner of Those rites; the god of holy marriages must Punish for thy perjuries. 'Tis sin gain'st Cupit, to hear Such prophanation. Streph. Amintor thou art past recovery, I'l To my wanton Nymphs, Who love like me, Ex. sever. Not so to dote, yet fancie any He.— Amintor passeth by Aurelia. Ferdinand. Honest shepheard stay. Aureli. Vertuous shepheard, may Hymen to your Blest content crown all your chaste desires. Amin. Faire Nymph, if yet not wed, The self same wish attend thy marriage bed.
Ferdinand. Courteous shepheard, can you entertain This Nymph and I; who much desirous, to imitate that Harmless life, we hear you prosper in, hither invited Us? Our stock is not so great to boast, nor yet so poor To fear a want; your looks speaks you a Friend to strangers, who can forget to live, Sooner then be ungrateful. Amin. Truly I pitty you as strangers, and Should be proudly glad to entertain you, were I But master of where withall; for know I am but a servant to my father, An ancient shepheard age gives not leave To go abroad, his house is not far distant Hence, a poor small cottage; such as it is Please you to go with me, my poor endeavours Shall not be wanting, for what It can afford. Ferd. Brother, we thank you, and shall to Th' utmost you shall please demand, prove your Faithful paymasters. My sister here unus'd To travel, would gladly be at rest, Please you to lead the way? Amin. Most willingly, this is your path,— Ex. Om. Enter Delirus, Artesia, severally. Deli. Fairest of creatures, I can (alowd) proclaim tyidings Of joy, Aurelia's death, Ferdinando's flight; and what Beyond our wishes, most hapily falls out; the King in discontent hath left the Court, I hope ne'r to return. Artesi. Delirus, it is a Traytors wish. Deli. How Artesia? Artesi. You understand me sure, if I Mistake not; he is your King, or ought to be. Fye Delirus, so long a Courtier, and not Know your duty. Deli. I am confounded, sure 'tis not Artesia. Artesi. For that I shall resolve you straight. 'Tis the very same. — Looks in her glass. Where are your eyes? Deli. My reason's at a loss, this cannot be; Come, come, no more of this, beshrew me, But you almost stagger'd me, I know now 'Twas but in jest to try my temper, And I forgive it. Artes. Hah, hah! forgive it? you are not my Ghostly— Laughs. Father, 'Twas language might have become your
King, but sounds to saucy for a subject. Deli. Nay now Artesia, you over act your part, this Kiss concludes the Scene.— Offers to kiss her, she thrusts him by. Artesi. You are abominably out Delirus, you Should have acted at more distance, you must go con your Part anew, and learn to know, to whom you are to speak. The Poet ma instruct you. Deli. May I believe this real, and from Artesia? Artesi. 'Thats as you please; I gladly would find Out a way would more confirm you, which I shall study, since plain dealing will not do. Deli. By what neglect of mine, have I deserv'd this scorn; Let me but know, if but to lessen my admiration? Artesi. Neglect of duty to your King (if well Examin'd) you'l find deserves no less. Deli. Why Artesia, can neglect of duty be a Fault in me, to him you would have murthered? Pray recollect, and but consider what you'd Have courted me to do, which I refus'd in duty. Artesi. This but confirms thy ignorance, which Would not let thee see I did it but to try You, in which assurance know, Ther's not on earth A thing can acceptable be, from you to me, But your diligent search o'th King, Who when you have found, and that You tydings bring of his dear safety; I May forget your faults, tell when I take my leave.— Exit. Artesi. Deli. The gods above are just, nor am I Punisht yet to my desert. Here but begins your justice, which must so heavy fall, That but to think of, wracks my Eclipsed soul. Aurelia now afresh begins t' appear, her hair Disheve'ld 'bout her Ivory skin, threatning (aloud) Revenge. Thou shall have justice faire innocent, And thy appeased ghost, no more be put to wander Through the deep in gastly horrour. Artesia, 'tis time To think of death; for rather (then to my shame) Il' live to see thee lodg'd within anothers arms; I will in death injoy, what (scornfully) thou hast Alive refus'd; from this accursed hour, let no man Ere believe a woman can be true; And where There wants invention to contrive a just mans fall, Think of Artesia. O women, women! The sun whose Glorious beames survey the frantick world, Would stay his motion and stand still, as proud For to behold a constant faire one.
Why should their inside be so foul, there out so faire, But to intrap mortality? but I too late (with Death must purchase knowledg. Bad consciences are house-hold clocks that tells, On earth one minutes joy, ten thousand hells. — Exit. Enter Bellira sol. Deli. Angels protect my Lady, what ground so ere She treads, it was unkindly done, not to acquaint Me with her flight, for sure it must be so, for when my lord (In tears) saw me bewail (as by my fear, I did conceive) Her loss, he did with cheerful looks (such as Would seem) confirm the knowledg of her safety; Put me in lively hopes she liv'd. His language too, who would not say she liv'd; Would not confess, he thought her dead: But what of all I least can understand, is that when any But my self, (of those same few he will admit) name But daughter, or Aurelia, he throwes him on his bed; And for the while they stay, ne'r answers to them more; Some thing there is, I fain would understand, But dare not urge to know, the gods above assist her, What ere her undertakings be.— Enter Snap. Snap. Health to Bellira. what no news Yet of Aurelia's being? Belli. Not any; onely bare hopes she's well. Snap. From whence spring they? Belli. From little else more then that I fain would hope The best; yet Ferdinando's being with her Doth half assure me she can have no harm, As one, whose actions were ever known vertuous, And Noble. Snap. I understand you well, the Character you give Him▪ plainly speaks you love him; which is the Cause you imbrace so coldly, what I have labor'd for; But know Goldcalf will be delay'd no longer, Therefore you must prepare, to morrow to be his bride. What more whining? I had thought your Resolution had been fixt, or after all my Pains; must I yet travel for it?— Bellira kneels. What may this mean? Belli. O worthy brother! If ever tears and prayers Vnfained, from a distressed maid did move Compassion, behold (with pitty) your miserable Sister, who cruell fortune hath so unkindly dealt With, that I must chuse to loose my brother, Or my life. And with the loss of that, I am
Resolved to purchase peace hereafter. Heaven Knows I mean no other force to do't, more Then the confirmation of the match you speak of: 'Twill soon dispatch me, yet in obedience to Your will, that little time I have to live I'l call him husband.— Sheriseth. Snap. Never, never Bellira; Thou hast a noble soul, not fit to match in dunghill breed. And know I practised but a tryall of thy love to me, Be happy in thy choice who e'r it be. Thy love confirms my liking. For know, I Have fit instruments to compass my honest Ends on Goldcalfe, (how e'r the busie world May judg my actions) for well thou knowest, his Griping father, with base cosenage. Ruin'd my vncle, so consequently me. This the world knows is meet, To cheat the cozener, can be no deceit. Belli. Worthy Brother, you have reviv'd My blood that gan (apace) to chill Within my veins; for which, the life I hold, shall Ever be imploy'd, as you shall please dispose Of it. May all your undertakings prosper To your hearts desire. You have no present business To command me? if not, my Occasions call. Snap. Bellira, first know, I have prepar'd a habit for you You must put on to further my designs; A man you must appear Bellira for a few houres, Which shall be undiscovered to any but my self, I shall instruct you in the part you have to Act, at our next meeting: it is a trust Bellira, I dare impose in none but you; Till when farwell. Belli. Which I shall gladly execute, As you shall please command— Ex. Ambo Enter Corneli. Eugeni. Corneli. Antonio's gon in search o'th King. Eugeni. May his endeavours prosper; what a Hum this accident hath rais'd i'th Court: In What strange shape▪ and by whose assistance, He could contrive (so suddenly) his this, So secret being, begets in me a wonder. The gods Divert his minde from quitting (long) the Court; the event may prove much dangerous To us all, that wish him well. Corneli. The common people ignorant of their
Own safety (wedded to change) unanimously begin To call Bellicosus King; some crying up his Valour, and experience in the wars, some his Justice, all his honesty; whose loyall heart appears So far from coveting a crown, he seems much Troubled at the clamour. And should the King His discontent detain him long from Court, 'tis Thought the Generall must accept it, to appease The frantick multitude, who rashly may (should he Refuse) elect more undeservedly. Euge. His wisdome will foresee, and carefully Prevent such dangerous consequences, as one Whose approved Loyalty 'twere great injustice to Suspect. Saw you Delirus lately? The Court Speaks of strange alterations in his looks and carriage. Corneli. I did, and know it speaks no more but Truth; for never (to my knowledg) did I Behold a more dejected creature. The cause must From Artesia spring▪ or none. Euge. 'Tis without question so, ther's an ambitious Spirit lodg'd within that seeming modesty of hers, Hath almost crackt Delirus. How fondly doth That man inslave his reason, that dotes on pride And envy. She strangly hath forborn the Court Of late, and may be hatching mischief, were but Her envy backt with politick assistance. Her pride and scorn apparently was seen, (as Wanting government to hide it;) when as the King was pleased to throw his favours so Liberally on Aurelia. Corneli. On which I much observed, the King Great notice took: here comes the General. Enter Bellicosus. Bellico. Gentlemen, for love of virtue, your King and countries good, disperse your selves Into the City, where confidently you must give out, The King (by letters I received from him) confirms His health and safety, and that his strange deserting of The Court, was onely to perform a pennance he On himself enjoyned (by vow) for some unruly Thought his blood provok't him too; which once Performed, he will return with speed. This The distracted people may (for a time) Appease, in which we possible may hear some Tydings of the King. And as I well know You'r honest, I doubt not but with care you Will perform this trust, as what (at present)
Much concerns the common good. Cornell. Sir, You honour us in a trust, wherein We can express that love, and loyalty, our duty, And allegiance binds us to — Ex. Ambo. Gene. How unconsiderably violent doth untam'd Youth, hurry to its own destruction? The gods Can witness bear how innocent I stand (in but a Thought to act what other ways (might More then to my reason) just appear. My counsell In that letter I wrote the King, hath bred In him a jealousie Aurelia is by me removed. This by the flattery of some fawning slave I'th Court, must be confirm'd a truth; and all My services in ballance put with some base Wretch, not worthy name of man; ('tis But a small reward, for what the world Well knows I justly have deserved.) But Bellicosus, now is the time to right thy self, and Crown thy actions with the height of honour; when As the changeling rout with uncontrouled fury Proclaim the King. And must I (when thrown Into my armes) refuse to accept what with the Slaughter of a seven years war, could not be purchased. It speaks a weakness in my self, I know unfit to Govern. But Ile resolve—n'er to deceive a trust. Amasius, live to enjoy what's thine, I will usurpe In nothing, but thy care. 'Tis a known truth. He's more then man, offends not in his youth — Exit Enter Ferdinando Sol. I must in some disguise venture to Court, where Since we parted, the Country speaks of a sad change Of things; the King (in every shepheards mouth) Is spoken privately gone from Court, none Knows, or will do whither, but questionless in Discontent at fair Aurelias retyrement. And what we but suspected of his love to her, By this we may confirm is reall. Some quick Prevention must be studied, or it speaks Danger to them both. My absence too from Hence (till my return from Court) will offer to Aurelia the knowledg of the Kings deserting of the Court, which fain I would keep her from Knowledg of; for how so e'r her vertuous soul, Not willing to be thought ambitious of the King his love (more then a Loyall subjects duty Can deserve) she strangely loves his person,
Which she in modesty (to her weak power) makes It her labour to conceal. My labouring fancy is at a stand how to contrive, What I would gladly act, the poor Bellira too, Left alone unsatisfied laments her Mistriss Loss, though I deserve not pitty, or forgiveness; Once more, must undiscovered see her, And part unknown. Bellira, I love thee well, Yet would be loath to have it found in after Story, I brake my faith to satisfie thy love; It shall suffice I'm true, When known to all, I needs must be to you — Exit. Enter Goldcalf, Captain, Lievtenant, Ensigne, and Snap. As in a Tavern. Gold. Drawer. — Enter Drawer Draw. Here Sir, Gold. Draw a pottle of the best sack; Mr. Captain (Cozen that must be) What say You, i'st not so? Capt. It is a grape of power, which were I to Encounter Priams fifty sons, all at one time (The quarrel being just) would make the Victory doubtful. Gold. O strange! Drawer, let it be sack then, But Mr. Captain it will not make you angry With your frinds, will it? Capt. It operates the contrary effect on friends, And doth encrease affection, never To be divided. Gold. Directly it is wonderful; we'l taste it Most horribly then; Mr. Lievtenant, Shall we not? Liev. Noble Colonel we will. Till your Faire Mistriss at (but relation) of her healths We drink; shall stagger and turn round. Gold. Excellent good I protest. Mr. Ensign, You are for Sack too? Ensig. Renowned Colonel, since from our Mothers wombs, we strech't our warlike limbs, We scarce have tasted other, Behold Our Nectar coms. — Enter Drawer with wine. Capt. Colonel uncase. Cloaks are superfluous weeds, The blood shall boyl with Sack, and scorn the Robes Of shelter. Drawer fill to the brim. Here noble Mr. Snap. — Drawer fills and gives him; Captain drinks. Snap. Sir, you shall behold a miracle, I'l do you Justice.
Capt. By the life of Bacchus, bring me a more inspiring Glass, or Rogue you bleed; must We in thimble drink? Snap. Captain, 'Tis well. Capt. Must it be so then, thou man of Temperance? we then will sip in little. — Drawer fills Snap wine. Snap. Lievttenant, your Noble Colonels Lady, Liev. My murrion then lies low, while I— Throwes his hat on the ground. The goddess pledg. Gold. O admirable rare! Lievt. Thou standard-bearer to the son of Mars.— Drinks to the Ensign. Prepare to pledg his Venus. Sirra, let measure due be Given, fill to the brim. Ensig. Come to me. Gold. But Gentlemen, is it the fashion for all to have My Mistriss, but my self, Capt. Colonel you are the last must have her. Gold. Why then we shall ne'r be married I think — Drawer fills to the Ensign Capt. Sir, you mistake, I mean the last must have her Health in drink. 'Tis a la mode de France. Gold. Say you so? nay I shall learn quickly. Ensign. Lievtenant I thank you, Colonel, to your faire Mistriss, the incomparable Artesia. Gold. Thank you heartily good Mr. Ensign. Snap. These are all brave men? Snap. Sir, you speak them just, they'r men will do you Credit, (though I confess they'r costly) but Artesia's Wealth shall pay for it in the end. — Draw. gives Goldcalf some wine Ensig. Sir, 'Tis your Ladies health. Gold. And her mony too shall pay for it shortly; Shall it not Snap. — To Snap aside. Snap. Mary shall it sir, please you to drink. — Goldcalfe drinks. Gold. Gentlemen, her's to you to all, I'l be sworn It is a cup of right, excellent right wine; boy give me— Drawer fills to Gold. T' other cup. Cozen Captain and the rest, her's To you all. Capt. Heroick Coz, I thank you. Drawer, some Of your Spanish smoak? Draw. You shall sir. — Exit Drawer. Capt. Lievtenant; come, shall the foes bones be twirl'd. Colonel, you'l not stand out for half a dozen glasses? Gold. How mean you Captain? Capt. Art thou a stranger to the twirl of die, Behold a brace, made of a Germains bones — Captain pulls out dice. I slew in duel. — Enter drawer with Tobacco and candle. Gold. VVhat is your game? Capt. He that throw's least must drink.
Gold. Say you so? a match, come Snap. You shall make one. Capt. By any means, come Gentlemen, stand round, 'Tis all in fashion. Drawer, see you that stakes be made. So, so, 'tis well, set down. Come her's for me— Drawer fills. Lievt. A five, a special throw. Colonel, please you The die to hurl. Gold. Come hey for me; hey day an ass.— Goldcalf throws Capt. By the bright splendor of Artesia's eyes, 'tis true— Lieut. throws. A four that, come the next Mr. Snap. a six— Snap. throws. Colonel, he out throws you much. A deux — Ensign throws. Colonel you then must chirpe, come off with it To the next mu'st pledg. Gold. Come, come, give me it, an ass do you say at first? that VVas ill luck i'faith; her's to the next shall drink.— Gold. drinks. Drawer fill full; come begin I'l be the last this time. Liev. A trey? throw Mr. Snap. Come, come, 'Tis half the die. — Liev. throws, VVell done Mr. Snap. A five? he throws exceeding well— Snap. throws. Capt. Ensign, throw you the next. Drawer light me a pipe. — Drawer lights a pipe for the Captain. He drinks, he drinks; by Jove a deux— Ensign throws. Come this for me. A six, pox ot'h bone— Captain throws. I shall not drink to day: Here Colonel above — Goldcalfe throws. A deux you scape. Now by the whore of fate an ass again. — all laugh. Sap. The dye runs true, an ass he will remain — aside. Gold. An ass alwaies? besworn a pretty jest— Snap whispers to the draw. drawer goes out. Captain, I feel my self grow valiant Another ass will make me draw. Capt. By no means on your friends. Snap. Captain for all your blustering, the other cup — Lievtenant and Ensign drink to one another in private. May make him valiant. And now I do remember Some twelve moneth since, when but a puny lad, In such a humour just as this, he shrewdly Hurt two fencers, Capt. Which to prevent again, I'l drink For him, for know I hate to draw Upon my friends. Snap. Or foes if you can help it, if I mistake Not much. Gold. Come, come; who throws? — Enter Drawer. Draw. Noble Colonel. Ther's a young Gentleman In the next room, hath stay'd this hour for Company; who not comming humbly desires Admittance into your acquaintance as One fame lowdly speaks of. Gold. Snap. Shall he come in?
Snap. By any means. 'Twere uncivill to deny him, Drawer, tell him he shall be wellcome. Draw, I shall sir. — Ex. Draw. Gold. Has he a sword Snap? we should Have askt him that. Capt. Colonel, what afraid? Were he as Stout as Ajax arm'd with his sevenfold buckler; this Steel should (on his knees) force him confess— Points to his sword. Himself your slave, By Jove a pretty stripling. Colonel — Enter Bellira in the habit of a Gentleman. Pronounce him wellcome. Gold. Sir, you are kindly wellcome. Belli. Noble Colonel, (if I mistake not) Fame gives you out the man, I humbly thank you. And must acknowledg some boldness in my Request; which if a fault, pray blame report,— Lievtenant and Ensign drink to one another. The onely spur, invited my ambition; you Would be pleased to call me your servant. Gold. Sir, I understand you, and can tell You, here are Gentlemen (besides my self) have Swords which when they please to draw, The frighted people tremble. Belli. Gentlemen, I shal be proud to serve you, as One would gladly be your vallours scholar. Capt. Then know young man, from this time Forth thy foes must fear. Drawer, fill Me a brimmer of rich Canary.— Drawer fills. Belli. Gentlemen, I hope my rude intrusion, breaks Not up the sport (I understood by the Drawer You were at) I gladly shall make one, I have some Trifling crowns, I'd sport to pass away the time. Capt. To him (i'faith) Colonel. Gold. What saiest thou Snap. Shall I play with him? Snap. By any means, should you refuse, it might Breed suspition, you either wanted mony, or that you were Exceeding miserable, which might endanger coming To Artesia's ear; which must not be. Gold. Excellent well thought on, honest Snap. Cozen Captain, pray drink to the Gentleman. Capt. Sir, have at you, to all that honour our Noble Colonel. Belli. Sir, you make me proud to pledg a health, I so Much honour. Sir, to the Noble Colonel. — Drinks to the Lievtenant. Liev. Which to refuse were death, let come. Gold. Noble Colonel. How exceeding perfect, Snap, This stranger has it? Snap. 'Tis perfect through the City, thank my care. Gold. Honest Snap. right honest Snap. Come sir,
Shall we to this sport?— To Bellira. Belli. With all my heart sir, her's that will hold Some minutes play. — Pulls out a bag of mony. Capt. Lievtenant. Wou'd Bess, and Doll. were here, To nime the sum, they should have garments fine, And strut the streets by day. — Aside. Liev. The chimney corner then should smoake, Without our helps, and double pots stand still; while we the Tavern fortifie, against the potent Constable. Gold. Come, come; the dice. Snap. Gentlemen, I can furnish you rarelie, Behold her's choyce. — Snap. pulls out some dice. Gold. Sir, what's your game? I am good at nothing but At Passage. Drawer make clean the Table. Belli. Sir, I set you this? Gold. Sir, That's too much. Snap. Refuse to throw at none. Gold. Saiest thou me so, honest Snap? Then heer's at all — Throws. Belli. You then must pay me this. Capt. Courage Colonel, 'twill come again. Gold. Hang it dirt, I care not a pin, Belli. Come Sir, set me deep. — Throws. Thats mine, come again. Gold. Snap; You must fetch me more mony— Aside. Snap. Sir, You must not want here, one good Hand brings all again; if there be not mony enough, What think you of two or three Mannors, Ile bring the deeds. Gold. Do Snap, make haste honest Snap. Snap. I shall return with speed. — Exit. Snap. Gold. Come, I set you this. Capt. Courage Noble Colonel, the next pull's ours. Belli. 'Tis all my own. Gold. Ile swear he has the best fortune I ever saw, Capt. Come chear up, give him a brimmer; Colonel you are a cup to low to win: Sir, you Have admirable throwing. Belli. Sir, 'tis by chance, I seldom part a winner— Drawer gives Gold wine, he drinks Gold. Here Cozen,—'Tis excellent wine I feel it In my head. Here drawer, fill my valiant Cozen. Sir, Snap my man will come with more mony Presently. Capt. Cozen if this shit-breech wins, this steel — Points to his sword. Redeemes it all again, what e'r it be. Gold. That will be rare i'faith — Enter Snap. Come Snap, here Sir, this bag I set you — Gold takes a bag. Belli. At all, were it a million — Throws. 'Tis all mine
Snap. Sir, this is the last bag; but here are Deeds. Gold. Come Sir, her's t' other bag.— Sets t' other bag. Belli. This for it all.— Throws. 'Tis mine. Gold. Snap, did you ever see the like? Snap. After so often winning he needs must loose; Set him five hundred pounds a year. Gold. A match. Come Sir, you have all the mony; Heer are deeds of five hundred a year; Will you pay as much if you loose? Belli. Come Sir, I'l not be out-brav'd. Set them, and and if they prove so much, or more, Or less, accordingly, I'l pay, it. Gold. A match. Belli. Then lusty dice at all— Throws. They'r mine.— Takes up the Deeds. Capt. Mushrome, deliver all you have put up, back to The Colonel, or you eternally shall sleep.— Captain draws. Belli. How's that? return again what I have won, Deliver that again so sawcily, and slave you dye. You slaves.— Captain comes firce up to Belli, Belli draws, they all run off the stage, he following. Ile try your manhood, my coyn is easily made Good, without my brothers help: what things In shape of men did here appear. It will be wondered at, but more when known; By what a handsome shift we got our own— Exit. ACT. IV. SCENE I. Enter King Sol. Disguised in the habit of an Aged Pilgrim. King, AS yet my pilgrim weed, hath been my safe protection. Surely the Court is mercifully, sparing in their Search of me; I hear no hew and cry sent after me. (Though I have read t'has been a course, some Sawcy subjects have presumed to take in search of Their lost King.) My tender feet have faithfully Performed their promised pennance, in hope To appease the angry gods, for the by paths they Have trod, and must have present ease.— Lyes down For heaven knows, they are unable to support me Longer. Poor Aurelia, wer't thou but living now (The sad remainer of all the comfort left me) Thy tender heart would (pitifully) say I loved,
But that poor little hope I have, waits on despair. Death would be welcome now, but deaths a Tyrant to those that covet him, and only Loves to prey upon the worlds idolaters. Who vainly clambring in't to catch at all, By death receive an everlasting fall. Content is sure the Landlord of this happy place, Who lets out parcells to his Nimphs and swains, As harmless as the flocks they tend. Here on a hillock sits a shepheard swain (free in His choice to love) only with natures help, Composing what his un-envied wit brings forth To court his mistris with, while she seemingly Bashful smiles, to hear her self so courted. Neer whom a merry swain, with his oaten Reede, defies the bag-pipe, and proclaims a Challenge to all the valley, which when received, the Pretty discord in variety, begets a joy in (the then) Feeding flocks, who skip to hear the melody, Their safe protectors make. A universall silence Crowns this happy place; and I must sleep in jest, That fain would do't in earnest. Bad world, I Can forgive you all, O my poor unfortunate Aurelia.— Sleept. Aurelia undiscouered, sings hard by him. A Song. YOu God of love, whose aid I crave, Look down and pitty me; A harmless maid, from ruine save Lies wounded here by thee. Heaven knows my unaspiring heart, Ambitiously ne'r aim'd 'Twas you great god) chose out the dart, So Nobly me inflam'd. Then since (loves god) the power is yours, 'Twere just to let him know; How much a simple maid endures That dares no love to shew. 'Twere then but just, to ease my pain, And grant me my desire; That he as I, may burn again Or quite put out my fire. Enter Aurelia.
Aureli. Thus to the unpittying ayr, I vent my Sad complaints, who more a tyrant then a Comforter, in my own tone of woe, returns My words of sorrow; (poor satisfaction to a maid— Meaning the Echo. In love.) Aurelia, how hast thou lost thy Loyalty, Who most unworthily hast disobeyed the King his last commands? Did he not charge thee Not to harbour within thy breast that traytor To thy quiet melancholy, as one (he by experience Knew) if not with care prevented, would seek thy Ruine; yet thou like an ungratefull wretch, Hast entertained the Traytor. I want a confidence To see his face, that could refuse his counsell, (I Vndertook to follow in my silence.) Would Ferdinando but return from Court, my doubtfull Thoughts would find more setled reft, Pray Heavens all be well, for my disquiet sleep (I fear) presage no good O you preservers of The innocent, protect the vertuous King; who Had he been a subject. (I blush to speake the rest) I might perhaps have lived to have injoyed, What now were a presumptuous sin but for to hope; Yet heaven can quit me, 'tis not to enjoy his Honour as he is King, but as he is man His vertue. Defend me, you just powers; how Have I betrayed— She starts at spying him. My innocent thoughts? I hope he sleeps; his age And habit speaks no danger in him. 'Tis surely Some religious man, wearied by long travell, In the performance of some holy Rites, hath laid Him here to rest. He do's begin to stir; did not my modesty Forbid, I would observe him further, her's none so Neer to see me, if I should venture? Which I'l for once attempt.— Steps aside. King wakes and stretches. King. Where am I? such joyes I have received in sleep; I am afraid to know I am awake: for I am from a Short sleeping hight of happiness, thrown headlong to A lingring sorrow. Sure 'tis some heavenly place? Me thought I heard the musick of the sphear's charming My troubled senses into happiness, I dare not think of waking. I should (to the just gods) appear unthankful, Should I repay this blessing I enjoy'd (although but In a dream) with base despaire; heaven knows (what Ever I deserve) what's yet in store laid up. I am unjust to Nature and my self, by want of food to punish that
Life I should preserve. I'l to some honest Cottage near To find relief; Heaven knows I cannot Travel far.— The King wearily riseth, Aurelia goes towards him. Aureli. Ther's something in this holy man, speaks Much of sorrow, Me thinks we might be partners In our griefs, durst we but make them known: I was but late my self a stranger here, And should uncharitable be, not to acquaint Him, where there is relief. King. Sure I am in Paradice, and this Some goddess is— The King spyes Aurelia. For since my eyes left to behold the Fairest of that sex, I ne'r behold so excellent A form. There must be pitty in that Angel shape. Fair Nymph, assist a wearied wandring Pilgrim In your directions to some place of succour. But if thou art the goddess of this heavenly place, Forgive the doting errour my age pleads pardon For, and I shall pay (when known) the due Performance of your holy Rites. Aureli. Thou holy man, (such you appear to me) And truly I believe, I am no goddess I, but an Unfortunate poor shepheardess; too much acquainted with The afflictions, of this too bad world, who glad To shew, (in what I may) respect to reverend age; will Carefully conduct you to a house near hand, my self Is but a stranger to, yet dare presume what it affords, You shall be kindly welcome to. King. Sure I still dream, and did but think I wak't That voice, that face; and all doth so agree, My easie faith would fain believe 'twere she. Or else her Ghost assumes this shape; to let me know Her murtherers; 'Tis so 'tis so, faire innocent Thou shalt have justice, let me but know the authours of Our woe. But whether doth my passion lead me? Faire Nymph, let me but know thy name, And whence thou art? Aureli. Father I am ashamed I have Presumptuously disturbed your quiet; which was A fault of ignorance, I heartily can be sorry For. Can you forgive it? King. Pardon thou exellent creature; that I Have cal'd thy blood out of thy cheeks, with my unruly Passion; the sad remembrance (your faire form presented To my aged eyes) put me in mind of a lost child I had, so like your self; I durst almost have challenged You for her. But my Aurelia's dead.— Aurelia starts.
Why starts she at that name? 'Tis she. 'tis she. You gods let me not surfeit with excess, but by degrees Receive my thankful joy.— Throws down his staffe and runs to her; takes her by the hand. This faire white hand is flesh and blood? And this Aurelia, Living Aurelia? I am made for ever; This happy hour will gain me more then all my Labouring life could ever purchase. Aureli. You cannot blame me sir, to start at such Unusual passions in an aged man, which would they give You leave, I gladly should imbrace the knowledg of What (as yet) I am a stranger to. King. Madam, Then know, I am a man (how e'r with Age I do appear unable) hath been imployed In search of your fair selfe. For though my low condition in the Court, deserve No knowledg from your honoured self; know it Hath been my place of boad, before your honoured Father (the lord Sebastian) e'r could call you Daughter. Dear Madam? let— She starts Not my honest meaning truths afright you more, but Understand I am imployed in search of you, By none but by your King. Aureli. Away, you'r an Impostor, or some unhappy Man, (with too much care) bereft of Reason. It was my charity to your assistance, and not My custome, made me thus fondly inquisitive Of your condition, which I have found my self As much mistaken in, as you appear in mine; For know I am a poor shepheards daughter, not Far from hence, that daily tends my flock Which I have so long neglected, I fear I shall Be shent: So heaven preserve you.— Offers to be gon, he pulls her back. King. Lady, pray know I cannot so mistake, but Since it is your will to have it so, I have no Commission to force you to confession, yet I Would gladly know whether the letters to your Faire self (I have with many a weary carefull step) Brought you from the King will be accepted, If not, it is my duty to return them, and onl greet Him with the glad tidings of our health and safety— Offers to be gone. Aureli. Pray stay; but have you letters from The King? and are you secretly (by him) imployed? Pray let me see them. King. If you be that Aurelia they are directed. To, I have. Aureli. Come, you will be secret. I am the Same, pray let me see them; I hope the King Injoyes his health.
King Never better Madam— The King puts one hand in his pocket as for letters, & with t' other takes off his false beard Know you this superscription? Aureli. My Lord the King.— Falls on her knees, and swoones away. King Her colour's gone; she faints, Angels Above, assist me; Aurelia look up, speake, or thy King ne'r more shall utter word. She breathes; How doth my joy, my bliss, my all delight on earth! One word of comfort, speak. Aureli. How fares it with the King? I am pretty Well thanks heaven, and your assistance, King Why that's well said; rise my Aurelia, And let this kiss confirm our never to be divided loves, I now could surfeit here with joy, did reason not Command forbear. O let this happy day be to all After ages kept as a day of joy, which I (while The just gods shall lend me breath on earth) With care will see performed, in memory of that Happiness, this hour confirm'd Thee living. But my Aurelia, it was unkindly done (unknown To any) to desert the Court, and take this borrowed Shape, leaving me desperately unsatisfied of thy life Or death; it was a punishment (Aurelia) I could Not well collect, I had deserved from thee. Aureli. My much loved Lord, that virtue shines Within your noble breast, will hardly give You leave to credit; the plot was laid to take Away this harmless life: which to preserve (only With the assistance of faithfull Ferdinando) We privatel got hither as to a place of refuge, Where with the change of habit we meant to spend Some days, in the contrivance of our future safety. King. Aurelia Thou do'st amaze me with a story, Of that unheard of cruelty, had any tongue but Thine related, I could (as soon) with the same faith Have credited, what mans invention could proclaim Impossible. Sure the have no Christian names, Or if they have, let me but know the fiends, and as I am thy King I'l see thee righted. Aureli. My Lord, I freely can forgive them, They may repent, and in their after life deserve your Pardon. Please you my Lord to put on your Disguise, we else may be (by some unwelcome guest) Discovered; And (as to my poor present home) We walk, I shall in duty to your commands discover all. King 'Twas carefully remembred; the joy I Have received in the blest encounter of m faire Aurelia, made me forget I was to all the world
(But thee) a counterfeit. This kiss; now lead the way, Where virtue is my guide I cannot stray — Ex. Ambo. Enter Antonio. In a riding habit, a switch in his hand. Anto. Where should this King be, I have Endeavoured pretty well to find him out, with What diligent search my wit, and labour could Contrive, yet all in vain I seek. From the city, to The small cottage, hills, and dales, woods and Plains, yet no ridings; not a stripling of eighteen I see, but I from top to toe examine. Had but some That I know the large commission I have ther's Not a handsome gentlewoman in the country (Without a protection from the General) should Go unsearch't, 'Twere well if they scap't too. Indeed I am too modest for the imployment, which Was a fault the General might possibly have Thought me not guilty of, considering I was bred I'th Court. But if I persist in't, I shall be able To give but a very slender account of my travels. It being now in fashion for Princes to make escapes in VVomens habit; but I must mend my fault, and Stretch my modesty. But who comes here — Enter Amint. Amint. Save you Courteous Gentleman, pray saw You a faire young she pheardess straggling here About, I fear hath lost her waie. Anto. You speak as if she were a stranger to the Place, dwells she far hence? Amint. But here at hand▪ Anto. What danger is there then, that she can Straggle here if dwell so neer. Amint. Although she dwell so neer, She is a stranger here. Anto. Prethe courteous shepheard, let me but understand thee And I perhaps may tell some tidings of her. Amint. Then know, she's but lately come amongst us, For we (as yet) not know her name, nor whence she came; But sure she is as courteous a Nymph, and faire, As ever sung to pipe. Anto. What years do'st think she is of? Amint. She looks some seventeen, Or much about. Anto. Shepheard, (may I a stranger to This place my Beast being tyred request you help Me to some refreshment for my horse, and me; For which in part of payment, take this
Gold; with it, my hearty thanks. Amint. Excuse me Sir, the poor entertainment Our Cottage will afford, cannot deserve this pay; I wish we had it for you. Anto. Shepheard, I ever made content my Feast; which I am sure to find, In what you have. Amint. Thank you Noble Sir, since you will Have it so; please you to stay till I but search the Next Cops for a stray Lamb, I will Return with speed,— Ex. Shepheard. Anto. Shepheard. I shall attend; I do not Know, more then a simple hope, grounded On strong desire it should be so: But I am on the sudden strangly overjoyed, with Confidence of a discovery of something. A young shepheardess (did he not say?) of Some seventeen years of age, I and a stranger too; One that as yet, he neither knows her name, nor Whence she is. Well my young King, if I Do chance to find you in the smock habit, I May hap to make you look re di'th cheeks, Without the help of Spanish paper. You gods, I'l pray my beads o'r twice a day The more, should this stray shepheardess But prove my King. And all you powers, bear witness With me, 'tis not for honour, or reward, I covet thus to Finde him, as that I fear, some more unwelcome to Him, may do it to his more prejudice. But her's my Shepheard come. Shepheard shall we go, Amint. Sir, I now will wait on you; this is Your way to your horse. Anto. Thanks honest shepheard, the joy I apprehend, Made me forget I had any — Ex. Am. Enter Cornelius Eugenio. Eugen. I hope the rout's now pleas'd they have a King, Yet some cry'd out for none (the devil stop their wind-pipes) The General appeared much backward, in the judgment of the standers by, to accept the Government; yet Crowns Are things, seldom unwelcome come, How e'r with care maintain'd. Cornel. Eugenio, be confident, the General nothing acted Outwardly in show, but what his loyal heart provok't him too, Nor could he with the safety of the Kingdom (as things Then stood) refuse to accept the Crowa; For that besides the present danger might have ensu'd By the domestick rabble, had he refus'd.
His known acceptance of it now▪ strikes terror in The Forreign Enemy, as under whose victorious Arm, they have long groan'd. Eugen. Cornelius, I am satisfied, and hope (as you) The best, but where the King Amasinus (if alive) Should live so long recluse, to my poor sense. Appears miraculous; the gods protect him, and prevent, What we have just cause to fear. Cornel. He is hardly honest, joyns not in that prayer. Eugen. Amasius, Till I here thy death confirm'd, (which Heavens forbid) I never shall acknowledg other King but Thee, and curst be he that do's. Cornel. Prethe forbear, I think I hear him coming. Enter Bellicosus, Sebastian, Fabius, and attendance. Bellicos. My lord Sebastian, what e'r I'm forc't (to my best Care for all your goods I hope) to take upon me, This is— Sebastian stands bare. A ceremony, from you, I neither will expect nor suffer, Pray my lord put on; it is your grave assistance In this great charge I have undertaken; not what in duty Doth become a Subject to his King, that I expect from you. And I am glad (my lord) to see these over-acted passions, So well blown o'r, that did so ill become your gravitie. We men that know the world, if thankfully would Receive a blessing; must patiently endure a Cross. Sebast. But mine is great (my lord.) Bellicos. 'Tis truth; therefore your patience in't appears The more commendable; for know, ther's not a Loyal heart Amongst us all, but hath receiv'd a loss, a great one too. Though I must confess yours comes with advantage; But let us not despair; The gods are just and merciful, And when we least expect, may bring us joy. Cornelius, what no news yet from Antonio, in his Search ot'h King? he is a man I put much Confidence in his Noble care. Corneli. My gracious lord, I dare (with reverence to your self) Presume ther's not that thing alive, that owns the name Of man, would more rejoyce, to bring you happy Tydings then himself; nor make a more laborious Search in what he hath undertaken. Bellicos. It is believed Cornclius. and you mistake my Meaning much, if you but think I spoke as doubting, In the performance of that trust he did with joy imbrace, I know he's honest, as you can think him. Gentlemen, I fain would urge a question to you all, which could You satisfie, 'twould be a favour I ever should acknowledg. Corneli. My Lord, please you propound, (my honour Stand engaged) in what I may, I'l satisfie.
Bellico. Thank you Cornelius, the question's then, What you conceive may be the cause, my son Delirus so dejects himself. Corneli. Then here my Lord, I take off my ingagement; I think it doth proceed from faire Artesia's scorn, Whom he unfortunately, yet entirely loves. Eugeni. My Lord, he speaks my thoughts. Sebast. And mine. Bellico. Gentlemen, I thank you all, and shall as Carefully (in what I may) acknowledg this great favour. Fond Boy, how hast thou lost thy self? I fear past all Recovery. Proud scornfull woman; yet why do I Blame her, when she stands bound as she expects Her future blisse, to make her free election. Yet how he should Deserve her scorn, I understand not: the bloud that fills his veines Speaks him as nobly born as she, stand was as well deserving. Things of This nature must be gently curb'd, and by degrees, with Moderate perswasion wean'd from. He that with violence, seeks to restrain loves fire, Instead of quenching, makes it flame the higher. My Lord, and Gentlemen, your good advise in matters that much Concern the common good, requires your present aid. Corneli. We ever shall obey, in what you please command. — Ex. Om. Enter Artesia. Sol. Artesi. The King not to be found? He doated strangely so to leave the Court, ne't to be heard of more. Upon a begger too, a thing not worth His Royal thought: and whether dead, or living, it matters not, The multitude with noise hath made their General King: And since 'tis so, Delirus ought to be considered of, as now the Best in being— it must be so; A few good words will reconcile the man. — She calls. Within there, Dreswell?— Enter Dreswell. Dres: Madam here, Artesi. Haste to the Court, there to Delirus Lodgings, and if by Any means thou canst procure admittance to him, pretend you come as Of your own accord, in pity of your Ladies sufferings, who ever Since she heard of his melancholy retirement, hath kept her chamber, And denyed accesse to all comers of what quality soever, nor will She eat, or drink, or sleep, (as is conceiv'd) till she hath seen him. All this you must do in so melancholy a posture, He shall not doubt a syllable you utter, (And if thou can'st deliver it in teares, it will do better.) This done, strictly examine all his gestures, and every word and sigh, So exactly, that you may be able to give me a just account how he Stands moved with your relation, that thereby I may accordingly Prepare my self for his encounter. Is my Coach ready? Dres. Madam it is.
Artesi. Then I'l abroad, but will return by that time I Conceive thou canst be here again. Be careful in't. Farewel — Exit Artesia — Dreswel looks back. Dres. Well go thy waies, thou woman, indeed thou art the very Master piece of all thy sex for cunning. I thought I could have Done pretty well; but I am a very puny, and but begin to learn The art of dissembling. Delirus, you shall be happie; My Lady Does love you, but 'tis because the mad-folks of the Town Have made your father King. Who should they but depose, as They are like enough, (it being now in fashion) my Lady Then must sue out a Divorce, and marry the next heir Apparent to the Crown. Now shall I have this melancholy Coxcombe (who she hath Sufficiently abused) believe me; for I shall do it rarely. I serve So exquisite a Lady in the trade; I cannot chuse but move Compassion. 'Twere rare durst I but laugh, to see him sit cross Armed, and sigh out (in some pitifull tone) his folly, which I Must charitably call his repentance, which he, (in hope I will be Mercifull to him) and call it so to my Lady, gives me five pieces, Which I must seemingly refuse, yet hold it fast. What necessary Commodities to our Ladies are we waiting-women; and faith Should not grudg at any thing we do, if they would but in (some Reasonable measure) consider us. We must not kiss (forsooth) The gentleman-Vsher, not for a hundred pound that's not to Be forgiven; they are very tyrants to us in that particular, And covet all. I had but some small hopes of Ferdinando, the Lord Sebastians man, and indeed to say truth, the fellow was of A pretty able make, and promised well. And he they have shuffled Out of the way; all is too good for us poor souls, but we May find a time to fit them for it: But to My business now in hand. — Exit. Enter King, disguised as before, Aurelia, Antonio. King. Aurelia, thou hast fil'd me with amazement, in the Relating of such a peece of villany, the fiends of hell, would surely Tremble at to see perfor'md. Put on thy hat Antonio, this is no Stands bare. Time nor place to shew respect to persons. O Aurelia, how are we Bound to the just gods, for thy miraculous protection, and sure Those gods have blessings yet in store for thee, that have so safely kept thee. Faithful Ferdinando, I yet may find a time to pay thee for thy Loyalty. Antonio, thou lately cam'st from Court, and Can advise us for the best; delayes do oft prove dangerous, What woul'dst thou have us do? Anto. Since you are pleas'd to think my poor advice Worthy the following; I humbly should request you not Conclude on any thing, till Ferdinando be return'd, who Madam (if I mistooke not) you hourely here expect. Aureli. I do Antonio, and wonder at his stay. Pray heaven all be well.
King. Antonio, I like your counsel well, and will be rul'd, how took The General our strange departure from the Court— Enter Ferdinando Aureli. Ferdinando is return'd, Ferdinando wellcome. Ferdinando starts to see Antonio. Nay be not frighted, her's none but are your friends. Ferdi. Noble Antonio, I know not whether my joy; or wonder To see you in this place, is greater, but both speak much. Anto. Thanks good Ferdin ando, thou living miracle of honesty, Pray take acqaintance of this aged man, as one we all stand bound to, Which you (at more convenient time) shall understand. Ferdinand. Heaven still encrease your age, and happy daies. King. Thank thee my good son, and maiest thou live Long to be wondered at for thy fidelity. Aureli. What news from Court, I hope my Father doth enjoy his health? Ferdinand. Madam, he does. Anto. Ferdinando, thy looks speak no good tydings No news yet of our King? Ferd. Madam, I expected that enquiry to have been made by you. Aureli. Indeed 'twas comming out, had not Antonio Prevented me, I hope he's well. Ferd. That hope is all we have left; for hitherto their search hath Been in vain. Madam, I much mistake (if since my late departure,) Your looks speak not much more of cheerfullness, then When I left you. And I am sorry I have not news for to deliver, VVould fetch more of that blood into your cheeks, hath Been so long a stranger to it's home. Anto. Thou speak'st a Prologue to a Tragedy, prethe be brief. VVe stand resolv'd to hear, the utmost can befall us. Ferd. Then thus it is. The King (as yet not heard of) the factious People, (mutable by nature) generally rise; some crying out Bellicosus Should be King; others would have no King; but most of all, VVould have they knew not what. Thus in the streets Tumultuously they swarm, who Bellicosus (for some small time to Appease) in hopes to hear ot'h King, pretends receiving Letters From him; wherein he certifies his health, and that the reason of his Stealth from Court, was to perform a pennance he on himself enjoyn'd by Vow, for some unrulie thoughts his blood provok't him to, and VVould return with speed. This by the eminent'st men it'h Court Delivered as a truth amongst the Rout, did for a time appease; but Long it lasted not; for being shortly after, throughly whet with wine, They all brake out; crying aloud Bellicosus should be King. At which the General under pretence of what might have fallen Out more prejudicial to the Common-wealth, accepts it for prevention; And since makes strong apologies in his own defence. But may they all be swallowed up alive, that own him for their King, long as Amasius lives, or we confirm'd, (VVhich heavens forbid) he is dead.
King. Let this confirm thee, Amasius is alive— King pulls of his disguise. Alive to thank thee for thy Loyalty. Ferd. VVhich life, long may the gods preserve— Ferdinando kneles. VVith health and joy.— Riseth, Anto. Ferdinando, leave off to wonder at this happiness, it is No time to talk but do. Sir, the long experience of the Generals Loyalty and faithful service to your crown, may justly arm You with a considence, he dares not act the Traytor. King. But Antonio, what think you of the intended murther of This fair Virgin; there was a fault Antonio, a great one too, One that the gods command should not be smother'd. Anto. So please your Highness. if you but think the General Guilty but of a thought, (of what I know his very soul abhors) I soon could clear that doubt. King. Till when, I shall conclude him not Aurelia's friend, Though he may take my Crown, and yet ne'r injure me. Anto. Then on my knees, I beg this favour (for your satisfaction,— Antonio kneels▪ That you vouchsafe me leave to go to Court, where speedily I will contrive a way to clear your doubts, in what You can desire to know. King. Rise Antonio, 'Tis granted on those conditions, and how In the mean time (for the advantage of your undertakings) We shall dispose our selves, consider; and 'tis done. Anto. Virtuous Sir, it is a trust, my life could ne'r deserve, which I'l perform or loose it in the attempt. Madam please you to let Your faithful servant shew me to the road I am a stranger to, I shall (to him) impart what's best for you to do, suiting With my designes. So heavens showre down his blessings on you both King. And speed thee in thy honest undertakings. Aureli. Ferdinando, conduct Antonio, as he shall desire. King. Come my Aurelia, our poor hom's the best, Although no Pallace, ther's more quiet rest— Ex. Amb. ACT. V. SCENE I. Enter Snap, Captain, both Drawn, a fighting, the Captain Forcing Snap backward on the Stage. Snap. CAptain, hold, hold, I say; thou now deserv'st that Title; Come let us put up, you shall have your desire. But know it is not out of fear I do it; fear being a thing I never Understood. But 'tis thy vallour that hath won my love, Which shall continue, long as you dare thus valliantly make good Your honour, which I (in pitty to your self) Much fear is not long liv'd. Capt. Then wellcome death, who in the horrid'st shape he
Can put on, shall ever make this flesh of mine (but now redeem'd From the base brand of coward) e'r tremble to behold him. Sir, be not too incredulous nor wonder-struck; that I Can speake a truth; which to my shame (I must confess) I have but seldom uttered. Forknow the baseness Of my former actions, hath wak't my better judgment To a repentance of my sinful folly; nor is there in these veins One drop of blood but came from noble springs. And if this Small sprinkling of my redemption can nothing gain on your belief, But name an undertaking honourable, that may confirm Me to the world I am a man, and I'l attempt it, or With the loss of life leave ample satisfaction, I dyed no coward. Snap. I do imbrace thy friendship, and believe thee— Imbraces him. Heartily believe thee, as one that joyes in thy recovery, And what (before) I could not think thee worthy of; now doth Appear unworthy thy acceptance. But for the present Here take this bag, with it the assurance, of— Gives him a bag. My assistance in what I shall be able. And what so e'r you Have done for me, (how ever to your judgement it appears) yet Know, it was but honest, and but a sleight to get my own; Long since by Goldcalf's fathers unjust dealing Detained from me. Capt. Sir, it is believed, and for your mony (my want compels Me to accept of) I thank you, as what I not deserve, but What your Nobleness (in pitty of my present state) is pleas'd Bestow on me. And that you shall see your mony well Imployed, I'l to the army, where my actions shal speak me Willing to redeem my mis-spent youth, or Finde a Noble death. Snap. May victory and reward, crown all your Undertakings. So farwell.— Exit Snap. Capt. Succeess attend your wishes to your desires, while I Practise to live, that I shall dare to de,— Exit. Enter Bellicosus, Delirus. Bellicos. Delirus, however I have past by the enquirie of Your discontent, yet know I have a fathers eye, that sees your Wound that bleeds, and know it must be searcht well, ere it can Be cur'd; therefore I charge you on my blessing (as You expect that I should prove your faithful Chirurgion) prove You a dutiful patient, in plainly laying open to me The cause of this your present grief. Delir. Sir your Commands are too powerful for me to Disobey. And what of Discontent you have lately Seen in me, sprung from Artesia's scorn On my impatient love. Bellicos. Me thinks thou should'st consider, whose son thou art
A Souldier too, and have thy reason captiv'd By the imperious pride of a vain-glorious woman. For shame Collect thy scattered senses; (and if not out of pity to thy Self) yet in respect of my commands (which here I lay upon Thee) return her scorn again. And then she'l sue to thee. Fond Boy, thou doest not know the subtile traines of women, Whose wavering minds prove labyrinths to the most ingenious Searchers, canst thou yet love, and she yet scorn? Deli. My Royal Father, in all obedience to your Demands I thus must answer; and call the gods to witnesse with me, I hate her actions more then I e'r lov'd her person; Which now with scorn, I both disdain. Belli. That's spoken like thy self. What news with thee?— Enter Fabins. Fabi. My gracious Lord; There is; a traveller (a stranger he seems) Desires to be admitted to your presence; who (as he Doth pretend) hath businesse of much concernment to deliver. Belli. Admit him in. Welcome friend, wouldst— Enter Anto. his coat chang'd, a false beard. Thou ought with us? Anto. Yes, my good Lord, I have something to impart that Much concerns your knowledge. Deli. I do not like this fellowes looks, what should his Businesse be. Sir, your businesse may require privacie, I'l wait within your call. — Deli. offers to go off, Anto. stayes him, Anto. Pray stay sir, my gracious Lord, such is the nature Of my businesse, I shall not onely crave this Gentleman may Hear the delivery of it, but also such of your Royal Councel as are near at hand. Belli. Fabius, call those that wait without— Fabius goes to the hangings calls them. Ent. Corneli. Eugeni. Now when you please begin. Anto. Then (by your gracious favour) it sadly thus fell out. 'Twas, when the harbinger of light, had given notice To the late darkned world, that the bright Sun was darting Forth his radiant beams upon the teeming earth, when neer To the black Cliffe (a place well known to all) and fit So black a purpose; upon the top of which, a man (I thought I spy'd, (but prov'd a monster) near whom, after a Stricter view, I could discern something to move, (but Knew not what it was. Towards it I gently made, willing To see, unseen: when by the help o'th craggy Cliffe I soon Had got within the hearing of a voice (in such a Tone of woe Sadly lamenting) the neighbouring rocks in teares did seem To melt, to hear the moan it made. Pity, and curiositie, To know what it might be, joyn'd to contrive, how I might make my approach so near, to satisfie my doubts Remaining undiscovered, when envious nature conspiring The ruine of what she should preserve, by a small creek O'th Sea divided us. Yet at so small a distance, I could
Discover a maid (for such she seem'd to be) upon her knees. With hands held up for mercy to her murtherer. Who Less relenting then the hardned Rocks, proclaim'd himself an Enemy to pitty. And with a voice befitting such a bloody Minde, demanded if she were prepar'd to dye. (As if he meant, for to preserve in her, what in himself i'th Very act he must destroy.) To which she answered something, So faintly dying not to be understood, when streight I could Perceive the slave prepare (into the Sea) to cast the innocent Fair one, whom he before had drown'd in teares. This sight, I tremblingly beheld, cursing the water that divided Us. Yet hoping to prevent his bloudy execution, a loud I cal'd, as confident in the consideration of his own present Safety, being discovered, I happily might save her life: But all in vain; for what with threats, fair promises, and teares I could prevail, was onely to behold her fall into the sea. At which unheard of peece of crueltie, the Sun not daring to Behold so foul a murther, withdrew his waterish beams (Made pale with fear) behind the burthened clouds, who big With Tears, in thousand spouts did trickle to the earth, There witnesses of sorrow. The Villain, his black deed done, question's the justnesse Of the Gods, in hopes he should escape: which to prevent I nimbly down descended, fetching a compasse to the place my Reason prompt me to believe he must attempt to make his Flight, where (by the Justnesse of those Gods he so mistook) We met. I drew and bid him stand; at which the daring Slave grin'd in my face, and with a confidence, as if his Cause were just, drawes in defiance of my single opposition. To blowes, and thrusts we went, when guided by the hand Of Justice, my sword soon found a passage to his death. When he (afraid to die) when death appear'd so near, Tremblingly for mercie beg'd, in hope he might have liv'd. On which I took advantage, and with the promise of My assistance in his cure, and silence for the fact he had Committed, he to my joy (in his behalf) discovered, not Onely who it was he had murthered, but also who had hired Him to that accursed deed of darknesse; which when at Full delivered (to my amazed wonder) I fell to earth, as if I had received the greater wound. Onely I rose again, which He did never; for just (as if the Gods had lent him breath Enough for his confession,) he left the world. My Lord, I have not yet quite finish'd,— Deli. offers to go out. And shall desire all that are present, may hear my story out. Bellicos. Delirus stay, I do command you stay. Deli: My Lord, I am not wel, o'th suddain. Bellicos: So short a stay as this requires, can no waies
Prejudice your health. Friend go on to let us know, as well The Murtherers, as the murthered; heaven knowes, I tremble But to think, at what I urge to know. Anto: As soon as grief will give me leave (My Lord) I shall. — Anto. pretends to weep. The murthered person, was that virtuous innocent, the Fair Aurelia, Daughter to the Lord Sebastian. Deli. O Delirus, thou art lost for ever, ever lost. — aside. Bellico. Sure friend thou didst but dream, and this some Vision was. It was an act so horrid, the gods in justice Never could have beheld. And there must want temptation In the fiends of hell, to work on man (though frail) To be her murtherer. Anto. My Lord, it was no idle dream; yet heaven can Witness, I could have gladly slept for ever, rather then lived To see this waking truth. Bellico. Then briefly speake her murtherers. Anto. First on my knees I beg your gracious Pardon, for what— Kneels. I must deliver or burst. And here I stand to accuse— Riseth. Your son Delirus, and the Lady Artesia, daughter to the Late Lord Endimion, the innocent Aurelia's murtherers. And Ferdinando, servant to the Lord Sebastian, (whom with this Hand I slew,) by them was hired her executioner. Bellico. My trembling heart will hardly give my tongue The utterance to say it is impossible. Deli. My Lord, I am confident your grave wisdom's such, Ther's nothing (this loose fellow) in madness hath delivered, Deserves your serious consideration, more then what punishment He hath deserved; for give me leave my Lord, had he his wits, (Which no man here can think) in what hath faire Aurelia Injur'd me? or if she had, my faire actions in the world Speak me no murtherer Besides this frantick accusation, Delivered by a single man, whom none knows whence, Or what he is. My Honoured father, this rightly weighed. 'Twere fit the slave should know his punishment, which Must be great as his offence. For villain know— Turns to Anto. Thy lif's to poor a satisfaction for my injury. Anto. Sir, I have heard you, and must take leave to tell You, I am no slave nor villain; nor is there in these veines of Mine one drop of blood (however I appear) but sprung From Noble parents. And here I call the gods to witness With me; I wish, and heartily, you could but cleer your Self of faire Aurelia's murther as thus I cleer The doubts of what I am— Puls off his disguise, puls out a purse. All Antonio! Anto. You knew this purse Delirus, when loaden with
The price of innocent Aurelia's blood, you gave it Ferdinando In part of payment for his black deed. Deli. True Antonio, 'tis all but truth. O cruel Artesia, By thee I fall, to my eternall ruine— Deli. Falls. Bellico. Be mercifull great powers too a weak aged Man, and loade me not too much with your afflictions, Your burthen is to great, yet fain I would support it Bravely. Cornelius, I do command you take speedy order, That object of my shame be carefully conveyed to the Castle. And you Eugenio— Ex. Corneli. Haste to Artesia's lodgings, where seize her with a guard, And house them both together. They may forgive each Other, and repent before their deaths.— Ex. Eugen. O Antonio, I look't for joy at thy return, but thou hast brought Me woe; bitter woe Antonio, but I forgive thee freely,— They fetch Deli. off the Stage And commend thy honest care, thou hast nothing done, But what our Lawes, and thy religion bound thee to. Antonio, I mean to act the Judges part my self, for since Corruption crept into the Bench, the Jury findes it death for to be Poor, the rich may plead not guilty. Poor Lord Sebastian Thou shalt have justice done thee. (Small satisfaction for thy loss) Yet all the world shall see, If thine be great, mine cannot lesser be— Exit Bellicosus, Antonio. Enter Sebastian, Ferdinando. Sebast. O Ferdinando, thou hast made me young again, Thou happy messenger of joy; me thinks thou hast pul'd back Least twenty of my years. And will the King be here (Dost say) and in disguise, and my Aurelia too? Ferdinand. My Lord they will; be confident they will. I do expect them every minute. Sebast. But Ferdinando, I want how to contrive to entertain Him, my poor house is quite unstored, and no direction's given For any thing, can look like welcome to him. Ferdinand. My Lord, since you so much desire to make him Welcome, I shall instruct you how to make him so. If you but think his welcome doth consist in feasting (my Lord) You so mistake our present business, that know you ruine all His honourable designs, he hitherto (with care and pains) hath Laboured for to compass. First you must let it be your care, Your joy transports you not; but what of joy You must express, must be upon good grounds you are securely Private; other waies to take no notice of them, more Then what they outwardly appear to be. This, and no other is the welcome that the King expects. Sebast. Thanks Ferdinando; honest Ferdinando, thou Faithfullest of servants, I thank thee for thy advice, which I in all things carefully will follow. I can no longer keep my
Joy within the narrow bounds of my poor breast, It must (at these weak aged eyes of mine) have vent, It must, it must.— Weeps for joy. Ferdinana. My Lord the King is here. Enter King, Aurelia. Sebast. Long live my gratious King, and may your poor— Kneels. Sebastian live to be truly thankfull to the gods For this blest hour of joy. King. Rise Sebastian, no more of this, we know thy Love and Loyaltie. But must enjoyn you (in all your actions To express to us, not what we are, but what We appear to be. Sebast. My much loved Lord, your poor Sebastian can be Aquainted with no other study but what shall teach me to obey. O my poor girl, never more welcome to thy fathers arms. Aurelia kneels. You gods, let not my joy make me forget my dutie. King. Ferdinando with speed find out Antonio, and let him Know of our arrival at the Lord Sebastians, where we shall Hourly expect to hear, as he shall find occasions offer. Ferdinand. I shall with care perform it— Exit. King. Come my lord Sebastian, we are now your guests; Dispose us as you please, you dare without suspition, trust Your fair daughter with us, her vertu's guard enough. Sebast. Your own, (great Sir) may challenge a far Greater trust. So please you, I shall conduct you to The best part, of a homely house. King. Sebastian you are happy you have a house that You may call your own; 'tis more then I dare do. Come my Aurelia, 'tis all my joy, that I can call thee mine. Aureli. Sir, wer't not a sin I am a stranger to, I should begin to fear I should grow proud ot'h honour You are pleas'd to do your creature. King. As I to have such a creature for to honour. Ex. Ambo. Enter Dorothy. sol. Doroth. My Lady hurried (with a guard) to the Castle? 'Tis so, the scorn she threw upon Delirus hath made him desperate, And confess the murther; my jealous heart presag'd No less, when no entreaties could prevail on him, I might But speak my message; which when I but Attempted, he seem'd in scorn, and hate Of her to stop his ears. Lady, your plot's are now discovered to the world; at least, To Ciciley, which is too hot for me to live in. A ship (now weighing anchor) stands bound for Italy. I'l take this profer'd means for my escape. Farewell Artesia, my safety bids not stay, Shee dyes a fool, that dyes, when live she may— Exit. Enter.
Enter Antonio, Cornelius. Cornel. Cruel Ferdinando, how were we all mistaken in That murthering villam, whose name (to all posteritie in Memory of this damn'd act) shall ne'r be thought on but with Horror for faire Aurelia's loss. The gods (in her) have Rob'd us of our Magazene of vertue Anto. In her we have just cause to fear our Princes loss, Their vertues were as inseparable, as I fear their fortune. Cornelius, how took Delirus his conduct to the Castle? Cornel. With much seeming patience, but not a sillable Enter Eugenio, Could be urged from him. How now Eugenio? how have you Disposed of your bloody faire one, the everlasting shame To all her sex? how doth her pride and envy Bear her present fortune? Eugen. Prethe be merciful be merciful in thy opinion of her, for Though the thought of her foul deed proclaims her monstrous, Beshrew me but she made me weep, and so would thee Cornelius, hadst thou but seen her penitence. Cornel. They'r Crocodiles tears Eugenio, for know she can Put on what shape she please, to act her present part, And 'twas thy charity, not her true penitence, That so prevail'd on thy believing sence. Eugen. Cornelius, I boast (my self) to have no knowing Insight in the womens trade, yet dare with confidence affirm, Those passions I saw in her of sorrow for her fact could not Be counterfeit. For know▪ soon as she saw Delirus, in The Castle, her tears in floods gusht forth, as Witnesses, she sorrowed more for him, then for her self; And humbly on her knees before us all, confest her self His murtherer. At first he seem'd with loathed eyes to Look on her, who still her self, confest her self to be The principal in blood. This penitence in her, compassion Wrought in him, who took her up and kist her In witness of forgiveness, she wept the more to see him Pitty her, for which she knew she did deserve the less From him. So like two weeping Niobies they stood and read, (As well as tears would give them leave,) their own Misfortunes in each others face; and both in pity Wept, while they themselves, themselves unpittied, Yet for each other pitifully wept. When I (unus'd I Must confess) to wash my face in tears, made up A third in mourning. Which she perceiving, humbly Thank't me for my compassion, and hop't it was Bestowed on him, as what she not deserved. This, And such like expressions of repentance, with streames Of hearty sorrow flowing, wrought so in him, he ask'd Her if she lov'd him dying, she so much injured
Living. Which she (as well as words and tears could witness For her) answered, yes, so well, that were she but as Sure of his, she should rejoyce a faithfull penitent in death. This, in true signs of love, and sorrow uttered, he Sends away (straight) for a holy man o'th Church, Who after some private confession on both sides made, Joyned both their hands in holy marriage; which Done, as griefe would give them leave, they both Rejoyc't, and kist; then wept again, so that my Pitty (in my tears) rather increast, then lessned by my Stay. When urging necessity for my departure, I sadly Took my leave, and left them prodigally bestowing Their tears upon each others face. Anto. I blame thee not Eugenio, for being a weeping witness of their woes, when I can scarce forbear At the relation; heaven knows, I wish them long Life on earth to enjoy each others love. Corneli. Eugenio, Thou hast delivered miracles, But know, I can believe what comes from thee, Which had appear'd much doubtfull from anothers Mouth; she hath purchac't now my pitty and my Prayers, which I'l acknowledg justly due, and pay— Enter Fabi. weeping Anto. How now Fabius, weeping for your young master? Fabi. You cannot blame me Sir, when I am Made the messenger of death. Eugeni. How? sure 'tis not yet come to that. Fabi. I would it were not; or else some other had Been made the messenger. Corneli. Prethe speak out, that we may understand you. Fabi. The King inraged, to understand his son Was married to his murtherer, commanded me to Let them know 'bout four a clock this afternoon, They must prepare to dye, and keep their Wedding in the other world. Which they (poor Souls) with joy received, and thank't me for my paines; (As willingly) as if I had deserved it: Anto. 'Twas but short warning, the gods Prepare them for their long journey. Gentlemen, I have some present business calls me aside, but I shall soon return to share with you in sorrow. Ex. Anto. Eugeni. You'l hardly find us unprepared for that. But think'st thou Fabius the King intends this Hasty execution; 'tis surely done to fright them into a Preparation for the other world: Fabi. Sir, Pray heaven you not deceive your self. The King is known too constant in his resolves, To alter what he with seriousness protests, which to our
Griefes we too too soon shall find. Corneli. Eugenio; The tim's but short, and 'tis But labour lost if we not speed. If he will have Them dye let's move for longer time. Eugeni. With all any heart, I shall plead hard for one. Corneli. Then let's away.— Exit. Enter Delirus Artesia. In mourning habits, as in prison. Deli. Come my Artesia, dry those fair eyes, the gods We know are mercifull, and can forgive what We can act. Thou hast with penitentiall tears, in Streames of sorrow (from thy swoln eyes) Washt off that guilt that clouded thy faire soul, And do'st appear as white as sainted innocence. We Are married to another world Artesia, let them Injoy the happiness in this (if there by any in't) That are wedded to it, whom we with pity, not With envy must behold. And 'tis no little joy, amid'st Our sea of troubles, to see thee thus prepar'd for Death; which we'l imbrace as greedily, as Shipwrackt travellers do the long'd for shoare: And O thou injured maid, in what celestiall Part so e'r (thy now made glorious soul) doth hover; Look down with pitty and a forgiving eye, on us Thy sorrowfull murtherers, who ready stand to Sacrifice two lives, to appease thy angry ghost. Give me thy hand Artesia, our time draws on apace, And yet methinks I fain would have thee live; Would my poor life pay the great debt we owe, But the devouring law cryes all or none. Thy blood Artesia, sits with a confidence in thy fair cheeks, As if it meant not suddenly to leave its habitation. And 'tis great pity, now it hath possession, to turn it Out of doores. Artesi. My Lord, I have but ill deserved this Noble pity; and here my dying breath shall witness For me, I would not live on earth after your Death, to be commandress of the world. Yet know My Lord, I gladly could both live, and dye, to serve you. Dye, for to confirm this doubtfull world, with What a feeling sorrow for my sins, I could endure Death, and live with you on earth; to witness to the World how I could love, and honour you. Which Since denyed, I gladly shall imbrace my death, and Only grieve I have rob'd the world of you— Enter Fabius. Fabi. My Lord, your guard waits you, and you to Death are summon'd. Deli. It shall be welcome Fabius. Thou seest no
Pannique fear about us.— Takes her by the chin. See how the lillyes, and the roses in these Faire cheeks undaunted fit. Why do'st thou weep for us. Fabi. I weep (my lord) for you, and for my self; for You, that you must loose your life; and for my self that none But I, must be chose out the messenger of death. Deli. Thou art vainly troubled, at what I thank thee for. Come my Artesia, this kiss, now lead us to our deaths. Kisses her. Exit. Enter Goldcalf sol. Gold. Heer's doings indeed, my Mistriss going to pot I'faith. What a deal of mony't has cost me to be a Colonel To no purpose. A plague of that stripling stranger, he made no Stranger of my mony I am sure; the Jack napes firkt Me too, out of my Deeds of almost a thousand pounds a year. Pox of those German's bones, my Cozen Captain slue in Duell; They were sufficiently reveng'd on me for the murther, but 'Tis no matter, I have saved my life yet, by not being Too hasty. If I had married Artesia, I had been peppered i'faith, (However I scape yet) for ther's Delirus, a brave spark Must dye, but for offering to have her. — Enter Snap gallaut. Hey day Snap, what turn'd Gentleman? Snap. Sirra, no more such buggs words; which if you dare But utter, I'l nail your ears to the wall; a punishment Your honourable father (long before his death) wisely Prevented, by leaving them behind him on the Pillory, For Cozening such honest Gentlemen as my self. For know you wretch, you that dare talk saucily, the Gentleman that won your Deeds of you at play, when be perus'd Them, and knew them to be the very same your father Cozen'd my uncle of; He, in pitty of my present wants Bestowed them upon me, and they are mine. And should I chance to hear you should but say they e'r were Yours. People should soon forget you were alive. But as you may behave your self, I may forget all your Past folly, and keep you company. Gold. Thank you good Snap. Snap. You draw no breath if I but hear that word again. Gold. Pray sir, forgive me for this once and I'l remember; How may I call you, are you a Colonel too? Snap. No sir, by chance, I am no Colonel; the name I Answer too, is Sunck-low. Gold. Sunck-low; Methinks you are risen very high.— A side Well honest Mr. Sunk-low, pray let me have your company for Old acquaintance sake; you know you can loose nothing by it. But by no means, be not known, how I was belov'd, for Mr. Sunk low, it were as much as my lif's worth, were it but Known Artesia would have married me, for ther's one
Must dye, but for offering to have her. Snap. Well Sir, I shall be careful, so you observe as I Instruct. Farewell— Exit Snap. Gold. I am finely gull'd i'faith, but I must wiser be, Or else resolve, to wear Snaps liverie.— Exit. Enter upon a black Stage. Bellicosus, Sebastian, weeping. Antoni. Corneli. Eugeni. Fabi. Delirus, Artesia, in mourning. Executioner. After them, the King and Ferdinando. Disguised. Belli. My Lord Sebastian, the gods (you see) have here Miraculously discovered to the world, your daughters Murtherers. (And yet, but that we know them to be so, They do not look like such) my Lord you shall have Speaking to Sebastian Justice done. Delirus, wer't thou a Stranger to my blood as It ill becomes a Judg. And all you gods can witness, amidst My mass of grief, I have rejoyc'd to hear your sorrows for Your faults exprest, and willingness to dye. I must confess Your have been cruel, bitterly cruel to your selves and us; for by your Means (Heaven knows I not accuse your wills to do't) we have Lost a general loss, unspeakable, a King, a vertuous King, never to be Enough lamented. But I shall cease to add unto a grief, This world affords no cure for; and will forbear to stop You longer in your journey to a better. But ere you go, take with you my forgivenesse, and with it, Both my blessings. And may that comfortable joy good men Receive in death, fill both your breasts. Deli. My gracious father (unhappie in so unfortunate a son) We come with no set speeches here, for to prolong Our wretched lives. Let not those aged eyes distil a tear For us, we are prepar'd for death. Can you (my lord Sebastian) And all the rest, shew mercy to a dying pair, in your Forgiveness; we gladlie would depart this life in peace, With all the world, if you vouchsafe, it may be so. All. Our prayers, and tears speak for us, we both Forgive and pitty. Deli. The gods above (with store of blessings Arte. Reward your charity. We are now at peace with Heaven, and earth, and fain would be at our expected rest. Bellico. Then Sirra do your office.— The executioner prepares to strike.
King Hold, hold I say. Bellico. Who's? that dares contradict what we command? King If you have not forgot me Bellicosus, 'tis one That had power to dare; nor do I know by what Strange means I have lost it; know you this face— King discovers himself. Anto. The King? Long may the gods preserve your Life, and make us thankfull acknowledgers of his Blessings in your Highness safety. Bellico. Pardon me gracious Prince, my sudden joy Encountring so much grief, made a confusion in my troubled Senses, and did retard my duty. Which thus upon my knees— He kneels. I beg forgiveness for; and what so e'r (for'cd for the Common safety of your distracted kingdome) I have taken On me, here on my knees, in duty to your Highness I surrender with tears of joy. Long live our gracious King Amasius, King of Sicily. All Long live Amasius King of Sicily.— all kneele King My Lords, and Gentlemen, I thank you all For the Loyall remembrance of your poor Prince, Whose tender care shall be to study all your Safeties, and preserve them. Rise Bellicosus, thou Ever to be admired pattern of love and Loyalty. Just man, I ask thee pardon for every evill thought, I ever Harboured 'gainst thy virtue. Justice and mercy still Walk hand in hand, I know thou canst forgive it. Belli. O my much honoured Lord, your virtue ever Kept too strong a guard on vice, to let you act what Could deserve forgiveness, from any but the gods. My Lord, I shall become an earnest suitor, that Youl vouchsafe to let a piece of justice pass on these Prepar'd Offenders. King Offenders? Delirus, and the faire Artesia, (If I mistake not)— King looks at Deli. Artesi. My Lord, what masque is this, for sure they cannot act Offenders parts in earnest; pray make me understand you. Belli. Forgive me then my Lord, that must be the sad Reporter of my shame, and their unheard of cruelty. In them behold the fair, and virtuous innocent Aurelia's, murtherers. King You have unjustly done, but to suspect them Guiltie, your witnesses are false, Delirus, and Artesia, Murtherers? it cannot be, it is impossible; poor soul she ever Lov'd them well, so they did her; it is some villainous Train, (by forgery) laid to betray their innocent lives. And here I set them free— King takes them by the hand. Belli: My gracious lord they have confest the fact. King 'Twas then because they were asham'd to live
After so foul a charge maliciously laid on them: Delirus, Artesia, speak, was it not so? Deli. My Lord, and King, we are Aurelia's murtherers, For which foul deed, we have with tears and prayers Made peace with heaven and earth, if you'l be Mercifull and but forgive us too. King With as much willingness, as I'l receive a blessing; Rise both, rise I say, so. Bellicosus, I hope (in my— They rise. Late pilgrimage, I have made my peace with heaven, For all my youthfull sins, and am (at length) return'd With joy. As for Aurelia (know Bellicosus) I Loved her more then life; but since unfortunately She is dead, and these her murtherers (as they confess) Have truly sorrowed for their offence; I here Pronounce their pardons, which stands irrevocable, If I command in chief. Belli. Why then my Lord, you are to your self, and All the world unjust. In your commanding hands you Hold a sword, as well as scales; can it be mercy call'd To act injustice. Princes, as the Embassadors From heaven are bound to right the wrong'd, and not To wrong who should be righted. Behold this Aged man whose bitter tears of sorrow cry out— Turns to Sebast. (Aloud) for Justice. And if my gratious Lord) you Have made a vow (at the return from your devotions) to act A piece of mercy; now shew it on your self, in Doing Justice on these prepar'd offenders. King O Bellicosus, thou art my safe Protector and my Guide to vertue, behold this warrant for the justness— The King brings in Aurelia, in rich attire; Bellira following. Of my actions—nay be not wonder-struck, She is alive— And warm.— Kisses her Bellicos. I am o'rcome with the apprehension of a joy, I fear my self unable for to bear. Wellcome to Life thou vertuous maid. Cornelius, Eugenio, all see, Aurelia Is alive, and our lost Prince return'd; safely return'd; Delirus and Artesia, ask mercy of the King, and Faire Aurelia; they are good, exceeding good, and can forgive. So, so, my joy must have a larger vent, Or I shall burst, — Turns about and weeps. Deli. The gods preserve your Highness,— Deli. Art. And the much wrong'd Arte▪ kneels Aurelia.— Ferdinando discovers himselfe to Bellira. Artesi. O my most Gratious Prince, and thou Much injur'd maid, if ever tears, from a true sorrowing Heart compassion moved; pronounce forgiveness To a pair, whose tears in prayers, to the just Gods, we'll
Daily pay for your Eternal happiness. King Rise, and here receive (from us) Forgiveness and our favour. Aureli. May all my actions prosper as I freely do forgive You both. Long may you live and love. Deli. The gods crown all your desires, with joy Arte. And length of daies. King. My Lord Sebastian, I now must call you father, For by to morrow night, I doubt not your consent, To bed the faire Aurelia, Sebast. My Lord, we are your poor creatures, can onely pay Our daily thanks, for what undeserved honours you Are pleas'd to throw upon us. Aurel. So please your Majestie, I see a pair Of lovers met (I have long parted) desirous To kiss your hand.— Ferdinando kneels, and Bellira; the King gives him his. hand to kiss King Rise Ferdinando, and may'st thou joy in thy Faire choyce, thy faithful services, shall be My Care to see rewarded. Come Bellicosus we shall some mysteries unriddle to you, And let you understand, Antonio's mistake in his relation Our following dayes, do fairly promise joy. He ignorantly fears, The sailing of his ship, that Bellicosus steers.
The Epilogue, intended for the STAGE. ALL from our Author that I have to say, Is that he hopes (as we) you'l like his play. Confirm then what (as yet) but stands in doubt, As you came welcome in, you'l go pleas'd out. Epilogue, to the Reader. NOw Critick woudbees, (faith) my play's not good You'l say, because when read 'tis understood. Would I have pleas'd you, I should have written so, Not to understand't my self (nor you) you know When you have read it. (pox on't) what's easily said, Though ne'r so quick, ought to be buried. Which if it be, 'twill rise again by fits, To fright you (if you have any) from your wits. Which to preserve, be modest, or write better, You'h more then paid me then, I'l rest your debtor. As unto all wipes out my faulty score, Till by my next, I run indebted more. FINIS.
