M725 11875273 50192
Roman Catholicks UNCERTAIN Whether there be any True PRIESTS OR SACRAMENTS IN THE Church of Rome: Evinced by an Argument urg'd and main∣tain'd (upon their own Principles) against Mr EDWARD GOODALL of Prescot in Lancashire. By THOMAS MARSDEN, Vicar of Walton in the same County. The Treatise divided into Two Parts. The First being Explicative of Terms. The Second Argumentative. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCLXXXVIII.
THE EPISTLE TO THE PROTESTANT READER. Courteous Reader, IF thou art skilled in good Authors, I freely make thee Judge of these Papers, and covet thy Admonition, if thou seest any thing Material amiss in them, defiring nothing more than that Truth may take place. I have no∣thing more to say to thee, if thou art what I suppose thee to be. But if thou art less seen in Books, I crave leave to give thee some Advice. Read over this small Treatise with a pre∣sent Mind, and such Light may chance to beam forth from it upon thy Ʋnderstanding, as may shew thee the crazy Estate of the Roman Church, notwithstanding the proclamations many make of its welfare. If thou findest that not one Person of that Communion, measuring his State by their own Doctrine, can be certain whether he enjoys the Ordinary Means appointed by God for Man's Salvation, (which I pretend to prove) I would oblige thee to these few Things, 1. Heartily to pity them, and pray that it may be better with them. Pray, I say, that they may see and reject their Errors, and retain neither more nor less for Faith, than That once delivered to the Saints. 2. To praise God thou art in Communion with the Esta∣blish'd Church of England, whose Faith rests Ʋnmoveable upon the Holy Scripture and Ancient Creeds, and whose Go∣vernment
(for the Substance of it) is truly Primitive and Apostolical. 3. As thou hast sound, so to hold fast That which is Best. Let neither a fond Affection to Novelty, nor a groundless Ad∣miration of Mis-called-Antiquity turn thee aside from the tru∣ly Old Paths. In Order to This, strive to work thy Soul to an high Esteem of Truth and Peace, the two Grand Legacies our dear Lord hath lest his Church: For These cannot be in safe Keeping, unless the Heart assist the Head, in Order to their safeguard. Cold Speculation secures not from the pre∣valency of Temptations. Men may part with Truth, not be∣cause they like it not at all, but because they hope by Exchan∣ging it for Error, to get something to boot, they like better. All times and places have Experience of This. Now if thou expectest to be assisted with some previous In∣structions, for thy more Ʋseful Reading of what follows; Know, I need but give thee Little here, having all-along in my passage enlarged (some will say, to a fault) on several Heads, that I might acquaint thee with the whole Nature of the Subject, treated of. The Fourth Part of what I have written, might, I suppose, have sufficed to have let my Adver∣sary know my Mind, so far as he hath obliged me to impart it. The Rest is employed in Ʋnfolding Things for thy sake. And more I would have done for thee in this kind, had not the Multiplicity of my Affairs, which for many Years have divi∣ded my Endeavours into several Chanels, allowed me onely much interrupted parcels of time for this Occasion. Being jealous of being mis-understood, I shall explain a few things here, which otherwise might possibly chance to be a Stumbling-block in thy Way. 1. I frequently call men Priests and Bishops, whil'st I am questioning whether they be truly Such. And I say, They Baptize and Ordain, whil'st I question the validity of those Acts. Which may seem to thee a sort of Contradiction. But know, all Authors speak in the like manner, who speak of the like Matters, I deal with. The meaning is but this,
We call them Priests and Bishops, because the Matter and Form of Ordination hath been Outwardly applied to them, and they are therefore reputed such. In like sort, I. say, They Baptize, Consecrate, &c. When the Outward Sacra∣mental Action is performed, and They are therefore reputed to do so. But since the Roman Church declares, That an inward invisible Act of the Minister's Will, called his Intention, is necessary to the perfecting Ordination and Baptism, &c. I therefore question How her reputed Priests or Bishops can be known to be true Priests, or Bishops: Or their reputed Baptism, true Baptisne, according to their Doctrine. To save a Circuit of Words, Men generally speak, as is afore∣said; and the Meaning of the Words is easily known by the other Words they are connected with, in the Discourse. 2. Note, when at any time I call the Church of Rome The Church, it is where the Contexture of the Matter obligeth me to accommodate my Language to them, and not otherwise: for I am fully satisfied the Roman is out a Church, not the Church; viz. but a particular, not the universal Church. 3. If at any time I say to this Effect, — Ordination and your other Sacraments, I do but occasionally suit my Words to theirs; as not at all approving their Number of Sacra∣ments. God hath blest me with better eye sight, I praise his Name for it, than to agree with the Roman Church in any One point, wherein She disagrees with the Church of Eng∣land. I add, Thou art not in a Discourse of this Nature to expect a Stile dress'd with brisk Metaphors, or pretty little Turns of Wit, nor yet with much variety of Words. To speak openly and with sure dependence, is the Province of a Disputant, and all that a Wise man looks for from him. This is all I had a mind to tell thee, and so I bid thee heartily Farewell.
The General CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART. SECTION I. MAtter of Fact related. 2 SECTION II. Mr. G. Ʋnseasonably calls for Explication of Terms. His request is granted. The Order of proceeding in it set forth. 7 SECTION III. What Councils have dealt with the Intention. The Roman Church requires it as necessary to a Sacrament. 10 SECTION IV. The Intention of doing the Exterior Action is not re∣quired, but presupposed. 16 SECTION V. The Intention defined. That of the End required. 22 SECTION VI. The End particularly considered is not required; but gene∣rally. The Virtual Intention is required, and held sufficient. 32 SECTION VII. R. Catholicks not certain of their Priesthood taken in gene∣ral by any simple or absolute Certainty. Nor certain of it taken in special by any simple, or so much as a Moral Certainty. 35 SECTION VIII. The several Explications before given, summ'd up. And the Question resolved into its parts. 41
The General CONTENTS of the SECOND PART. SECTION I. THe General Order of proceeding. The first part of Mr. G's Letter set down and examined. 43 SECTION II. Mr. Goodall sets forth the Argument, and his Answer to it, as follows. 50 SECTION III. A more general view of the mistakes of Mr. G's. Answer. 54 SECTION IV. The Intention of the Bishop in Ordination cannot be made appear either by Reason or Authority. 60 SECTION V. The Intention is not knowable by Authority, whether Di∣vine or Humane. 71 SECTION VI. Roman Catholicks have but a bare Opinion to secure them of the point. 78 SECTION VII. The Ordaining Bishops not certain whether there be true Priests in the Roman Church. 88 SECTION VIII. Consequences drawn from the Ʋncertainty of the Roman Priesthood: and the feeble condition of that Church, issuing from thence, shewn. 97 SECTION IX. The Banks Mr. G. hath cast up to secure the Roman Priesthood, taken in general, cast down. 109 SECTION X. Mr. G's Argument, urged by way of Retort, examined and enervated. 127
IMPRIMATUR Liber cui Titulus, Roman Catholicks uncer∣tain whether there be any true Priests, &c. Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacr. Domest. April 20. 1688.
THE UNCERTAINTY Of any True Priests or Sacraments In the ROMAN CHURCH: Proved against Mr. EDWARD GOODALL. The First Part, Being chiefly Explicative of Terms. SIR, WERE You and I called to represent all the accidental Discourse that passed between us, when I was last at Your House, I fear we should vary in our Reports: for when you undertook within an hour after to tell part of it at the Inn, you found your self to be contradicted by those that heard us. And indeed, we penetrated so little into the Merits of any Point we spoke of, (but how that hapned our Auditors can best say) that it would not be worth the while either for us to tell, or others to hear, the unready fruitless story of it. However, to make way to our present business, I think fit to entertain the Readers (for as your Papers have already, so mine may meet with more eyes than
yours and mine) with a little of what passed before the close of our Altercations. Which being done, I shall proceed to the work which you have since scored out for me. And for better Order-sake, and that you may with more ease let me know the Faults you find with me, I shall divide my Paper into several Sections and and Paragraphs. SECT. I. Matter of Fact related. §. 1. WHEN you alledged that our Orders in the Church of England were invalid, in the judgment of Roman Catholicks, (a thing I could not wonder at, having cause to believe You had renoun∣ced them) I straight justified them by those of the Church of Rome, unto which our first Reformed Bi∣shops were admitted. You said, They had indeed been good, had our Bishops kept to the old Ordinal; but that They forsook it, and only gave power to dispense the Word and Sacraments, which any Deacon might do: and that afterwards, perceiving the Nullity that hap∣ned by it, They again alter'd the Form, and gave power to do the Office of a Priest. Thus you. §. 2. TO this I returned, That Words and Phrases might be changed, and yet their matter remain the same: and that so it was in this case. You took the word dispense, I told you, in too narrow and crampt a sense, making it denote only distribution, with re∣spect to the Eucharist; whereas Our Church made it there signifie Consecration also. I added, Scripture-Language would secure us in this: for S. Paul him∣self sets forth the entire Office of the Gospel-Ministry by , the Dispensation of the Gospel; and all Gospel-Ministers (those of the highest rank not ex∣cepted)
by , Dispensers of the Mysteries of God. Which you could not gain say. And hence I concluded, that the Alteration spoken of, was Verbal only, and not Material. §. 3. This ended, to occasion you to take a view of some Fetters which the Roman Church had put upon her own claims, I denied that She could be certain, according to her own principles, that she hath any true Priesthood. I thought, Sir, some of your Councils had put the stamp of Faith upon a Doctrin which would in its just consequences so far blot the Evidences of your Priesthood, (and of all other your things that depend upon it) as to make them not certainly Legible, and therefore I used those words—according to your own principles. And finding you not forward to prevent me by proving the Affirmative, I gained your leave to make good the Negative, which I attempted to do by the following Argument. §. 4. All Churches that make Priestly Ordination de∣pend upon a Condition, that no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd, must be uncertain, whether they have any true Priesthood. But the Roman Church makes Priestly Ordination de∣pend upon a Condition, that no man living knows whe∣ther it be fulfill'd: Ergo, The Roman Church must be uncertain whether she hath any true Priesthood. §. 5. When I complained of your repeating my Syl∣logism imperfectly, you alledged it was a long one, and therefore desired me to write it down for the help of your memory. To gratifie you, I writ the whole as it stands, saving, that I only hinted the praedicate of the Minor, as sufficient for your help. After perusal of it you denied the Minor, which I proved thus,
§. 6. The Intention of the Bishop is a Condition, which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no. But the Church of Rome requires the Intention of the Bishop to Ordination: Ergo, The Church of Rome requires a Condition to Ordina∣tion, which no man living knows whether it be fulfilled or no. §. 7. Now, in compliance with the words of the former Syllogism (not adverted to, through hast, when I form'd the Second) I shall present the Matter of this latter thus, The Intention of the Bishop is a Condition, that no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd. But the Roman Church makes Ordination depend upon the Intention of the Bishop: Ergo, The Roman Church makes Ordination depend upon a Condition that no man living knows whether it be ful∣fill'd. I have not, Sir, made this digression for your sake, who did not before by word, nor since by writing, find the least fault with my barely verbal Alteration: I did it only out of a respect to Decorum. But I must go on with it a little for the sake of the less discerning Reader. The minor Propositions, wherein the variation lies, I will place together, for the more easie comparison of them. The Church of Rome requires the Intention of the Bi∣shop to Ordination. The Roman Church makes Ordination depend upon the Intention of the Bishop. Upon the first view of them thus placed, it appears that they are equivalent Propositions, giving the very same sense; and so are both alike true, or both alike false. For by the word requires, I mean, requires as necessary. This I have added, lest any should be apt to
conclude, They see another person because they see an∣other dress. But to return from this unnecessary Digression. You denyed the Major of my second Syllogism, al∣ledging that it was not universally true, forasmuch as the Ordaining Bishops knew whether they intended to Ordain or no. §. 8. To this I replied, by Explicating what I meant by these words, the Intention of the Bishop, viz. the In∣tention of such as were truly and indeed Bishops. Upon which I added, That your Bishops know not whether they exert that Intention which your Church requires to Ordination, for want of certainty that those duely Intended who Ordained them, and consequently that themselves are true Bishops. For it is not the Inten∣tion of a man consider'd otherwise than as a true Bi∣shop, that will serve to the purpose of Ordination. Nor can any Bishop be surer that his Intention (toge∣ther with the due application of Matter and Form) is effectual to Ordination, than he is, that his, who un∣dertook to Ordain him, was so. But how he should be certain of that, I am to learn. §. 9. The Sum then is, Nothing short of all this I have exprest, will reach home to the purposes of your Church; and therefore your Councils have fallen short of their main end, if in handling this matter they re∣quire not all this in their Definitions; or at least pre∣suppose not that part of it as necessary, which they do not formally require. And sure I am, That none is more sure that he Intends as a Bishop, than he is sure, That he is a Bishop: Which assurance he may begin to seek when he pleases, but I am confident he will never find it, till he hath found a Casement in his Ordainer's breast, through which he may view his very heart. The Major then (for ought I see) remains true in the most extended signification of the words, no man
living (no, not the Ordaining Bishops themselves) knowing that the Condition of the requisite, effectual Intention of any Bishop is fulfill'd in Ordination. Although, Sir, I spoke not all these words to you, yet you know I exprest the full matter of them. §. 10. But because you was not satisfied with this No∣tion, (but why you should not, let others judge) I limited the Signification of those words [no man living] by contradistinguishing all men to the Ordain∣ing Bishops. And then the sense stood thus, No man living, except the Ordaining Bishops, know whether the required Intention be present in Roman Catho∣lick Ordinations. Which explication of the words you accepted. I was well content, I confess, to take up with this for that time, as thinking with my self, That the Ro∣manists might well forbear their mighty claims, if it could be made appear (and this I never doubted) That no Priest, nor Deacon, nor Sub-deacon, nor any of the lesser Orders, nor any one Lay-person amongst them can be certain, That there is any true Priesthood in that Church, nor any true Sacraments given or received in it. §. 11. I would with your patience, add one thing more. Immediately after. I had received my Paper from you, you demanded to have it in keeping: and when I told you there was no reason you should have my Script in exchange for your vanisht breath, you acted a sort of triumph, telling me I durst not give it, as be∣ing conscious to my self of its infirmities. You too often dared me to give it you, with repeated promises you would answer it. At last, wearied with importuni∣ties, I gave it, and you engaged to answer it, under your hand. I have not reported this out of any design to blame your zeal, but to let others know you may thank your
self for it, if I chance to toil you a little more than you have a mind of. §. 12. Sir, I hope your memory when a little rubb'd up, will serve to assure you, That what I have now re∣lated as matter of Fact, is substantially true. How∣ever I am ready to give you a Certificate of any part of it, which you shall please to question, Signed by the hands of the then present Gentlemen. SECT. II. Mr. G. unseasonably calls for Explication of Terms. His request is granted. The Order of proceeding in it set forth. §. 1. NOW I come to acknowledge the receit of your Letter, dated London September 29. in Answer to my Paper delivered to you about the Sixth of August. It is, I hope, the issue of mature advice and deliberation, and therefore may save me the trouble of expecting from you any thing of greater moment on this subject. 'Tis some satisfaction to know the utter∣most strength of an enemy. You pronounce it a full Answer to my Argument; and full admits not of in∣crease. You also insinuate it probable that I may ac∣quiesce in it, which indeed I ought to do if it be a full Answer; Truth being the thing you and I are to run in quest of, and to rest in, being found. But if I chance not to see your Answer such, (as in truth, I cannot, for want of eye-sight, or for want of Object) and will therefore pursue the point further, you invite me to state the Case distinctly and clearly. Your words are these, §. 2. If you have any thing more to Offer against us, be pleased to state the point distinctly and clearly, by telling us what sort of Intention you think is required in these
Councils, [viz. of Florence and Trent] as a Principle of our Church, when you say, That the Intention of the Bishop is a Condition which no man living, viz. contra∣distinguished from the Ordaining Minister, knows whe∣ther it be fulfilled, or no. Whether you think an Ha∣bitual, Actual or Virtual Intention be there declared; and whether such as is conversant about the Act which is exercised, or about the End; and whether this End be Proximate or Ʋltimate. As also what certainty you speak of in your Propositions, whether it be Moral, Metaphysi∣cal or Mathematical. That so I may return you a distinct answer. §. 3. Sir, Your request that I would explicate the Terms in my Propositions, is reasonable; but it had been more reasonable you should have made it sooner, if you really doubted of my meaning in them. First, to write a deliberate Answer from a seven weeks con∣sideration of the Terms I used, and after that to ask the meaning of them, is wonderful inartificial: such a , as a person of your standing in an Uni∣versity is seldom guilty of. While you look upon my Words as Equivocal, you can fasten no determinate sense on them, and then ex∣cept you had run through all the various significations of them, and shew'd that none of them would be ser∣viceable to me against your Church, you have answer'd but at a venture, and fought hoodwinkt. Had you proceeded after this manner: Sir, If you mean, That the Intention is required to be conversant only about the Sacramental Act, none in his wits can miss it; and so no uncertainty ariseth thence: if about the end, you mistake our doctrine; or, we are sure the Ministers of the Sacraments, always carry their Inten∣tion so far. If you mean an actual Intention is required, you misunderstand our Church; if an habitual or vir∣tual, this is indeed required, but then the Ministers can never fail of Intending so, &c.
Had you done this, you had not needed now to crave of me the Explication of the Terms, as having your self met with them in all their shapes, and rendred them unuseful to my interest. But not having done this (as will appear beneath) you have run the risk of making an impertinent answer, whatsoever it may prove to be, at last. Not to speak ad idem, is to speak to no purpose, and you know not you have spoke ad idem, till you know what I mean. §. 4. Had you askt me at Prescot what I meant by them, I must have told you, or become the object of your scorn: for he that cannot explain the Words he hath spoken by way of Argument against another, will be thought to want common Wit, or Language; and he that will not explain them to a fair inquirer will be su∣spected to have spoken no good sense. But you were not then doubtful of the Terms, as appeared by your bare denying a Proposition, without more ado. § 5. Or, had you, by the Post, called me shortly after, to this performance, I must for the same reasons have been your Obedient Servant. But not to ask this till your Answer was given, is a very great rarity. §. 6. However, though it come unseasonably for your self, your request is just, and I will set my self to fulfil it. And I shall the more largely explicate the Terms you mention, (with some other things, if I find, as I go on, that occasion requires it) for the am∣pler satisfaction of the Reader; for saving my self all future trouble in this kind; and for bringing the matter in Controversie to a more evident period. In Order to this work, I shall require that two things be granted me by the Romanists. §. 7. 1. That when your Councils speak of the In∣tention of the Ministers of the Sacraments, they mean something by their Words; and also express their Sense
in such sort that it may be understood. To deny me this would be to blast the reputation of your Oracles. § 8. 2. That the Romanists, (at least) whose Faith is guided by, or rested upon such Councils, are, and have been able to declare the true Sense of their Decrees and Definitions. This follows from the other: for if the Councils writ intelligibly (which I take for granted) the Romanists have concern enough to inquire into, and skill enough to find out their Sense; and therefore shall be concluded to have done so. This being premised, I shall explicate the Terms (so far as is needful) from Roman-Catholick Authors. What they mean by them, I must mean by them; otherwise our Controversie can be nothing else but a strife about words. §. 9. To do this more Orderly, I shall shew, (1.) What your Councils say of the Intention: (2.) In what manner of quality, or under what Notion they require it, with relation to the Sacraments: whereof they make Orders one. (3.) About what it is conver∣sant there. (4.) What sort of Intention is required. (5.) What certainty I speak of, when I deny that the Roman Church is certain of her having any true Priest∣hood. This done, I shall attempt to judge of the strength or weakness of your Answer, according to the state of the Question. SECT. III. What Councils have dealt with the Intention. The Roman Church requires it as necessary to a Sacrament. §. 1. FIrst, Two of your Councils only have dealt in this Matter. What they were, and what they have said of it, I come now to shew.
Pope Eugenius's Decree propounded by way of In∣struction to the Armenians, was read and approved in the Florentine Council, and thereby made a Synodical Decree, in the year 1439. Wherein, after the Number and Names of the Sacraments are recited and fixed, and the Ends or Uses they serve to, specified: We read this, Haec omnia tribus perficiuntur, viz. rebus tanquam Ma∣teria, verbis tanquam Forma, Persona Ministri conferentis Sacramentum cum intentione faciendi quod facit Ecclesia. Quorum si aliquod desit, non perficitur Sacramentum. i. e. All these [Sacraments] are perfected by three things, Viz. Things as the Matter; Words as the Form; and the Person of the Minister conferring the Sacrament, with an Intention of doing what the Church doth: if any of which be wanting the Sacrament is not perfected. §. 2. The Council of Trent in the year 1547. the 7th. Session, 11th. Canon (De Sacram. in genere) saith thus, Si quis dixerit, in Ministris dum Sacramenta conficiunt & con∣ferunt, non requiri intentionem saltem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, anathema sit. i. e. If any one shall say, That there is not required in the Ministers, whilst they make and confer the Sacraments, an Intention at least of doing what the Church doth, let him be accursed. Thus have we seen what these two Councils have said of the Point. §. 3. Secondly, I am to shew in what Manner, or un∣der what Notion they require the Intention. And here I doubt not to affirm, That they require it as Necessary to the very Being of the Sacraments; insomuch that though all the Externals, according to Christ's Institu∣tion be exactly performed, yet there is a Nullity in them, if the Intention be a wanting. The Council of Flo∣rence speaks clearly enough to this purpose, making the Word, Perfected, equally respect Matter, Form and In∣tention: And consequently a Sacrament may as well
be perfected without Matter, or Form, as without the Intention: That is, Not at all. This the dullest eye may find by a review of the Citation. §. 4. I confess, the Trent-Council only says, The Inten∣tion is required, not adding How far, or in What man∣ner, it is so: But that it means, required as necessary to the Being of the Sacraments, I prove by these Argu∣ments: §. 5. (1.) It will be granted me, that the two Coun∣cils determining or declaring the very same Article, must by their Words mean the very same thing. And Nature teaches me to make the more plain Unfolded Words of the former a Commentary upon the more general infolded Words of this. And then there can be no Orders or other Sacraments, where there is not the requir'd Intention. §. 6. (2.) I prove it from the Stile of the Trent-Coun∣cil, which makes the Word, [requiri] required, where-ever it is mentioned in her Canons, to signifie required as of necessity to the thing it is applied to. For instance, in the 14th. Session, 9th. Canon. De Poen. Sacram. we read thus,— If any one shall say, That the Confession of the Penitent [non requiri] is not required in Order to the Priest's Absolving him, let him be accursed. Again, in the 4th. Canon, thus, If any one shall de∣ny that Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction [requiri] are required in the Penitent, as the matter of the Sacra∣ment of Penance, &c. let him be accursed. And so the Word is used elsewhere. And then the Sense runs thus, As there can be no Absolution without Confession, so there can be no Sacrament without the Intention. §. 7. (3.) I prove this from the Rubrics of the Mass-Book of Pope Pius the V. corrected and set forth by the Decree of this very Council, De Defectibus circa Missam occurrentibus, Num. 1. Where we read, Quicquid ho∣rum deficit, scil. Materia debita, Forma cum Intentione,
& Ordo Sacerdotalis in Conficiente, non conficitur Sacra∣mentum. i. e. Where any of these are wanting, viz. Due Matter, Form with the Intention, or Priestly Order in the Consecrator, the Sacrament is not made up. Note here. Although the Eucharist only be spoken of in this Citation, yet by Parity of Ground, Orders, and the rest are equally concerned, as to the Intention. Thus then it hath appeared, That the Council of Trent, as well as that of Florence, makes the Ministers Intention necessary to the Being of all the Sacraments. §. 8. However, lest it should be suspected, that I have taken a false Survey of the Matter, I shall go on to ju∣stifie it from Roman Authors, so far as can fairly be re∣quired to our present purpose. §. 9. Of these some assert the Thing expresly, and others by most certain and unavoidable implication. §. 10. But before I produce them, I shall desire the Reader to remember, in Order to the better understan∣ding of what follows, That if some of the Authors I shall cite, declare the Intention of the Minister to be Necessary, or Essential, or Substantial, to this or that particular Sacrament (as Baptism, or the Eucharist, &c.) it is as much as if it had been affirmed concerning all the rest of them; it being by virtue of its generical ingre∣diency, that it belongs to any or all the Species. If it be necessary to Baptism as a Sacrament, it must be equal∣ly so to all the other Sacraments. §. 11. Of those that assert the Point directly, Thomas Aquinas shall speak first.Sacramenta requirunt In∣tentionem Mi∣nistri par. 3. qu. 64. Art. 8. The Sacraments (saith he) require the Intention of the Minister. And Cajetan upon him thus,Intentio Mi∣nistri exigitur ad perfectionem Sacramenti. The Mini∣sters Intention is required to the Perfection of the Sa∣crament.
According to this Author it appears, That the Inten∣tion is not called for onely as a thing congruous in the Minister, or such as that he cannot but sin, if he confer the Sacraments without it: But it is required to the perfecting or making up the Sacrament it self. The very Nature of the Sacraments requires it, as well as the Church does. §. 12. The Summa Sylvestrina affirms,Par. 2. Verb. Sacram. That there are three things [de Substantia—] of the Substance of a Sacrament, viz. Due Matter, Due Form, and the In∣tention of the Minister coupling together the Matter and Form. §. 13. Gabriel Biel is of the same judgment, Who saith,Li. 4. Dist. 13. q. 1. That to constitute a fit Minister of the Eucharist [de necessitate requiritur—] there is necessarily required the Power of Order, the Faculty of Speech, and Integrity of Intention. §. 14. Johannes. de Burgo speaks to the same pur∣pose,Pupil. Oc. ca 2. de Baptis. To the Integrity of Baptism (saith he) three things are required, viz. Matter, Form of Words [& Intentio Baptizantis] and the Intention of the Minister. §. 15. Dom. à Soto speaks on the forecited place of Aquinas thus,Conclusio praesens non so∣lum intelligitur quantum ad de∣centem Sacra∣menti ornatum. imo Intentio de ejus existit essentia, quemadmodum in Concilio Florentino declaratum est. in 4. Senten. Dist. 1. q. 5. Art. 6. The present Conclusion [of the Inten∣tion] is not onely understood of the Decent Ornament of the Sacrament, but the Intention is of its Essence, as was declared in the Council of Florence. §. 16. Bellarmine may serve me the labour of bringing in more Testimonies for this Point, Who declares it to be the judgment of Catholicks in general, adding withal that the Councils of Florence and Trent teach it.Sententia Ca∣tholicorum est, requiri Intentionem, &c. De Sacram in genere. li. 1. cap. 27. §. 17. When I spoke of producing some Authors that attest this Thing (not so expresly, but) by most certain
implication, I meant it of such as bring the Intention into the definition of a Sacrament. Now a definition being nothing else but an Explication of the Nature or Essence of a thing, their putting the Intention there infers that they held it necessary to the Being of the Sa∣crament. §. 18. Jo. de Burgo tells us, in the forenamed place,Est al lutio corporis exteri∣or in aquâ, cum Intentione de∣bita, facta sub formâ Verbo∣rum praescri∣ptâ. That the common definition the School Divines give of Baptism [est talis] is to this effect; Baptism is the external washing of the Body with water with due Intention, made under a prescribed form of Words. I could in a good measure verifie this Authors words by setting down several definitions of the like sort, out of Summa Sylvest. Gabriel, Alstentaig and others; which were founded before them by Guil. Parisiensis, Aquinas, Alensis, Scotus, Occam, &c. But I have no mind to burden my Paper with needless Ink, on this account. §. 19. I shall trouble the Reader but with one defini∣tion more, which the same Author gives of Penance, est absolutio hominis poeni∣tentis facta cer∣tis verbis cum debita Intentione, prolatis à Sacordote, de Sacram Poen. in. gener. cap. 1. The Sacrament of penance is the Absolution of a Peni∣tent man, made with certain words pronounc'd by the Priest, with due Intention. Now by the same reason that Baptism and Penance may be defined by the Intention; Order and the other Sacraments may be so. Thus have I besides setting the two Councils in full view, given a taste of Roman Authors, that lived some of them, sometime before either of them, some between them, some at and after the time of the latter; who agreeably declare the Ministers Intention to be so ne∣cessary to the Sacraments, that there are none where that is absent. Which was the thing I undertook to shew.
I have omitted to write several Citations at length in the Author's words, because to do it would clog my Paper, and I am under no fears that disguising their Sense will be charged upon me. 'Tis a fault I confess, to overdo a thing, and I fear I am guilty of it, at present. But know, Sir, the great∣est part of this Section is not writ for your sake, who, I acknowledge, did not call for it; but for theirs, whe∣ther of your or our Communion, that are not satisfied, That any such Doctrin is establish'd as matter of Faith in the Roman Church. I know there are such of both sorts. SECT. IV. The Intention of doing the Exterior Action is not required, but presupposed. I Am now to shew what the Intention, which the Roman Church requires, is to be conversant about, in the Sacraments. You, Sir, ask me whether it be such as is conversant about the Act to be exercised, or about the End. Now that the less learned Reader may understand the Na∣ture of your Question, and be thereby better enabled to judge how I proceed, I shall explain it to him from the Pen of Gabriel Biel, one of your own renowned Doctors. §. 1. His words are these,Intentio potest dupliciter ser∣ri in aliquid, velut in Objectum; vel ut in terminum aut finem. Sic Intentio Baptizantis potest ferri in actum baptizandi sicut in Objectum, & sic nibil aliud est quam velle actum istum porficere 'Potest etiam ferri in aliquid ut in finem, scil in illud propter quod vlt Baptizare; ut velle fieri illud propter quod Baptismus est institutus. l. 4. dist. 6 q. 1. The Intention may two manner of ways be carried to some thing, either as to its Object, or to its Term or End. So the Intention of the Baptizer may be carried to the Act of Bap∣tism is to its Object, and so it is nothing else than to will the performance of that Act. It may be also carried to something as its End, viz. to That for which he wills to Baptize; as to will that to be done, for which Baptism was instituted.
It is but making the case of Ordination parallel with the instance given of Baptism, and all will be clear. If a Bishop purpose, will, or intend barely to pro∣nounce the words your Church uses in Ordaining Priests, viz.—Receive thou power to offer Sacrifice in the Church for the quick and dead, in the name of the Father, &c. (which you make the form of that Sacrament) and to deliver to them the Paten with Bread, and the Chalice with Wine, (which you make the matter of it) with∣out going any farther: in this case the Intention is said to be conversant about the Act. But if he also will or intend the Effect or End, to which the Sacramental Act is insti∣tuted as subservient, he is said to intend the Effect or End. §. 2. The First, for distinction sake, is by good Au∣thors called the Exterior [outward] Intention, the lat∣ter, the interior [inward] or Mental Intention. Which Terms I shall use in what follows, for saving a Circuit of Words. And for the same end I will call the Appli∣cation of Matter and Form the Sacramental Act, or Action. Having said this in a previous way, I come now to Answer your Question, Whether your Councils re∣quire such an Intention as is conversant about the Act, or End of the Sacraments. §. 3. And I boldly affirm, 1. That it is not the First only (if at all) which they require. 2. But that it is the latter. And I hold my self concern'd to make ample and firm proof hereof, in regard all the inferences I am to make against you in this dispute, will especially lye upon these two grounds. 1. For the First, That it is not the Exterior Inten∣tion your Councils require by way of Decree or Defi∣nition, I shall endeavour to prove by these Arguments, §. 4. (1.) This point is not proper matter for Councils to deal with. It is Matter of divine Faith, Worship,
or Government that They (acting within their sphear) are to debate upon, and Synodically to determine: and not Matter of common natural Knowledge, whereof the Heathen Philosophers were as competent Judges as they. To an assent to Propositions of this (latter) kind, our judgments are to be wrought by the power and force of Reason: nor can our ignorance of them be conquered by any other weapons. This knowledge is not to be beaten into mens heads by bare Ecclesiastick affirmations and Anathema's. Nor did ever wise men take this course to do it. Well, The necessary pre∣sence of the Intention, or Will, to all external Actions that are humane and free, is a point of mere natural Knowledge; it being in plain speech nothing else but this, That a man willingly doth (acting humanely) the external actions he doth. Which [Velle] motion of the Will cannot be wanting to such Actions, except in the case of Drunkenness or Frenzy, or something else, which in like manner robs the Will of her Guide. Yea, it is such a common Operation of the Will, we now speak of, as no more concerns those of the Sacra∣ments than all other Actions in the World, that are hu∣mane and voluntary, whatever the Object, or End of them be. Thus when a man promiseth a thing which at that time he resolves never to perform, he yet intends to make that promise. When he threatens another only in terrorem, without purposing ever to execute that threat, he then intends to make that threat. And the Intention is so altogether presupposed to outward Actions, that in common use of Speech we omit [say nothing of] it, in commanding, or forbidding, or re∣citing exterior Acts, &c. We say, Read me a Chapter; make ready my Dinner, &c. without adding any thing more. For though these Actions now mentioned, are imperate Acts of the Will; that is, though the Will commands the inferiour powers to do them, as the hands
to act, and the Tongue to speak, &c. yet the Act of the Will [viz. the Intention,] is not so much as named when we speak of such Actions: and to do it would be su∣perfluous, inasmuch as it is necessarily supposed to at∣tend them. All men take it for granted that men in∣tended to do, what they see them do in good Order. And this assurance is grounded on the mere Natural know∣ledge of the Nature of humane Acts, which are there∣fore called Voluntary, because of the Will's Efficiency in them; or because of their necessary dependence upon and connexion with the Elicite Acts of the Will. §. 5. And in particular; for this Reason, Learned Men discoursing about our very Question, make the Action of the Sacraments express this intention, with∣out otherwise naming it; except upon some special oc∣casion. Dom. Soto speaks plainly with a respect to this Point (in 4. Sent. Dist. 1. q. 5. art. 8.) Actus enim exterior & volitio interior pro eodem reputantur. i. e. The exterior Act and the interior Volition [Act of the Will] are reputed for the same. His meaning can be no other than this, The Outward Act is the Object of the Inward Act of the Will, and together with it doth compound or constitute one hu∣mane Action; and so may fitly denote the whole. Which is a very obvious Truth to all, whose thoughts have been any whit thinn'd and improv'd by Observation. §. 6. Thus have I made it appear, That the Necessity of the Exterior Intention to all humane Acts (of which number are the Sacramental) falls under the Cognisance of Natural Reason: And indeed it is such Doctrine as hath been taught passing well in the Heathen Schools. Wherefore I conclude that your General Councils at Florence and Trent (which you must say knew and were mindful of their proper Province) did not gad so far out of their Way, as to determine and decree mere unrevealed Natural Points, such as this we have in hand.
§. 7. To prevent mistakes. I wot well there are se∣veral Points of Natural Knowledg revealed in Scripture, which are therefore (by accident) become also Points of Faith: And that if these were denied by any Body of Christian People, Councils might congruously declare them. But the Exteriour Intention is none of these; and my Argument respects only such as this. §. 8. I add, if your Councils might draw within their Sphear mere Points of Natural Knowledge, like this I have insisted on; Aristotle's Books might chance to be adopted into our Christian Creed; which would look but odly. Could such work rightly be done, it would be worth a Council's while to make a Compleat Course of Infallible Philosophy, to save much pains and endless wrangling in your Schools. For if all such things were once defined, a Roman Catholick could no longer questi∣on them. §. 9. But this onely upon Supposition your Councils have defined the Intention to be necessary to humane Acts. I, for my part, clear them from any such guilt. But if you do, Sir, What means your Question? §. 10. It appears also, That there is such an evident dependence of the Sacramental, and all other humane Acts upon the Will or Intention, that no Man of Sense ever did or can question it: And therefore besides that the work were improper for a Synod of Divines, it were altogether needless and fruitless to determine it: it were to act without a Motive, in my Opinion. Those that would do This, might at the next step, be expected to decree it Necessary, That all Lectors open their eye∣lids when they read a Chapter; and that all Preachers open their Mouths when they exhort the People. Now, Sir, you must either joyn with me in loading your Councils with these absurdities, or in concluding; That it is not the Exterior Intention which is the Mat∣ter of their Decree and Canon.
§. 11. But whatever you do, Bellarmine will befriend all I have said on this Head. (De Sacram. in gen. l. 1. cap. 27.) Neque tamen volumus à Concilio definitum id quod vult Catharinus, & Chemnitius vellet, nimirum ut solum in∣tendat Minister facere actum exteriorem, quem Ecclesia fa∣cit: id enim non erat opus definire, cum à Nemine unquam negatum fuisset, nec posset neg ari. i. e. We mean not that That is defined by the Council, which Catharinus means, and which Chemnitius would have; namely, that the Minister should onely intend to do that Exterior Act which the Church doth: For there was No Need of defining That, in regard it hath never been de∣nied by any body, nor could be denied. The Cardinal here declares, 1. That the Council [of Trent] did not define the Intention we now speak of. 2. That they had no Motive to do it, forasmuch as none ever did or could deny it. Whose Testimony shall shut up this Particular. §. 12. (2.) I argue from the Nature of the Contro∣versie between Papist and Protestant about the Inten∣tion: Which cannot respect it in the present Sence of the Word, there being no Protestant, that I ever read or heard of, who denies its necessity to the Act. None of us ever asserted that any Madman (as such) was fit to manage any Civil Concern, much less Spiritual. In this case then, we could hardly contend, because we concur in the Thing. Or at least, it would follow, That the Learned men of both Parties quarrel not onely about Trifles, but about just Nothing. Which thing, me∣thinks, a Romanist should be unwilling to impute (how∣ever he judge of us) to the wisest Men of his own Com∣munion. Hence then I conclude, That it is a further Intention than this of the Act, which the Roman Church requires: And this breeds the Quarrel. §. 13. After all this: Were it supposed that your Councils had stoop'd to that impertinent and needless
work of defining the Necessity of the Exterior Inten∣tion; You are not a-whit the safer, except they had onely done that. Had they done that, and stopt there, we could not possibly have inferr'd from thence, That you were therefore uncertain of the Truth of your Sa∣craments. But if they have required the Intention of the End, which lies not open to humane perception, you must still be liable to my charge. And that it is such a One which they require, I am to shew, in the next place. SECT. V. The Intention defined. That of the End required. HAving already shew'd, that the Intention of the Act is not that which is established in your Coun∣cils, I apply my self to evince what it was, that is: I affirmed it was the Intention of the End or Effect of the Sacraments. And I shall prove this, according to my Method, from the Learned Writers of the Roman Church: Some of which assert the Thing expresly; Others obliquely, by putting or stating Cases, from which a very mean Understanding cannot but infer the truth of what I have affirmed. But before I produce them, I think fit to premise these things, 1. What Intention properly so called, is? According to the general consent of School men, I may safely de∣fine it thus, §. 1. It is an Act or Motion of the Will, tending to some End, by or through some Mean or Means. To this very purpose speaks Aquinas, Gerson, Gabriel, Sylvester, and Others. The words of some of them, I shall set down, but need not English them, the sense of them amounting to no more than the Definition now given.
Motus voluntatis qui fertur in finem, secundum quod acquiritur per ea quaesunt ad finem, vocatur Intentio, saith Aquinas, (1a 1ae q. 12. art. 4.) Est actus voluntatis in aliquem finem tendentis per aliquid vel aliqua ad illum fi∣nem ordinata, saith Altenstaig from Gerson (verb. Inten.) Intentio est motus voluntatis tendentis in finem per aliquod medium, saith Sylvest. (verb. Inten.) Intentio propriè ac∣cepta est volitio finis assequendi per media, saith Gabriel Biel (Repert. l.} 2. dist. 38.) §. 2. I note from hence, That the mere Intention of the Act, which took up our last Section, is not Inten∣tion, properly so called; inasmuch as it came short of the End, to which the Act was to serve as a Mean. I note also that the Minister then only properly intends whiles he celebrates the Sacraments, when he wills the End of them (considered generally or specially; some way or other) as attainable by the Use of the insti∣tuted Actions. §. 3. 2. I premise, That if my Authors prove the In∣tention of the End to be required, they also make out, That the Intention of the Act only is not required. Your question, Sir, is disjunctive, Whether— of the Act or the End. If I prove the latter, I remove the former. 3. I repeat my desire to have it kept in memory, That the Sacraments faring all alike with a respect to the In∣tention, if my Authors shall, under that Relation, speak of any of them, they as truly do it of all the rest. Now to my Authority. §. 4. I begin with Gabriel Biel, the clearness of whose words leaves no room for cavil.Ad veritatem Baptismi re∣quiritur Intentio Ministri, non tantum respectu Actus Baptizandi ut Objecti, sed etiam respectu ejus ut Finis & Termini. l 4. dist. 6. q. 1. To the truth of Baptism the Intention of the Minister is required, not only in respect of the Act of Baptizing as its Object [viz. as that which the Intention is only carried out to, stops at, or is terminated by,] but also in respect of its effect, as its End and Term.
This Author divides this conclusion into parts, and presents Arguments for the proof of them. But it would be superfluous to transcribe the whole. He saith, the Intention to do the Act is necessary; but adds [non sufficit] that it is not sufficient. And the Reason he gives amounts to this, That though the Act of Baptism be done with Intention, yet in several cases it may be∣come fruitless and void [there may be no Baptism not∣withstanding that Act] for want of another Intention, viz. that which respects the End. Again, our Author speaks clearly,Non sufficit Intentio exercen∣di Baptismum. ut est talis Actus in Natura, sed ut est signum ad certum finem institutum. It sufficeth not that the Mi∣nister intends to Baptize, as that is a Na∣tural Act; but as it is a Sign instituted to a certain End. §. 5. Here note, That none can use a Sign, as such, but he must have a respect to the thing signified, to which the Sign, as such, hath an essential Relation, and cannot be considered, as a Sign, without it. So that all Sacraments being [in genere Signi] Signs, as all the Roman Doctors do, and must teach; and the Ministers being required to exercise them as such, (as the cited place affirms) the Intention, according to them, must not be terminated or rest in the Outward Act of the Sacraments; but it must in some manner reach the Effect or End of them, without which, we see, They are not made and conferred. And hither (to save time) I refer Bellarmin's saying, That the Action is to be done, not as it is a certain Na∣tural work, but as it is a Sacred work,[Sed utest opus Sacrum] de Sa∣cram. l. 1. c. 27. which equally proves our point, and is to be understood in the like manner. §. 6. Gabr. Biel writ in the time between the Two Councils, and hath spoken fully and plainly to our pur∣pose: and his Seniors would assure us, had we a mind to consult them, that his Language was no novelty in
the Roman Church. Alexander AlensisIntendere fa∣cere quod facit Ecclesia. est in∣tendere abluere exterius, ut De∣us abluat inte∣rius, de Sacr. Bapt quaest. 8. may serve to do this, who is very liberal upon the same subject: To Intend to do what the Church doth, is to intend to wash out∣wardly to the end that God may wash inwardly. He tells us, the Sacramental Action [est actio relata] is a Relative Action, and that which it relates to, is the Action of God, and collects [unde intentio respicit utramque actionem] that the Intention respects both the Actions, as a Cause without which there cannot be a Sacrament. Our Author hath here taught us by most transparent words, That the Intention must of necessity be carried to the Action of God, which is nothing else but the con∣ferring of Sacramental Grace; and this Grace is the End or Effect of the Sacraments. Which was the Thing to be proved. §. 7. Guliel. Parisiensis speaking of Orders, cap. 5. asserts the [mental] Intention to be Essential to the Form of the Sacraments; and that though the words be duly pronounced, yet a contrary Intention evacuates, and robs them of their meaning. Again treating of Baptism, cap. 2. he declares, That vitious Ministers cannot deprive the Sacraments of their due Effects, nor defraud the worthy Receivers of them: but he doth it with this reserve, That they strive not against them with a contrary Intention. He implies, All is nothing if that should happen. §. 8. AquinasCum aliquis non inten∣dit Sacramen∣tum conferre. par. 3 q 64. art. 10. makes the Action void, When the Mini∣ster intends not to confer the Sacrament. I grant he speaks a little before, as if it were suf∣ficient to intend the bare Action; (art. 8.) But be∣sides the contradiction he would in that case be liable to, the learned Romanists declare he meant no such thing. I shall call two of them out to speak to this, be∣cause I would not have so great a man to stand in my way.
§. 9. Thus speaks Cardinal Cajetan upon the place,Non est intelligenda ut verba sonant, puta quod non requiri∣tur in Ministro Intentio proprie mentalis, sed sufficit Intentio Ec∣clesiae per verba expressa, quic∣quid intendit ipse Minister inte∣rius. His mind is not to be understood as the words sound, as if there was not re∣quired in the Minister an Intention properly Mental, but the Intention of the Church expressed by the words would suffice, what∣ever the Minister may intend in his mind. §. 10.Ʋt Opinio illa salsissima est, ita nullatenas est S. Thomae — Requiitur secunaum cum Intentio non solum ap. licandi materiam & formam, sed ipsius effectus. Dom. Soto shall make up the pair, who was one of the most renowned Mem∣bers of the Trent-Council. As the Opi∣nion that Intending to do the Act only is sufficient, is a most false one; so it is not at all S. Thomas's—For according to him there is required not only an Intention of applying the Matter and Form, but of the Effect it self. §. 11. Aquinas's sense of the Article being fixt, let us further observe Soto's judgment. He delivers it a little before thus,Ea ratione Christu discipulos suos Sacramentorum Ministros si∣bi substituit. ut sua ipsius Intenti∣one bujusmodi obsequia perfice∣rent. Christ therefore sub∣stituted his Disciples to be Ministers of the Sacraments that they might perform such Offices with his very own Intention. And he calls This, an Intention like to that of God. Now it being plain, that the gracious Ends or Ef∣fects of the Sacraments are intended by Christ, he in∣fers they are also to be Intended by his Ministers. And this he all along makes Essential to a Sacrament. §. 12. I cannot forbear to recite what I meet with to this purpose in Altenstaig, viz. That it is required to in∣tend to exhibit the matter and words of the Sacraments,Tanquam ea quae ad certum effectum instituta sunt à Christo, & hoc est exhitere in fide Eccle∣siae. Verb. Sacram. as those things which are instituted by Christ to a certain Effect; and This is to exhibit them in the Faith of the Church. §. 13. All I shall say by way of remark upon the se∣veral Authors already cited, is only this, That if the Reader hath born in mind, what I was to make out, viz.
That the required Intention respects the End or Effect of the Sacraments, he cannot but see that they have ma∣nifestly proved it. I designed also in a particular manner to confirm my Assertion from those Roman Casuists that have laid down Grounds, from whence the same appears by a fair and unconstrain'd inference. But to avoid further te∣diousness, I shall onely point to their usual way of hand∣ling things of this kind; and subjoyn two particular in∣stances, of a pretty odd Nature. §. 14. They generally put the Case, That the Sacra∣mental Form [or Words] may be abused by Addition, Substraction, Transposition, and false Pronunciation; and upon This they put the Question, Whether a Sacra∣ment be perfected in such cases. And they commonly resolve it thus, If those Additions, &c. be not corrup∣tive of the Substance of the Form, [that is, if they per∣vert not the Sense of the Words] there may be a Sa∣crament notwithstanding: Provided still (Mark that) that the Minister intends not that undue alteration; For if he doth, they conclude the Sacrament to be evacuated. Their Argument lies thus, He that on purpose corrupts the Form may be judg'd not to intend to do what the Church doth; and without this Intention there is no true Sacrament. But then if the intention be right, the Sacred Work is perfected, notwithstanding the 'fore∣said imperfections. The Act is here supposed to be the same, whether it happen to prove a Sacrament, or no; it is the Mental intention then that makes or marrs all. Which was the thing to be shew'd. §. 15. Now to the Instances. Soto, on the 'forecited Article, teaches thus,Si quis haberet Intentionem singu∣larem Baptizandi Petrum, scilicet fili∣um Regis cum exclusione cujuscunque alterius, videlicet si mente diceret, Si non es silius Regis, non te Baptizo; tunc si quem alium baptizaret, seu foeminam, Sacramentum non esset validum, quia non interfuisset Intentio Baptizandi il∣lum qui baptizatun. If any Minister should have a singular Intention to Baptize Peter the King's Son, exclusively of all other Persons, Viz. If he should say in his Mind, if
thou be not the King's Son, I Baptize thee not; then if he should Baptize any other Male or Female, the Sa∣crament would not be valid for want of his intending to Baptize him, who is Baptized. §. 16. I take my second Instance out of the Mass book of Pope Pius QuintusSi quis habeat coram se undecim hostias, & intendat consecrare solum de∣cem, non determinans quas decem inten∣dit: in his casibus non consecrat, quia requiritur intentio. De defect. circa Mis. occur. Num. 7. corrected and set forth by Order of the Trent-Coun∣cil; where we read, If any Priest have Eleven Hosts be∣fore him, and intend to Consecrate onely Ten, not determining which Ten he intended to Consecrate; in this case there is no Consecration made for want of the Intention. §. 17. We are not to imagine that in either of these Cases, the Priest sees his mistake till the Action is over; and therefore must suppose him seriously to perform it, and for ought he knows really to confer Baptism, and consecrate the Eucharist. And yet afterwards it being found out that there are Eleven Wafers instead of Ten; and that the Child, washt solemnly in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, was not the King's Son; here is neither Baptism nor Consecration made, for want of an absolute Intention. The Priest had as good have done Nothing. Oh, the force and value of the Intention! §. 18. But not to protract this over-long Section, I shall vertually cite a hundred Authors more to the same purpose, by speaking a very few Words. All that make Matter, Form, and the Minister's Intention, necessary to the Sacraments, (and which of your Writers that treat of that Subject, do not so?) do mean by the word In∣tention the interior Intention, the exterior being inclu∣ded in the Act. §. 19. In forma intelligitur verbum vocale; saith Sylvest. (Verb. Bapt.) i. e. By the Form is understood the Word spoken.
And then by proportion; By Matter must be meant Matter applyed. And this is supposed to be spoken and done with the Will or Intention. Now then when be∣sides all this, the Intention is added as a distinct thing, it must be interpreted of the interior Intention. The bright Words of Soto shall Seal up this, §. 20. Si nulla esset intentio necessaria faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, vana esset assertio Doctorum & Concilii Florentini, qua definitur requiri praeter Materiam & Formam, Intentio∣nem Ministri: Nam in hoc quod dicitur Materia & Forma, intelligitur quod velit tam Materiam applicare quam for∣mam. Actus enim exterior & Volitio interior pro eodem reputantur. Cum ergo insuper addatur requiri intentionem, alia intentio intelligitur. i. e. If the Intention of doing what the Church doth, was not necessary, the assertion of our Doctors and the Coun∣cil of Florence were vain, by which it is defined, that be∣sides the Matter and Form, the Intention of the Minister is required: For in the naming the Matter and Form, it is understood that he [the Minister] intends to apply both Matter and Form: For the exterior Act and the interior Intention [of doing that Act] are taken for the same Thing or Act. When therefore it is further added, That the Intention is required, another [Intention] is understood. §. 21. Thus, Sir, have I declared that the Intention your Councils require, is to be conversant about the End of the Sacraments; and shewed that the Stream of your Authors assist me with their Suffrage. If I err herein, they have led me out of the way: But then it is to your great harm, but not at all to mine. For if they under∣stand not what your Councils require, as Essential to the Sacraments in general, then they must be uncertain whe∣ther they have any true Sacrament; and in particular, whether they have that of Orders, and so any true Priests. How can you be certain you have enough, if you know
not what is enough? were this the case, my point is proved from your confess'd ignorance, as much as it could be from the most shining demonstration. §. 22. Indeed, Sir, I have been more luxuriant in my proof of the subject matter of this and the foregoing Section, for these two Reasons: 1. To lay a sure Ground for the deductions I hope to draw anon, to your dis∣advantage. 2. To confront some false Assertions of a certain Priest of your Communion, made some time ago, to a person of Quality, who was concerned to en∣quire of him what the doctrin of the Intention amoun∣ted to, as establish'd by your Councils. He affirmed to the Lady, as I can shew under her well known hand, these three things: §. 23. 1. That the Intention respected the Exterior Act only, saying, That it is impossible for a Priest that is in his right Wits, to perform the exterior Action re∣quired, without Intending to do as he then doth. Now I have proved that there is required an Inten∣tion of the End, which confounds his false account of the matter. §. 24. 2. He said, The Roman Church never de∣clared the Doctrin of the Intention to be matter of Faith. But I have proved it to be One, if a Decree or Definition of such Councils as the Body of Roman Catholicks hold for General, can Oblige to Faith. And if these cannot do that, farewel Pope Pius's Creed. §. 25. 3. He only assigned this for the occasion of the Councils medling with this matter, viz. That some held an Opinion that the Consecrating and Conferring the Sacraments by madmen, who knew not what they were about, was valid. But I have shewed, that it is granted aforehand, That the Exterior Action should be Humane, i. e. the issue of previous Knowledge; which a mad-man, as such, can∣not
exert. And I have also shewn that the Intention the Councils deal about, reaches farther, and is of an∣other Nature. And so his frantick Story is void of Patronage. §. 26. I confess School men, treating of their Mat∣ters, put every Objection that can possibly come into their too fine spun thoughts; but if a man hatch from thence in his head swarms of Sectaries, that are sup∣posed seriously to embrace the matter of many of them, he can make them exist no where but in his fancy. §. 27. And I doubt this is the case, when any one re∣ports there were a Sect of people who held stark and staring Mad men to be effectual Ministers of the Sacra∣ments. Authors do indeed speak of Mad-men with a respect to our Case, and pronounce them unfit Mini∣sters, because they (as such) cannot exert Humane Acts: but then their Argument amounts to this, be∣cause Mad men cannot do the less, viz. Intend the ex∣terior Act, much less can they do the more, viz. Intend the End or Effect of an Institution; which is required by the Roman Church. §. 28. I wish the Assertor would tell us, in what Age there were such a Sect of men; in what Region they lived; who headed them; who began the Error; what Pens seriously defended it; what Bishop excommuni∣cated any man for holding it; or what Pope suspended or deprived any Bishop for embracing it. I would learn what Notoriety of Fact there was for these things, that it should be worth a General Councils while to cast an eye this way, and labour to stop the growing evil. §. 29. I have read several Catalogues of Heresies, some Ancient and some Modern, but I can find nothing like This amongst them all. I wish my plain dealing with him, to which I have had more than sufficient provocation, may whet him to the innocent revenge of making good against me (if
he can) his Affirmations above described. Till this be done, I shall conclude him either a most unlearned man; or one of a poor Spirit, who could find in his heart so to abuse and impose upon a worthy Lady's want of skill in Roman Doctors and Councils. Sir, I acknowledge I have stept out of our way, a while, to salute a friend; but I do not desire you to take any notice of that, unless you please. However, those that are more concern'd, will do it; and subscribe to the justice of my Visit. SECT. VI. The End particularly considered is not required; but gene∣rally. The Virtual Intention is required, and held suffi∣cient. HAving already proved the Intention of the End to be required, I come now to view your next Que∣stion, whether that End be Proximate or Ultimate. §. 1. And I must say, I see not what Reason you have to ask this Question here, the matter of it having no necessary influence upon the subject of our debate. For if it be the End, however consider'd, whether confu∣sedly and in general, or distinctly and in special; it is alike out of the compass of the Inspection of others, which is the formal Ground I argue from, to your Un∣certainty of having a true Priesthood or any Sacraments at all. I say, if it be the End more generally consider'd, ex gr. to do an Action as Sacred, as Relative to an Institution, as a Mean to this or that indefinite End; all this comes to one, with a respect to my design. §. 2. Nevertheless, I shall chearfully go some paces (though upon a needless Errand) which way you shall please to drive me. I affirm then, Your Councils and
Doctors require not the intending any End, thus, or so distinctly considered or specified; but as something in general, which Christ and the Church; or, Christ or the Church intends to do by the instituted Action. §. 3. This something is (it seems) sufficient to the Sacraments, although very hardly, as we may learn from the words of the Trent-Council, which I shall here repeat, There is required of the Ministers of the Sa∣craments an Intention of doing, at least, what the Church doth. The saltem [at least] sounds, to me, a poor word, where a dogmatical Article is defined: how∣ever, I must take it as it is, and shall explain the matter briefly from your Authors. §. 4. After G. Biel had told us (as is aforesaid) That the Ministers are required to will that to be done, for which the Sacrament was instituted; he immediately adds, Et haec Intentio est duplex, scil. specialis, quâ intendit ut Baptizatus fiat filius Regni; qui est finis remotus: vel propinquus, qui est remissio peccati Originalis & Gratiae in∣fusio; aut quod fiat Chritianus & membrum Ecclesiae mili∣tantis: vel generalis, ut fiat quod Ecclesiae intendit, licet non cogitetur aut ignoretur vel etiam non credatur id conferri per baptismum quod Ecclesia intendit, i. e. And this Intention is twofold, viz. Special, whereby he intends that the baptized person may attain Salvation; which is the remote End; or that he obtain the pardon of Original Sin and the infusion of Grace; or that he be made a Christian or a Member of the Church Militant; which is the proximate End of it. Or it is general, viz. that That may be done which the Church intends, althogh it be not considered, nor understood, or not believed that That is conferred by Baptism which the Church intends. We see here, it is a very general and indistinct End that is set forth by these words, what the Church intends or doth. And our Author goes on to reach our point in his third Conclusion.
Ad veritatem Sacramenti non requiritur intentio Mini∣stri respectu. effectus Baptismatis in specie: sed sufficit inten∣dere quod Ecclesia intendit in genere, i. e. To the truth of the Sacrament there is not required such an Intention of the Minister as respects the effect of Bap∣tism in special: but it suffices to intend what the Church intends in the general. §. 5. De Burgo, (cap. 5.2. par.) having described the Intention in the like manner concludes thus, Re∣quiritur ergo generalis intentio ad minus, &c. i. e. There is a general Intention required at the least, &c. Which ex∣actly jumps with the sense of the Trent definition. But I need cite no more for This, the Roman Doctors being generally of the same mind. §. 6. You ask again, Whether the Intention required, he Habitual, Vertual, or Actual. To which my An∣swer must be the same your selves use to give, viz. The Habitual is too short, as being no more than one asleep may have: The Actual through humane infirmity and wandring of thoughts may sometimes happen to be wanting in well-meaning Ministers, and therefore is not necessarily required. But the Vertual is necessary to the Sacraments. §. 7. By Vertual, Roman Catholicks mean the force of the Actual Intention, exerted a little before the do∣ing of the Sacramental Action, ex. gr. If a Bishop in∣tends actually to make N. N. a Priest of Christ's Church, (or to do something to him which Christ or the Church hath appointed the Action of Ordination for, or the like,) and goes to Church and attires him∣self, &c. for that purpose; though while he applies the respective Matter and Form, his mind happens to range out to some other Objects, yet the Action done by ver∣tue of the late Actual Intention hath those influences shed into it from the past Intention, which suffice to perfect the Ordination.
§. 8. I shall set forth Bellarmine's words to evince the point because they are short and clear, (de Sacram. in gen. l. 1. c. 27.) Non requiritur necessario actualis intentio, nec sufficit habitualis, sed virtualis requiritur & sufficit; quam∣vis danda sit opera, ut actualis habeatur, i. e. Actual Intention is not required necessarily, nor is Ha∣bitual sufficient; but a Virtual Intention is required, and is sufficient; although endeavours are to be used, that the Actual may be had. §. 9. To him I shall joyn a Book which will outweigh ten thousand private Authors, viz. the Mass-book of Pope Pius the 5th. (de defect. &c. num. 7.) Si intentio non sit actualis in ipsa Consecratione propter evagationem mentis, sed Virtualis, cum accedens ad Altare intendit fa∣cere quod facit Ecclesia, conficitur Sacramentum: etsi curare debet Sacerdos, ut etiam actualem Intentionem abhibeat, i. e. If there be not actual Intention in the very Consecration [of the Eucharist] by reason of the wandring out of the mind; but a Virtual one, when the Priest coming to the Altar intends to do what the Church doth, the Sacrament is made: although the Priest ought to take care, that he also actually intend. We conclude then that the Actual Intention is con∣gruous, but the Virtual is necessary, and sufficient. SECT. VII. Roman Catholicks not certain of their Priesthood taken in general by any simple or absolute Certainty. Nor certain of it taken in special by any simple, or so much as a Moral Certainty. YOur last Question is, What certainty I speak of in my Propositions, (when I deny the Roman Church to be certain She hath any true Priesthood) whether it be Moral, Metaphysical, or Mathematical.
§. 1. Here I must premise a distinction in Order to the clear resolution of your Question. Your Priest∣hood may be considered either confusedly and in gene∣ral, as inherent or existing in some persons of your Church indeterminately consider'd; as if it were said, there are in the Roman Church some true Priests, al∣though it be not known that This or That individual person be such a one: Or distinctly and in particu∣lar, as inherent in These or Those persons deter∣minately considered, whose names may be told, or their persons mark'd or pointed out. As if it were said, Fa∣ther. A. or B. is a true Priest. §. 2. Now for Answer: I deny the Roman Church is simply or absolutely certain that she hath any true Priesthood, in the first sense. The Proposition is not evident by its own light to all that understand the Terms; and therefore I deny that you have for it the certainty of Intelligence: which is all one, I suppose, with that you call Metaphysical certainty. Nor is it any Conclusion evidently deduced from first Principles, and therefore I deny that you have for it the certainty of Science: which is the same, I suppose, that you call Mathematical certainty. If you make good your Priest∣hood either of these ways, our understandings could not resist the evidence presented, inasmuch as the Reason of our assent to first Principles is the clear immediate connexion of the Terms; and the Reason of our assent to Scientifical Conclusions is the clear connexion of the Terms with an evident Medium. But your men never pretended to prove this point either of these ways, that I have heard of: nor would I have said one word of this kind, had not the Terms of your Question offered me the occasion. However, to accommodate my self to your thoughts so far as I can, I will suppose, You meant not to use those words, Mathematical and Metaphysical, in a proper sense; but only in an allusive way to denote
by them a simple Certainty, equal to that of Intelligence or Science, which you suppose to spring from a diverse root, viz. Divine Revelation. But then I must answer on, as I have begun, by denying that you have any Certainty of Faith for the Matter. §. 3. For the Proposition taken in the second Sense, viz. That you have any Persons in your Church deter∣minately or singularly considered, as Father A. or B. who are true Priests; I deny that you have for it either the absolute and infallible Certainty of Faith, or so much as a Moral Certainty, properly so called. §. 4. And here it will be as needful a piece of work, as any I have yet done, to prepare the Reader for ma∣king a sure judgment of what shall follow, to open the Nature of Moral Certainty. And because your Au∣thors are sufficiently agreed about it, it will not matter much, which of them I call forth to describe it. Let Cardinal Bellarmine be the Man, who sets forth the Mat∣ter very distinctly (Le justif. lib. 3. cap. 2.) He then (as others do) having divided Certainty into Evident, and Obscure Certainty, assigns three degrees to both of them. Of the Evident he gives the first degree to first Principles, the second to Science, the third to Experi∣ence. Of Obscure Certainty he gives the first degree to Divine Faith, the second to Humane Faith, the third to Opinion. Having said this in a previous way, I shall now pro∣duce what he says touching Moral Certainty. Secun∣dum gradum, &c. Those things (saith he) obtain the se∣cond degree of Obscure Certainty, which are believed for the sake of Humane Authority, but so confirmed and cele∣brated a One, [ut omnem formidinem prorsus excludat] that it altogether excludes all fear. Such as are these, That Cicero and Virgil were famous Men: that Augustus go∣verned a great part of the World happily: that there are many famous Cities in Provinces at a great distance from
us, as Alexandria in Egypt, Constantinople in Thra∣cia, Jerusalem in Palestine, Antioch in Asia. And this is called the Certainty of Humane Faith, or Moral Cer∣tainty; which although it be not so great, that it can be no way false, (for every Man is a Liar) yet it is so great, that he may deservedly be judged temerarious, who thinks or disputes against it. Thus Bellarmine. §. 5. Hence it is obvious to collect, 1. That Moral Certainty is the experimental knowledge of others con∣veyed to us by due Testimony. 2. That this Certainty bred from the Evidence of the Motives (I say not of the Object) that cause our assent, so far fills the Mind with tranquillity and security, that there is no place left for rational doubts or fears, lest our conceptions should not be answerable to their Objects. And truly when I re∣flect upon my belief in this kind, and the grounds of it, (and fear can only arise that way) I find my self no more tempted to doubt, whether there hath been such a City as Constantinople in Thracia, which I have never seen, than I am whether there hath been such a City as Lisbone in Portugal, which I have seen. Though it be not repugnant to the Nature of Man to be deceived, and to deceive; yet how such Multitudes of Men of several ranks, qualifications and Countries, should be deceived in a most sensible Object; or conspire to deliver a false∣hood for truth, especially when by the report they could not hope to reap to themselves any possible advantage, (this, I say) is so utterly unperceivable by any regular Thoughts, that he may well be deem'd to want the use of his reason, who is afraid of being deceived in his be∣lief, that there hath been such a place as Constantinople, upon so credible Testimony. The bare possibility of a thing's being otherwise than we judge it to be, (when the exactest disquisition can make no more of it) so little affects the Mind, that I have not so much as the Shadow and Figure of fear, lest there should not be such a place as Constantinople.
I know indeed there may be some degrees of Moral Certainty proportion'd to the Motives or Mediums that beget it; but yet it belongs to the Nature of it in gene∣ral, firmly to adhere to its Object, from the perception of truth and conviction of the Mind, so far that it is not in our power, acting reasonably, to dissent from it, or to fear that we judge amiss. This Point will yet look brighter, if I set forth what Bellarmine immediately subjoyns to the Words last cited. §. 6. Tertium gradum habent illa, &c. Those things (saith he) have a third degree of Certainty, which rest on so many signs and conjectures, as render a Man secure and exclude anxiety, [non tamen formidinem omnem ex∣pellunt] but yet expel not all fear; and this is called con∣jectural Certainty, and rather belongs to Opinion than Faith. Thus he. §. 7. Now by comparing Moral and Conjectural Cer∣tainty, according to their Descriptions newly given, we find a considerable difference between them. The first shuts out fear, as being the result of a brighter Motive; the latter lets in fear through the in-evidence of its Me∣dium. The first is a firm adherence to a Thing as true, the latter is an infirm adherence to a Thing as likely to be true. And therefore the first deserves the Name of Certainty, but the latter is abusively so called. Where∣fore the Cardinal seeing what he calls Conjectural Cer∣tainty, unworthy to stands upon the same level with Moral, reasonably thrusts it down into an inferiour Place. §. 8. I know indeed that Aristotle and his Followers, speaking as Natural Philosophers, make not Humane Faith [or Moral Certainty] a Middle thing, nor place it in a distinct Classe, between Science and Opinion: But the Reason of that is, it was not their design to make any exact comparison of the greater or less strength
or weakness of Assents to particular contingent things, and to give them distinct Seats, accordingly; but to com∣pare them in a lump with Science; and to shew, That the highest Assent below That, may possibly be false. And so they leave these two lapt up in a Bundel without distinction, under the Name of Opinion. But those that speak of them, as Moral Philosophers do very manifestly, and upon good Cause distinguish them, as Bellarmine hath here done; making Moral Certainty to exclude fear, and Opinion to admit it. And none can question, but when there is foundation for them in the Nature of things, distinctions are to be allowed. §. 9. But if any list to retain the former way of speak∣ing, it will come to the same; provided we thus distin∣guish of Opinion, viz. Opinion is either most vehement and intense, such as, Morally speaking, excludes all fear; Or light and weak, which necessarily gives way to fear: And provided we make Moral Certainty the same thing with the first Member of this distinction: Men may be allowed to use what words they please in Polemical Discourses, supposing we understand what they mean by them. Thus, Sir, have I dispatcht the Explication of those Terms that you called for, and of some others which might puzzle some Readers, unless they were attended with such help. This work I thought I was obliged to extend to an unusual length for these Reasons, (menti∣oned before) 1. To enable the more unlearned to be∣come competent Judges of the strength of my Argu∣ments, or your Answers to them. 2. To save my self much possible trouble of Papers, which might be multi∣plied upon Occasion of a few Words left in ambiguity and darkness. When men are once ingaged in Contro∣versie, we find by daily Experience a small matter serves almost endlesly to keep them doing, to the loss of their time, and disquiet of their Persons. 3. I add, our Dis∣putative
part will look clearer, when we need not blend it with requiring and giving any explanation of words. Now because what I have done in this kind lies scat∣tered in the several Sections, I shall gather them toge∣ther, and in brief, present them at once to your view, in the following Section. SECT. VIII. The several Explications before given, Summ'd up. And the Question resolved into its Parts. 1. I Have declared, That your Councils require the Minister's Intention, as necessary to the Being of a Sacrament. Sect. 3. 2. That the Intention they require, is not that of the Outward Act, (its presence to the Act being presup∣posed.) Sect. 4. 3. But it is That of the End or Effects. Sect. 5. 4. That it is not necessary to Intend the End distinct∣ly considered, as Proximate or Ultimate, but as some∣thing in general, which relates to Christ's Institution, or the Appointment or Practice of the Church, or the like. Sect. 6. 5. That a Virtual Intention is Necessary and Suffici∣ent. Sect. 7. Your Sense of the Terms must (as was said before) be mine: And that I have truly represented your Sense, your Authors already produced, or referred to, will amount to a full Certificate. They will secure me upon the Supposition made, that the Doctrine of your Councils is capable of being understood, at least by the leading Members of your own Church. If it be not, you mag∣nifie those your Councils without Reason, which either could not speak intelligibly, or for some odd Ends seemed to define Faith, when they did Nothing.
6. I deny that your Priesthood taken Indeterminately or in general, doth (in an Ordinary way, or without Spe∣cial Revelation) admit the infallible Certainty of Divine Faith: Or that taken determinately, or in particular, it admits either the aforesaid Certainty of Faith, or an Ex∣perimental, or yet a Moral Certainty properly so called. §. 1. By certainty, I still mean an Intellectual certainty, such as is consentaneous to its Object, which is the Mea∣sure and Foundation of it. These things being thus set in open view, it will be ea∣sily apprehended, That our Question is a Complex Que∣stion, and is resolvable into two simple ones; which as they are stated, will stand thus, §. 2. 1. Whether the Roman Church, which makes Priestly Orders necessarily depend upon the Ordaining Bishops (at least) Virtual Intention of the End of Ordina∣tion, can be certain with an absolute or infallible Certain∣ty of Faith, that they have some true Priests, in general. §. 3. 2. Whether that Church—can be certain with the aforesaid Certainty of Faith; or with a Moral Cer∣tainty; That they have This or That true Priest in par∣ticular. Now I deny to your Church the fore-named respective Certainties of their having a true Priesthood, in either Sense: and which is more, have taken upon me to prove the Negative, a task I cannot complain of, (though it be not very natural) because I was, for once, content to take it upon my self. Pray mark, That I moreover deny a Theological Cer∣tainty of your Priesthood taken in either of the Senses of it above-mentioned. That is, I deny that it can be con∣cluded either from two Revealed Propositions, or from one Revealed and another Evident by the Light of Na∣ture. Bellarmine's Silence of it tempted me to omit it in the last Section.
THE SECOND PART BEING Argumentative. SECT. I. The general Order of proceeding. The first part of Mr. G's. Letter set down and examined. HAVING finisht the Explications required of me, in a far other and ampler manner than was required, and whatever else I thought useful in a previous way, for the clearer sight of the point in question; I shall now declare in what general Order I purpose to proceed. §. 1. 1. I shall evince by managing the Medium already exhibited, that the Roman Church is uncertain of their having any Priesthood; as Priesthood is taken determi∣nately, or (as I may say) in the parcels. This was the only thing I formerly stood upon, when I had occasion in a very short Paper (a single Folio page) to expose the Evils incident to Roman Catholicks from their doctrine of the Intention. Let me say, by the way, I mean that Paper, to which one of your Priests told me in your hearing, he had some years ago seen an Answer. I add, I wish I could see it too, that I might, for some reasons, compare it with yours.
And this was the only thing I intended to do at the first starting of the Argument with you; as knowing it would enable me (when made good) to load you sufficiently with unwelcome consequences; and to set That in the light, which it would be your interest to keep in darkness. §. 2. 2. I shall consider a little (beyond my first pur∣pose) how far your Priesthood taken indeterminately, and (as I may say) in the gross, will follow the fate of the other. This being said, I come to produce your Letter pur∣porting an Answer to my Argument, and to examine its force. If I find my self so bridled up by it that I can∣not run my designed course, I will acknowledge the power of your Curb: but if not, I surely go forward to your loss. The former part of Mr. Goodall's Letter. Sir, It was alledged to you that the Orders of the English Church had been by Roman Catholicks judged in∣valid by reason of your altering the Form of Ordination, and sufficient discovering your. Intention not to do as the Church doth in that Sacrament. And your way of de∣fending your Ordination seemed to me very strange, when you retorted in this manner: I deny, say you, that the Roman Church is certain that she hath any Priest∣hood or Sacraments according to her own Principles, and I oblige my self to deal with Mr. Goodall about this point. Witness my hand, Thomas Marsden. I ac∣cepted and subscribed, Edward. Goodall. For when you deny that we are certain that we have any Priesthood according to our own Principles; it were but reason∣able for you to expect of us, that we should be uncertain at least, that you have any, since you so earnestly contend to derive your Succession and Orders from us, [See for this
Mr. Mason, Archbishop Laud, Bishop Bramhal, Bishop Taylor, Dr. Fern, Dr. Hammond, &c.] And there is an old rule, you know, Nil dat quod in se non habet. But whatsoever you pretend of our being uncertain con∣cerning the truth of our Priesthood, yet, for our comfort, you are certain enough of it, and therefore you never re∣ordain those Priests, who sometimes, though rarely, Apo∣statize from the Roman Catholick to joyn in your Commu∣nion. The words you have used in Stating the point against the Roman Catholick Church are very extraordinary, when you deny her to be certain that she hath any Priest∣hood or Sacraments, according to her own principles. Thus you. The Examination of it follows. Sir, Although the Prefatory part of your Letter here recited, does not at all affect my Argument by way of Answer, and so without any prejudice might be passed by without regard; yet on other accounts I find it my concern to dissect it, and to expose its putrid parts. §. 3. You then undertake two things in it, 1. To re∣late some matters of Fact which passed between you and me. 2. To insinuate some disadvantages incurred on my part, through (at least) an unwary manage of things. Both these shall be inspected. For the first: Your Relation of Fact contains two things; 1. Your charging the Church of England with the invalidity of her Orders, both because we had altered the Form of Ordination, and also discovered our In∣tention not to do as the Church doth, in that Sacra∣ment; as you term it. 2. My attempt to discharge her by denying the Ro∣man Church to be certain, that she hath a true Priest∣hood or Sacraments, according to her own principles;
and obliging my self to deal with you on that Head. This is what you declare for Fact. Now I confess, were the case exactly such as you re∣present it, I made but a very weak defence of our Church, how freely soever I might strike at yours. To argue that my Coin is current, because my Neighbour cannot prove his to be so, would be very inconcluding. But what would not a man give for Faith in a Historian! §. 4. Sir, You have said both too little, and too much, concerning your self and me. 1. Too little. For when you affirmed our Orders to be invalid in the judgment of Roman Catholicks, I justi∣fied them by those of the Roman Church unto which our first Reformers were admitted. And when you said the Nullity of our Orders proceeded from our forsaking the old Ordinal, and from our giving power to the Or∣dained only to dispense the Word and Sacraments, which, said you, any Deacon might do; I shewed how you mistook the thing by taking the word dispense in too narrow a sense, whereas it comprehends the whole duty of Gospel-Ministers; and therefore the alteration was only verbal and not real. This Fact I have set forth more particularly, Part I. Sect. 1. whither I refer the Reader. This, Sir, was a direct Answer to your Objection, and consequently a perfect desence of our Priesthood against your assault. Now I am sorry you should conceal not only the forenamed Relation I made to your Orders, but also the Instance you gave, and my Answer to it, on pur∣pose (as much as I can gather from your words) to make people believe I had nothing at all to say in behalf of our Ministry, but deserted it at first view of your wretched Objection, and requited you with a bare Re∣crimination: Nay, which is yet more gross, that I used that as a Medium, and my only Medium for the
Vindication of our Church. Your own Conscience, besides the Testimony of our Auditors, (who were no Children,) can assure you that such was the Matter of your Objection, and such the Matter of my Answer, as is set down before. §. 5. 2. You have said too much, in reporting that to in∣validate our Orders, you urged our sufficient discovery of our Intention not to do as the Church doth. This, Sir, I am obliged to call pure fiction, no such words being named but by me upon the Question now in hand, after our slight skirmishes concerning the other were ended. I could make your own Authors ridicule you about the very matter of your charge, but I forbear lest you should take some light occasion from it to desert your less grateful POST. What I quarrel is only your re∣port: and truly I would hope that some cares or troubles had blended your thoughts when you writ these things, being loth to think there was much of Will in these Errors. However, I would as a friend advise you to be cautious hereafter, of treating even your enemies at such a rate. §. 6. For the Second, viz. the disadvantages you sup∣pose me to ly under by some unlucky or unadvised pro∣ceedings on my part. (I know not well how to word it.) §. 7. The first (reputed) disadvantage is my strange way of defending our Church by taxing yours. Answer, This is washt off already by detecting (to speak softly) your partial Relation of Fact. The Second is, If we make you Uncertain of your own Priesthood, you must be supposed to be, at least, Uncertain of Ours, who contend to derive our Orders and Succession from you. §. 8. Answer, 1. Pray, What mortal harm is this to us, who rest not for any thing of moment upon the sole judgment of the Roman Church? 2. For our de∣riving our Orders from you, we mean only this by it,
that our first Reformers received their Orders from Christ by the Ministry of such English Bishops as were in Communion with the Roman Church; and these considered onely as Christian Bishops. Which surely might be done, and yet you may have embraced a Do∣ctrine, which till you discard it, will render you un∣certain that you have, and consequently convey true Or∣ders. And whether that of the Intention be not such is to be the matter of the approaching tug between us, and therefore is to be referred to its proper place. 3. Your Nihil dat quod in se non habet, seems quite besides our business; which is not to scan whether you have none, but whether you are uncertain of your having any Priesthood. You may have and give, without being certain of either, whilst you hold to the Doctrine of the Intention. The third is, Though we pretend you to be Uncer∣tain, yet for your Comfort, We are certain enough of the truth of your Priesthood, and therefore never reordain, &c. §. 9. Answer. You are, it seems, grown wonderful kind upon a sudden, in granting us to be certain enough of the truth of your Priesthood. To be certain, is a great Word: Certain enough, a greater: And your Priesthood is a great Matter to be certain of. You puzzle me to think How this should be: For your great Writers allow not us (you call He∣reticks) to understand Scripture, or Fathers, or Coun∣cils, but appropriate all this to the Sons of your Church. And then what Way is there left for us to arrive at this Certainty? But I will take your Word for it, and desire you to remember against another time, that Protestants (whilst such) may be certain of Matters of no small mo∣ment in Religion. But I should not, I think, build too much upon this concession, because I have sometimes found a trick in things of this kind, viz. Our judgment is good when we declare any thing in your Favour: But
when we charge you (to the best of our judgments) with any Errours, We are very Idiots. §. 10. This is surprizing also, that you build Comfort upon our Certainty of your Priesthood. I had thought Roman Catholicks were so top ful of Comfort from their own Grounds, that there was no room left for our supply∣ing them, but you have undeceived me here; We add, it seems, to your stock. Comfort is a precious thing; and you ought henceforth, instead of counting us a mere Offence to you, to acknowledge us for your Benefactors. §. 11. But heark you. If we be certain of the Thing (which you grant) and you chance to be uncertain, how redound this to our disadvantage, unless our perfection be reckoned against us as a Crime? Or, what is the Reason of your mentioning our Certainty here? Is it, that if we be certain, you must be so too? Non sequitur. If one Man so hoodwink himself that he cannot rightly distinguish Objects relating either to himself or others, may not he yet do both, who keeps the muffle off his face. This is the case, You are hoodwink'd with the Doctrine of Intention (as will be found anon) but we are not so: And till you put that off, you will not be able to see any one man in your Church to be a true Priest. And, by the way, if you put off That, you with∣all put off your (pretended) Infallibility. The Fourth is, That my Words are very Extraordi∣nary, when I say, I deny the Roman Church to be certain that She hath any Priesthood or Sacraments, according to her own Principles. §. 12. The Extraordinary words you refer to, if I may guess by the score of your Pen under them, (to express which, I have put them in a different Character) are these,— any Priesthood or Sacraments. Answer. The words are ordinary, that is, in fami∣liar use, taken single, or apart; and in their Contexture they are not otherwise, unless they give impertinent
Sense or Nonsense. But till you be at leisure to make this appear, I shall not be at leisure to frame an Apology. §. 13. But you may perhaps think it extraordinary, that I deny you to be certain— according to your own Principles, and may have put your lineal Mark under the foregoing Words by mistake. For I perceive, that for some reason or other, you afterwards give me a Memento concerning them. If it chance to be so, (for that I sup∣pose is but a small Error) I shall return a few words to it: Had I made a Doctrine common to you and us the Basis of my Argument, though my manifest Inferences from it must have bound you, yet I could not properly have called this Arguing from your own Principles: But if I prove the undertaken Conclusion from a peculiar Ar∣ticle of your own, viz. that of the Intention; then you are uncertain that you have a Priesthood, &c. accord∣ing to your Principles; forasmuch as a Conclusion evi∣dently deduced is the genuine issue of its Principles or Premisses, and virtually contained in them. §. 14. Thus have I (if I flatter not my self) disarmed the several disadvantages you suppose me to have incur∣red, of all the Advantages you could hope to reap from them; and therefore abide hitherto in a state of safety. Which is all a Man can desire, considered as Defendant; and I have sustained that Notion well-nigh throughout this whole Section. Having done with the Proem of your Letter, I shall in the next place set forth the Answering part of it. SECT. II. Mr. Goodall sets forth the Argument, and his Answer to it, as follows. —BUT your bare saying so, will not make the World believe it. Let us then see how you undertake to prove it.
All Churches, say you, that make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition, which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfill'd, must be uncertain whether they have any true Priesthood. But the Roman Church doth so. Ergo, The Roman Church is uncertain, whether she hath any true Priesthood. You endeavour to prove your Minor Proposition af∣ter this Manner, The Intention of the Priest is a Condition, say you, which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfill'd or no in Ordination. But the Church of Rome requires the Inten∣tion of the Bishop to Ordination. Ergo, The Church of Rome requires a Condition in Ordination, which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfill'd or No. I admit of the following Interpretation, wherein you say, That by every Man living you mean all Persons contradistinguished to the Ordaining Bishops. In answer to your Syllogisms or forms of Argumen∣tation, you must give me leave first to distinguish in the major Proposition of the former, between that Knowledge which is obtained by the Observation of the exterior Actions and Gestures, and attention to the Words of the Prelates in any particular Ordinations; and that knowledge we have from the consideration of the Nature and End of Ordination in general, and which is also necessarily deduced from other known Principles of the Roman Catholick Church grounded upon Divine Revelation. First then, if you understand by knowing here know∣ing in the former way onely, which you seem to me to do, I deny this your first Proposition to be true. For supposing (not granting) that the Roman Catholick Church doth make Priestly Ordination to depend upon a Con∣dition, that no Man living, contradistinguished from the Ordaining Bishop, knows, in the former way (viz. by ob∣serving only what is outwardly done, &c.) Whether it
be fulfilled or no, yet it doth not follow that she must be uncertain whether she have any true Priesthood: Because others, besides the Ordaining Prelates, know, that she hath true Priesthood by the second way of knowledge above-mentioned, that is, from the nature and end of the thing, and necessary deduction from other true Principles: For they know, as to the nature of the thing, that it is Morally impossible that all the Prelates in the Roman Catholick Church should be so Malicious, as wilfully to have omitted any thing in Ordination, which they believed to be essential to it, and which the Church requires as so, supposing it possible for them to do it, and not be discovered. It is impossible for us to believe, according to our Principles, that they should all turn Devils, and conspire, as much as in them lies, to damn the whole Church in their time, and all succeeding Ages, when withal they could propose no advantage at all to themselves by this, but the clean contrary. Again, Roman Catholicks hold this as a Principle, viz. That there is but one Holy, Catholick, Apostolick Church, and that This, in the Communion of which they live, is It; and that God will preserve and conti∣nue this Church to the Worlds end, and all this from Divine Revelation. Now they are not so dull therefore, as not to be able to conclude necessarily from hence, that they must al∣ways have a true Priesthood: For the Means is neces∣sary for the end. Therefore whatsoever Intention of the Prelates is by them believed, as necessary for this end, they do certainly believe according to their Principles, that God's Providence will secure it. His Omnipotence is able to make good his Fidelity. Remember now that you are arguing with Roman Catholicks, according to their own Principles, and these last mentioned are cer∣tainly so. Thus I have shewed the first Proposition in your first
Syllogisin to be false, though upon it your whole Ar∣gumentation depends. Secondly, If you mean by Knowing that way of Knowledge which is thus necessa∣rily deduced from Principles, and the Nature and End of Ordination, then for the last mentioned Reason, the Minor of your former Syllogism, and the Major of your latter are both false. For the Roman Church doth not make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition which no man living besides the Ordaining Bishops know, (viz. in the way of knowledge last men∣tioned) whether it be fulfill'd. And the Intention of the Ordaining Bishop is not a Condition, which no man, besides himself, thus knows to be fulfill'd. If you understand the word knows in one of these senses in your first Proposition, and in another in your fol∣lowing, then your Syllogism is vicious, because it hath four terms. My Answer will be made more clear by an Instance which I shall use by way of Retort upon your Argu∣ment. You take it for a Principle amongst you, That there is a certain number of those that are truly elected to Salvation, in your Communion. And you will allow this also as a principle that these Elect must have true saving Grace in their hearts, as a condition necessary to their Salvation; which saving Grace be∣cause you do not know to be in any particular man, therefore you cannot be certain that he is one of those that is Elected to Salvation: yet you would say that the man were a very bad Logician, and maliciously bent against you that should thus argue: That Church which makes Salvation depend upon a Condition, which no man living knows whether it be fulfil'd in order to Salvation, must be uncertain whether they have any who shall be saved in their Communion. But the English doth so. Ergo, The English Church is uncertain whether they have any which shall be saved in their Communion.
True Grace in the heart is a condition which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no in order to Salvation. But the English Church requires true Grace in the heart in order to Salvation. Ergo, The English Church requires a Condition in order to Salvation which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no. For you will say that in the general way of knowledge beforementioned you know certain∣ly that this Condition is fulfill'd, though you know it not as to particulars. The Argument may be thus ap∣plied to any Christian Church in the world, or to all of them together; but you see it is vicious upon the same reason that I have alledged against yours, as is ma∣nifest: Therefore so is yours too. I desire you also to take notice here, that I do not deny that the Intention of the Ordaining Prelate may be sufficiently known in both the ways of Knowledge abovementioned, which will make the case different from the instance but now brought. But it is enough for the present that I have fully answer'd your Argument. SECT. III. Mr. G's Answer summ'd up, and some strictures made upon it. SIR, I Have done you justice in truly exhibiting your An∣swer, and have presented it at once, as it lies in your Paper, to the Readers view; lest if I had given it in parcels, and interposed my Reflections by the way, it might have been said, I had robb'd it of somewhat of its beauty or strength by breaking its face or dependance. The sum of it (to my understanding) comes to this, §. 1. The Ordaining Bishop's Intention is knowable either by the observation of his doing the Exterior Acti∣on,
and his Gesture, in particular Ordinations: or by considering of the nature and end of Ordination in gene∣ral, and also by deductions from other known Prin∣ciples of your Church grounded on Revelation. You deny not but it is knowable both of these ways, but you seem to fix your confidence especially on the latter: and so between hope and fear, apply your distinction to se∣veral of my Propositions. Supposing, not granting, say you, it cannot be known that way, yet it may this way, and so if the first way fail, our Church is not yet un∣certain of her Priesthood. Then you tell more parti∣cularly what you mean by Nature and End of Ordina∣tion. 1. As to the Nature of the Thing, that it's Mo∣rally impossible all the Priests of your Church should maliciously conspire to omit in Ordination any thing which they believe to be essential to it, and which the Church requires as such; and thereby endeavour to damn the whole Church. 2. That this is a Principle with you, That the Roman Church (I mean it in your latitude of sense) is the Universal Church, which Christ hath promised to maintain and propagate to the worlds end. 3. That your Priesthood is a necessary mean to this end, and therefore God's power will make good his promise, by the continuation of your Priest∣hood. Lastly, you pretend to retort the like Argu∣ment I have urged against you, and that it failing, mine must do so. To this purpose you. §. 2. In the way to the work I chiefly intend, I shall acquaint you with a few of the incongruities of your Answer, reserving the farther sifting of it to its proper place. §. 3. 1. When you have distinguisht of Knowing a Condition to Ordination to be gained either by observing the Ordaining Prelates exterior Action, Words and Gestures, &c. Or by considering the Nature and End of Ordination, &c. You say, if I understand by knowing,
knowing in the former way only, which you say, I seem to you to do, then the first Proposition of my first Syllo∣gism is false. Now that the Reader may see whether you dream not both of my sense of the word knowing, and also of the falseness of the Proposition, I will set it down before his eyes. It is thus, All Churches that make Priestly Ordination depend upon a Condition which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd, must be uncertain whether they have any true Priesthood. Let it be noted that these are the very first words put by way of Argument upon the Question, and then let any man tell me what he sees in them that hath any ap∣pearance so grosly to shackle and confine my sense of the word knows. Nay, I must first be supposed to act the mad man before I could seem so to mean: for to what purpose do I charge another with the ignorance of a thing, and hope to annoy him with consequences drawn from that ignorance, if all this while I suppose that though he cannot know it one way, yet he may know it well another, and so is not at all ignorant as I pronounce him to be. Sure it must be thought I meant it could no way be known, speaking relatively to the charge I give, which appears in the state of my Que∣stion. Now, Sir, I leave it to judgment what a sorry shift you have made to get a colour to accuse a Proposition of Falsehood. I also leave it to judgment, whether it is not most probable that the Un-Scholar like course you took of deferring to call for the State of the Question, till your Answer was given, was not chosen on purpose, that when your Matters failed, you might have this to say, for ought I knew he might have understood the terms otherwise. But it will not serve you for a Blind, even to the meanest capacity that reads what I have said of this, Part I. Sect. II.
It remains then that your Supposition is false, and my Proposition true, for any thing you have said, as yet. §. 4. 2. I note, If your making and applying the said distinction to the former Syllogism be either a necessary or proper work, then you were wanting to your cause at Prescot, where you barely denied the Minor without any hint of distinction or limitation offered; or saying one word to the Major. §. 5. 3. You put me in mind, that I am to prove you Uncertain according to your own principles. Which is a needless office, since you find me doing it already, if you own (as you must) these two Articles to be your Principles, viz. That the Intention is necessary to the Sacraments, and That Ordination is truly and properly a Sacrament. But then for you to take a poor colour from those words to mention your other (fanciful) prin∣ciples, particularly your believing your selves to be the Catholick Church, and to aim at obliging me by vertue of those words of mine, to submit to your deductions from them, is an apparent design to escape from me, and such as betrays your apprehension of the necessity you are under to quit the field. I have accounted for the sense of those words before, and will keep you within just Boundaries. §. 6. 4. I shall shew from the manifest drift of your Answer, that it is not a full Answer as you pretend, and your undiscerning Friends proclaim it to be. This will appear as follows. §. 7. I purposed at first, as I have told you, only to prove you Uncertain of having any true Priests in par∣ticular, because the Prelat's Intention is not discover∣able in your particular Ordinations (an Opponent, let me say, by the way, may be allowed to give the Sense of his own words, provided the Sense he gives make against his Adversary, and so contain him within the compass of an opposition to him.)
§. 8. I add, it appears you apprehended That to be, at least, part of my meaning: for when you had di∣stinguish'd of Knowing the Prelate's Intention either by observing his Actions Words and Gesture in particular Ordinations, or by considering the Nature, &c. you say thus, If you under stand by Knowing here, Knowing in the former way only, which you seem to me to do, &c. I meant, Sir, at that time what in part I seemed to you to mean, viz. to confound the certainty of your Ordinations in particular. And it was sufficient to argue from your Not knowing by any sort of means the Ordainers, In∣tention in particular Ordinations to your Not knowing the Ordained, in particular, to be true Priests; there being with you and essential dependance between the one and the other. The rest your words fix upon me you shall hear of afterwards, as you have done in part al∣ready. §. 9. You knew I meant this, as appears; and now I refer it to all discerning Readers whether you have hinted one single ground in your Answer in Bar of such my attempt against you; or so much as pretend you have. For ought you have said, I may go on with my design against you without stop or remora. I perceive you thought, I might also by defeating your Certainty of having any Priesthood, in particular, go on to con∣clude by way of Induction your Uncertainty of it, in general; and therefore you have cast up some sort of Mud-walls (whose strength I shall try anon) to secure your self on that side: but you have left your self na∣ked and open, where you were sensible I must first as∣sault you. Which hapned not, I think, for want of regard to your cause, but because you had no general story to tell, which would seem to secure you, as to this. §. 10. 5. I apprehend not your Answer to be either ne∣cessary or artificial. When you hold the Intention knowable in both the ways you mention, and conse∣quently
that my Propositions you apply your distinctions to, are altogether or absolutely false, what need you as Respondent, do more than Simply deny them? In a course of Argumentation, a full stop is that way put to Falshood; and so there needed not very many Words to have effected this. It is the Truth of Propositions in one Sense, and not in another, that makes distinctions requisite; and therefore yours cannot be requisite while you deny Mine to be true in any Sense. The manner of applying Distinctions by Learned men evinces all I say, which usually runs thus, If the Word, or, &c. be taken in this Sense, your Proposition is false for this or that Rea∣son; but if in that Sense, I may grant the Thing with∣out any disadvantage to my self. But if a Man pleases to make an unnecessary distincti∣on, saying, Such a Proposition may admit these two Senses, but it is false in both of them; and if he proceed to assign Reasons why it is not true in one of those Sen∣ses, me-thinks Order requires he should likewise do it in the other, there being the same Reason he should omit or perform it in both. §. 11. This, Sir, is your Case; your Answer is made up partly of a distinction, which is unnecessary upon your Supposition of the absolute falsity of my Propositi∣ons; and partly of (seeming) Reasons given why they are false in one of the two Senses, mentioned; but there is no Cause alledged why they are not true in the other: Wherefore I conclude your Answer is neither necessa∣ry nor Artificial. I heartily beg the Readers pardon for having spent too much time in the more general consideration of your Answer, which yet I have done to undeceive the Ap∣plauders of it. I shall now bend my self to my Under∣taken Province, viz. to prove the Major of my second Syllogism, to which your distinction may (in some sort) be applied, though it could not congruously to any Pro∣position in the first.
SECT. IV. The Intention proved not to be Knowable by Reason. SIR, the Proposition which you deny, and I am now to prove, is this, The Intention of the Bishop is a Con∣dition which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfill'd or no in Ordination. To be short and clear, I put it thus, No Man knows whether or no the Bishop's Intention be pre∣sent in Ordination. We are to keep in mind, that his Intention of the End (in some sense or other, in some degree or other) is here meantPard. l. Sect. 5., and that the Intention is a mere interior Act of the Will, as was shewn abovePar. l. Sect. 4. §. 1.. This premised, Thus I prove the Point: §. 1.No man knows whether the Bishop's Intention be present or no in Ordination, either by Reason or Authority. Ergo, No man knows whether or no the Bishop's Intention be present in Ordination. All the ways whereby the Intention can be supposed to be known are put in the Antecedent; if Which be proved, the Consequent must be good. Now I proceed to prove the Parts of the Antecedent in Order. 1. It cannot be known by Reason, as I prove thus, §. 2. No man knows whether or no the Bishop's Intention be present in Ordination, either by the Evidence they have of it in its self, or in any Effects of it: Or (which comes all to one) no man knows it either by Intuition or Discourse, Ergo, No man knows by Reason whether or no it be present in Ordination. All the ways that can be supposed to know the Inten∣tion by Reason, are reckoned up in the Antecedent; and therefore if That be made good, the Consequent stands firm, by reason of its just dependance on it.
I shall evince that it can be known neither of these ways; and shall use more and freer words to do it, than a rigorous frame of Argumentation would admit, be∣cause Men not bred to the strict formality of discourse may that way judge more naturally of what is offered; and might otherwise be at some loss. §. 3. I shall, in passing, describe Seeing of a thing in it self, or intuitive Knowledge to be That which is formed by the proper Idea, or Similitude of the Thing known, and when the Understanding is carried immediately to the Object, without the help of Discourse. It may be illustrated by our Experience of Sensitive intuition, ex. gr. We immediately know those proper Objects of Sight that are set before our eyes; and not by any run of our thoughts from one thing to another, in order to get the Knowledge of them. By this we may measure the Na∣ture of intuitive Intellection. Now to the Point. §. 4. 1. The Intention of one Man cannot be known to another, in it self, or by intuitive Intellection. For though God hath given us Faculties to assure us imme∣diately of the proper Objects of our Senses, and of those Verities usually called First Principles, or Common No∣tions, by which we measure the knowledge of other things; yet he hath not thought fit to give us any, imme∣diately to inspect the secrets of another's heart. Now the Intention of the Bishop, whereof we treat, is most pro∣perly one of those Secrets. Liberty and Freedom is Essential to the Will, (which is the onely power capable of exerting that Act:) and therefore, though it be furnished with all prae-requisites to its Acting, yet it may intend, or it may not; and how can any man pretend to know whether it do, or not? Humane Understanding cannot penetrate the recesses of that free immaterial power, nor break open that best se∣cured of all created Closets. §. 5. So far are the particular mere Acts of the Will
from being pervious to the eye of man, that according to the most and greatest Authors, the Angels themselves cannot (at least, this way) know them. Aquinas, Cajetan, Suarez, Valentia, Vasquez, Hurtad, and many more, de∣termine the Thing, as I have said: And indeed the case is so clear, that I need but touch upon the words of one or two of them. The Question in Aquinas, isƲtrum Angeli cognoscunt cogi∣tationes cordium., Whe∣ther the Angels know the thoughts of the heart? And he resolves it in the Nega∣tive, upon this groundEx sola voluntate dependet quòd aliquis actu aliqua consideret. Pars 1. Quaest. 57. Art. 4., It wholly de∣pends upon the Will that any one actually considers any thing. Because the Will is the only power in Man, that is formally free, and this power sets the un∣derstanding on work, he concludes that the particular acts of the understanding cannot immediately be known by the Angels themselves. If then these cannot be known for the Reason alledged, much less can the mere Acts of the Will, which is intrinsecally and formally free. Cardinal Cajetan words it thusDicimus quod Cogitatio, co quod volita seu libera, est naturaliter oc∣culta. in locum., We say that the Thought, because it is volun∣tary or free, is therefore naturally secret, or hidden. Suitably to these two Authors doth Hurtad offer the same Doctrine by way of remarkAdverte secretum cordis esse so∣los actus voluntatis. Metaph. Disp. 12. Sect. 4. §. 30.. Mark, saith he, that only the Acts of the Will are the Secrets of the Heart. Now if the Will be sealed up from the view of An∣gels, much more is it from that of Men. Were it need∣ful, Saint Paul's Question would put this Point out of doubt, 1 Cor. 2.11. What Man knoweth the things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man which is in him? §. 6. It will farther appear, that these Secrets fall not within the immediate cognizance of Man, if I shew in a few words, that they are onely open to the eye of God,
Who at once knows all things, past, present, and to come, by a pure and immutable Act; that is, by his very Es∣sence. The Authors newly named, having denied that view to Created Beings, go on to appropriate it to God. I will only mention Aquinas's Words, which are short and plainEa quae ex voluntate sola depen∣dent, vel quae in voluntate sola sunt, soli Deo sunt nota. Loco citato.. Those things which depend on the Will onely, or which are in the Will onely, are known to God alone. But a far greater Authority, viz. the Scripture, leaves no doubt for this, asserting in many places, that God re∣serves the Knowledge of those Secrets to himself, as an incommunicable Prerogative. I need refer but to a few. Jer. 179, 10.— I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins. 1 Chron. 29.17. 1 Sam. 16.7. Psal. 7.9. Acts 1.24, &c. The Sum of what hath appeared here, is, That the In∣tention of the Ordaining Bishop is not Knowable imme∣diately or in it self, by any created intellect: Nor can it be seen in its Cause, by reason of that Dominion a Free Agent hath over its own Acts; which it may, or may not, exert, when it pleases. If it be askt me, Why God hath given any Faculty to any of his Creatures, which as to its particular tenden∣cies, is impenetrable to the sharpest eye of Man or An∣gel; I might take up with resolving it solely into the Divine pleasure. However, it seems congruous to Rea∣son, it should be so: Which thing I shall set forth in the Words of Balthazar TellezOrdo Naturalis praestantiaque intellectualium Crcaturarum postula∣bant, ne Secreta suorum cordium in∣tuitive al is manifestarcntur, praeter∣quam Dco, qui solùm, ut testatur Scriptura, renum testis est, & cordis Scrutator vcrus. In Logic Disput. 14. Sect. 1., and so shut up this particular. Natural Order, saith he, and the Ex∣cellency of intellectual Creatures did re∣quire that the Secrets of their Hearts should not be intuitively manifested to any besides God, who alone, as the Scri∣pture attests, is the Witness of the Reins, and the true searcher of the Heart.
2. As I have shewn that the Bishop's Intention can∣not be known in it self by any besides himself; so, Sir, I now come to shew that it cannot be known by any effects. §. 7. The Reason is, It is so merely and intirely an Act of the Will, that it is the Act of no other power; and con∣sequently doth not of it self produce any Term or Effect without the Will; for which reason such Acts are called immanent both by Philosophers and School Di∣vines. But it would be needless here to cite them. The Term or Effect then being shut up in the Will, it is no more discoverable than the Act it self, which you, without ground, suppose to be manifested by it; and so you have nothing to argue from in that case, as from a thing more known, to a thing less known, and there∣fore must remain uncertified of the Being of the Act, unless you can invent some other mean of discovery. The Will hath no such dependance upon, nor connexi∣on with any natural cause in its acting, as that it must impress upon the Body any sensible marks of its mo∣tions, in which we may surely read when and what it acts; as alteration of Voice, change of Countenance, or any the like thing from which you pretend to make a judgment of it. Aquinas will tell you this, with the reason of it.In actu appetitus intellectivi non requi∣ritur aliqua transmutatio corporalis, quia bujusmodi appetitus non est virtus alicujus Organi, prim. secund. q 22. Ar. 3. No change in the Body necessarily attends an Act of the Will, because such an appetite is not the virtue of any [bodily] Organ. I add, if any motion should by accident result in the Body from the actual Will, as signs of joy, or sorrow, or shame, &c.. yet this can lead only to the discerning some affections of the Will, in general; but not any particular Act of it. Hence I conclude, you can never secure your notion of knowing the Bishop's Intention by observing his
Action, &c. till you make the Will to be a material power, and immanent Actions to be transient; which yet is impossible to be done. Now because you assign no other way of knowing the Intention in particular, than making the fore-men∣tioned observations, I will take the freedom to deal a little more samiliarly with you about it. I will suppose here, that a Bishop doth with a laud∣able shew of Gravity pronounce the Words, and do the exterior Action your Church requires to Ordination, and that hardly any Bishop comes short of that, who pre∣tends to confer holy Orders; but when I have done, I remain ignorant how I may certainly conclude from such his performance, whether he thereby intend to confer Spiritual power, or to do as the Church doth; and therefore would learn that skill from you. Either inform me that there is an individual connexion between his doing the one, and intending the other, or tell me when, and in what circumstances, the connexion fails. The exterior Action is too dim, and indeed too uncer∣tain a Glass to see this in. §. 8. May not a man do a thing materially good, and directly commanded by God, without intending the End God requires? What think you of some mens re∣lieving the poor, from no higher a Motive than that of vain glory? Matt. 6.1. What think you of some mens frequent saying their prayers for the same low end? v. 5. Our blessed Saviour plainly intimates that others may mistake the Intention of such, and earnestly applaud them for righteous persons; and that God only, who sees in secret, can detect their carnal purposes and crooked wills. Did not Judas declare it his desire to have the Bag saved for the sake of the poor, when he meant it only for his own advantage? John 12.6. He spoke good words, and did a seemingly-kind action to our Lord, he said, Hail Master and kissed him, when
he intended not to express any true affection but to betray him, Matth. 26.49. I forbear to multiply in∣stances of this sort, these now given being sufficient to evince, that there is no necessary dependance between the exterior actions of men and their interior Inten∣tions, and consequently it is no sure arguing from those to these. §. 9. For the Ordainer's Gesture, I think you bring it in to no great purpose. Do you fancy Judas laught in our Saviour's face when he passed upon him that trea∣cherous Ceremony? Or that the Pharisees flear'd or made Mowes, when they gave their Alms, or said their Prayers, in token of their acting for undue ends? Are there not Sinons yet in the world? May not a serious face frequently disguise a dissembling heart? Were the outward appearance always the true Picture of the mind, Hypocrisie would upon the matter, be wholly divested of its Essence. In an Irony there is indeed (as it were) a natural discovery of the contrariety of the Mind to the Words spoken; but in formal Hypocrisie a studious concealment of the repugnance between the motions of the heart and the outward appearance. Were your Bishops wont in an openly ludicrous or sportive manner to pronounce the Form and apply the Matter of Ordination, your observation of their Gesture might tend to your discerning that sometimes they were not in earnest, but still we want a mean to know when they intend aright. We have proved a grave out-side will not assure us of this. But I think no Bishop in the world will do so childish an act, or expose himself to scorn or hatred, or danger by an apparent mock-Ordi∣nation, and so your observing of their Gesture will not so much as enable you to know when they intend not. I will put the Case further, may not a Bishop who actually intends to make a Priest, chance to smile at some odd sight when he is pronouncing the words—
Accipe potestatem, &c. Or would any man in that case pronounce the Ordination a nullity? I think not. Pray tell us then in what manner you are guided to the know∣ledge of the Ordainer's Intention by your observation of his Gesture. I am afraid, when you explain your self we shall have a sad story of it. Besides, there is a manifest insufficiency in your Rule of judgment, which is the Bishop's words, actions and gesture in Ordination; for after your way, you can only pretend to know whether or no he actually intends in the Administration of Orders: but supposing you could find that he doth not then so intend, your observation is worth nothing; For, 1. Your Church requires it not as necessary that he should then actually intend; if he do it virtually, it will answer the End it is required for, as is proved beforePart I. Sect. VII.. 2. Your observing his Action afterwards cannot surely lead you to an intrinsecally contingent Act of his Will which passed a minute or two before the Action done. He may have intended for ought you know, before, (which is called the virtual Intention in the time of the Action) but whether he did or no, you cannot be certified by the subsequent Action, except you have a singular gift of discerning, not known to the rest of Mankind. If you have such a gift, and can communicate your skill of knowing the secrets of man's heart by observing his Words, Actions and Gestures, it may be of extra∣ordinary use to the world. Many sorts of men might avoid great harms otherwise incident to them, by virtue of your instructions. Princes would be secured from employing servants that meant not Faith and Secrecy when they promise them. Masters and Parents would at a notable rate inspect the minds of servants and chil∣dren. And Mental Reservations would hereby become unprofitable, which would be a great loss somewhere. If you can in the manner aforesaid, judge of such a par∣ticular
Act of the Will, you are sufficiently enabled to make all these and many more such discoveries. But alas! Your Notion is a mere dream, as I have shewed by barely declaring, That the meer interior, elicit Acts of the Will (and our Intention is one of them) make not of themselves any such sensible im∣pressions upon the Body, as that another can make there∣by any sure judgment of them: and that they make no such impressions by accident as will reach that end. I have therefore forborn to confirm what I have said of the Nature of the Will and her Acts, by nume∣rous Testimony, because I expect no Adversary here. However I will add a few words more to confront your method of Trial. §. 10. Your greatest Authors describe the Intention I speak of, by such Epithets as shew they held it not to be knowable by your way. They call it mentalIntentio Mentalis. A∣quin. par. 3. qu. 64. art. 8., properly mentalProprie mentalis, Cajetan in locum., internalInterna, Bellar. de Sacram. in Gen. l. 1. c. 27., occultOcculta, Medina in prim. secund qu 112. art. 5., &c. Now they would not have spoken thus, merely be∣cause the Intention is not knowable immediately, or in it self, if yet it had been knowable by any necessary connexion with some other thing we know by the Mi∣nistry of Sense or Experience; for they call That evi∣dent knowledge which is so collected. But they call it properly Mental, Occult, &c. because it is not so con∣nected with any other thing which may surely lead us to it. I shall illustrate this by an instance, when out∣ward Actions are done immediately or proximately by the lower executive powers, upon the command (as I may say) and motion of the Will, (which are there∣fore called imperate) such Actions are called the actions of the Will, or voluntary actions: and yet no wise man will call these Occult or properly Mental. For though the
motion of the Will be secret in it self, yet we have now some sensible effect so dependent upon and connexed with it, that all that are not strangers to the Ordinary course of Nature, may be assured of the presence of the Will in such Actions. I must grant, Sir, your writing an Answer to my Argument to be a voluntary action, and that your purpose to write it was not visible in it self; yet it is sufficiently made so by your doing it. And on this score your Will or purpose to write it ought to be called an open or exterior, not an interior or hidden purpose. But then if we seek after the particular End you intended in writing it, we shall not be able to find the secret. Whether you thereby intended to honour God by vindicating a supposed Truth of his, which I had assaulted; or to please your self by baffling your ob∣scure neighbour, or to gain some reputation (or other advantage) with your party by a dextrous defence of your Cause, is, and must be, a secret to all besides your self; nor would the best observation made of your Action and Gestures, while you was at work, have ascertained the Spectators of your Intention. So then your purpose to answer me is manifest by what I see; but your intent in doing it I must remain uncertain of, for want of a sure ground to argue from, to the knowledge of it. Well. That concerned in our Question is the Inten∣tion of the End, &c. which effects nothing without the Will, from whence we may derive any certainty of it, and therefore it is truly called inward and hidden, and mental by your Authors last cited; and consequently the Ordainer's Intention is supposed by them (and many others that speak the same language) not to be dis∣coverable by your external observation. §. 11. I add, If it be God's prerogative to search the Heart, your Notion of discerning the Intention wants foundati∣on, in as much as That doth not only exclude Man from
the intuitive, but also from the discursive Knowledge of it. For if it might surely be known this way, then Men were also Searchers of the Heart. On that supposition, the Thing is not denied to Men, but onely the Mode of it. But if the Manner of Knowing made all the difference here, Why should the Knowledge of the Heart be more eminently ascribed to God, than the Knowledge of any thing else, since he knows all things alike, and the same way, viz. by his own Essence? I conclude then the meaning of the Attribution to be this, That God hath reserved the inspection of the Heart to his own eye, ha∣ving by the Spirituality of its Nature, so shut it up from others, that the Agent himself cannot in some cases as∣sure another of the Being of its particular Acts. And the Prelate's Intention (as hath been often said) is one of these. Hence your ablest Writers speaking of this Act, do not onely say, it may be hid, but that it is always so. Take a tast of such their language. The Intention of the Minister is al∣ways hid from us, without which we cannot know there is a Sacrament, saith MedinaSemper Intentio Ministri est nobis occulta, sine quâ Sacramentum non constat. in prim secund. qu. 112. art. 5.. And again he saith in the same Article, They that are present [at Baptism] cannot determine whether the Minister Intend to do as the Church dothQui intersunt non possunt fla∣tuere an Minister habuerit Intentio∣nem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia.. Now, Sir, what becomes of your pretended Know∣ledge of the Intention, by observing the Action, Words, and Gesture of the Minister? Tell us how You therein see the lively Effigies of it, when it is not visible to o∣ther-Men. Man may indeed guess at, and fancy things, but none in the World are so Eagle-ey'd, as to see That in any Ef∣fects. D. Soto's eyes were in his Head, and he had oc∣casion to make a narrow search for this Thing, and after
all, he affirms by a Rhetorical Questi∣on, that no man could surely find itQuis potest certior omnino fieri, quod ille qui haptizat, habeat Intentio∣nem Baptizandi. De Natura & Gra∣tia, lib. 3. c. 13.. Who can be fully certified that he who Baptizeth hath an Intention to Baptize? Thus have I said enough (and I fear far too much) to evince, That the Intention of the Ordaining Bishop can∣not be known by Reason, as being evident neither in it self, nor in any Effects. SECT. V. The Intention is not knowable by Authority, whether Divine or Humane. SEcondly, I shall prove the said Intention cannot be known by Authority, in this manner, §. 1. It cannot be known either by any general Revela∣tion made by God, nor by the Authoritative Testimony of Men: Ergo, It cannot be known by Authority. I mention not Good Angels here, because, 1. The Secrets of man's Heart, as appeared before, is lockt up from them. 2. Were they privy to them, yet we have no Ordinary Observable Commerce with them. 3. Nor have Rules to discern their true Declarations of Fact from Satanical Delusions. I therefore made the Testimony of God and Men to be a sufficient Partition of Authority in the present case. I shall now make good both Parts of the Antecedent, and then the Consequent will stand firm. §. 2. 1. It is not knowable by any Revelation of God. For if we read Scripture from beginning to end, we shall find neither Prophecy to foretel, nor Promise to assure, That all the Roman Bishops in general, nor this or that in particular, throughout the several Centuries from the Apostles days, nor in any one of them, shall in their
Ordinations intend the end of their Institution, or to do therein as the Church doth. Nor doth the Scripture furnish with any Rule, by which we may certainly judge when they so intend, and when they do not. Tradition is also silent here; nor is it, whatever other uses it may serve to, pretended to prefent us with such Notices. Wherefore I conclude, We cannot attain the Knowledge of the Bishop's Intention by Revelation. §. 3. 2. We have for This no such Humane Testimo∣ny, as may beget that certain Knowledge of it, which is properly called Moral Certainty. (And what is below this, excludes not rational fear, and therefore is but abu∣sively called certain Knowledge.) To make this good to full satisfaction, 1. I shall rec∣kon up the several things required to found the said Mo∣ral Certainty: And withal shew what-like Assent they breed. 2. I shall manifest that those requisites do not concur in our case of the Intention, and that therefore we cannot know it with the foresaid Knowledge; The House cannot be strong, where the Foundation is weak. §. 4. To Moral Certainty it is required, (1.) That the Objects of it be Sensible Objects; and such as are obvious to the Observers; Things so nota∣ble or Remarkable, that if some Men should chance to make false reports of them, others may, or might have contradicted them. I note it here as a Thing ordained by the Divine Wisdom, to preserve us from Impostures, that Men are (as it were) naturally bent to detect the Errors of others, and to expose such as they observe to advance a Fiction for true Fact. A secret pleasure attends this work, and a Reputation follows it; and sometimes an uncharitable Temper promotes it. And consequently insensible notable Objects, the misreports of some will be blasted, by the contrary affirmation of others, at least so far, that they shall not gain the Authority of an Uni∣versal, uncontrouled Testimony.
§. 5. (2.) That a competent number of Persons of known Sense and Probity, openly and constantly declare, that they have a Physical Certainty of such Objects; that is, that they saw such Sights with their own eyes, or heard such Words or Sounds with their own ears. Nothing less can be of Weight and Strength to per∣swade Men to entertain a prudent Belief of what the first Reporters say, and to set on foot a Tradition of it to Posterity. §. 6. (3.) That no Advantage can be well thought to accrue to the Reporters, by imposing upon others False∣hood instead of Truth. Every Eye sees what vast power Secular Ends have, to deprave the Heart and Tongue of frail Man; and there∣fore when it may be reasonably supposed, that Persons may say this or that in a subserviency to such Ends, discreet Men cannot entirely credit them. §. 7. (4.) That none qualified, as I have supposed the first Reporters to be, oppose their Experiences in Con∣tradiction of them. Were there such Opposers, it would forbid all Certainty. For the Eyes and Ears of one Man may be as good, and ought to be regarded as much as the Eyes and Ears of ano∣ther; provided the Object be Evident and Obvious, and the Witnesses alike credible on both sides. §. 8. Where these Requisites meet together, I take their Testimony to be a Virtual Communication of their Sen∣sations to Others. We do, upon the Matter, see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and cannot reason∣ably fear, that the Matter should be otherwise, than it is represented to us. Though That was physically evident to the Spectators, &c. which is onely Morally so to me; that is, though they had the assurance of an Object by Eye-sight, and I only by Hear say, yet my Hear say may be so encircled with solid and convincing Circumstances, that I can no more question the Truth of what I hear,
than I can of what I see. Ex. gr. When our Seamen or Merchants are failing, first time, for Amsterdam in Hol land; they are no lefs sure before-hand, that there is such a City, than they are when they arrive there. This certainty is express'd by Medina thusQuod certum csi Moraliter, absque aliqua baesitatione potest jur amcuto con∣firmari. in prim. secund. qu. 112. art. 5., That which is Morally certain, a Man may swear to without Haesitation. His notion, I confess, seems somewhat uncouth, but it amounts to a full description of the Nature of proper∣ly-Moral Certainty, as it is exclusive of all Fear, lest Things should be otherwise in the Understanding, than they are in themselves. The Author means the same thing, (and no more) by the Words now cited, that he fets forth in these WordsCertitudo moralis omncm excludit dubitationem, convincit & necessitat intelleclum. Nemo enim sanae ment is potest regare quod Roma sit. bidem., Moral Certainty shuts out all doubt, it convinces and necessitates the Vnder∣standing to assent. For no Man in his Wits can deny, that there is such a place as Rome. Melchior Canus, speaking of Things so attested, comes up to the same heightHaec non modo negare, sed in his otiam addubitare stultissimum est. Le Locis Theolog li. 11. c 4., It is a most foolish thing, not only to deny these things, but even to doubt of them. It reaches so near to the Certainty of Sense, that Suarez advanceth such an attestation to a kind of EvidenceHumana quaedam evidentia. De Trip. virt. Theol. Disp. 10. Sect 2.. Having thus recounted the Pillars that bear up Moral Certainty, and also shewn the weight of the Assent, that rests upon them, I shall now set forth by way of Com∣parison, that the pretended Knowledge of the Intention hath no such Firmament to support it. §. 9. (1.) It is not a Sensible Object, but a Spiritual or immaterial Act, shut up in a Faculty, which (as we have seen alreadyPart 11. Sect. 4.) is inaccessible to the eyes of Men and Angles.
§. 10. (2.) And consequently, as no creature can see it but the single Agent himself, so none is capable of contradicting his Relation of it, if it should be (as it may be) in it self false. So then a grand Rule of Trial most conducible to Moral assurance, is wanting on this score, and then what a rational stress can be laid on such Testimony? §. 11. (3.) Were the Object of it self liable to com∣mon observation, yet one witness is not sufficient to challenge our Credence. God himself was pleased in the Old TestamentDeut 19.5. to intimate, that a single witness was less credible than many, and not to be trusted in matters of moment; and our Blessed Saviour hath repeated it in the NewMatth. 18.16. ; — That in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be est ablished. From whence we may estimate how slender a satisfaction the Bishop's word would give in that great concern, if he should say, I intended to do as the Church doth, in my Ordaining such a person. §. 12. (4.) As there can be no more but a single wit∣ness in the Case, so he may reasonably be suspected to affirm on his own behalf, or for his own Interests: and if so (which will appear shortly) it will much les∣sen the value of his Testimony. With a respect to This our Blessed Saviour saidJohn 5.31., If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. Gagneius's Gloss upon the Text may both illustrate and accommodate it to my Case,loquitur ut purus homo: hominis autem puri testimonium de se recipi non solct. in 8. cap. Johannis. Jesus speaks as a meer man: and it is unusual to give credit to a meer man when he bears wit∣ness on his own behalf. §. 13. Now that any Bishop in the world may be a party concerned (and therefore an incompetent wit∣ness) in affirming he intended as the Church requires, will be easily made appear. If he be declared Anathema (as he is by the Trent Council) who denies the ne∣cessity
of the Intention to the Sacraments, sure no light punishment would be allotted to that Bishop who should discover that he defeated his Ordinations of their Efficacy by omitting to intend as the Church requires. This crime is called Sacriledge by your Authors; and it must be such in a high degree according to your Hy∣pothesis, it being beyond comparison, more hainous to rob mens souls of Sacramental Grace, than Churches of consecrated Cups or Patens. Excommu∣nication may be well supposed to be inflicted upon the Criminal Bishop, which Censure is followed with su∣spension from Office and Benefit, and with the loss of the priviledges of the Laws, as your Authors teachSee for this Card. Caje∣tan's Summuls. verb. Excom.. At best shame and reproach will attend such a disco∣very: on which account I find some of your Casuists shie of advising the Ministers of the Sacraments to re∣veal the matter, when they have rendred them inesse∣ctual through their Not-intending or otherwise. For example, when a Priest hath given an invalid Absolu∣tion, he must be cautious of making it knownNè si poenitens admoneatur, sequetur scandalum vel infamia. Suarez. tom. 4. par. 2. disp. 32. Sect. 6., Left some scandal or infamy fol∣low his revealing it to the Penitent. But on the contrary, he is obliged (say they) to make the defect known, when it may be done without any great harm to him∣self, and without scandalquando sine gravi nocumento ipseus confessoris & sine seandalo seri potest. ibid.. But guilt is jealous of the harms sometimes subse∣quent to such discoveries; and since the offender will be judge, he will hardly think himself safe, save in a deep concealment of such his faults; and therefore will like those Authors best that furnish him with the best Evasions. §. 14. Thus have we found that the Bishop's con∣fession of their Not-intending aright, may expose them to loss, or shame, or both; and sad experience tells us that many are more tender of their Riches and Reputa∣tion,
than of their Conscience; and apt to sackisice Truth to their worldly welfare. And therefore when a Bishop is askt, how he intended in such an Ordination, none knows but such respects may prevail with him to make an untrue Answer. If he have wilfully offended in that point, we may expect he will cloak his malice with a Lye; if through gross carelesness, he may stu∣diously conceal it: But suppose he hath done his duty, his telling us so cannot prove it, because it is but every way the same Answer they give, who have transgress'd it. §. 15. The summ hereof is this, There is hardly any thing alike between the two Things I have now com∣pared. There an object liable to the observation of ma∣ny; not so here. There several Witnesses affirm, here is only singularis testis. There no personal interest makes the Testimony suspicious, here the single witness de∣poseth for himself. The Inference from hence is this, There a strong Assent is founded, here a weak one. There is certainty, here is none. §. 16. I add, I am perswaded that Roman Catholicks seldom (if ever) actually have the slender security of the said single Testimony. For I never heard in my Converse with them, nor read in any of their Books, that they use to ask their Ministers, whether they In∣tend aright or no. They presume they do so, and rest in that good natur'd belief, without troubling them with such questions. But we are to consider, that a blind Perswasion and Intellectual certainty are far diffe∣rent things. That is incident to all sorts of Hereticks, This to the Orthodox only. §. 17. Now, Sir, if I am not a partial judge in my own Cause, I have made it plain, that the Ordaining Prelate's Intention cannot be known either by Reason or Authority; (than which I find no other grounds of
certain Knowledge.) Which was the thing I under∣took to prove. SECT. VI. Roman Catholicks have but a bare Opinion to secure them of the point. §. 1. IT now remains, Sir, that I only leave the Roman Catholicks that weak assent to the point, usually termed Opination. Had this been granted me at first, viz. That you hold your Priesthood considered in particular, by no other claim than that of bare Opi∣nion, as Opinion is opposed to moral certain Know∣ledge; I had not taken the trouble of writing much, but gone on immediately to infer from that Grant the crazy estate of your Church. I shall briesly say upon What some of your great men found their Assent to the presence of the Ministers Intention, and then evince that their Foundation will bear up no more than bare Opinion. §. 2. 1. It is the Probity of the Ministers of the Sa∣craments they rely on, as a sufficient security that they intend aright. Soto shall declare this for himself and others— Cum videmus homines pro∣bos uti forma & Materia Eccle∣siae; credimus sanas etiam Chri∣stianâs{que} habere mentes dum Sa∣cramenta ministrant, in 4. Sent. dist. 1. qu 5. art. 8.. When we see honest [sincere, vertuous] men use the matter and form of the Church, we also believe that they have sound and Christian minds while they administer the Sacraments. 2. To shew what a small weight this ground will bear, I will proceed by some degrees. But in the way hereunto I premise these things, §. 3. (1.) Your Authors agree That those may be true Ministers of the Sacraments who have neither Faith nor Probity: for which they give this reason, Sacra∣ments
have their Efficacy from the Divine Institutor, and therefore depend not for this, upon the Qualificati∣ons of the Minister, provided he perform what is requi∣red by the Institution. And I find them accursed by your Trent Council, who deny that a wicked Minister doth validly administer the SacramentsSi quis dixerit Ministrum in pec∣cato mortali existentem—non consicere aut confcrre Sacramentum, anathema sit. Ses. 7.. Ca. 11.. §. 4. (2.) I never found it in practice among you, to judge the Dispensing your Sacraments more or less valid for the greater or less Temperance, Continence, Devo∣tion, &c. of your Ministers. §. 5. (3.) I then account it your great infelicity, if as the cited words intimate, you cannot be well satisfied that any Minister intends aright; whom you know not to be a good and sincere Man. Among the vast Numbers of your Clergy, (as it also happens to those of other Churches) there must be many irreligious and immoral men, not so Christianly qualified, as You and I could wish: And then according to the Rule laid down, How many Hosts consecrated by such, may be adored with doubting Minds; How many Absolutions given, whose Virtue may be rationally que∣stioned, &c? §. 6. But enough of this. I will now try how firmly your security lies, even upon the conceived Probity, or Sincerity of your Ministers. I take the Argument to be this, Good men will not be wanting to their duty. Good Mi∣nisters will be sure to Intend as the Church requires. What I shall say to this Argument, is as follows, I confess, a good Conscience, or a Principle of Grace, is a very Operative thing, and excites to watchful dili∣gence in duty, where it really is: But it is fit we should know, 1. In whom it is, before we conclude the Mini∣ster's Intention, or any other good Effects from it, in particular. 2. Whether that Effect necessarily follow from that Cause.
§. 7. First, Let us inquire, how it can be known, where it surely is. For satisfaction in which Point, I shall lay this down as evident, That we know not any other Man's frame of mind, so well as himself knows it; as whether he sigh for his sins in secret, strive to mortifie the unruly Motions of his Heart, values himself chiefly upon God's Mercy, through Christ, loves God above all things, and purposes to obey him without Reserve, &c. Having said this, I shall determine according to your own Doctrine, (for I am not concerned here to interpose my own judgment) how far your Ministers of the Sa∣craments are certain, that themselves are sincere Chri∣stians, or in a state of Grace: And then compare That with What others know of it. §. 8. (1.) Themselves cannot infallibly know this, without special Revelation, as your Trent-Council definesNullus scire vales certitudine Fi∣dei, cui non potest subesse falsum, se gratiam Dei esse consecutum. Sess 6. Cap. 9.. No man can know with the infallible Certainty of Faith, that he hath obtained the Grace of God. §. 9. (2.) Roman Catholicks cannot agree to allow any Man such a Certainty of it, as is equal to Moral Certainty, which excludes all rational Fear of being deceived. Aquinas saithHomo non potest per certitudinem dijudicarc utrum ipse ha eat Gratiam. prim. secund. qu. 112. Art. 5., No man can judge certainly, whether he have Grace. And he proceeds to say, Men know this only by way of conjecture,Ibidem. gained by some Signs or other: [Conjectura∣liter per aliqua Signa.]. Medina (upon the place) words it thusVir justus non potest habere cer∣titudinem ae gratiae, sed tantummodo conjecturalem, & quae non tran cendis limites Opinionis human, quae habet semper formidinem adjunctam., A just man can have no more than a conjectural certainty of his Grace, and such as transcends not the limits of Humane Opinion, which always hath Fear adjoined to it. §. 10. (3.) From the Knowledge you allow your Mi∣nisters
to have of their own Sincerity and Grace, it will be easie to collect in what measure others are able to know their state, if the Rule of judgment, I premised, be remembred, viz. That every thinking man knows the affections and state of his own Heart, better than another man can do it. §. 11. If your Ministers then, who have experience of their own internal Acts, know not certainly whether they Fear and Love God above all things, (by which I now describe being in Grace). much less can others, who can view onely outward Signs and appearances, but are strangers to the Root and Spring of them. §. 12. Supposing your Ministers had undeniably a certainty of their Grace, equal to a Moral Certainty, which admits no fear of the contrary; yet all besides themselves, for the Reason given, must fall short of that Assurance, and so take up with Ʋnstable Opinion. §. 13. But since you will not agree to allow them to be so certain of it, others must still proportionably fall below them, and be content with a lean and languid Assent, which shakes and totters for want of Evi∣dence. From what hath been thus set forth, I shall now de∣stroy the Argument offered by the cited Author, in fa∣vour of your being satisfied, that your Ministers of the Sacraments duly intend in the Administration of them. §. 14. If Roman Catholicks cannot be so much as Mo∣rally Certain of the Probity and Christian mindedness (to speak with the Author) of their Ministers, on which Qua∣lifications they ground their confidence of their due Intend∣ing; (as I have proved they cannot) then they cannot be Morally certain of their so Intending. The building can∣not be stronger than the foundation; nor the conclusion more evident than the premisses. §. 15. Moreover: Your case is yet worse than this; For you are greater Strangers to the particular Mental
Acts of your Ministers, than you are to the Frame and Habit of their Minds. For you may fairly guess at This, by observing a full course of their Outward Actions, but not near so well at these Acts. The Reason is, a good Man may omit a good act, or do an ill one, without the destruction of his good habit, which denominates him such. To accommodate this to our case, it is to be no∣ted, That the Minister's Intention may be obstructed, not onely by malice or contempt of Religion, or gross Negligence; but also by Natural inadvertence, or such accidental prevalent cares, or fears, or deep concerning Studies, as in gross, and (as I may say) swallow up the mind, or hale it from a duty in hand, elsewhither. In these latter Instances, there may chance to be a defect of the Intention, without a wicked Habit in the Mini∣ster: So then the Connexion between good Habits and such particular Acts is not certain, and therefore not to be depended on. §. 16. The result, as to our present concern, is this, 1. As it is but probable (as probable is opposed to moral∣ly certain) your Bishops have Christian minds, (remem∣ber I speak of them in particular) So is it but probable that in their Ordinations they intend as your Church re∣quires, the Evidence of the latter depending on that of the former, according to the Argument I deal with. 2. It is not so probable that they so intend, as it is that they are Christianly affected, a good man being liable to omit a good Act he ought to perform, and this not destructive of his gracious Habit. Nothing is left for you, but loose Sand, instead of a pretended Rock, to build your certainty upon. Having largely examined the most plausible Plea, Ro∣man Catholicks have for their Security, that their Mini∣sters intend as they ought, and disarmed it of its strength; I shall now, in way of surplusage, shew how hopeless it is, for the end it was brought for, from the Context of the cited place.
§. 17. For this end, I will repeat the cited passage, pre∣fixing to it the foregoing Words. The Author had declared, that though the interior Intention be required to the Sacraments, yet when men see the exterior Actions done, they may quiet their minds with a perswasion, that the Ministers intend as the Church requires them: And seeing an Objection stare him in the Face, He sets himself to An∣swer it. The Objection is this,Isla non est evidens certitudo. That certainty [or perswasion] is no E∣vident certainty. He returns this Answer to it, I ingenuously confess it;Fatemur equidem ingenue: sed nec requiritur evidens, sed, illa satis est ad Conscientiae quietem: quouiam neque scmper certitudinem abemu an Ministri sint vere Sacerdotes. Sed cum videmus homiues probos u∣ti, &c. nor is an E∣vident Certainty required; but That is sufficient to quiet the Conscience: be∣cause we are not always certain that the Ministers are true Priests. But when we see honest men use the Matter and Form of the Church, We believe that they have found and Chri∣stian minds, while they administer the Sacraments. Behold, here a Learned man is sorely puzled, through the infirmity of his cause. He would have men satisfied of the validity of their Sacraments, by some assurance of the Minister's Intending as he ought to do. But see how he is forced to cook the matter. §. 18. (1.) He grants there is no Evident Certainty of the Thing: And consequently that it is not liable to the view of the Understanding. §. 19. To make it as intelligible as I can, I will give a short account of the meaning of the Terms, Evidence and Certainty. And this I will do (according to the me∣thod I have used) from one of your Authors. Peter Hur∣tad de Mendoza defines both of themEvidentia est claritu sive per∣spicuitas qua intellectus quasi videt Objecta. : Evidence is that clearness or perspi∣cuity, by which the Ʋnderstanding doth as it were see Objects.
Certainty is a firm determination and adhesion of the Ʋnderstanding to Truth as Truth.Certitudo est firm a determinatio ad∣hesioque intellectus ad verum ut verum est. Disp. 10. Sect. 3. de Demonst. The Author then having granted that there is no E∣vident Certainty of the Intention, doth in effect grant, that the Understanding cannot view it for want of light, nor imbrace it as a Thing in Being. Evidence doth in∣deed Naturally cause certainty. As I can no longer que∣stion the Being of what I see plainly with my bodily eyes, so neither can I, what I see with those of my mind. But no Natural Beams lighten this Object; it is confes∣sed to lie in darkness. §. 20. (2.) He saith, such certainty is not necessary, in order to the Quiet of the Conscience. But, I say, something is necessary to that End, because Anxiety would oppress the Soul, were it left to fluctuate about the weighty matters of Religion, such as the Truth of our Sacraments are acknowledged to be. And it hath been shewn that the Truth of these cannot be known, unless the Minister's Intention be so too. Well: Evi∣dent certainty is given away; but what brings the Au∣thor to supply it? Why, he lays no claim to that obsoure Certainty that is founded on Authority. He neither saith, There is the infallible Testimony of God for the Thing, nor yet the credible Testimony of men: Which silence is a tacit confession, he had no such thing to plead, it being then his Province to say all he could to secure the Soul in that Point. §. 21. (3.) He gives this most sorry Reason, why it was not necessary so to know the Intention in Baptism, (of which he was speaking) viz. because, saith he, we are not always certain that our Ministers are true Priests. The relation of these Words to the former, seems to make the whole sound but this, viz. Baptism fares no worse than Ordination; let us hope well of both, but we
are certain of neither. When he cannot cure the ma∣lady, he gives them Narcoticks to still and stun the Spi∣rits, that they may be less sensible of their pain. Let us not torment our selves but believe the best, is the effect of his words, to my understanding. §. 22. Yet he minces the matter. We are not al∣ways certain, &c. saith he. Then never certain, say I, upon the account of the Intention: (which he pur∣posely treats of in that Article.) But are there not greater hopes when moral men Administer? Yes. But I have proved there is no certainty. §. 23. But because of some inconveniences which that distinction of good and bad Ministers, as applied before, may chance to breed among Roman Catholicks, I will now suppose that by the words, Good MenHomines probos., the Author meant to describe all their Ministers promiscuously How∣ever not daring to trust this Notion; I have considered them as implying the fore-named distinction. I would not impose a meaning upon any man's words, but take his own, if I knew it. In this method I cannot miss his Sense: it must be here or there. §. 24. Well, I construe the words thus, when we see any Minister do the Sacramental Actions, we believe he hath a Christian mind and duely Intends. Now I proceed to say, it hath already appeared that there is neither Evidence nor Authority claimed by the Author to secure the Conscience in this matter: And therefore I conclude his Credimus [We believe] only denotes the judgment of Charity, which he conceives sufficient to stay and settle the mind. §. 25. Sir, I will freely grant you this judgment of Charity for your Ministers, and consequently for their intending aright. For where there are not manifest to∣kens of Vice, we are to account every man Virtuous; and for things that look doubtful, we are rather to in∣terpret them in the more favourable sense, when there
is an Obligation upon us to pass our judgment. But this tye of making a charitable judgment is too weak a stay for Conscience in the great concerns of Religion, such as the Minister's Intention, on which you make your Baptism, the Consecration of the Eucharist, &c. depend. This will appear by considering these two things, §. 26. (1.) The judgment of Charity alwaies sup∣poses the Object Uncertain; or to speak more properly, the Understanding Uncertain. For what needs Cha∣rity come into the Scale, if Evidence hath weighed it down beforehand? What needs the Will come into the work, but that the Understanding is at a loss? §. 27. (2.) The Soul is not a jot nearer Truth by this judgment of Charity. The pious affection of the Will is indeed exercised, but it makes not the Act of the Understanding more certain. Truth is the Object of the Intellect alone, and therefore certainty is not at all taken from the Will, but from the Evidence of the Ob∣ject, or from the motive to Faith. §. 28. I forbear to add, That the Understanding may be easily, and is often exposed to the danger of false∣hood by the charitable inclination of the Will; and that ignorance may contribute much to the false quiet of the mind. The will hath nothing to do with the Understanding (that I know of) in order to Know∣ledge, but barely to stir it up to act. When that is done, it must judge for it self, and hath Rules of its own to examine things by; but the bent or biass of the Will is none of them. And he that makes himself (as I may so say) certain without or beyond Rational Motives, is but blindly perswaded or pertinacious. I have said enough, if not too much, to convince That the judgment of Charity concerning the Inten∣tion, amounts not to an intellectual certainty of it. Which is the only thing I was concerned to make out, in this place.
§. 29. Now since neither Reason nor Authority will ascertain the Intention, and since the Judgment of Charity falls short of the mark, I may, I hope, with∣out presumption conclude that my Proposition is veri∣fied, viz. That the Intention of the [Ordaining] Bishop is a Con∣dition which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no in Ordination. And then the premises being true, the conclusion is so too, viz. The Church of Rome requires a condition to Ordination which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no. I confess I have extended my proof to a far greater Latitude (as I have done some other things in these Pa∣pers) than any thing you have offered, exacted from me: but I had rather be accused of being over than short. Besides, I had a mind to prevent the often re-hearing of the Cause, to which several little new Suggestions might give occasion, by a more particular sifting of it. I had also a respect to some others, who had never seen the Subject set in a full light. But after all, I am sen∣sible I have done something more than needed. §. 30. I have indeed considered the Proposition only under the limitation before express'd, excepting the Ordaining Bishops out of no man living knows. Who may therefore pretend to know their own Intention, and by consequence that there are true Priests among you. But if an Interpretation I gave you of my Pro∣position at Pn. had not (without Reason) been dis∣pleasing to you, what I have already done would have left your Bishops unsecured of your Priesthood, as well as all the rest of your Communion. However I shall with little ado cure that defect by offering the same thing in such words, as will not, I think, be evaded.
SECT. VII. The Ordaining Bishops not certain whether. there be true Priests in the Roman Church. HAving already proved, That all Roman Catholicks, except the Ordaining Bishops, are Uncertain whether the said Bishops Intend aright in their particu∣lar Ordinations, and consequently as uncertain whe∣ther they make any true Priests, I come now to prove That the Ordaining Bishops (so called) are uncertain whether or no they Intend with such an Intention as is available or effectual to Ordination. In order hereunto I will let my first Syllogism stand as beforePart I. Sect. l.. The minor Proposition of it, which only could regularly be denied, is this, The Roman Church requires a condition to Ordination which no man living knows whether or no it be fulfill'd. To wrap up the Bishops in the same uncertainty with the rest, I prove it thus, The Intention of a person who is a true Bishop is a Condition which no man living knows, the Ordainers themselves not excepted, whether it be fulfilled in Or∣dination. But the Roman Church requires the Intention of a person who is a true Bishop to Ordination. Ergo, The Roman Church requires a condition to Ordina∣tion, which no man living knows, the Ordainers themselves not excepted, whether it be fulfill'd in Or∣dination. The minor is clear, for it is not every man's using the Matter and Form of the Church, and intending to do as the Church doth, (although you say, This may suffice to Baptism) that you hold to be sufficient to ordination. You judge not only Lay-men but simple
Priests uncapable of doing that work, as the Curse of your Trent-Council makes appearSi quis dixcrit Episcopos non esse Presbyteris superiores, vel non babete potestatem Confirmandi & Ordinandi, vel cam quam habent illis cum Presby∣teris communem esse, Auathema sit. Sess. 23. Can. 7.. If any one shall say, That Bishops are not Superior to Priests, or have not the power of Confirming and Ordaining, or that the power they have is common to them with Priests, let him be Anathema. The Ordainer then must of Necessity be a Bishop. This for the Minor. If there be any difficulty in the matter, it respects the Major: But I am now to shew there is none at all. This then I lay down as evident, except the Ordainer know that he is in Truth what he is called, viz. a Bi∣shop, he knows not that his Intention is such as operates in, and is effectual to Ordination, nor consequently that he makes a true Priest. My Medium, you know, points directly at this, and the connexion is unquestion∣able, according to your selves. Which being said, it onely remains that I make out, That none of your Bishops know that they are true Bishops. I do it thus, No Bishops that are Ʋncertain, whether or no they are true Priests, know that they are true Bishops. But all the Roman Bishops are uncertain, whether or no they are true Priests. Ergo, No Roman Bishops know that they are true Bishops. To verifie the Major, I need but say, 1. Your Church holds, That no man can be a Bishop, who is not first a Priest. A tast of Authority may satisfie for this. If any one (faith SuarezSi quis ita consecrcetur Episcopus per saltum ut Sacerdotii Ordinem prae∣termittat, eum non solum mancre su∣spensum, verum etiam non maners con∣jecratum: quia character Episcopalis, si quis est. essentialiter requirit cha∣ractarem Sacerdosalem. Suarez. Tom. 5. Disp 31. §. 53.) should of a Deacon be made Bishop without first taking Priests Orders, he doth not only remain suspended, but Ʋn-consecrated: because the Episcopal Character, if there be any such, Essenitally requires the Priestly Character.
D. Soto delivers the matter in shortEpiscopatus dependet à Sacerdo∣tio, nam conjecratio Episcopi ante∣quam sit Sacerdos, non valeret. De just, & jure, li. 10. qu 1. art. 2.. The Episcopate depends on the Priest∣hood; for the making a man Bishop be∣fore he is made Priest, would be of no avail. The Reason hereof, is, No man can give that which he hath not himself; the Pro-eminent power the Bishop hath, was especially given him for Constituting Priests for the Service of the Church; and therefore it is neces∣sary, that he have what he confers. The power of the Keys is founded in the Priestly Character, saith Gab. BielPotestas clavium fundatur in cha∣ractere Sacerdotali. Li. 4. Dist. 19. qu. 1. art. 1.. Though your lessor Orders may be jump'd over, I am sure you will not say, This can; Which if he want, he hath the Name of Bishop, and no more. This for the Dependence of the two Orders. 2. As your Ordainers know not whether they had Priestly Orders, so they cannot know, for that Reason, whether they had Episcopal Orders. The Uncertainty of the former necessarily destroys all certainty of the latter. Thus much for the Major. As for the Minor Proposition, it is largely proved be∣fore-hand, viz. That all Roman Bishops are Ʋncertain, whether or no they be true Priests, for want of knowing their Ordainer's Intention. Now the Premisses being safe, the Conclusion is set beyond all hazard, viz. No Roman Bishops know that they are true Bishops: And consequently they know not that their Intending is available to Ordination. But supposing them to know that they were truly made Priests, (which yet, as appears, they neither do, nor can know) yet they cannot know that they are true Bishops, for the same Reason that Priests cannot know that they are true Priests, viz. Their Ignorance of their Consecrator's Intention. Bishops are as far from in∣specting
the Hearts of their Consecrators, as Priests are from inspecting the Hearts of the Bishops. There is Parity of Reason on both sides. I will advance one other Medium, to prove your Bi∣shops to be Uncertain of their Orders. I take my Ar∣gument from their Not-knowing that they were indeed Baptized. And I will take your Simple Priests along with them for Company. In Form it runs thus, No Bishops or Priests, that are uncertain whether or on they were truly Baptized, know whether or no they be [re∣spectively] true Bishops or Priests. But all Roman Bishops and Priests are Ʋncertain, whe∣ther or no they were truly Baptized. Ergo, No Roman Bishops or Priests know whether they be true Bishops or Priests. The Major Proposition must be granted, if these two Things appear, (1.) That there is a Necessary Dependence of Holy Orders upon Baptism. (2.) That there is between them a Dependence of Knowledge, as well as Being. What shines not of it self, I shall, after my wont, prove from your own Au∣thority. For the First. Your Angelical Doctor hath long ago acquainted usQui characterem baptismalem non habet, wullum aliud Sacramentum reci∣pere poiesi. Addit. ad tertiam par∣tem. qu. 34. art. 3. That he is not capable of receiving any other Sacrament, who hath not the Baptismal Character. And he doth not only say this in ge∣neral, which yet had been sufficient, but he applies it to our particularBaptismia est janua Sacramento∣rum, ergo cum Ordo sit quoddam Sa∣cramentum praesupponit Baptismum. Ibidem. Baptism is the Gate of the Sacra∣ments, and therefore since Order is a certain Sacrament, it presupposes Bap∣tism.
He goes on to certifie usTalis si promoveatur ad Sacer∣dotium, non est Sacerdos, nec confi∣cere potest, nec absolvere, &c. ibidem., That if any Unbaptized person be promoted to the Priesthood, he is no Priest, nor can he either consecrate, or absolve, &c. To be short, Your Canon teachethIn Decret. li. 3. ti. 43. cap. 1.3. de Presbyt. non 'Baptizat., That they who are promoted to Orders, unbaptized, shall be Baptized and Re∣ordained. This I have said, is enough to evince the necessary dependence Orders have upon Baptism, which is the Gate through which your other Sacraments enter; and which being shut, they are kept forth. For the Second, I need add nothing to enlighten it: For the abovesaid dependence being acknowledged, no man hath power to deny, That he who is uncertain that he was Baptized, must be so that he was Ordained. This for the proof of the Major. The Minor is this, All Roman Bishops and Priests are Ʋncertain whether or no they were truly Baptized. But this is proved before-hand, by those Arguments that convin∣ced, that the Minister's Intention is not Knowable by any besides himself. Now the Premisses being sted fast, the conclusion stands most firm, viz. No Roman Bishops or Priests know whe∣ther they be true Bishops or Priests. I shall not be reckoned to have made superfluous proof of this Point, if the Reader shall consider the Fruit it yields, the several Mediums being so many Hammers to break to pieces the pretended Certainty of the Roman Priesthood. If it be born in mind, that the Intention is a Mental contingent Act, which the Agent may, or may not do, at his pleasure; and that none can discover, whe∣ther he exert that Act, or not, it will be very obvious here to view the several Grounds of the Uncertainty of their Priesthood. If the Bishop was not Baptized with due Intention, he cannot Ordain. If he was not so made
Priest, he cannot Ordain, if he was not so consecrated, he cannot Ordain. And it plainly appears that himself cannot be certain of any of these, and therefore cannot be certain he makes a Priest, because all these go to qua∣lifie him for that Work. And the Priest, besides these insuperable uncertainties, common to the Bishop with him, is vexed with one more as bad as the rest. He knows not that the Bishop (if he should chance to be ca∣pable of doing it) intended to communicate Spiritual Power to him. So that there are three hazards to allay the Bishop's confidence of his making Priests, and a fourth more to allay That of the Priest. But this may be accounted a small thing in compari∣son of what follows. The Consecrator of our present Bishop was liable to the same three Uncertainties, and these are chargeable, in their Effects, upon our Bishop. If his Ordainer and Consecrator were not truly Bapti∣zed, made Priest, and Bishop, (and God only knows that) They had no Faculty to Ordain or Consecrate, and then our Bishop hath but an empty Name. And the fourth comes in too, he knows not what his Consecrator In∣tended. So then our Bishop and his Consecrator, with respect to their Knowledge, whether they ordain Priests, are ne∣cessarily liable to Six Contingencies, any of which fal∣ling out will Un bishop him, and therefore make void his Ordinations. Think then how vastly these Contingences will mul∣tiply from the Apostles times to ours, and that our pre∣sent Bishop is so far chargeable with any one of the said Omissions of Intention, that he hath lost his Power and Office, if any such hath happen'd in a direct descent. According to the Suggestions of common Reason, your Mass-books, and other Books contain Suppositions, That there may be defect of due Intention: And Priesthood
comes down no other way but by a claim of Succession; Intention is necessary to hold the links together, and is concerned in the manifold particulars specified; and if any of the links be broken all falls to pieces; No Bishop or Priest afterwards in that particular Line to the worlds end. Now I refer it to every inquisitive man, whether the ground be not too slippery for Certainty to stand on, amidst the manifold variety of those contingencies 'fore∣mentioned. Though I allowed you, for Argument sake, the judgment of Charity for all your Bishops of this time, yet supposing they mean never so honestly in their Acts, it appears now That is not sufficient to decide the question; for their Intention may be void and ineffectual, though not through want of Will, yet for want of Power. Their Baptizers or Ordainers may have neglected them, and These upon this score are made useless to others. The fault may have been committed several Ages ago, which yet the poor Gentlemen can neither know nor remedy. What room then is there for certainty in this thick con∣texture of hazards? We shall find that even the dark judgment of Charity will run very low, if we follow the Ordainers up into some distant Ages, wherein Ignorance and Vice strove, as it were, for mastery in the Roman Church. What say you of the 9th. and 10th. Ages, and the four next fol∣lowing, wherein Learning was generally fallen asleep in the Western Europe, and wickedness as much awake in it? If Historians of those times may be credited (as they must, or farewel Authority) great breaches might very probably be made in the Sucession of Bishops in many Sees; for such as are blind and careless of their own Souls will hardly be sure to look out sharp, and be regardful of the Salvation of others, in their Admini∣strations.
It ought to be observed, With what ease and speed Nullities may be diffused and multiplied. Let us put a fair case, Suppose a Bishop, within whose Diocese the greatest University of a Nation is, should out of unbelief, contempt of Religion, supine carelesness, or from any other cause, omit to Intend as is required, in his frequent Ordinations of the Collegians: it would follow that the Bishops taken out of these Priests, though never so good men and careful to Intend as they ought, must yet act ineffectually, and fill many places with empty names, instead of power. The more such, so much the worse; and the longer they live, the bigger is the mischief. And who can secure us against this Supposition? Now considering that Nullities may have at any time thus spread, (I speak still with a Relation to your doctrine) and that the farther they go, they grow far more numerous, what can a thoughtful man fin amidst all this for the certainty of the Roman Priest∣hood! If it be said, No man knows on the other hand, that they fail to Intend. I answer, It is not enough to Cer∣tainty not to know that they fail, we are to know that they fail not. Knowledge stands not in Negatives, it is Positives that stay the Understanding. Give a positive Reason why they must hit the mark, and I shall be sure they cannot miss it. But none we have found can do this. The result is, Not one of the Roman Church, except the Ordaining Bishops, can know the Intention of the Ordainers. They know it not either in it self, or in its Cause, or by any Effects. They are not assured of it either by Divine Revelation, or by sufficient Humane Authority. And therefore they have no true certainty of their Priesthood which depends upon it. They have not (to use your own terms) either a Metaphysical, or Mathematical, or yet a Moral certainty of it. They
have not (to speak my own language) either Divine or Theological or yet Moral certainty that any one of all the reputed Clergy of the Roman Church is a true Priest. For the Ordaining Bishops, They may indeed know whether themselves Intend, but know not whether there be any force or virtue in their Intention for making Priests, for want of knowing the Intention of the whole Succession of their Baptizers, Ordainers and Conse∣crators. So that not one Soul in the Church of Rome hath any true certainty of the matter. You see I have laid the weight of what hath been said, on these two grounds: 1. That a Mental inte∣rior Intention is required to the very Being of your Sa∣craments, which hath been shewn from your own Authors. 2. That Holy Orders is a Sacrament, and so as much depends upon the Intention, as any other of them. This I have indeed taken all along for granted; but shall now prove it from the Council of TrentDubitare nemo potest Ordinem esse ve∣re & proprie unum ex septem Sanctae Eccle∣siae Sacra mentis Sess. 23. cap. 7.. None ought to doubt that Order is truely and properly one of the seven Sacraments of the Holy Church. These Two (I say) are your own Principles, and from them I have concluded your Uncertainty of your Priest∣hood considered in particular, and so have made good my word. It now remains that in the next Section I draw from hence such Consequences or Consectaries as will set the feeble estate of the Roman Church in so full a Light, that all that wink not, must needs see it.
SECT. VIII. Consequences drawn from the Ʋncertainty of the Roman Priesthood: and the feeble condition of that Church, issuing from thence, shewn. §. 1. IF no Roman Catholick can be certain that there is any one true Priest in particular, in their Church, This necessarily follows in the general, That each of them must be uncertain whether he have the benefit of any one Sacrament which depends upon the Priestly character. Now you teach that all your Sacra∣ments do so depend, except Baptism and Matrimony: So then five of the seven are unavoidably uncertain to each of you, by immediate inference from the Uncer∣tainty of your Priesthood. §. 2. Moreover, You are uncertain upon the same ground, viz. your ignorance of the Minister's Intention, of having the two other, whether administred by Priests who are the ordinary Ministers of them, or by others whom necessity makes such in the Priests absence. Christ surely instituted his Sacraments for great Spi∣ritual Ends, which are as surely attained by the worthy partakers of them. How deplorable then is the estate of the Roman Church, since not one of its Members knows that in his whole life time he receives any One Sacrament! this in general. §. 3. I will now infer more particularly, from the Virtue of the Premisses already laid down and proved; 1. Not one Member of your Church can without spe∣cial Revelation (which is excepted in the State of our Question) be ascertained he had the Blessing of Chri∣stian Baptism, which you hold to be a Sacrament neces∣sary to all; and without which your Trent Council saith, There is no SalvationSiquis dixcrit Baptismum non esse necessarium ad salutem. A∣nathema sit. Sess. 7. c. 5.
§. 4. I know the Canon is generally interpreted thus, An adult is Savable by Contrition and the desire of Bap∣tism, if the Minister chance to have robbed him of it by Not intending. But behold the miseries he is yet liable to, notwithstanding that: (1.) You cannot plead that such a one is capable of any Office purely re∣lating to the Service of God's Church, (2.) nor that he is capable of the Benefits of any other Sacrament. Sacraments, as I said, were appointed by Christ for great Blessings to his people, as being not only signs, but also instrumental causes of the Grace they signifie: and therefore the next to the misery of wanting them, it is most lamentable to be Uncertain whether or no a man indeed has them; which is apparently the Case of all Roman Catholicks. §. 5. But if an Infant dye defrauded of the Baptizer's Intention, (and none can be assured that any particular one is not) according to the current of your doctrin he is eternally shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven; in as much as he is not capable of making up the defect by Contrition and desire of Baptism. If there be no assurance had of the Baptizer's Intention, there can be none had of the Child's Salvation, according to your doctrin. Which must make the Funerals of poor Babes far more bitter to their Christian Parents, and Friends, than they would be, had they just grounds of security for their Reigning with Christ in Glory. §. 6. 2. No Roman Catholick is sure that after a Con∣fession of sins made to his Priest, he gains from him a true Sacramental Absolution. As Baptism is, with you, necessary to all without exception, for taking away Sin, and for the infusion of Grace; so is Penance necessary to all them that after Baptism have fallen into mortal sin: and the effects of it are no less, say you, than Pardon and Reconciliation. This is the only Plank to swim safe to shoar on, after a
moral Shipwrack; without which all such sink down into the Abyss of Perdition. Well, the more necessary you esteem This to be, and the more valuable its Effects, the more comfort would proportionably fall to your share, if you were sure you had it. But on the contrary it will be your misery not to know you are inriched with that treasure. When you have come to the Priest Contrite, and opened all your sins to him without Re∣serve, and are disposed to satisfie for all injuries done by you, it is a mournful thing, after all this, to come away Uncertain of your being indeed Absolved, for want of Knowledge that the Priest could Effectually, and did Actually Intend to Release you of your sins. Which is the sad case of every Roman Catholick. §. 7. 3. No Roman Catholick is certain that he at any time receives the Sacrament of the Eucharist Though you make not This altogether so necessary, as you do Baptism and Penance, yet you hold it to be matter of great advantage to the Soul. The Substan∣tial Body of Christ, you say, is received there, and with, and by it Spiritual Nourishment, whereby the Graces of the Spirit are sustained and increased; and the Soul consequently made more vigorous for performing all Christian duty. Now the more excellent the Effects of this Sacrament are known to be, the greater comfort it is apt to yield to all that are certain they receive it, and do this, as they hope, Worthily. But on the con∣trary, how doleful is it to be uncertain (how great so∣ever their preparations have been for it) whether they at any time truly have it, for want of Knowing that the Priest could Effectually and did Actually Intend to Consecrate, without which the Elements remain Un∣sanctified, and cannot be Vehicles of those Blessings de∣signed by Christ to be communicated that way to the Soul. And yet this is the sad case of Roman Catho∣licks.
§. 8. It remains that I add, you are not only unhappy in not knowing This, with respect to the foresaid Bles∣sings to be received by it; But also with respect to two great Duties (as you count them) to be done, which de∣pend upon the Consecration. One is the Adoration of the Host; the other the Offering it as a Sacrifice both for the quick and dead. If your Church do both these on Uncertain grounds, it will look a very sad thing: And that she doth so, will be inferred from what hath been already proved, Consecration it self, which alone can be supposed to support them, being found to be an Uncertain thing. That nothing may remain obscure, touching these matters, I shall take room enough to ex∣plain them. For the First, viz. Adoration of the Host; The Trent-Council delivers this Doctrine to warrant the practice of it: There is no place left for doubt, but all the faithful of Christ may exhibite Adoration, which is due to the true God, to this most Holy Sacrament, in their Veneration of it.Nullus dubitandi locus relinqui∣tur, quin omnes Christi fideles— la∣triae cultum qui vero Dco debetur, buic sanctissimo Sacramento in veneratione exhibcant. Sess. 13. cap. 5. And the Council there subjoins, that the Custome was piously and religiously brought into the Church, of Yearly setting a Day apart, for carrying the Sacrament in Solemn Procession, through frequented Ways and publick Places, in order to its being Adored, &c. It is too well known to be insisted on, that assoon as the Priest hath consecrated, he pays to the Sacrament the Worship that belongeth to God alone; and the Peo∣ple present, upon the Usual Notice given them, do the same: And that in the most populous Towns of the Ro∣man Communion, when it is carried through the Streets to any Sick person, under a Canopy, all that meet it fall down and adore it. §. 9. I have said all this, to evince that the Adoration
spoken of, hath not for its Object our Blessed Saviour considered as corporally present in Heaven, but as pre∣sent under the Species of Bread or Wine; or both. It is the Sacrament that is to be Adored, your Council and practice tell us. But now the Body is no Sacrament with∣out the Species, for there would be wanting in that case a Visible Sign, which is the Genus of a Sacrament. This Point being fixt, I come to ask, What if there happen to be no true Consecration, when the Exterior Sacra∣mental Action is done, which is a thing you all grant may happen? §. 10. Why, the same Adoration is paid still, upon a presumption of true Consecration. If I ask again, What is adored in that case? It must be answered, a Creature, viz. the Bread, is adored instead of God. And then this is in one sense or another, Idolatry. It follows also, upon the same ground, That when men are Uncertain whether there be true Consecration, they are also uncertain whether they commit not Idolatry in such their Adorations. Now I conclude, that Roman Catholicks are at no time certain, that they commit not Idolatry in Worshipping the Host. I add, God is very jealous of his Honour, and Men should be tender of it too; and therefore I would think they should have either simple Evidence or Revelation for the Divinity of the Object, before they pay to it that greatest Tribute of Adoration: But Roman Catholicks light far short of that Certainty of the matter, and yet venture to adore, hit or miss. §. 11. For the Second: The Eucharist, according to you, is a proper Sacrifice: That is, the Body and Blood of Christ, are by the Priest truly and properly offered to God in the Mass, under the visible Species of Bread and Wine: And this is a Propitiatory Sacrifice. God being pleased with this Oblation, grants to those, for whom it
is Offered, Grace, Repentance, Remission of many and grievous Sins, and Supplies for their several Necessities. Nor doth this profit Men alive onely, but after Death. Thus your Church teaches. I cannot but acknowledge that this Doctrine is belie∣ved among you, for I find that most Men of Estates in your Communion, do at their Death leave good round Sums of Mony to certain Priests, who in consideration of it, are to shorten their Benefactors stay in the acute pains of Purgatory, by saying of Masses, or Offering this Sacrifice in their behalf. And if this Doctrine be true, the Service done them is worth their Mony; which can∣not be better employed otherwise. §. 12. But if there be no Consecration made by those respective Priests, who promise to help them by that Means, there will be a great disappointment somewhere. But I shall say no more of that. However, this I may say, (having laid down a Warrant for it) that neither Priests nor People are certain, that there will be a return of Masses for the Mony, as not knowing whether they be true Priests, and so (intend how they will) capable of turning the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, which are the supposed Matter of that Sacrifice. In this condition are all Roman Catholicks. Thus, Sir, supposing, for Argument-sake, your Doctrin of Transubstantiation to be true, (though I profess, it was never in my power to believe it) the sundry things I have here alledged, do nevertheless hold good against you. §. 13. 4. No Roman Catholick is sure that he ever par∣takes of your other Sacraments, not yet particularly men∣tioned by me, as Confirmation and extreme Unction, as not knowing whether the Ministers of them could ef∣fectually, and did actually Intend in the Administration of them. Without which, as I have often shewed, there is no Sacrament. Being almost weary of enlarging on particulars, I have put these together.
Number and describe all the great Effects you can at∣tribute to them, (and in any thing of this kind I will grant your Supposition, for argument-sake, as I have all along in these Papers) and after you have done this you will find, that no Roman Catholick is fure he shares in any one of them, for the Reasons often alledged before. Bishops, Priests, and all other Members of your Com∣munion are wrapt up in an inextricable Uncertainty. §. 14. All I can honestly (to the best of my Know∣ledge) grant you, according to your Principles laid down, is this, That the Ministers of Baptism know that those they have Baptized are partakers of that Sacra∣ment. I mean it only of Infants, who could not put in a bar against the Efficacy of it. But yet neither the said Ministers nor any other of your Body knows that himself was Baptized, as not Knowing how he intended who Baptized him. So that what I inferred stands firm, viz. that not one of you knows that he doth or hath re∣ceived any one of your Sacraments. §. 15. I advertise, This is it which makes the diffe∣rence in this respect between the Ministers of Baptism and those of your other Sacraments, treated of before, Those need no special character to qualifie them for that work. Any man or woman, whether Jew, Heathen, or Turk, may Baptize with Effect, provided they Intend to do what the Church doth; according to your doctrin: Whereas the Ministers of the other Sacraments (Matri∣mony excepted) must have special power and authority from Christ to Administer, or else they Act in vain. And though Matrimony depend not (to speak your language) on the Priestly character, the parties Mar∣rying being the proper Ministers of that Sacrament; yet I cannot grant them the same Certitude with the Ministers of Baptism, because Two must there Intend alike, or nothing is done; and neither of them can be sure judges save of their own respective Intention.
That they make a civil Contract to lead an indivi∣dual life plainly appears, when he saith, I take thee for my Wife: and she, I take thee for my Husband. But whether both parties also Intend to make those Words signifie the sacred Conjunction of Christ with his Church, (in a general or special Sense, in a more di∣stinct or confused) and thereby to obtain Grace, can∣not appear to either party. The man can be sure but for himself, nor can the woman but for her self. §. 16. Here is to be noted, when I make the Con∣tracting parties Ministers of Matrimony, I follow only the greater part of your Authors. Where you vary, I cannot represent you as agreed. But for those that make a Priest the Minister of it, they are not a whit the nearer Certainty, because they know not his Intention. Before I move forward, I shall re-mind the Reader that the Inferences hitherto drawn speak forth misery to Roman Catholicks on these two grounds, put toge∣ther. (1.) There is no Sacramental Grace conveyed, where there are no true Sacraments. The Terms are essentially Relative. (2.) There is an equal Uncer∣tainty of the Sacraments, and of the fruits of them. Now I say, each Roman Catholick, for ought he can know, wants the Sacraments, and by consequence their Effects; and if he have them, he yet wants the comfort of Knowing it. Which makes the Roman Church in a sad condition. Sir, When you have considered what hath been al∣ready said, I would commend a few Inferences more to the exercise of your thoughts. §. 17. 1. If none of you can know that any particu∣lar man in your Church is a true Bishop or Priest, (which is proved) it follows that the Jesuits, who lay so much weight upon the Papal Chair, cannot know the Pope to be so much as a Priest, nor consequently that he is an Infallible Judge of Faith.
Those they account Successors of Saint Peter in the Universal Pastorship of the Church (to whom they appropriate special Priviledges, and particularly that of Infallibility) are not to be Lay-men sure, but such as have the Sacerdotal Character. But since no man alive (as is proved) is sure according to your doctrin, that any particular man is Priest, no man is sure the Pope is such, and consequently that he is an Infallible Judge of Controversies. The Intention of him who Baptized and Ordained the Pope, and the capacity of his Ordainer were, and ever will be hidden things: and hence springs the Un∣certainty. §. 18. 2. Now a word to those called the Parisian Di∣vines. If you cannot know that any particular men are true Bishops or Priests, you cannot know that any of your Roman Councils have defined Infallible Truth, in as much as your selves hold that the promise of Di∣vine Assistance, by which alone they can be supposed to be preserved inerrable, is not made to any Assemblies but such as consist of men in Holy Orders. You are indeed content that Lay-men be present there, and act in a certain inferior Sphere, viz. That they assist in examining difficulties, consult, debate, approve, protect, &c. But to none of them do you al∣low the power of Determination or Decision. Those Synods then, as your selves hold, are to be made up of Bishops, or Priests, or both. Now because it cannot be known that these ever had Priestly Orders, for want of Knowledge that they were truly Baptized and Ordained, you must be Uncertain whether such were true Councils, and consequently whether they decreed and defined Infallible Faith. Although you may have some true Priests in general, yet in regard you are uncertain who they are, How know you that the major part of such Councils, ex. gr.
that of Trent, were true Priests and consequently ca∣pable of making Infallible determinations? I will speak a less word, How know you that the 4th part there were such? You might have a true Clergy, I say, and yet it is possible that few or none of them might be in that Synod. For the Clergy in a Council usually bears but a very small proportion, for number, to the rest. Many of these may possibly have true Orders, when most of the Members of such a Council want them. Unless you know both the capacity and Intention of those who Baptized and Ordained such Members, you are not (as hath been proved) assured they were Bishops or Priests; and consequently that the Holy Ghost assisted them in their work. If sending men to a Council will indeed by Post-fact justifie mens Baptism and Orders, it were well worth the while (whatever it cost) to have as frequent Coun∣cils as possible; and to send numerous flocks of the Clergy thither to stay one Session, to be succeeded still by more, till the Uncertainty of the Baptism and Or∣ders of most of the Bishops and Priests be removed. But I think my self the first that ever spoke of this Cure for this Disease, and therefore think it will never be plead∣ed against me by my Adversaries. However, the di∣stemper remains till some Remedy be found out, you know not that the Members of your Council are true Priests, and so interessed in the promise of Divine As∣sistance, and so capable of making infalltble decisions. §. 19. 3. For those that hold Pope and Council, when conjoyned, to be Infallible, I say but this to them, Neither Pope nor Council will be more surely proved to have had Baptism and Orders, when they are toge∣ther, than when they are a-sunder; that is, it cannot be proved at all, if the Roman doctrin by me exhibi∣ted be true: and then they can hardly be thought to be Infallible Determiners of Faith.
§. 20. 4. If no Roman Catholick can know that any particular man of theirs is a true Priest, then the boast∣ed Argument taken from the Un-interrupted Successi∣on of Lawful Pastors in the Roman Church, is of no force, till they can be sure of the Intention of the re∣spective Baptizers of every Pope, and that every Pope from the Apostles days hitherto was Ordained by such as were capable of giving them Orders, and Intended to do it in each respective Ordination, (which, as I have evinced, can never be known) their Succession rests but upon bare presumption without proof, and therefore amounts not to a cogent Argument. Thus have I, as I think, accomplish't my Under∣taking, not leaving one Member of the Roman Com∣munion certain that there is among them any one true Priest in particular, nor any Sacraments in particular, given or received in the Roman Church: and all this from the Medium I laid down at first, viz. your doctrin of the Intention. §. 21. Now I think fit to re-mind the Reader, that to do This (1.) I have explicated the Terms from Ro∣man Catholick Authors. (2.) I have taken their do∣ctrines for the grounds of my Inferences: nor have I in Order to any part of my work, needed to ruffle or quar∣rel any of their Notions, otherwise than my mere de∣ductions from their Principles will do it. It is all one to me if they would make Seventy instead of Seven Sacraments, provided I prove they are not certain of their Giving and Receiving them. It is all one to me if they should make each Bishop of their Church as In∣falllible as the Jesuits make the Pope; and every Pro∣vincial Council as Infallible as they do those they call General, provided I prove they cannot be sure that those Bishops, or Members of Councils are in Holy Orders, and thereby capable of that power of Decision or De∣termination, which they would attribute to them.
None then ought to wonder, that I speak their language, without crossing several Principles of theirs, which I have occasion to mention, since it hath been my only de∣sign to render all their things loose and uncertain from their own Doctrine. §. 22. If it be said, I have proved some things which Roman Catholicks deny not. I answer, (1.) The worst that will follow hence, is, There is a little labour lost. (2.) It may be of some advantage to the Truth to pub∣lish That among the Vulgar, which though the more learned Romanists cannot deny, yet they would gladly bury in silence. This Article of the Intention, I believe to be one of that kind. For want of representing This honestly and generally, the Credulity of Persons of both Perswasions is apt to be abused. §. 23. 1. Not a few of the Romanists are liable to be filled with an ungrounded Confidence, that Sacramental Grace ever attends the performance of the exterior Sa∣cramental Actions. One of that sort I can name, who upon receiving an Absolution from his Confessor, came forth of his House, and leapt up for joy, and told some judicious Protestants, (who were occasionally before his Door) That he was then as free from Sin, as is an Infant newly Baptized. Had this Man known and considered the Truth I have here sifted out, he would either have been modestly silent, or tempered his Speech with these Conditions, If I be a true Penitent, and if my Confessor be a true Priest, and be thereby capable of Absolving me, and also did I in∣tend to do it, then am I freed from Sin. But I fear most of your Laity entertain the like confidence, bottomed upon the like Ignorance. §. 24. 2. The vulgar People of our Communion, for want of skill in this Point, are more obnoxious to the Snares of your Priests, who tell them they both can, and
will forgive them their Sins, if they will come into the Bosom of the Roman Church, and confess them. Now the Conscience being afraid of nothing, but Sin, a confi∣dent promise of Remission is oft hearkened to readily, and with some pleasure, even when there is nothing suf∣ficient to warrant it. Whereas, if all our People knew, that those stout Pro∣misers could never prove, that themselves were truly Ordained, nor consequently Authorized to forgive Sin; nor so much as that themselves were ever Sacramentally Absolved from any one of their Sins, (all which I have proved.) They [our people] would smile at their Confi∣dence, and bid them go find out a way for their own safety. §. 25. The Conclusion is, My true Representation of Things, to such as have not had the opportunity to know them before, may excuse my insisting upon some few things, which perhaps may not be denied by Roman Ca∣tholicks, when they are squeez'd to a Declaration of the Truth. SECT. IX. The Banks Mr. G. hath cast up to secure the Roman Priest∣hood, taken in general, cast down. SIR, I had, together with the last Section, ended all the trouble I purposed to give You, had you not by your way of Answer drawn me somewhat farther. I have said more than once, I thought it Manifestation enough of the weak Estate of your Church, to prove her Uncertain, whether she have any true Priests or Sa∣craments in particular. And I leave it to the judgment of the discerning Reader, whether I have not effected that, by shewing the Uncertainty both of the Bishop's Intention, considered in it self, and also of the Validity
of it, in case he doth Intend. But because you would have more, you shall. §. 1. And this more shall be chiefly to cast down or de∣molish the Bulwarks, you have cast up for the Security of the Bishop's Intention, in order to the Defence of your Priesthood in general. And truly this is all, that in strictness can be required of one that Undertakes to prove a Negative. What he does more, may well be accounted Surplusage. Having premised this, I shall again set down your Distinction in your own words, and then try what ten∣dency it hath to the End you bring it for. §. 2. You must give me leave, say you, to distinguish in the major Proposition of the former Syllogism, between that knowledge which is obtained by the Observation of exterior Actions and Gestures, and attention to the words of the Prelates in any particular Ordinations; and that knowledge which we have from the Consideration of the Nature and end of Ordination in general, and which is also necessarily dedu∣ced from other known Principles of the Roman Catholick Church grounded upon Divine Revelation. First then, if you understand by knowing here, knowing in the former way onely, which you seem to me to do, I deny this your first Proposition to be true. For supposing (not granting) that the Roman Catholick Church doth make Priestly Ordination to depend upon a Condition, that no man living knows in the former way (viz. by observing onely what is outwardly done, &c.) whether it be fulfill'd or no, yet it doth not follow, that she must be uncertain, whether she hath any true Priesthood, because others, besides the Ordain∣ing Prelates, know that she hath true Priesthood by the second way of Knowledge above-mentioned; that is, from the Na∣ture and End of the Thing, and necessary deduction from other true Principles. Thus far you. §. 3. I shall now examine this distinction, taking in your Explication of it, and try how far it may bestead You.
To gain an opportunity of making a distinction, and applying it with some shew of pertinence, you seem to fancy my sense of the matter to be this, viz. The Or∣dainer's Intention cannot indeed be known by observing his exterior Action and Gesture in his particular Ordi∣nations, but it may be known some other way. What else do these words of yours signifie, viz. If you under∣stand, say you, by knowing here, knowing in the former way onely, which you seem to me to do, &c. This, Sir, is a ground∣less conceit, hatcht on purpose, I think, to serve a turn. For, as to your Ordinations in particular, upon which your Priests in particular depend for their Being, (which it was my only aim to deal with) I have denied that the Bishop's Intention in them can any way be known, and have made my denial good. If then you apply both the Members of your distinction, with a respect to this Ac∣ception of the Terms, you pronounce my Proposition false, upon a figment of your own brain, which yet you would father on me, though I never gave you the least temptation to entertain it. But if you make the latter Member of your distinction, not to respect the Thing considered in particular, but onely in general, then (1.) It is not applied ad idem, and therefore gives you no relief against my declared design. (2.) If it only respect (I say) the Ordainer's Intention in general, I deny that it can be known infallibly either of these ways, or any other what∣soever: And then there is no room here for your Suppo∣sition. It remains then that these Words in my Propo∣sition — a Condition which no man living knows, &c. are absolutely Negative, with respect and proportion to the State of the Question laid down before. Which state had you called for, before you gave an Answer, your Things would have been no less pertinent. §. 4. As you have without cause made me think what best liketh you, so you are too oft leaving the thred of my Argument, which yet you are altogether to keep to,
if you will be pertinent. I expected you would (as you should) have spoken here with a formal relation to my Proposition, which is this, all Churches that make Priest∣ly Ordination depend upon a Condition which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd, must be Ʋncertain whether they have any true Priesthood. Hence it evidently appears it was my direct business to prove you uncertain of your Priesthood from your Uncertainty of the performance of a Condition required to Ordination: and you did not, could not deny the firm Connexion of the Medium with the Extream. Let us see now how you order your Mat∣ter. §. 5. You distinguish of Knowing without mention∣ing, for some time, any object of that Knowledge: which you should have supplied thus, I distinguish be∣tween Knowing of a Condition required to Ordination, &c. Then though you mention a Condition, yet you do not keep to it, but forthwith as it were forgetting it, run from it to Priesthood it self; that is, you run away from the consideration of a Sacrament to the [res Sacramenti] Effect of it. Your words are these — Supposing the Roman Catholick Church makes Priestly Or∣dination to depend upon a Condition that no man living — knows in the former way — whether it be fulfill'd or no, yet it doth not follow She must be Ʋncertain whether she hath any true Priesthood. This is true if the Condition can be known to be fulfill'd any other way: but it is imperti∣nent in this place, for it should have been thus said— Yet it doth not follow she must be uncertain whether the said Condition be fulfill'd or no. Or, if it may not be known that way, yet it may be known another. Here then is a manifest sliding from the Condition required to Ordination (which I afterwards made to be the Ordainer's Inten∣tion) to the Priesthood. §. 6. Now had I in my Reply grosly swallowed this Gulgeon, and submitted my self to deal about the proof
of the Roman Priesthood in an indefinite unlimited manner, I must have lost my present Argument which precisely depends upon the incapacity of all men to know another man's Intention. But know, Sir, your Answer is no Answer to me, farther than you speak relatively to my Argument: and though you seem wil∣ling to slink away from a Condition to Ordination to Priesthood, the Effects of it; which you would find some plausible way to maintain, if you could shake off my Medium, yet I will surely keep you to it. It is an Ar∣gument, ad hominem, I grant, but it will bite you sorely. §. 7. Here I shall take occasion to advertise the Rea∣der, that though an Argument ad hominem be in many cases less considerable, yet in mine who argue against Roman Catholicks from their established doctrin, it hath as much Virtue and Cogency against them as if I made my Inferences from the four Gospels, or the Divine Epistles. For they hold the voice of their Church in their Councils of Florence, Trent, &c. to have the same Obligation upon Conscience that those Gospels and E∣pistles have. If my deductions be good, they must ei∣ther grant the whole to their great loss, or by denying the Principles I go upon, loose and undo the whole frame of the Roman Church. Other Churches that assume not Infallibility, in such a case, part only with a particular Tenet, the rest of their frame standing as it did before; but Roman Catholicks who attribute un errableness to their Church (on which pretended ground their present Fabrick stands) utterly ruin their whole Building, if they grant their Councils to have been mistaken in any one Article they have de∣fined for Faith. §. 8. Now I come to the Matter your Words present us with, for ascertaining the required Intention of your Ordaining Bishops, considered (I suppose you mean) in general.
As your Words seem to run at first sight, you lay down two Grounds for this. 1. The Nature and End of Ordination in general. 2. Deductions from other known Principles of the Roman Catholick Church. I shall consider both these. §. 9. For the first, I know indeed that every Institu∣tion sets forth the Nature of what is to be observed, and the Ends they are appointed for, are notified by the Institutor: but I never learned that Institutions carry power in them to cause themselves to be observed. The Churches named in the Revelation, which long since perished, (these and others) once had all Chri∣stian Institutions, but in process of time lost or left them, what proof then is the Nature and End of Ordination of its true Existence, or due performance in the Roman Church? But if you intended the Two I mentioned to be but one Ground-work by their conjunction, so that the Sense is this, The Nature and End of Ordination in general, in Union or together with Deductions from other known Principles of the Roman Catholick Church, &c. I am well content, as not being inclined to make any man's words (howsoever put) to signifie what their speaker or writer meant not. And I confess some of your own words perswade me they look this way. I shall therefore consider them together under the next parti∣cular. §. 10. For the second. You tell of the Bishop's Inten∣tion to be Knowable by way of Deduction from some known Principles of the Roman Church, grounded upon divine Revelation. The Reader may mark, you do not say, This Knowledge is immediately deducible from di∣vine Revelation, but from some Principles grounded on it. For ought I see by this, you are not agreed to claim an In∣fallible certainty of the Intention of your Ordaining Bi∣shops, even considered in general; that is, that there are
any at all in the Roman Church that exert the required Intention. And yet without this, we have found there is no Ordination, and so no Priest, nor any of those 5. Sacraments that you consent to say depend on the Priest∣ly character, or lastly, that your Church is a true Church; which yet is less than an Infallible Church. Deductions are but the work of Reason, and Reason is but a fallible Principle, say many of you. The dependence of all the links of this Chain hath been made good before, save the last, which is this, where there is no true Priesthood there is no true Church: Where there is no Infallible Certainty of the Being of a Priesthood, there is is no Infallible Certainty of the Be∣ing of a Church. To confirm this I need but say little. Thomas Aquinas lays down this distinction. A thing may two manner of ways be called necessary in respect of an End: 1. When the End cannot be had without it: as Meat is necessary to sustain man's life. And this is simply necessary to an End. 2. When the End cannot so conveniently be obtained without it: as a Horse is ne∣cessary for a journey. But this is not simply necessary to an End. This being premised for the clearer Resolution of the Case in hand, he adds, There are three Sacraments necessary by the first way of Necessity; two to particular persons, viz. Baptism simply and absolutely, and Penance upon supposition of mortal sin committed after Baptism. But the Sacra∣ment of Order is [viz. simply] necessary to the Church. But other Sacraments are neces∣sary by the second manner of necessity, &c.Primo igitur modo necessitatis sunt tria Sacramenta necessaria; duo quidem personae singulari: baptismus quidem simpliciter & absolutè, poenitentia autem suppo∣posito peccato mortali post baptis∣mum. Sacramentum autem Or∣dinis est necessarium Ecclesie. Sed secundo modo necessaria sunt alia Sacramenta, &c. Sum. Theol. par. 3. q. 65. art. 4. Nor have any of his Commentators, that I have met with, excepted against This, nor any others of your Church. Your self a little beneath grants the point, where you say with relation hereunto, The means are
necessary to the end. Several of your men, Bellarmine in particularDe Clericis, cap. 3., contend that Protestant Churches are no true Churches, because as they alledge they want a true Priesthood. Besides, enough is to be fetcht for this purpose out of your Trent CouncilSess. 23 de Sacram. Or∣dinis., but it is needless to do it. §. 11. From hence then I present you with this Scheme founded on your own Authority, you are no surer you have a true Church, than you are that you have a true Priesthood; you are no surer that you have a true Priest∣hood, even taken in general, than you are that you have true Ordination; you are not surer that you have true Ordination, than you are that your Ordaining Bishops Intend as your Church requires. Now in regard you a∣gree not to claim for the Intention, the Infallible Cer∣tainty of Faith which immediately depends upon divine Revelation, I see not how you can reasonably agree to claim the Infallible Certainty of Faith for the truth of your Church. Which I commend to the Reader's obser∣vation. §. 12. You first tell us in general of some Known Principles of your Church from which the Knowledge of the Intention is deducible, and afterwards reckon them to be these, viz. That the Roman is the only Ca∣tholick Church; That God will continue and preserve that Church to the Worlds end: and all this, say you, ap∣pears from divine Revelation. You conclude hence they must have a true Priesthood, the Means being necessary to the End. Therefore, say you, whatsoever Intention of the Pre∣lates is by them believed as Necessary for this End, they do certainly believe according to their Principles that God's Providence will secure it; his Omnipotence is able to make good his Fidelity. §. 13. For reply, 1. I observe to the Reader, That though you have presented us with a list of those Prin∣ciples
from which you pretend to deduce the Knowledge of the Ordainer's Intention, yet you only say, They appear from Divine Revelation, without shewing either what this Revelation is, or where it is to be found. §. 14. 2. As our discourse was at first Personal, every one will conceive, that if your thoughts had then enabled you to make the above-named distinction, I must have asked, What the Revelation was and where it appeared, on which your said Principles are pretended to rest: Nor could you have refused to satisfie my Question, without bringing a Cloud upon the Cause you manage. And you may easily believe, that if I had known what you had been writing at London, I should have wisht you would have set down What and Where the Revelation you speak of, is; that so I might have consented with you, or refuted you, according to the best judgment I could make of the Thing exhibited. I assure you, Sir, to obtrude upon the World, Doctrines, under the Notion of Articles of Faith, without due proof of their Divine Original, is too great an Empire for Creatures to arrogate to themselves; nor can one reasonably submit to another in such cases, whether they respect God's honour, or their own safety. Therefore when you talk of Divine Reve∣lation, you should have shewed it. §. 15. You would surely enroll me in the Catalogue of Franticks, if I should upon this Occasion spend Years in hunting through all Books for Texts of Scripture, which your Popes, or their Subjects have fancied to be useful for proving the Roman to be the Universal Church, and in confuting their vain Glosses, when I have sound them. Your Person is not adverse to me, but your Cause; and therefore you leave the Field, and cease to be my Adver∣sary, unless you shew me your places of defence, and wherein their strength lies, and then defy my Assaults. But this is not done here. Tell me, is the Revelation you speak of, recorded in the
first Verse, or Chapter of Genesis, or the last Verse of the Revelation, or in any Verse between those. Have you not read that Pope Boniface the VIII. proved the Pope of Rome to be the sole Head of the Christian Church (with rela∣tion-to which Head you call yours the One and the Whole Church) out of the first Verse of Genesis, In the beginning God created, &c. He collected the Argument thus, Dici∣tur in principio non in principiis, &c. It is said, quoth that Pope, in the Beginning; not, in the Beginnings, &c. And this is urged to prove, that there must be One visible Head of the Church, and this the Pope of Rome, with whom all Christians must believe, and to whom all must submit. Have you not read how Pope Gregory the VII. a great while before that, fetcht a proof for the Point, out of the 16th. Verse of that Chapter, God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, &c. —Illa [dignitas] quae praeest diebus, id est Spiritualibus, Major est. That is, — That Dignity that rules the Days, that is Spirituals, is greater. I shall omit the comparison between Popes and Kings, which this Text is brought to settle, and only ap∣ply it to the Point in hand; That God made the Pope to Rule all Christians, is all that I shall take Notice of, as proved by it. I have brought these two infallible Interpreters of Scri∣pture upon the Stage, (and which of you should be such, if your Popes be not) only to shew it would be endless to seek out those many Texts supposed by Roman Catholicks to tend to make out, that the Roman is the One Catholick Church of Christ upon Earth, and to expose their extra∣vagant Mis-expositions of them. I might soon begin with Genesis, but might be long before I had run through the Bible. If these two Popes had spoken onely in general words, as you do, of Divine Revelation for their Head∣ships, (on which your Matter vertually depends) I am so dull, I should never, unless by chance, have found out what Scriptures they referred to for it: And so, though I had
discussed a hundred other Texts, if those had been left out, it might have been said, I had left my work undone. But wise Men will not judge I ought to undertake Unreason∣able tasks, or seek a Needle in a Bottle of Hay. But I spend time: For, it had been enough to say, I am only proving a Negative, and need do no more than over-turn what you are pleased to erect for your De∣fence. You have set me no more work here than I have considered, and so I have no more to do here about your divine Revelation, whether you refer to Scripture, or any thing else. §. 16. Yet it cannot but be worth our Notice, That your Method of maintaining your Church is most easie and expedite. When you find your selves unable particu∣larly to prove your performance of those things which your Councils require to the making your Institutions valid, yet your work is done by saying, We are the Ca∣tholick Church, which God hath promised to preserve to the World's end; and therefore all we require will be certainly performed, though we cannot otherwise make it out. You may also prove all your more speculative Do∣ctrines (had you a thousand more than you have) by the same easie Method. We are the onely Church, you may say, to which God hath promised his Spirit to lead us into all Truth, and therefore our Articles cannot be false, tho' we cannot otherwise prove them to be true. §. 17. If this be sufficient, how imprudent have many of your Men been, to spend their pains, and health, and time, about evincing your particular Points to be founded on Revelation, when a few general Words would have done it to rational Satisfaction. Besides, as Cart loads of Books, on this supposition, are unnecessarily written, so the Readers of them are at unnecessary expence of Mo∣neys in buying them, and of labour in perusing them. What an easie World should we have had, if this your
Method had all-along generally obtained. To shorten the way to knowledge is a praise-worthy enterprize, and to teach how to defend truth without care and trouble is a mighty thing. Well; You have shewed us an expedite Art of Controversie, and such as may be taught even il∣literate Plow-men in half an hours time. And I leave it to the Reader to determine, whether a Plowman of your Perswasion, could have said less in this Matter, than you have done, We are the Onely Church, &c. §. 18. However, consider, Sir, This you use, is but an accidental Argument, and can bestead you no longer, if any other Body of Christians shall please to call them∣selves the Catholick Church, without offering the least proof of it. Which is most apparently your case here. The Donatists of old, who appropriated to themselves the name of the Catholick Church, might have easily quelled all Arguments brought against them, at your rate of answer∣ing: For the said name being arrogated, and the premis∣ses belonging to it, all the rest will follow readily. §. 19. If you think to relieve your self by saying, I am bound to accept any deductions you shall make from any of your Principles, I reply, no surely. I was indeed to prove a Point from some of them, and have, I hope, done it. The more you speak of That, I fear you expose your self the more to derision. §. 20. From the view of your Answer, it will appear, that though you called to me, out of due time, for the Ex∣plication of more than a few Terms, yet you have not had the heart to explain one of them in your Answer, neither what you mean by Intention, nor what by Certainty, nor any of the rest. Instead of saying, what is the particu∣lar nature of the Intention required by your Church, you describe it no otherwise than thus—Whatsoever Intention of the Prelates is by them believed as necessary—. Instead of telling us the particular nature of your knowledge of the Intention, you only say, I deny not that it may sufficiently be known—.
You have no mind it seems to swim out of your depth, it being a silly thing to court danger: nor are you so hardy a Champion as to step a few paces out of your hold to meet an enemy, being mindful enough of the old Proverb, It is good sleeping in a whole skin. Your frank opening your self this way might have led me, if I had mistook any thing of yours, to the true mark, but could not have caused my di∣gression from it; and therefore though you were not bound in rigour (further than to make your Answer apposite and useful) to have done this, yet it would have lookt brave and generous to have done it. Whether others shall interpret your carriage in this kind to be due caution or no, I shall not concern my self. Nevertheless I must say this, you knew the point must be beaten out at last, and it had been manly to have contributed something towards it: whereas he that knew not the particular Nature of the Subject before, knows it but very little better by any help you give him in your Answer. I hope the Reader will excuse me for staying a little too long here, in recompence of the labour I have been at in the first part of this Tractate, to make the state of the question plain to him. §. 20. Whatsoever shall become of any higher Certainty which you cannot challenge me to yield upon Principles you have hitherto barely beg'd, without offering the least colour of proof for them; you seem to have a mind to se∣cure to your self a moral Certainty of the Intention of your Bishops in general. Your words are these, It is morally impossible that all the Prelates in the Roman Catholick Church should be so malicious as wilfully to have omitted any thing in Ordination which they believed to be Es∣sential to it, and which the Church requires as so, supposing it possible for them to do it and not be discovered. It is impossible for us to believe, according to our Principles, that they should all turn devils—and conspire to damn the whole Church— when withal they could propose no advantage at all to them∣selves by this, but the clean contrary: Thus you.
I Reply: The Pillar you have placed here for supporting your moral certainty of the Intention, is too weak to bear it up. Which will appear by considering the following particulars. §. 21. 1. You say not, It is impossible that any one, or several, or many of your Bishops should out of Malice withdraw the required Intention. You only say, It is morally impossible that all should turn devils and conspire to damn the whole Church— §. 22. 2. I say, if Some may withhold their Intention through Malice, (which you deny not) Others may upon other accounts omit it, viz. for Unbelief, culpable Igno∣rance, gross Negligence, natural Inadvertence, &c. I shall speak a little of some of these. §. 23. For Ʋnbelief. It is Morally possible that some of your Bishops have internally or mentally embraced Paga∣nism or Judaism notwithstanding their profession of the Christian Religion. It is notorious that the Inquisitors of Heretical pravity in Roman Catholick kingdoms have of∣ten met with such men, after they had many years lain hid under the disguise of the Christian profession: and is it any way repugnant that the same Cloak which frequently covers Merchants and Gentlemen and others, should cover Priests and Bishops also? Now these disbelieving the virtue of all Christian Institutions, and that of Ordination in particular; nay judging them to be the devices of certain Politick men, or the Off-spring of deluded Fancies, may omit Intending in their Ordinations, without designing to damn or otherwise hurt the Ordained party. §. 24. For Culpable Ignorance, which the Schools call Antecedent. It is morally possible that more than a few in your Church have in several ages been promoted to the dignity of Bishops, who have been men of very little Learn∣ing and much laziness, and so may have faln short of Know∣ing either That your Church requires the said Intention at all, or at least under the said Necessity: and no wonder
then if they may have omitted it. But here is yet no malice nor devils in the case; for I may suppose if such had known it, they would have roused up themselves to the perfor∣mance of their duty. §. 25. For Supine Negligence: It is too frequently seen that many grosly slight and neglect those duties which yet they know are to be done for the good of others, without harbouring any malicious design against them. §. 26. It is enough to hint to the Reader, that the Inten∣tion may fail through occasional Cares, or Fears, or Crosses, or deep Studies (spoken of before) which either put the Thoughts often to long stands or pauses, or else hurry them away from duty else whiter. Many men are enabled by sad experience to conceive this I have said, to be very probable. §. 27. Besides Natural Inadvertence incident to all men, There is in many a very dull unactive temper of Mind ari∣sing either from Natural Constitution, or sometimes from contracted Bodily distempers, whereby the thoughts are many times hindred from rising higher than to what is sen∣sibly to be done. And it cannot be denied that it is morally possible that such Impersections may be incident to your Bishops, (as well as other men) and that their due In∣tending may be obstructed by them. §. 28. Now, Sir, I must put you in mind, you have not made any tolerable Enumeration of the Causes of the defect of Intention: and while you have only put a Bar against an Universal Conspiracy from malice, you give room for the defect from all other Causes which you have no way pro∣vided against; and so you are stark lame in your defence. If you are well acquainted with Roman Catholick writers, I wonder you should take up so short, since they assign the same Causes I have done. Suarez doth in one place, add to Malice o∣ther two Causes of this, among other things, viz. Culpable ignorance, and Natural Inad∣vertence which excuseth from sinSive id fecerit ex malitia, sive ex ignorantia culpabili, sive ex naturali inadvertentia quae ex∣cusat peccatum. Tom. 4. disp 32..
And your Authors in their applying Remedies against this Evil seem to have their eyes chiefly fixed upon other Causes than Malice. To shew this, and the defectible∣ness of the Intention, I shall produce only-one Testimony. It is a passage in the famous Mass-book, ad Ʋsum SarumCautclie Missae.. If any Priest in the time of Consecration be distracted from Actual Intention and de∣votion,Siquis tempore Consecrationis ab actuali intentions & devotione distractus fuerit, nihilominus con∣secrat dummodo intentio habitua∣lis in eo remanscrit. Si autem per summam distractionem habitualis intentio cum actuali tollcretur, videtur quod deberet verba con∣secrationis cum actuali intentione resumere. he nevertheless consecrates, provided the Habitual Intention remain in him.—. But if through very great distraction his Ha∣bitual Intention be taken away as well as the Actual, it seems that he ought to resume the Words of Consecration [say them over a∣gain] with Actual Intention. Here note, that the words Habitual and Virtual have the very same signification, as to our case: and that Aquinas with the other elder Schoolmen described this Intention by the word Habitual, till Scotus his time, who substituted the word Virtual as more proper to express the said Notion, and is followed ever since by the writers of the Roman Church. §. 29. Now I go on to say (1.) This passage of the Mass∣book is an express acknowledgment, that Priests when they do the Exterior work of Consecration may fail to Intend both Actually and Virtually. Which upon the same ground is equally applicable to Bishops with respect to Ordination. (2.) It prescribes this Remedy against the said defect, that the Offending Priest go to the work again, and do it better. I wish the advice had power to necessitate those it is addres∣sed to, to follow it. But that (alas!) cannot be hoped for. §. 30. (3.) This advice is not offered to such as withdraw their Intention through personal malice, or contempt of Re∣ligion, (which is the thing I here directly aimed to shew,) but to such as fail by inadvertence or dispersion of thoughts. And such are omitted in this address perhaps for this Reason, That such cannot be well lookt upon as capable
(in any proximate degree) of the Advice given, whereas some, at least, of those other careless blundering (yet cha∣ritable) Priests may. (4.) I observe once again, from the scope of the cited pas∣sage, against a certain Person I mentioned before, That the distraction or disturbance here mentioned, as the Cause of the failure of the Intention, cannot be meant of the distem∣per of Frenzy or Madness. For, 1. The Advice is offered to such as perceive their own defect, which Mad men, as such, cannot do. 2. Wise men (and such I hope the Compilers of the Sarum-Missal will be held to be) advise that Physick be given to Mad-men for the Recovery of their Reason, ra∣ther than directions to act wisely by, which supposeth them already in the state of it. If a Mad-man (who had gained a Habit of Baptizing before his distemper) should rush into a House, and wash an Infant, newly born, with the Invoca∣tion of the most Blessed Trinity, no wise Man would desire him to do it again with due heed and Actual Intention, his supposed condition, forbidding him either to hit the Inten∣tion at first, or to amend it in the repeated Action. This ad∣vice then given, must be concluded to be directed to persons capable of receiving it; which therefore cannot be frantick Priests. Hereby is confounded the affirmation of the Priest I point at, viz. That none but madmen could fail to intend aright. §. 31. You fee, Sir, several purposes are served by this Ci∣tation, besides that I directly brought it for, but all of them tend to the illustration of the Subject treated of. I shall only add this at parting with it, That it is not to be lookt upon as a single Testimony only, but instead of a thousand such, as implying the judgment of all those Clergymen, who used and approved that renowned Missal. And what a consider∣able part of our Nation that Book obtained in, before that of Pope Pius the V. was framed for the general Uniformity of your Worship, I leave you to think of: and consequent∣ly, what a vast Company of your Clergy (who sure were the best Judges in this case) did implicitely and by true In∣terpretation
acknowledge, that there may be a defect of the Intention, both Actual and Virtual, which may proceed from other Causes, than that of Malice, which yet is the only thing alledged by you to that purpose. §. 32. Next, as an enforcement why there could be no malicious conspiracy of your Prelates, you add this, They could not, say you, propose any advantage to themselves by it, but the clean contrary. But you forget the Genius of Malice, to which doing mis∣chief is an agreeable thing, without any allurements of Worldly profits, or the like. Remember the sad Instance of Satan's murdering our first Parents. This I say not, as be∣lieving any such conspiracy; nor is the fancying such a thing at all needful to my business, having shewed that what Malice may do in some, the same may other Causes effect in others, as to the spoiling of the Intention: I say it only to shew that to be weakness, which you bring to strengthen your Ground. §. 33. There will need no conspiracy of any sort to ren∣der you uncertain of the validity of your Ordainer's Inten∣tion, if you remember what I said before, (after the dis∣patch of my first task) viz. That all the defects of Inten∣tion, in your Ordaining Bishops from the Apostles death, hitherto, are chargeable upon, and utterly disable all that are reputed to derive power from them; and that the lon∣ger the Line is spun out by time, there will be more Nulli∣ties in the Intention, both of Bishops and Priests. §. 34. To rivet this, I ask, What if the Catholick Church for many Ages after Christ did not require this Intention, as necessAry to the Sacraments? If so, the grand Motive to vi∣gilance and heedfulness of Intending was wanting, and so it is more probable, defects might then arise, which might baffle and enervate the greatest care and circumspection of succeeding Bishops. I cannot find that it was uninterrup∣tedly so required; but if you can, I intreat you to shew it. The Sum hereof is, (1.) You have attempted to arm
your self only against one of the many Causes of defect of Intention, letting in the rest like a Flood upon you. (2.) You have falsly supposed, that the effectual valid Intention can∣not have failed in your Church, without an Universal Con∣spiracy of the Bishops of one Age: Whereas the defect may have been let in by degrees, and so may have over∣spread your Church, for any thing you have said to the contrary on this Head. SECT. X. Mr. G.'s Argument, urged by way of Retort, examined and enervated. NOW you come to instance in, and frame an Argu∣ment upon a desperate Subject, which you take to be exactly parallel to mine, and say, That is vicious, and there∣fore Mine must be so. And to make the clearer way to your Syllogistick Forms, you pretend to lay down two Principles of our Church, as the Ground-work of them. Of the First you express your self thus, You take it for a Principle amongst you, that there is a cer∣tain Number of those that are truly Elected to Salvation in your Communion. You mean in the Church of England. §. 1. For Reply. Holding you to be well seen in the Do∣ctrine of our Church, I would desire you to instruct me, where I may find that Principle. I had thought our Church had dealt with such Things only in a general way, with a respect to the Universal Church; and left particu∣lar Churches to try their Election, by making sure their Calling. Of our Articles, the 17th. only concerneth this point; Which so far, as I am concerned to produce it, runs thus, Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby He hath constantly decreed by his Counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he hath
chosen in Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made to honour. And of the Promises relative unto this, the same Ar∣ticle saith, Furthermore we must receive God's promises in such wise as they be generally set forth in holy Scripture. You see how indefinitely our Church speaks in this Mat∣ter — Those whom he hath chosen in Christ out of Mankind: And— We must receive God's promises, as they be generally set forth in holy Scripture. 'Tis our Principle, you see, That some in God's Church belong to the Election of Grace; and that God will make good his Promises by Saving them. But we descend no lower, nor need we, as thinking it sufficient for any par∣ticular Church to be able to say, We have all necessary Doctrine, both Dogmatical and Moral, and may be Saved, if we truly Believe, and Sincerely obey it; to both which God in his mercy call us. We ven∣ture not to say, God hath Elected and promised to Save those in Italy, or these in England: But we say, Whosoever truly Repents and Believes the Gospel shall be Saved, whe∣ther in Italy or England, or any other place. We have Di∣vine Warranty for this: But we have none to give a Local or Personal description of those that are Elected, and shall through Grace be Saved. §. 2. Nevertheless we have as great ground of Hopes, judging of the Tree by the Fruits, that many of the Mem∣bers of this Church are of the Number of the Elect, and so will be saved, as you can have that the Members of the Italian, or Spanish, or French Church are such. But we do not, cannot (I say) undertake Unerrably to determine the Estates of particular Men, or Men of particular places. When we bury Men of the most pious and exemplary con∣versations, you may remember we express our strong Hopes onely, but not perfect assurance of their Bliss. Secret things belong to God. §. 3. However, this will not alter the Nature of our pro∣ceeding,
because you afterwards say, The Argument may be thus applied to any Christian Church in the World, or to all of them put together. The Universal Church exists in all of them put toge∣ther, and since you make the Case of That and particular Churches all One, as to this Matter, I have the Liberty to make the Argument to respect all of them put together, or the Universal Church. You mention a Second Principle in this manner, And you will allow this also as a Principle, That these Elect must have true Saving Grace in their Hearts, as a Condition necessary to their Salvation. This, Sir, I acknowledge to be one of the Principles of our Church, and of all other Christian Churches in the World. Then you proceed from hence to add this, Which saving grace, because you do not know to be in any particular man, therefore you cannot be certain that He is one of those that is Elected to Salvation. Which is unquesti∣onably true. Now I am to examine your Forms of Argumentation, pretended to be parallel to those, I urged against you. Your first is thus, That Church which makes Salvation depend upon a Condi∣tion, which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfill'd, in order to Salvation, must be Ʋncertain whether they have any, who shall be saved in their Communion. But the English Church doth so. Ergo, The English Church is Ʋncertain, whether they have any which shall be saved in their Commu∣nion. §. 4. Now because you say, The Argument may be thus ap∣plied to any Christian Church in the World, or to all of them to∣gether; I shall alter the Form a little, and make it respect all of them. Thus it goes, Whosoever makes Salvation depend upon a Condition, which no Man living knows, whether it be fulfill'd in Order to Sal∣vation,
must be Ʋncertain whether they have any who shall be saved in their Communion. But all the Christian Churches in the world put together, do so. Ergo, All the Christian Churches in the world put together, are Ʋncertain whether they have any which shall be saved in their Communion. In regard, I say, One and all Christian Churches fare alike, according to your own acknowledgment, with re∣spect to this Argument, I have placed this latter form also in view. And what I shall say of them, is as follows. §. 5. I shall admit the parity of either of these Syllogisms with my first, under your own Notion of them newly mentioned: yet must tell you, in my way to your other, that though you made a distinction, and, at least, unnecessa∣rily applied it to my first Proposition, and thereupon cause∣lesly pronounced it false; yet I shall not imitate you in your indiscretion; but grant your Major, as generally put, to be true, because of the Connexion of a necessary Condition with That it is required to: whether it be in deed necessa∣ry, or only so in the Estimation of the Church that requires it. For the Not-knowing a Condition to be fulfilled, upon which the Being of a Thing is suspended, evidently ne∣cessitates the Uncertainty of the Thing it self. §. 6. Pray know, Sir, had I not been prevented by your Compliance and Concessions, I would have dealt more distinctly with relation to the Instance you have put before I had given an Answer to it. I would in time have asked you a few of those questions you asked me out of time, as what Knowledge or Certainty you denied in your In∣stance, &c. or parted the sundry senses my self, and applied them; but I perceive I now need not. I shall then only deny the Minor which you prove in this manner, True Grace in the Heart is a Condition which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no in Order to Sal∣vation. But the English Church [or, all Christian Churches put to∣gether—] requires Grace in the Heart in Order to Salvation. Ergo.
The English Church [or, all Christian Churches put toge∣ther—] requires a Condition in Order to Salvation, which no man living knows whether it be fulfill'd or no. §. 7. Before I speak to this, I advertise That you here pretend only to make one man Uncertain of the truth of Grace in another man's Heart, as I did to make one man Uncertain of another's Intention when you gave this An∣swer. And indeed the making your Instance a parallel to mine confines the sense hither. So that here is, according to your self, room left for every man to judge as well as he can, of his own Grace, and so whether he be one of God's Elect. Which thing falls not here into dispute. §. 8. This premised, I will thus distinguish in the Major of this Syllogism, of true Grace in the Heart. By Grace in the Hearts of men is meant either— in the Hearts of men con∣sidered [determinatè] in particular, or— in the Hearts of men considered [indeterminatè, vel in confuso] in general. §. 9. If when you say True Grace in the Heart is a Con∣dition which no man living knows, &c. you mean it of men in particular, I will freely grant your Proposition to be true. For no man hath full certainty that another hath true Grace in his Heart, God having reserved that prerogative to him∣self, who is the only searcher of the heartJer. 17.10.. §. 10. But then I add, my granting this brings no disad∣vantage at all upon us. The Knowledge of our having the true means of Grace, (with their Effects) as God's holy Word and Sacraments, and Persons duly Authorized to Administer them (the Knowledge hereof, I say) is not any whit obstructed or clouded by our ignorance of another man's grace: inasmuch as a graceless man may be a true Minister of them, and the Efficacy of divine Ordinances de∣pends upon the merciful Operation of their Institutor, and not on the Grace of those that Administer them. Where∣as on the other side, your ignorance of the Intention of your Ministers in particular, renders you Uncertain whe∣ther you have the true means of Grace, and consequently
the Benefits God is ordinarily wont to confer by them; as hath above been shewn. Which amounts to a vast diffe∣rence. §. 11. But if you mean it of Grace in the Hearts of men taken in general, (which acception alone your Instance seems to respect) So that the Sense of the Proposition is This, True Grace in the Heart of some or other, some where or other, is a Condition which no man living knows, &c. §. 12. I, without more ado, deny your Major as utterly false in this Sense: and so may either dismiss you re infecta, or put you to the trouble of making another Syllogism be∣fore I need to assign the manner of Knowledge, whereby we know Grace to be in some or others. But I will be good natur'd and supply your defect. You should then have gone on to urge to this purpose. If true Grace in the heart be a Condition which any man living knows whether it be performed in order to Salvation, then he knows it either by some Principles evidently grounded on divine Revelation, or some other way. But he knows it neither by any Principles evidently ground∣ed upon divine Revelation, nor any other way: Ergo, Grace in the heart is a Condition which no man living knows whether it be performed in order to Salvation. §. 13. Now, Sir, and not till now, am I obliged to assign the way by which true Grace may be known to be in some or others, though we know not who. Upon my denial of the Minor when you are pleased to say, ad partes, I must tell which way I know it, or give up my Cause. §. 14. Well. Without the formality of your distinction I say, This may be known by a Knowledge grounded immediately on divine Revelation. The whole of this mat∣ter appears in Scripture. 1. When our B. Saviour promiseth That the gates of hell shall not prevail against his ChurchMatt. 16.18. : He saith in effect, that in despight of men and devils, he will at all times even to the worlds end maintain some in his true Faith and Wor∣ship, and also save them at last.
2. He determines true Grace or Purity of heart to be ne∣cessary in order to the Salvation of such. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see GodMat. 5.8.. Which words by true and unquestionable implication exclude all impure persons from Salvation. But in many Texts such are formally excluded from it. Without holiness no man shall see the LordHeb 12.14.. 3. His promise to maintain and continue such a people cannot fail by reason of his divine Perfections— God that cannot lye promisedTit. 1.2.. He is faithful that hath promisedHeb. 10.23.. §. 15. Thus according to express Scripture we find, that Grace in the heart is necessary to Salvation: that God hath promised he will ever preserve and save some in the world who are Faithful and Gracious: that his promise cannot fail. All which put together truly grounds our Knowledge, that there is true Grace in some Members of the Christian Church, though we know not who or where they are in particular. Thus have I spoke to your Argument considered in itself, and this more regularly than you have done to mine, if I flatter not my self. §. 16. But that which is the main concern, I do not find that parity you pretend there is between your second and mine: pray where find you in the divine Oracles that the Intention I have described, is as necessary to the Being of the Sacraments, as they teach that Grace is to the being Sa∣ved. Had God indeed knit them individually together, and declared the necessary dependence the Sacraments have of this Intention, we should have been sure from divine war∣ranty (as I have proved we are in the matter of Grace) that some Bishops and Priests in God's Church have from time to time duly Intended. But alas! you have exhibited no∣thing of divine Revelation to shew this; the chaffy general words you have given have nothing of weight or cogency in them. This grand disparity is very apparent, and you have said nothing to hinder any man from apprehending it such; and so the design of your Instance is defeated, and shares with the rest of your Answer in its misfortunes.
§. 17. I may well forbear to speak of other things; for, Fancy what promises you please, as peculiarly made to Men of your Communion, yet know, God is not bound to en∣able Men to believe and perform what himself hath not made necessary, in order to Grace and Salvation. §. 18. I shall now, Sir, desire the Protestant Reader to remember, as an Antidote against Temptations from Roman Catholicks, the uncertain comfortless Estate you are in. For pick you out the most discerning Layman amongst you, and suppose all your reputed Clergy to pass leisurely by him, one by one, yet he shall not upon sure Grounds be able to say, of any of the whole Number, This is a true Bishop, or a true Priest: Nor can any of Them with better Warranty affirm of themselves, I am such a One. Nor can one Member of your whole Body assuredly say, I have once in my life time been partaker of one true Sacra∣ment. All this I have made good. If you could say, some or other of our Clergy are true Bi∣shops and Priests; and some or other of our Body have re∣ceived true Sacraments, tho' we know not who, or where those are; yet it is a very lamentable thing for each of you to be uncertain concerning himself, and uncapable of apply∣ing those Mercies to any particular Persons. And yet it ap∣pears you have taken no great Care to secure even this heartless General Good to your Church. Had you armed your Paper with any particular strength, with relation hereunto, you should have found me an easie Enemy, inasmuch as I had not, nor needed to have, any de∣sign that way upon you, what I have done otherwise, being sufficient to expose your Nakedness. SIR, After you have delivered what you call your Full Answer, (which I have examined) you write something more, though not under that Notion. And that I may ap∣pear just and fair to your Expectation, I will in short ac∣quaint the Reader, what the Severals of it are; and subjoin a few Words to each of them. §. 1. 1. You desire me to declaro, What our Doctrine is of the Subject in question.
Answer. It was the only business I undertook, to distress you with Consequents from your own Doctrin; and while I am a doing this, you call to me, Pray, Sir, What is the Do∣ctrine of your Church? Now let the World judg, whether your request be not a calling me off from my proper Work, and very probably seeking an Occasion to leap aside from your Province. For whatever we hold, (which yet you was long enough a Student amongst us to under stand) what could my telling you that, boot you, so long as I evince that your own Doctrine intails afflictions on you? §. 2. 2. You call for an Explication of several Terms. Answer. I have told you how unseasonable your Call was, but withall have done at large what you requested. §. 3. 3. You say, It would have been more for the Satisfa∣ction of my Protestant Auditors, if I would have proved (as you proposed) the Lawfulness of our Separating, at the pre∣tended Reformation, from every Communion of Christians in the World: or that any one Term of your Communion (you say, you gave me my Choice) was Unlawful, or just Ground of our Separation. §. 4. Answer, 1. Among sundry other things then started, those you speak of were indeed mentioned, and I gave such Grounds of Resolutions of them, as seemed sufficient to my self, and the Protestant Auditors. And I gave more than you had a Mind of, for when I was laying down the Terms of Christian Communion, you flung off from the Considerati∣on of it, saying these Words, You now enter into the Merits of the Cause! As if that was no time or place for it. And this the Auditors say, They very well remember. §. 5. 2. Your great Undertaking is well worth observing. You take no less upon you, than to maintain for just and lawful, every Term the Roman Church requires to her Com∣munion. Your Province is Wide, and requires an Universal skill in the Controversies between the two Churches, as will thus appear. (1.) She requires the Belief of all those Articles your Councils have defined to be Matter of Faith. And these will be found not a few, if we compare Pope Pius
his, with the Ancient Creeds. (2.) She requires an Assent to, and Compliance with your whole Worship. Now each of these Articles you are, it seems, furnish'd to maintain, as also the whole frame of your Worship: and this not against me onely, but also against Dr. Wr. Mr. P. and (for ought I know) all Comers. §. 6. Sir, I love courage in any Man, but I love Caution too. Pray tell me, How it happens, that in your Study of Theology, for full twenty years in our Communion, you were not able to find one of their distinguishing Articles defen∣sible; and now in One years time see them all perspicuous and surely founded. Your concern to search for truth was the same before, as lately, your Purse enabled you to buy Books, and your Education and Parts to read them, and you will not, I suppose, be Unwilling We should believe you weighed the Arguments on both sides. Pray then tell us, how, all at once, you hapned to find all those Points we call Popery, to be Warranted by Divine Authority. §. 7. If you be inspired, I am sure to have the worse in con∣tending with you. If you be not, I have no reason to dread your Challenge. §. 8. But I have found out your strength; you can justifie all your particular Points with a few begg'd general words, viz. We are the only Catholick Church, and therefore whatsoever We teach for Faith, cannot sail of being true. And what we re∣quire as necessary, cannot fail of being done. §. 9. I confess you are able at this rate to baffle all the Protestants in the World, and on that Score may dare us, even from Dan to Beersheba. But we onely smile at such impotent conceits. I have set forth the Matter of this last part of your Let∣ter, though our present Controversie is not touched in it, that You may have no Colour to Complain, I have sup∣pressed any thing of Yours. §. 10. It was my onely business to present You with a View, of the Feeble Estate of Your Church, which I hope I have performed, and so rest, Yours, &c. FINIS.
