n948b 99825349 29729
NEWS from Bishops-Gate-Street. Being a True RELATION Of a most Barbarous and Bloody MURDER, Committed by one Jacob Turner, a Broad-Weaver; upon the Body of Mary Turner his Wife; in Lamb-Alley, in Bishops-Gate-Street. With an Account of the Coroners Inquest, who sate upon the Deceased, on Friday the 18th. of this Instant January, 1688/9. Who brought in the said Turner, Guilty of Willful Murder. MAny and Notorious are the Murders, that of late have been Committed by divers wicked Persons, and in sun∣dry manners: But none more to be lamented, than this  Horrid and Ʋnnatural, as those of Husbands on their Wives, &c.  deplorable Instance, of which (good Reader) be pleased to ke as followeth:
In Lamb-Alley, in the Parish of St. Botolph Bishops gate, at the House of one Mr. Vowel, a Victular, over against the Sign of the Last; Lodged for some considerable time, one Jacob Turner, and his Wife Mary. He was Born in the Parish of St. Mary White-Chappel, of honest Parents, being carefully brought up; and when capable, was by his Industrious Pa∣rents bound an Apprentice to a Weaver; but being very loote and dissolute youth; as soon as the Term of his Apprentiship was expir'd, he betook himself to these Extravagancies, which in this Age (alas) are to predominant, as well as Epidimical. Notwithstanding all this, he had the happiness to Marry with a Vertuous and Chast Maid, with whom he has lived these 22 years; and by whom God has blest him with a Pious and Dutiful Daughter, now almost 21 years of Age: However these Blessings were not esteem'd by him, as sent by an over∣ruling Providence: But being instigated by the Devil, per∣petrated this deplorable Murther on the Body of his Wife, in the manner following. On Wednesday the Second of this Instant January, 1688/9. A∣bout three in the Afternoon, this said Turner being drinking at the Sign of the Lamb, in the aforesaid Alley, and wanting Money to discharge his Reckoning; he sent one to his Wife (who was then a Nurse to one Mrs. Freeman a Broad-weaver in the same Alley) but she not having wherewith all to com∣ply with his demands, he immediately went to his Lodgings, at the aforesaid Victualing House; where sending for his Wife, she presently came to him, whom he led up Stairs; and after many Curses and Oaths, and other Abusive Languages, he fell a Beating of her; and she stooping down to save her Face, he took up a House Knife, that lay by him on the Table, and struck her with great violence into the Ribs, under the Right Shouldier, which immediately occasioned a great effusion of Blood.
After which having some emse, he feignedly caught her up in his Arms; telling her, he having done her business. would now do his own; but (poor Woman) she Innocently begged of him not to do any violence to himself; but immediately he in a great Passion, stomping and raving, his Landlord ran up Stairs with his Son, who coming into the Room, found him the said Turner, in the middle of the Room, in a very Impudent and Bravado Posture, with his Arms exten∣ded, and accosting his said Landlord; cries out, I have done her Business (meaning his said Wife.) The Landlord, replyed to him, Turner, now you have done bravely; now you'll be hang'd: up∣on which words, Turner took up another Knife, and made at Mr. Vowel, his Landlord, swearing he would do his Business too; but Vowel and his Son over-powring him, took the Knife from him, and quell'd him: Many Women of the Neighbour∣hood, coming in, got the Woman to Bed, and sent for one Mr. Litchfield the Elder, a Neighbouring Chyrurgìon, and Turner himself run in his Mad fit, for Mr. Litchfield's Son assronting the Old Gentleman, and forcing him to give place to his Son; who having let her Blood, and applyed sutable Medicaments to her, was asked by the Company, whether the Wound would prove Mortal, but would give no positive Answer, but said, he much feared her Recovery; notwithstanding, the Ignorant Neighbourhood, took no Care to secure him; and he as im∣pudently went about his Business, without any Remorse or Concern, for what he had done, she, the said Mary Turner, lay Languishing from the Second day of this Instant, to this last Wednesday, being the Sixteenth; during which space of time, this Villanous Monster of a Man, behav'd himself very impu∣dently, both to his Wife, and the Neighbours, that discour∣sed and reasoned with him, in indeavouring to lay before him the Heynousness of his horrid Crime; but he replyed, only
with Oaths, Curses, and Blasphamous Expressions: and in∣stead of having the least Remorse of Conscience, avowed se∣veral times, that if it were to do again, he would do it; and further. That he had more Persons Business to do, besides her, his said Wife. As soon as the Neighbour-hood, found his Wife was Expi∣ring, they procur'd a Constable, and seised him, at a small Ale-House, at the Sign of the Feathers in the Artillery-Lane; who, perceiving the Constable coming, with his Long Staff, came out to him; very impudently, saying, I am the Man, who, I suppose you seek after; I am ready to go with you; who immediately, (he being taken in the Tower Liberty) carryed him, before the Right Honourable, the Lord Lucas, who committed him to Prison, where, he continues, in order to his Tryal, that he may receive the Just Punishment, for so Barbarous, Bloody and Unnatural Murther; and last Night, being the Eighteenth Instant, the Coroners and Jury, sate on the Deceased Body, and brought in Jacob Turner Guilty of Willful Murther. And thus Reader, I hope this may be a warning to deter others from committing the like Crime. This may be Printed, 1689. LONDON, Printed for Stephen Draper.
