P1418 99833201 37676
SOME USEFUL SAYINGS, IN VERSE and PROSE, COLLECTED By a Lover of Vertue and Good∣ness in Whomsoever. The Heart of him that is upright, In Heavenly knowledge takes delight. I will delight my self in THY Statutes. If thou would'st true Wisdom win, Then thou must retire within. That which may be known of GOD is manifest in them, Rom. 3.19. The Second Edition with Alterations and Additions. He that is instrvcted unto the Kingdom of Hea∣ven, bringeth out of his Treasure things New and Old. London, Printed for the Author, 1688.
THE PREFACE. THe former Impression (excepting the Post∣script) was chiefly intended for Young People, and This being not only for such, but more especially for Those of riper years; most of the Verses are left out, and many Sentences in Prose (and some of them of a more Spiritual concern) put in: which probably, to some Hun∣gry Souls who are waiting for the Crumbs that fall from their LORDS Table, may be of some Service and Refreshment. For its the Poor and Hungry that are to be fed with Good things, when the Rich and the Full goes empty away. O THOU INFINITE AND WON∣DERFUL BEING! How dost THOU hide the Mysteries of THY Kingdom from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals them to Babes; even to those sincere Souls that are intirely given up to serve THEE: This, this, is THY do∣ings THOU KING of Righteousness and KING of Peace. Go on, go on, I beseech THEE, that THINE OWN WORKS
MAY YET PRAISE THEE: and that it may be known that the GOD of Daniel is the ONLY TRUE AND LIVING GOD, and that HE alone is the Revealer of Hiden Mysteries, to those who are found Inno∣cent before HIM, and who are freely and wil∣lingly given up to part with all that is near and dear unto them for HIS Sake. O THOU GREAT AND MIGHTY ONE! make bare THINE Arm, that the Nations may know there is a GOD that judg∣eth in the Earth; and that will reward every Man according to his Deeds. I that am but as a poor Worm, Prostrate my self before THEE: Humbly begging that THOU wouldst Rule and Reign in and over Me, and all Mine, henceforth even for ever, and ever. Amen. Dec. 1687.
SOME USEFUL SAYINGS, &c. 1. TO work aright, OLORD, instruct thou me, That in THY Sight I may approved be: Then shall my Soul have Rest and Peace for ever In THEE, which neither Death nor Hell can sever. 2. IT matters not, how I appear to Man, A Witness in my Soul there is, that can This record to the FATHER bear, that I Seek not Mans praise, but Immortality: That so a Crown of Rest I may receive, Which Mortals have not in their Power to give. If I yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ. 3. THo' all the World my Actions discommend, I am at Peace, when Conscience is my Friend. And herein do I exercise my self, to have alwaies a Conscience void of Offence towards GOD, and to∣wards Man. 4. HE that Commands himself is more a Prince, Than He who Nations keeps in Awe, And they that yield to what their Souls convince, Shall never need another Law. The WORD is nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, to obey it and do it.
5. HE's still himself, when company is gone, Too well employ'd ever to be alone; He takes no thought to be observ'd or seen, Whil'st all his Acts are eccho'd from within. Love to be unknown and nothing accounted of. 6. HE dares not wish, nor his own fate propound; But if GOD send, reads love in ev'ry wound And would not lose, for all the joys of sense, The inward comfort of Obedience. Remember Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful. 7. WHen all the stormy World doth roar, How unconcern'd am I: I cannot fear the falling lower, Who never would be High. The lowliest mind is safest. 8. HAppy that Soul that is content alone, And needs no entertainment, but its own. Never less alone, than when alone. 9. HE that lives at Home, and learns to know, GOD and himself, needs no further go. The Kingdom of GOD is within you. Luke 17.21. 10. AT length this Secret I have learn'd, Who will be happy must be unconcern'd; Must all their Comfort in their bosom wear, And seek their Treasure, and their Power there. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels. 2 Cor.
USEFUL SAYINGS, &c. 1. THe Fear of the LORD is the first step to be accepted of HIM, and true Wisdom obtaineth HIS Love. 2. Blessed is that Soul that heareth the LORD speaking in Her, and receiveth from HIS Mouth the Word of Comfort. Christian Pat. 3. Blessed are those Ears that hearken only to the DIVINE VOICE, and listen not to the Whisperings and Allurements of the World. 4. If I choose the LORD for my Portion, then Mercy and Goodness shall follow me whilst I live, and Glory and everlasting happiness shall be my Portion when I die. 5. He that hath little Understanding, and sear∣eth GOD, is better than he that is exceeding Wise, and transgresseth the Law of the most HIGH. 6. He that intends to attain to the more inward & Spiritual things of Religion, must with JESUS depart from the multitude and press of People. 7. Twas Sir Henry Woton's Motto, after all his Travels and Embassies, I have at length learn'd, That the greatest Wisdom is got by a quiet retirement. 8. Let it be our Care to live here as we ought, contented with the condition which Providence alots us; whatever we may meet with in the Way we shall be happy in the End, which the Wise in Heart considers.
9. Learn to overcome thy self in all things, for the Love of thy CREATOR, and then thou shalt be able to attain to Divine Knowledge. 10. If thou spend the Day profitably, thou wilt have cause to rejoyce in the Evening. 11. Simple Obedience is to be preferred before all Worldly Wisdom. 12. The Glory of a good Man is the Testimony of a good Conscience; have That and thou wilt have inward Peace in the midst of many Troubles. 13. To do alwaies well, and to have low thoughts of thy self, is a sign of an Humble Soul. 14. They that follow Sensuality, stain their own Consciences and lose the favour of GOD. 15. Withdraw thy self violently from That, to which nature is viciously inclin'd. 16. They that avoid not small faults, by little and little, fall into greater. 17. They that live at Liberty and Ease, shall ever live in Disquiet. 18. True quietness of Heart is got by resisting our Passions, not by obeying them. 19. Remember alwaies thy End, and how that lost time never returns. 20. If we engage into a large Acquaintance, and various Familiarities, we set open our Gates to the Invaders of most of our time. Charon. 21. Visits made or received, are usually an intollerable consumption of Time, unless prudent∣ly order'd: and they are for the most part spent in vain and impertinent Discourses, J. Hales. 22. Many Visitings, or many Visitors does not only hinder true Tranquility, but much deprive
us of that time which ought to be better employ'd. 23. Time fruitlesly passed away, will in the end cause an aking Heart. 24. Defile not thy Mouth with Swearing; nei∣ther use thy self to the Naming of the Holy ONE. 25. Let the Name of GOD be sparing in your Mouth, but abundantly in your Heart. 26. The Jews of Old accounted the Name JEHOVAH so Sacred, that they durst not ut∣ter it; the High Priest alone, and that in the Temple only, but once in the Year at their So∣lemn Feast, while he blessed the People, might have leave to mention it, for others it was Death. Buxt. Lex. Youths Monitor p. 100. 27. It is a mark of folly and ill nature to hate reproof, and far from his mind that said; If the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oyl. 28. Sin and Sorrow are inseparable Compani∣ons; thou canst not let in the one, and shut out the other; he that swims in Sin, must sink in Sorrow. Divine Breathings. p. 66. 29. Corrupt Examples may sway with weak Minds, but the wise in Heart will regard and con∣sider their own Duty. Sam. Crosland. 30. Noah had perished in the Waters, if Times had carried him. LOT had Burnt in Sodom, if the Multitude had sway'd him; The sins of Times GODS People may alwaies be pious mourners for them; but never practisers of them: Be ye (what ever others are) Righteous in your Genera∣tion before the LORD. Idem. 31. Oppose no Man willfull, neither follow any in evil Courses, Idem.
32. Obstinacy is an Advantage to our Ene∣mies, a Trouble to our Friends, and the assured overthrow of our Selves. 33. SO gracious is Providence, that every Man has a Light set up within himself for a Guide. Seneca. 34. An Immutable Law, which with the know∣ledg of Good and Evil, is Engraven upon the Heart, and Grafted into the Soul of Man. Origen. 35. Let none blame the Light, they are not Sa∣ved, but their own Rebellion who refuse to be Saved by it.—No Man is without a Teacher, to Instruct, or Assist him, in the Way to Eternal Life. Chrysostom. 36. The most excellent thing the Soul is awake∣ned to, is her Guide; that is, a Divine Spirit with∣in: But if man be Rebellious to it, it will prove his Torment. Pythagoras. 37. Socrates frequently said, he had the Guide of his Life within him, and call'd it his good Angel, or Spirit, that suggested to his Mind what was Good and Vertuous, and inclined and disposed to a Pious Life; and that it furnished him with Di∣vine Knowledge. 38. The Vertue and Happiness of a Man de∣pends upon the close correspondence of his mind with the Divine Will. Cleanthus. 39. Seneca saith, I have a clear and certain Light by which I may judge the Truth from Falshood; that which appertains to the felicity of the Soul, the Internal will direct to.—GOD is in us, the Holy Spirit sits or resides in Man, and is the ob∣server
of our Good or Evil Actions; as HE is dealt with by us, HE deals with us. 40. GOD hath Built to HIMSELF a Tem∣ple in the Consciences of Men, as the Place where∣in HE would be Worshipped; and that there Men ought to look for HIS Appearance. Justinus. 41. A Life Subject to the holy Guidings of the Universal Light in the Conscience, is a kind of a natural Christianity, or to be naturally a Chri∣stian. Tertullian. 42. Worship GOD; reverence thy Parents; know thy Self; in Child-hood be Modest; in Youth Temperate; in Man-hood Just; and in Old Age Prudent, that thou maist die untroubled. Chilon. 43. Vertue is the Beauty, and Ʋice the deformi∣ty of the Soul, Socrates. 44. Vertue is an Armour that none can pierce or take from good men. Pleasure is one of the greatest Mischiefs in the World. Antisthenes. 45. Where mens Souls are deeply and frequent∣ly employed in Spiritual Retirement, and wait∣ing for Divine Strength, and are oft exercis'd in Meditation; Holy Revelations, or Illuminations will occur, which enlightens the Soul and enables it the better to live and act Virtuously. Diogenes. 46. GOD grant that I may alwaies be so hap∣py, as to observe the venerable sanctity in my Words and Deeds, which are commanded by those Noble Laws, written in mens Hearts. Sophocles. 47. Cordially espouse all Vertue, constantly hate and decline all Ʋice. 48. To be humble to Superiors, is Duty; to
Equals Civility; to Inferiors Courtesie; to all Safety. 49. It is to be Observ'd, that the Poor Man Sings at his Plow, while the Rich Man frets in his Palace: This shews, that 'tis the Mind not the For∣tune that makes us happy. 50. The Glory of the Aged is their Experi∣ence and their Wisdom, the Glory of a young Man is his Modesty and Submission. 51. He that is a Companion of Riotus Men, shameth his Father and dishonoureth his Mother. 52. 'Tis not for young Men to drink Wine, nor for lovers of Vertue to be Drinkers of strong Drink. 53. Be not a Companion with Wine-bibbers, nor with Riotous eaters of Flesh. Pro. 23.20. 54. Deal by thy Estate which GOD in HIS Providence shall please to give Thee, as Cicero once Ingeniously and Prudently advis'd; Let them not be lockt up so close, but that Wisdom and Li∣berality may have the Key, and at any time come freely to them: Neither let them lie so loose and open, that Prodigality should abuse and wast them. S. Crosland. 55. He that will be Lavish in his Superflui∣ties, will afterwards find himself unavoidably straitned in his necessities. Idem. 56. Conscience once embased, the Heart once polluted by Ʋicious Courses, is not easily re∣cover'd to the true Fear of the LORD. Idem 57. Honour thy Father, and forget not the Sorrows of thy Mother; and take heed of Griev∣ing, Contradicting, or Contending with them: But with all Tenderness, Modesty, and Submission behave thy self towards them.
58. Youth should be a Pattern for Vertue, not a Priviledg for Ʋice: Therefore let thy Vertues be Grave, whilst thy Years are Green. 59. Plato, seeing a young Man play at Dice, reprov'd him sharply; the other answered, what for so small a matter? custom (said Plato) is no small thing; let idle hours be spent more usefully. 60. Let youth take delight in good things, for Pleasures are the Baits of evil: Observe the mo∣mentary sweetness of a delicious life is follow'd with eternal Sorrow, the short pain of the con∣trary with eternal Pleasures. 61. Be meek and courteous to all, yet choose only the Vertuous and Harmless for your Compa∣nions. The Dove flocks not with Ravens. 62. Let thy Speech be sober and seldom: To know how to be silent, is a great advantage to speak well; and he that knows not how to do the one, knows not the other. 63. Who heareth much and speaketh little, may best discern Falshood from Truth. 64. We ought alwaies to keep a Bridle at our Mouths, even in Religious and Holy Occasions; because it is hard to fall into Arguing, without of∣fence to GOD and our Neighbour. 65. Let thy Speech be short, comprehending much in few Words. For long Discourses, Ampli∣fications, and Repetitions, are a sign of Ostentati∣on in the Speaker, tedious and irksom, and of no real good to the Hearer. Even in a good Cause, or on a good Subject, a man may say too much. 66. Rare are the men who set a higher price upon hearing then speaking.
67. It is the Property of a good Man, to do much and say little. 68. The beginning of Strife, is as when one letteth out Water: therefore leave off Conten∣tion before it be medled with. 69. A froward Man soweth Strife: and a Whisperer separateth very Friends. 70. Silence is a Guard of the Conscience, a Bri∣dle from Insolence, and a sign of Innocence, and preserves from many Evils. 71. They that turn anothers words to a worse end than was intended, shews an evil Mind; and are far from doing therein as they would be done unto. 72. There is more desirableness in Meekness, and Innocency, than in all the Mountains of Prey or Self-exaltation. 73. A Vertuous Man is more Patient in Adver∣sity, than a Ʋicious in Prosperity. 74. I will learn contentment by considering o∣thers wants and my own enjoyments, and not learn discontent from others enjoyments and my own wants. J. Hales. 75. A Rich Worldling is rather to be pitied for what he wants, than envied for what he has. 76. Unsatiable desires in Temporals, makes a man poor in Spirituals. 77. How little soever the thing be, if it be in∣ordinately loved, it defileth the Soul, and hin∣dreth the enjoyment of the CHIEFEST GOOD. 78. There is nothing in the World conduceth more to the Composure and Tranouility of the Mind, than the serenity and clearness of the Con∣science;
keep but That safe and untainted, the Mind will enjoy a Calm and Tranquility in the midst of all the Stoyns of the World. And altho' the Waves beat, and the Sea works, and the Winds blow; the Mind that hath a quiet and clear Con∣science within, will be as stable and as safe from Perturbation as a Rock in the midst of a tempe∣stuous Sea, and will be a Gosken too, and within it self, when the rest of the World without, is like an Aegypt for Contusion and Darkness. 79. Whatever thou dost hazard or lose, keep the Integrity of thy Conscience, both before Trou∣bles come and under them; it is a Jewel will make thee Rich in the midst of Poverty, a Sun that will give thee Light in the midst of Datk∣ness, a Fortress that will keep thee safe in the greatest Danger, and that is never to be taken from thee, unless thou thy self betray it and deli∣ver it up. J. Hales Contempl. p. 374. 80. Many words do not satisfie the Soul, but a good Life comforteth the Mind, and a pure Con∣science giveth great assurance in the sight of GOD. 81. He that keeps the Law of GOD and ab∣stains from the impurity of the World, that is, te good Man, the just Liver; he is the Apostles true Jew and Circumcition. W. P. 82. The Curse of the LORD is in the House of the Wicked, but HE blesseth the Habitation of the Just. 83. Whoso feareth HIM, it shall go well with them at the last; and they shall find favour in the day of their Death. 84. Let reason go before every Enterprise: And Counsel before every Action. B
85. Tho' a good Life may have but few daies, yet a good Name endures for ever. 86. What are the delights of the World to the Peace of my Consoience? Rather let me be Poor with a good Heart, than Rich with an evil Mind. 87. How can Pleasures content me, whilst the Sting of them Poyson me? 88. Never think those true hearted Friends to thee, that are false to their own Consciences. 89. They who suffer their own Wills and Luss to Rule, not only oppress others thereby, but Rile and crucifie the Just and Faithful Witness in themselves. 90. There are no such Enemies without, as unruly Lusts and Passions within, therefore la∣bour to overcome them all. 91. The great folly of Mankind, is the unru∣liness and want of Government, of the Sensual Appetite or Lusts: Hence grows Internperance and excess in Eating, and Drinking, which breaks out into very Foolish, Vain, and Imprudent Acti∣ons; exhaust the Estate, wast and consume the Health, embase and impoverisheth the Mind, destroys the Reputation, and fills the World with much of that Folly and Disorder, that is every where observable. Judge Hales. 92. A thou desirous of a Kingdom, saies the Philosopher, I will presently shew thee One. Rule Wisely over thy self. 93. Erasmus saith, What Men set forth by Mens device, may be Perceiv'd by Mans Wit; but the Thing that is set forth by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, requireth an interpreter inspi∣red
with the like Spirit, for without the Inspirati∣on of It, the secrets of GOD cannot be known. 94. Our Eternal help is from GOD who Illu∣minates our Minds, without WHOM we are un∣able to understand any thing in Divine Matters; and HE inspires men with that understanding, which neither Age, nor Industry, nor Doctrine of Man can possibly give. Drusius. 95. Chilon, One of the Wise Men of Greece, left these three Pathetical sayings behind Him: 1. Whosoever thou art, learn to know thy self. 2. Be not earnest in thy desires after any Visible thing. 3. Misery will be the end of Medling with many Matters. 96. Humility and Abstinence keeps the Body and Mind, in much Evenness and Tranquility; but Pride and Fulness are Pernicious to both. 97. Afflictions are sent for the good, even of good Men; and it is their fault if they have not that effect. 98. Let thy Afflictions make thee humble, and thy deliverance therefrom the more increass thy humility. 99. Follow Peace and Holiness with all Men, not only with your Friends, but with your very Enemies; that you may be the Children of the HIGHEST, and of a good example to all Man∣kind. 100. The clean Soul of a Christian is the House of GOD, and also the House of Prayer, whose Body is HIS Temple. 101. There are some that Pray often, yet are not heard to speak much. There are many that make
long Prayers, yet Pray not at all — acceptably. 102. Prayer is a more Spiritual and Secret thing in the Sanctified, than is understood by most. 103. A just Man (saies Chrysostom) leaves not off to Pray; unless he leaves to be just: He alwaies Prays, who alwaies does well; the good desire is Prayer, and if the desire be continued, so is also the Prayer. 104. To me the Strife of Men is wearisom, their Threatnings, their Flatteries, their Applause, their Revilings, are all of them Wisely, and Si∣lently, to be passed over by him that truly mean∣eth Peace on Earth or Glory in Heaven. He were yet to seek (saies a worthy Man) how to live that knows not how to digest and put up such tryals as these. 105. The first step to true Religion, is, to de∣part from Iniquity: all other steps in Religious performances till that be, availeth little: for if ini∣quity be regarded in the Heart, GOD regardeth not that mans Prayers. 106. Religion (however pull'd several waies) is of it self a quiet and strifeless thing; Holy indeed, but Harmless, and Divine: yet still shining forth in much Plainness and Simplicity. Be you of that Religion which gives Glory to GOD on High, on Earth Peace, and Good will towards Men. 107. True Religion is not to fill Heads with Notions and Opinions, but to Sow in the Mind the Seed of Vertue, to direct how to Go∣vern Passions, and to destroy self-will. 108. Of all the divers Religions that are or may be in the World, they seem to be most Noble, and
to have greatest appearance of Truth, which without much external and bodily service, draw the Soul into it self, and raise it by pure Contem∣plation to admire and adore the Greatness and In∣finite MAJESTY of the cause of all things, and the BEING of Beings, without any great De∣claration or Prescription of HIS service. Charon. 109. Virtue and Goodness ought to be own'd in all Parties and Opinions, and if these were pra∣ctis'd it would reconcile all men to each other. 110. Happy is he that shall be exercis'd in these things, and he that layeth them up in his Heart shall become Wise. He that can Read, let him understand what follows. 111. THat the Soul may be the Habitation of the Celestial KING, it is necessary that it should be pure and without any blemish; wherefore the LORD purifies it as Gold in the Furnace of Tribulations and Temptations. 112. Thou art to know, that the humble Soul is a Habitation for GOD, that therefore to the end the Sovereign KING may rest in the Throne of Thy Soul; thou oughtst to take care it be Clean, Quiet, and Peaceable. 113. Think not that GOD esteemeth him most, that doth, or talketh most; but he is most belov'd, who is most Humble, most Faithful, and Resign'd, and most conform to the DIVINE WILL and Pleasure. 114. Where the DIVINE SPIRIT
dwells, there is alwaies Simplicity and Innocency; which are the proper fruits and effects of it. 115. The Spirit of DIVINE WISDOM, fills men with Sweetness, governs 'em with Cou∣rage, and enlightens those with excellence who are subject to Its direction. 116. It is a constant Maxim, that DIVINE Wisdom begets Humility: But that which is acqui∣r'd by the Learned (or others) begets Pride. 117. The LORD takes delight only in those Souls, where Peace and Quietness Reins, and Self-love and Self-will are banished. 118. Self-love and Self-will are two of the greatest Enemies to Mankind; and are hard to be discover'd, or overcome. 119. Incourage thy self to be Humble, em∣bracing Tribulations as Instruments of thy good; and desite that GOD may be thy only Refuge, Comfort, and Consolation. 120. Happy's that Soul who when Afflicted and disconsolate keeps steady within, and goes not forth for outward Comfort, but relies only upon the DIVINE Goodness. 121. The Soul that would be United to Christ must be conformable to HIM, and follow HIM through Good and Evil report. 122. Resign and deny thy self wholly; for tho' true self-denial seem harsh at the beginning, 'tis easie in the middle, and becomes most exceed∣ing Sweet and Pleasant in the End. 123. The disesteem of the delights of the World, and accounting of 'em troublesome, is a sign of a Mortified Man.
124. Inward Mortification and perfect Resigna∣tion, are necessary for obtaining inward peace. 125. Happy is he, who by DIVINE assi∣stance suffers both Internal, and External Cro with Content and Resignation. 126. Never disquiet thy self for any Accident; because, unquietness is the Door by which the Enemy gets entrance into the Soul to Rob it of its Peace. 127. Enjoyment and Internal Peace are the fruits of the DIVINE SPIRIT, which no man gets into his Possession, if in the Closet of his Soul he is not a resigned man. 128. Take heed of thy Self, for thou of thy Self, art the greatest Enemy to thy Self. 129. The Spiritual man that lives inwardly with his MAKER, is contented in the midst of all Adversities. 130. The Way of inward Peace is in all things to be conformable to the pleasure of the DIVINE WILL. This Conformity is the Sweet Yoak that introduces us into the Region of Internal Peace and Serenity. Hence we may know that the Re∣bellion of our Will is the chief occasion of all our disquiet. 131. O how much is there to be purified in a Soul that must arrive at the Holy Mountain of Perfection! O how Innocent, Sincere, and Hum∣ble, ought that Soul to be, which would not hin∣der the entrance of the DIVINE BEING in∣to it, nor HIS communication with it? 132. This preparing the Soul for DIVINE en∣trance, must of necessity be made by the DIVINE WISDOM.
133. He that will follow CHRIST, and come unto Perfection, let him part with his own Will wholly; let him intirely submit to the Yeak of Obedience and Subjection, by means of Solf dental, which is the truest Cross. 134. Perfection doth not consist in Teaching it, but in living it▪ Because, he is neither the great∣est Saint, nor the wisest Man that knows the Truth most, but he that practices it. 135. The LORD hath HIS repose in Peace∣able and quiet Souls, and in those in whom the fire of Tribulation and Temptation hath burnt up the Dregs of Passions, and the bitter wa∣ter of Afflictions hath washed off the Filthy Spos of Inordinate lusts and Affections; HE reposes only where Quietness Reins and Self∣love is Banished. 136. Tho the Soul be wanting in Sensible De∣votion, yet, it covets Solitude and avoids Conver∣sation, that it may be in readiness to receive the influences of the DIVINE Bounty. 137. How is it possible for any to have Com∣munication with the Sweet, Inward, and Power∣ful Voice of GOD, who are not sequester'd from the Noise and Cumults of the World? 138. And tho' exterior Solitude doth much as∣sist for the obtaining inward Peace, yet, 'tis the inward Solitude that chiefly brings a Man into the enjoyment of the CHIEFEST GOOD. 139. He is busied enough, who is alwaies waiting to do the will of GOD; to Whom one pure Act of Internal Resignation, is more accepta∣ble then a thousand Exercises in ones own Will.
140. Behold, to Obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken better then the fat of Rams. 141. He that is upon excuses and replies to his Superiors, has not a Simple and Humble heart; because, replies grow from a secret Pride that reigns in the Soul, and from thence the Total ruin of it. 142. The Soul when it is in the deepest Con∣templation, and in the feeling of the Ravishing delights of its BELOVED, is seldom seen in much Shew or Ceremony. 143. And when the Soul is in those enjoyments, which Eye hath not seen, Ear heard, nor enter'd into the Heart of Man to conceive; then the Ene∣my seeks by various Temptations and Alute∣inents, to draw the Mind from a Steady, Quiet, and intire Resignation: But the true Spouse who is kept Chast to her BELOVED, cannot be drawn from HIM by any Temptations. Di∣vinarions, Inchantments, or Alurements whatsoever; well knowing that one Hour in HIS presence, is better then a thousand elsewhere. 144. The Harlot by good Words and fair Speeches, seeks to bewitch and beguile the Hearts of the Simple; Happy is he that sees Her, and the foot that turns from Her. 145 He that hath put his band to the Plow and Work of GOD, ought not to look back what ever Reproach, Tryal, or Difficulty he meets with all; neither should he that is engaged in a spiritual War-fare, intangle himself with the Af∣fairs of this life.
146. Unless a Man be Circumcis'd in Heart, and Ears, he cannot be truly Happy. 147. Antichrist's Kingdom was upheld and pro∣moted in daies past by the Scribes, and Phari∣sees, in talking of the FATHERS Will: But Christ's Kingdom was upheld and carried on in Doing the FATHER'S Will: and as it was then, so it hath been in this our Age. He that hath Ears to hear, let him hear. 148. Many have been call'd, but few have follow'd the LORD fully, who requires a Purifying, yea, a thorow Cleansing of all, that this Day make mention of HIS Name. 149. It is written of the OX, that in daies past he knew his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; but the People who professed the Name of the Most HIGH they had forgot HIM daies with∣out Number, and as it was then, so it is now: He that can receive it, let him. 150. The Way is narrow that leadeth unto Life, and tho' many be the talkers of it, yet, ew there are that have found it, or are walking in it. 151. Many have a form of Godliness, but most deny the Power thereof, and from such the Righ∣teous and Sincere are to turn away. 152 To speak inwardly with GOD is the State and Happiness of an Heavenly and Spiritual Man. 153. The Blessing is not to the High, nor to the Exalted; but to the Poor in Spirit. 154. A Meck and Quiet Spirit is of great Price, happy are the Enjoyers and Possessors of it. Hugo Grotius, a Man of Ʋniversal Learning and profound Policy (before he came to dye) said, I would
give all my Learning and Honour, for the plain integrity and harmless Innocency of Jean Ʋrick. 155. Spiritual Worship is called for, and Spi∣ritual Worshippers are to be sought out; happy's the Man, and happy's the Woman that is fitted and prepared for it. 156. The PEARL which many have lost, is not to be found abroad; he that would find it, must dig deep for it. 157. It is good for all to have salt in themselves, that so the good Shepherd's Voice may be known from the Voice of a Stranger. 158. He that knows, and talks of his MASTERS Will, and does it not; must expect to be beaten with many Stripes. 159. In the Inward work let all be Diligent, and Zealous, lest whilst they see the Evils of others, they may be Blind to any that is within them∣selves; and then are they miserable: Therefore mind the fear of the LORD only, and that will keep your own Hearts clean, and will pre∣serve you from being hurt, or defiled by others. 160. Happy's the Man, and happy's the Wo∣man, that feareth alwaies; that standeth in Awe and sinneth not. 161. Truth leadeth its Followers into Humility, and Lowliness of Mind, and leads out of all Pride, Conceitedness, and Self-Exaltation. 162. Truth Glories not in Multitudes, nor the Followers of the LAMB in an Arm of Flesh. 163. No Man nor Woman can know the true SHEPHERD'S Voice, until they come to witness a silencing of all Flesh in themselves.
164. Death and Destrution have long talk∣ed of the same of Wisdom, but Wisdom is only justifi'd of her own Children; happy are they that have an Ear to hear. 'Tis not the Doves but the Birds of Frey that feed upon the Carkass. happy are they that have an Ear to hear, so as to feed only upon the true Bread. 165. A Virtuous Good and Holy Life, is more to be desired, and is more accepted of, then all the hearing, or all the talking of Truth in words, is, or can be. 166. This is certain, no Soul goes to GOD in Death; but only That which drew nigh to HIM in Life. 167. He that hath the Law of the most HIGH witten in his Heart, and is guided thereby, can∣not feed upon Wind; nor be satisfi'd with a Multitude of Words: For it is only the Word of LIFE that can satisfie the Hungry and Immortal Soul; happy are they that have an Ear to hear. 168. He that follows the Truth for the Loaves, or for any Senister or By-end, can never be an In∣heritor or Possessor of the true Bread. 169. He that seeks the good of others, ought not to be weary of well doing; there being a Season in which he shall assuredly Reap, if he faints not. 170. He that cannot freely forgive his Ene∣mies and reward Good for Evil, cannot be a Disciple of JESUS that JUST and HOLY ONE. 171. He that is not faithful to the Measure or Gift of GOD in himself, whatever others say
or do unto him, is not, nor cannot be CHRIST'S Disciple this Day. 172. He that Builds upon the Faith of others, Builds upon a Sandy Foundation; and he that gives up his Ʋnderstanding and Judgment unto o∣thers, whatever they be, is one of those Builders. He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear. 173. But he that Builds upon the Grace and Gift of GOD in his own particular, Builds upon a sure and safe Foundation; yea, he Builds upon that Foundation which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against, and which Men nor Devils can- overthrow; Happy are they that have Ears to hear, so as to be Builders on that Foundation. These are faithful and true SAYINGS: He that can receive them, let him. 174. MY Soul saith, in the bitterness thereof, O what wilt THOƲ do for THY GREAT NAME! Shall It be Dishonour'd, and shall none lay it to Heart? Shall the leadings of THY SPIRIT be departed from? and shall none take It to be their GUIDE? 175. Where are the People that are so Chast, so Resign'd, and so intirely given up to serve the LORD, that they are willing to part with all for HIS sake? 176. Where are they that are Valiant for the Truth, and are stedfastly set to follow the LORD fully? 177. Where is the Mind that is so Humbled as to follow HIM through all Reproaches? and
where are they that live by Faith and not at all by Sight? 178. Where are the Hungerers after the true BREAD? and where is the slain-Mind to all vi∣sible things? 179. Where are the Sufferers with the SEED? and where are Its True and faithful Companions? who suffers with It in Its forsaken state? and who joyns to It in all Exercises? 180. The Eye that's abroad cannot see HIM; the Mind that's at ease cannot behold HIM; they that are full see no want of HIM; they that slumber near HIM not; but the silent Water hath joy in HIS presence. Even so, O LORD, let THY Childrens whole delight be in THEE, hence∣forth and for ever. Amen. To Day if you will hear HIS Voice, har∣den not your hearts. For in such an Hour (and in such a Way) as you think not of, the SON of Man cometh. It is my chiefest Care, and greatest Con∣cern to endeavour the Finishing every Worlt I have to do; that when my daies are end∣ed, and the Work finished for which I came into the World, I may have nothing else to do, but to depart this Life in a Reaceable Quiet, and Happy State.
THOU shalt well consider in thin Heart, and remember all the Way that I have hitherto led Thee, to try Thee, and to prove Thee, [Thou that art the Author of these Collections] that thou maist in the following part of thy Life, know and acknowledge the GOD of all thy Mercies. Oct. 3. 1687. O LORD! Cleanse THOƲ me, and I Shall be clean; Purge and Purifie THOƲ me, that I may be as white as Snow, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: This, This is that my Soul hath long longed for; and now beg of THEE that it may be fully accomplished to THY Honour and Glory, henceforth even for ever and ever. Oh! hear, defer not I beseech THEE, to forgive whatever has been amiss in me; even for THY Great Names sake; for THY Suffering Seeds sake; and THY End∣ness, Infinite, and Incomprehensible Mercies Sake, which hath ever been extended towards all who have put their whole trust and confidence in THEE, as I do at this Day. Glory, Glory, for ever be to THEE, OTHOƲ most HIGH! who wert, who art, and who art to come! GOD Blessed for ever, and for evermore! Amen, and Amen. Octob. 19. 1687.
Several Coppies of this following were sent to my Friends and Acquaintance in and about, London, and is here Printed for the sake and service of all concern'd therein. Dear People, YOu, who are forth your Habitations, I am at this Moment, in suffering for you; and am made in that Love that is not of this World, to intreat and beseech you who have in any measure tasted of the Good Word of GOD; to return every Individual of you to your own Homes, Tents, and Ta∣bernacles: and there to wait in the stilness and silence of all flesh, for the Resurrecti∣on of that Life, and Power, which at pre∣sent seems to lye Dead; and as it were even Buried in most. Oh! reject not, withstand not, but be freely given up to the Counsel and Advice herein given you, then will you reap the Benefit, and I the Reward of this my Love and Faithfulness towards you all. Oct. 19. 1687. Choose you whom ye will serve: But as for me and mine, we are bound and ingaged to serve the LORD, the great GOD only. THE END.
