P3276 12349831 59948
The Present STATE OF THE VAUDOIS, Drawn out of Three LETTERS. I. One from Mr. Cox, Their Majesties Envoy in Suitzerland. II. The second from Monsieur de Loches, their Colonel. III. The last from Monsieur Arnaud Minister of the Vaudois. I. Part of a Letter of the Honourable Thomas Coxe Esquire, His Majesty's Extraordinary Envoy into Suitzerland concerning the Vaudois, Dated at Berne the 25th of October, Old Style, 1690. AS for our little Army of Vaudois, Pie∣montois, and French Refugiez, consisting of about 3000 fighting Men under Colonel des Loches, and his two Lieu∣tenant Colonels, Julien & Mallet; notwithstand∣ing that, they have been hitherto divided into three small bodies, at Suze, Lucerne and Bri∣gueras, they have behaved themselves well up∣on all occasions offered, and particularly at Lucerne, where they killed 7 or 800 French, with the loss of 25 or 30 only on their side, and but four or five Piemontois of their small number, and took two Colours from them which I sent to the King by the Messenger that carry'd the Treaty, as the First-fruits of their Courage in those Parts. Their Encouragement and Subsist∣ence is of vast importance to the good Cause and the Protestant Religion, both there and in all these parts of the World; besides the inexpressi∣ble consequence it is of, as a back Door, and in∣deed the only safe and certain Inlet into France. Oh what glorious things might be done in all Europe, and particularly in this, for its Freedom and Deliverance, and for the Honour of the Pro∣testant Religion, if the Parliament would with∣out delay in this extraordinary Conjuncture of Affairs, assist the King so vigorously and plenti∣fully, as to enable Him to finish Honourably and Successfully those noble and important Con∣cerns that lye before Him, both at Home and Abroad, and to the compleating of which, God has call'd him in so wonderful a manner! We are in great straits what to do about the distressed Vaudois Families, (I mean the Women, Old Men, and Children among them, for the Men that can bear Arms are in the Val∣lies) that are come into these parts before their time, in impatient hopes of returning in∣to their old Habitations. They came without Order, there being nothing ry for them; yet in the Vallies where all  Houses are burnt and destroyed, and no possibility of sow∣ing Corn this year, great Numbers of them are like to starve and perish for want of Bread, all the Collections of all sorts for them in these Parts, being totally at an end. It would be a most generous, Christian, and seasonable Assistance, if we could get another very speedy, though small Collection, from England and Hol∣land, without which, I see no way to avoid their perishing. Monsieur Arnaud is come to see his Family at Neu Chastel, and returns speedily into the Vallies. He spent two or three days with me here. The whole History of the Subsistence, Deliverance and Victories of these Protestants in the Vallies, is a continued Miracle, and would make a good Protestant of a profess'd Atheist, if he were not arriv'd to the last and fatal de∣gree of Obduration. I have perswaded and fi∣nally determined him, as he assures me, to begin speedily, and to finish a second History of the Vaudois, and of all the Miracles that have at∣tended their whole late State and Concerns; which I desire him may be much more circum∣stantiated and particular, than that of Monsieur Leger, his Nephew, who is setled a Professor at Geneva, and was imployed there in the late Collection of England and Holland for the Vau∣dois. I desir'd Monsieur Arnaud to consult for some Papers, &c. and I hear he is now at Geneva for that purpose. II. Part of a Letter of Monsieur de Loches, Co∣lonel of the Vaudois. A Fortnight ago I had notice given me, that the Enemy, whose Army which was En∣camp'd near Carmagnole, had caused their first Line to March, with six pieces of Cannon, and that the rest follow'd them close on purpose to exterminate those of the Religion, and totally to ruin them in these Vallies, and that Monsieur Catinat and other Generals of the French Army had publickly made known this their Design. I do not in the least doubt of this Intelligence, for our Troops daily Intercepting their Con∣voys, and being a continual plague to the Gar∣rison of Pignerol, it was likely they would do their utmost to be rid of them. I writ to His Royal Highness about it, and to some others at
Turin, who knew very well how few Men I had with me, without Mony, or Provision; most of them without Cloaths, Shoos or Stock∣ings, and several of them Sick: His Royal Highness did me the Honour to Answer me by three Couriers one after another, That it was true he had been Inform'd the Enemy had such a Design, but that the condition his Army was in would not permit him to oppose it; and therefore I should do well to leave the Vallies, and so gain the Hills towards Cony, 15 or 20 Leagues from hence. I must confess that in this occasion I visibly found that God by his Providence did watch for our Preservation. For notwithstanding the evident dangers I was exposed to, instead of Flying, as I was advised, he so strengthned me, that I resolved to stand the Enemy. According∣ly I did send a Detachment of a 130 to the Town of Barges, three Leagues from this place; where on the third instant, being Attackt, they Fought so well Retreating, that they kill'd many of the Enemy, and following the Orders which I had given them, they retired to a Village call∣ed Bibiane, that is half a League from hence. There they were Joyned by another Detach∣ment of 90 Men, which I had posted in that place. The next day at 11 in the morning they were Attackt by 8 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, and as many Batalions of Foot, the best Troops of all the French Army, Com∣manded by the Marquess de Feuquieres Lieute∣nant General. Our Men made their Discharge at them, but when they were very near, got out of the Village, and Disputed the Ground with so much courage, that they stopt the Ene∣my in every Post that did any wise favour their Retreat, killing several Officers and Soldiers; which when I heard, I Detached a Captain with 50 Men to back them, and being Inform'd that they gave ground, I sent two several times Lieutenants with 20 Men to Faciliate their Re∣treat: But their obstinacy hindred them from executing my Orders, and being got within Cannon shot of this Town, they gained the Hills of Roura. Then the whole Body of the Enemy fell upon Lucerne, all the Inhabitants whereof are Papists, and which being Disman∣tell'd, lies open on all sides. By the help of God I stopt the Enemy for 3 hours, hindred them from passing over a stone Bridg, and forced them to wade through the River, where they lost several Officers and Soldiers; but be∣ing overpowered by their number, I Retired to a Hill that commanded this Town; from thence I sent Orders to the Vaudois, who keep the Post of the Vallies of St. Germain, St. Bar∣tholomew, and St. John, to Joyn with all speed. The Enemy Detached their Vanguard, which entred the Town a quarter of an hour before Night, burnt some Houses, kill'd 8 or 10 Wo∣men, some old sick Men, and little Children who could not get away, having made no greater stay than was necessary for their Troops to March off. Monsieure de Feuquieres made a show as if he would have Encamp'd near the Town, by making a great number of Fires there; but soon after he caused his Men to March towards Pignerol without Drum or Trumpet, and with∣out committing any other act of Hostility upon the Lands of the Protestants, being favoured by a thick Fog, and making use but of two Lights; but when they had got half a League off, they lighted above a thousand, and begun to beat their Drums. This hasty March broke all the Measures I had taken to fall upon his Rear the next day, and to pursue the Sieur de Feuqui∣eres in the same manner as we had done when we came into the Vallies. I have lost in all these Attacks, a Serjeant and three Soldiers, and some Wounded; and the Sieur de Feuquieres, to hide his loss, Ordered his Dead to be Buried in the way, so that we met with Graves at every step. I am come back into Lucerne, and thank God with all my Heart that he has permitted us, with a handful of Men, to baffle the most cruel Design that ever was Formed against these Vallies. III. Part of a Letter written to a Gentleman of Note by Monsieur Arnaud, Minister of the Vau∣dois, who in Autumn last year, brought the first of them back into the Vallies of Piemont, from whence they had been totally expell'd, and who was there with them in continual service against an Army of 13000 French; the Vaudois hav∣ing no other Captain to command them in all their Engagements, till Midsummer last. MAy I beg of you, Sir, to continue your charitable Offices in the behalf of these poor and distressed Vaudois, whereof the great∣est part is already in Piemont, and the remainder of them in Geneva and Suitzerland, among the Grizons, and at Wirtemberg. As for my own particular, I cannot but praise God for the health, which by his Blessing I have injoy'd, having not had the least Indisposition, notwith∣standing the inconceivable Fatigues I have suf∣fer'd, with my 367 brave Soldiers and good Christians: I praise him also for his Divine As∣sistance, which has enabled us to resist the Devil and 13000 Men, both from France and Piemont, without any Commander, Mony, Supplies, In∣telligence, Habitations, and without Bread: But God who Confounds the strongest things by the weakest Instruments he makes use of, hath brought our Affairs to the pass wherein they are now. Pray Sir give our Friends to understand that our Vallies may open to them the surest way to mortifie the common Enemy. I am In¦form'd by Letters, That he hath taken Suze by Composition. There is a Mystery in it. Our Men have Surpriz'd and Taken Chateau Daufin. I suppose they will stop there, the season of the Year being too far spent. We are about Publishing the History of the Miracles, which God has wrought in behalf of his Children, that all the World may know there is a God in Heaven, to raise up his to Witness when the time markt out by his Providence is come. I Implore his Heavenly Blessing for the Preservation of our King, &c. From Lucerne the 5th of Novemb. 1690. The History of the Wars in Ireland to this Time, in 2 Parts, by the Honourable Riard Cox, Esq Published by Command. London, Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1691.
