R13A 99832035 36503
THE EXPERIENCED FARRIER, OR, Farring Compleated. In TWO BOOKS PHYSICAL and CHYRURGICAL. BRINGING Pleasure to the Gentleman, and Profit to the Countrey-man. In Which You have the Whole BODY, SUM and SUBSTANCE of it in one Entire Volume, in so Full and Ample Manner, that there is Little or Nothing more Material to be Added Hereto. For here is Contained Every Thing that Belongs to a True HORSE-MAN, GROOM, FARRIER or HORSE-LEACH, Viz. BREEDING; The Manner How, The Season When, The Place Where, The Colours, Marks and Shapes of all Stallions and Mares, and what are Fit for Generation; The Feeder, Rider, Keeper, Ambler and Buyer; As also the Making of several Precious Drinks, Suppositories, Balls, Pur∣gations, Scourings, Ointments, Salves, Powders, Waters, Baths, Charges, Perfumes, And Directions how to use them for all Inward and Outward Diseases. ALSO The PARING and SHOOING of all Manner of HOOFES, and in what Point that Art doth Consist; The Prices and Vertues of most of the Principal Drugs, both Simple and Compound belonging to Farring, (and where you may buy them,) Viz. Roots, Barks, Woods, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Juices, Gums, Rozins, Simples from Plants; Animals, their Parts and their Excrements, Minera's, Metals and Stones; Together with Chymical Oyls and Spirits, Electuaries, Treacles, Powders, Waters, Plaisters and Ointments, &c. You have Also A Large TABLE of the Virtues of most Simples Set down Alphabetically, and many Hundreds more of Simples Placed one after another, for the Cure of all Inward and Outward Diseases, which you are to make Use of according to your Discretion; With many New Receipts of Excellent Use and Value; Never yet Printed before in any Author. The Second EDITION much Enlarged and Amended, and Two New Sheets of the Prices and Virtues of DRUGS added to the Table of DRUGS, that was not in the Former Impression, with a Caution to the Farrier about his Buying of them; Also One Hundred and Fifty New Receipts, and Thirty Di∣rections for the Physicking of Horses, with about Two Thousand New Simples, and an Advertisement touching their Usefulness; With many other New Additions, too tedious here to Rehearse. By E. R. Gent. LONDON, Printed by Richard Northcott Adjoyning to St. Peters Alley in Cornhil, and at the Mar∣riner and Ancher upon New-Fish-street Hill, near London-Bridge. 1681.
TO THE READER. Nil dictum quod non prius dictum YOU would say, That this Book, tho' New, is no otherwise then Old, by reason that a great part thereof are Collections, and therefore the less to be regarded; Let me Ask you one Question, Is the Honey the worse, because the Bee sucks it out of many Flowers? Or, Is the Spiders Web the more to be valued, be∣cause extracted out of her own Bowels; Let not this be any Pre∣judice to this Book, but peruse it without Partiality, and with the Judgement of a Farrier; And you shall then find, That these Old Collections are become New, not because they are New Printed, but because they are New Digested and Modelized, and put into a better Form and Method then ever yet before Printed; For let me tell you, there was never any thing in this Nature ever Printed before, but there was something or other wanting to make it a Compleat Book of Farring; But in this you shall find nothing wanting, either to the perfecting a Cure of all Diseases of a Horse, either inward or outward, or to the making a Man a Compleat Horseman. Besides, these Old Collections, you shall find a great many New Additions; As first, A Table of the Prices and Vertues of most of the Principal Drugs, both Simple and Compound belonging to Farring, as they are com∣monly Sold at the Druggists in London, with a Caution to the
Buyer of them; A Table so very useful, that 'tis much to be wondred at, that amongst so many Excellent Books of Farring as are Extant in the World, there should be nothing of this kind ever before annexed to them. Secondly, you have a large Table of the Nature, Temperature and Virtues of most Simples, set down Alphabetically. Thirdly, you have an Account of many Hundreds more of Simples, placed in order one after an∣other, for the Cure of all inward and outward Diseases, with an Advertisement touching the Usefulness of them. Fourthly, wherever you find a Hand pointing in the Margin, you shall find such Receipts as have been often made use of with very good success, and which was never yet Printed before in any Author. Fifthly, you have the Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples and their Juices. Sixthly, you have the Method of ma∣king of Syrups, Decoctions, Oyls, Ointments, Plaisters, Charges, Poultisses, Balls, &c. Seventhly, you have hot Medicaments ap∣propriate to the Parts of the Body. Eighthly, you have Cold Medicaments appropriate to the same Use. Ninthly, you have the Properties of Purging Medicaments. Tenthly, you have the Properties of Altering Medicaments. Eleventhly, you have a Table of the Diseases of a Horse, either inward or outward, set down Alphabetically, shewing you where they do grow in any part of the Body; How you may know them, and what were the Causes that bred them. Twelfthly, you have in the Table of the said Diseases the Page quoted where to find the proper Cures for every Disease. Thirteenthly and lastly, you have Five Infallible Cures never yet put to Press before (which the Table of Diseases will direct you to) viz. The Glanders, Far∣cin, Staling of Blood, Scratches, and making the brittlest Hoof that
is so Tough that it will carry a Shoo Passing well; With many other things Contained in this Book, which is not here Inserted. By E. R. Gent. If you desire to Know the Ʋsefulness of your General Simples, set down in Order one after another, in the First and Second Part, be∣fore every Disease. Look for page 229. and that will inform you. Amend the Errata's before you fall to Practice.
The BOOKSELLER to the READER. COURTEOUS READER, HAving long since Printed with great Care, Pains and Industry, this my Experienced Farrier, for the Cure of all Inward and Outward Diseases, both in Horses and Mares; And finding it hath been Received by all Lovers of Horses or Horse∣manship with a General and Friendly Liking, Emboldens me once more to Present You with a Second Impression, well hoping it may find no worse Ʋsage from you then the former had done, but be Re∣ceived with the same Candour, Favour and Esteem equal with that, and the rather, by reason that the many Errors committed in the for∣mer Edition, is now carefully Corrected and Amended in this, and very many Ʋseful Additions Added hereto, that were not in the for∣mer Impression, there being no less then One Hundred and Fifty New Receipts; Besides, the Addition of two New Sheets of the Prices and Virtues of Drugs, very useful▪ for all Farriers to know, with a Caution to the Buyers of them; Also about Two Thousand New Simples, (with their Ʋsefulness declared) put to the End of the other General Simples, for the Cure of all inward and outward Diseases, which upon your Perusal you may find here and there scattered throughout the whole Work; You have also Thirty New Directions for the Physicking and Drenching of Horses, with an Account of Four se∣veral sorts of Aloes (which may serve as the Basis and Ground Work of all Purges and Scourings) with their Goodness declared, and the distinguishing Marks how you may know one sort of Aloes from an∣other, with many other things herein contained, which if at your Leisure you carefully Compare this Impression with the former, will quickly Inform you of the Truth hereof. R. Northcott.
The TABLE. THE shapes of a Horse page 1. The Colours of a house in verse ib. The shapes of a horse another way ib. and 6▪ A Proverb amongst Husband men on the colours of a horse 1 What things are good to strow amongst a horses Provender 2 Things that you are to have always by you in a readiness ib. The Virtues of them declared ib. Terms of Art to commend a Horse, if you know him to be good 2. The Office of the Breeder. The best manner of Breeding 1 Grounds to Breed in, and Change of Grounds 3 Choice of Stallions and Mares ib. The Age of Stallions and Mares 4 Observations upon Covering ib. Bad to cover after the Change of the Moon ib. Covering in the Wane ib. Burning when other horses cover her. ib. Spaying of Mare-Colts, and of Gelding of Horse-Colts ib. What time is best for a Mare to take horse ib. How long time a Mare goes with Foal, how to Order her before she is covered, and how to make her conceive to have a Horse-Colt or Mare-Colt 5 The manner how to cover her, and to know whether she stands to her Co∣vering ib. How many Mares for one Horse ib. How to order a Mare after she is co∣vered 6 How to help her if she cannot Foal ib. How to order her after Foaling ib. How long Foals are to run with their Dams 7 The time of Foaling looked upon to be very improper because in the Winter-Season ib. When Mares are fit to take horse 8 To know the true shape spirit and height of a Foal, from his Shin-bone, from the space between his Knees and Wi∣thers, from his spirit and from his Hoofs ib. Weaning of Foals ib. Taming of Colts ib. The time to break Colts ib. Coiling the Stud, or making of Election 9 Of barren Mares ib. General Observations concerning Mares, viz. Of Covering, of bringing of Foals, of making a Mare slink Foal, and to make her stand to horse; of Stallions for Trotters, and of Mares to horse. ib. To put your horse and Mare into an empty house; not to chase the Mares; the wall-Eye is an imperfect Sight, and of choice of Mares, &c. ib. & 10. Election of horses for War, for Swift∣ness, for Travel and for Draught. ib. To know whether your Mare be with Foal or not ib. To make a Mare conceive a Male Foal. 11
The Office of the Keeper. Of the horse in General, his Choice for every several Ʋse, his Ordering, Diet and best Preservation for Health, both in Travel and Rest ib. Yhe Nature of a horse in general. ib. Your Choice of a horse for the Wars. ib. What Colours of a horse is best. ib. Choice of a horse for a Princes Seat. 12 For Travel ib. For Hunting ib. For Running ib. For the Coach ib. For the Pack ib. For the Cart and Plough 13 How to Order these several horses, and first of the horse for the Wars. ib. Ordering a horse for a Prince or a great Ladies Seat. ib. Ordering of Traveling horses at home and abroad ib. Of Watering in the Morning, of Feed∣ing betimes, and of Moderate Tra∣veling. 14 To get a horse a Stomach ib. Not to stop a horses Feet with Cow dung till they be cold ib. Look to his Back, Girts and Shooes. ib. Not to eat nor drink when he is hot. ib. To labour him moderately, when the Weather is extream hot or cold. ib. Not to Travel him too late 15 The Saddle not to be presently taken off when he is hot ib. Horse-bread very good food ib. River water not so good as standing∣water ib. Swine and Pullen is naught to be nigh a Stable ib. The light of the Stable is best to be made towards the South and North. ib. To be Tied with two Reins very safe. ib. To Ride him on stony ways ib. Wheat-straw and Oat-straw is best for Litter ib. Of Dressing your horse 16 Of the Stable ib. A Mud-Wall naught to be nigh a horse. ib. Chopt straw good to throw amongst a horses Provender ib. Bottles of Hay to be Tied hard is very good ib. To sprinkle Hay with Water is also good, and so is Fennegreek strowed amongst his Provender ib. Exercise is very good ib. Grass is also good once a year, to cleanse his Blood and cool his Body ib. A horse hath good store of Blood after Travel ib. What you are to do in case of necessity coming late to your Inn 17 To give him Mares Milk to drink, if he be Poor, is very good ib. The best time when to Water in the Winter ib. Not good to wash a horse when he is hot. ib. To light at every steep Hill very good ib. How a fat horse is to have his Meat and Water ib. Rubbing very good for a horse ib,
Boyled Barley is very good. ib. Feet Picked after Travel ib. Much Rest naught 18 Be careful to look to your Saddle for fear of Pinching him ib. A Horsemans Rule in Verse ib. Riding softly very good ib. Trotters Oyl is very good to help stiff Limbs▪ ib. Legs Bathed with cold Water is good to prevent Scabs and Swellings ib. Washing at the Stable-door is very good if necessity requires ib. Dressing upon Travel and Rest ib. When to let Blood 19 Ordering of Hunting Horses ib. Sir Robert Chernock's manner of feeding his horse in Buck-season for hunting ib. Ordering of Running horses ib. Ordering of Coach horses ib. Ordering of the Pack and Cart-horse. 20 The Office of the RIDER and GROOM, and of things belonging to him, viz. His general an a particular Knowledge in Hand∣ling, Sadling, Mouthing, Backing and Ri∣ding of the great Horse, or Horse of Plea∣sure ib. Of the Stable, and what it ought to be built with; A brick Stable preferred before Stone. No Hog-sty nor Hen-Roost ought to be nigh it. Of the Man∣ger, of a Pitched Floor, a Mud-wall  and of dung not to lie nigh a  eels ib. of Stables approved to be better then Planked Stables for several Rea∣sons ib. The inconveniencies of a Plank-Floor shewed ib. Your Care in the Choice of a Groom. 22 How a Rider ought to be qualified. ib. What manner of Person a Groom ought to be ib. To Saddle and Bridle a Colt 23 Of Mouthing ib. Of Backing 24 Helps at first Backing ib. What Lessons for what Horse 25 Helps and Corrections from his Voice, from his Rod, from his Bit and Snaffle, from the Calves of his Legs, from his Stirrop's and Stirrop-Lea∣thers, and from the Ground. 25 and 26 Of large Rings ib. Of stopping 27 Advancing ib. Retiring ib. Of bitting 28 Of streight turnes and turnings ib. The first streight tnrn ib. The other streight turn 29 How to help an ill Rein and Cure a Run∣away Jade 30 The help ib. Another for unconstant Carriage. ib. The Office of the Feeder. The Introduction to the Work touching the time limited for a hunting horse. 31 Their Reasons ib.
Long time inconvenient ib. The first Ordering of the Running Horse, according to the several Estates of their Bodies. 34 To have an Eye to the particular Estate of a horses Body ib. The first Fortnights feeding of a horse for a Match, that is fat, foul, or either newly taken from Grass or Soil 35 His feet stopped with Cow-dung ib. Four Considerations in giving of Heats 37 The second Fortnights feeding 38 The first read ib. The Ʋse of the Muzzel ib. The first Scouring 40 Ordering of him after his Scouring. ib. The third Fortnights feeding 41 The second Bread ib. The fourth & last Fortnights feeding 42 The last and best Bread ib. Certain Observations and Advantages for every Feeder to observe in sundry Accidents 44 Of Meat and Drink ib. Observations for Lameness 45 Observations from the estate of his Body ib From his Inclinations ib. From his outward handling ib. From his privy Parts 46 For his Limbs ib. For Water ib. Observations from the Ground to run on ib. Observations from Sweat 47 Observations from the hair ib. The Office of the AMBLER. Observations in Ambling. 47 Mens Opinions and Errors 48 Ambling by the Ploughed Field ib. Ambling by the Gallop ib. Ambling by Weights ib. Ambling in Hand, or not Ridden 49 Ambling by the help of Schooes ib. Ambling by the help of fine Lists ib. Ambling by the Hand only 50 Ambling by the Tramel ib▪ Errors in the Tramel ib. The best Way to Amble a horse 51 The form of the Tramel 52 The true use of the true Tramel 53 VVhen to alter the Tramel ib. VVhen to Mount his Back 54 VVhen to Journey ib. The Office of the BUYER, wherein is shewed all the Perfections and Imperfections that are or can be in a Horse 55 Observations and Advertisements for any Man when he goes about to buy a horse ib. The End for which to buy ib. Election how divided 56 The General Rule ib. Of Breed ib. Of Colour ib. Of Pace, or Trotting ib. Ambling 59 Racking ib. Galloping ib. Stature 60 The particular Rule ib.
How to stand to view his Shapes, viz. His Eares, his Face, his Eyes, his Cheeks and Chaps, his Nostrils and Muzzle, his Teeth, his Breast, his fore-Yhighs, his Knees, his Legs, his Pa∣sterns, his Hoofs, the setting on of his Head, his Crest and Mane, his Back, Ribs, Fillets, Belly and Stones; his Buttocks, his hinder-Yhighs▪ his Cam∣brels, his hinder Legs and his Tail, &c. from p. 60. to p. 67 An uncontroulable Way to know the Age of a Horse, viz. By his Teeth, Mouth, Hoofs, Tail, Eyes, Skin, Hair and Barrs of his Mouth, from p. 65 to 67 The perfect shape of a horse altogether ib. Rules to be observed of putting a horse to Grass, and taking him up again. 68 Of Cleansing and making a horse clean. 69 General Notes concerning some Simples. ib. Of Syrups, Pills, Powders, Electuaries and Ointments ib. Of Oyls, Roots, Herbs, Seeds, Rind or Bark 69 & 70 A TABLE of the Office of the Farrier, Alphabetically set down, p. 70. A Accopium, a Drink, with the Virtues and Nature of it 123 and 124 Atman, a Confection, with the Virtues of it 125 B. Baths of all sorts 135 to 137 Bons, how many a horse hath, and where scituated 72 Blooding a horse, when the best time 73 Blood-letting, with Observations upon it 87 Of Burning 88 Burning Actual and Potential 90 Bread made for a horse to keep him in heart and strength of Body, and to keep him from faintness in his Labour and Exercise, be it never so sore. 116 Bread, to make another sort ib. Bangle-Eares how to help 121 Balls Cordial, to Cure any violent Cold, Glanders, which prevents Heart-sickness, which Purgeth away all Molten-Grease, which recovers a Lost Stomach, and makes a Lean horse fat suddenly ib. Blood cleansed, general Simples good for it 149 Bewitched, general Simples good for it 151 C. Complexion f a horse which is the most necessary Faces that a Farrier can Judge of his Infirmities by 74 Corrasives, 89. 115 and 145
Cauterizing 89 and 90 Cauterizing, in what cause 114 Cautery Potential 115 and 145 A Caustick 115 and 145 Cordial Powders to make 125 Charges of several sorts▪ 131 and 132 Copperas water 139 Congluinating Simples 146 Clensers of the Blood, Simples good for it in general, vide Blood clensed Cordials and Strengthners of Nature; See for Simples that are good in ge∣neral for it 151 To cast and overthrow a horse 153 D. Diapente, a Drink, how to use it, and to shew you the Virtues of it 79 Diahexaple, a Drink, with the Vir∣tues of it 79 and 80 Diatessaron made, or Horse Mithridate how made ib. Drinks given when you neither have Diatessaron, Diahexaple or Dia∣pente 81 Diseases of a horse known by the signes he shews, from 81 to 86 Drugs, the Nature of the principal sorts of them 94 Drinks in general for all inward Dis∣eases of a horse that troubles the whole Body, from 126 to 128 Other general Drinks for the Cure of all inward Sickness ib. A Drink very comfortable 131 A Drink Operative ib. Drugs, their Prices; see for the Table of them between the first and second part Decoction, what it is 146 E. Of the Elements and their Nature 73 Eyes a Caution about them 90 To make the black and red Aegyptia∣cum, which are both Corrasives. For their Naures are to corrode and eat a∣way all manner of proud and naughty Flesh, out of any old sore or Ʋlcer. 126 Drenches in general for all manner of Sicknesses 126 and 127 Dead Foal to expel, general Simples good for it 148 F. A Farriers Office, in what part it doth consist 70 A Farrier ought to know principally five things 90 A Farrier what he ought to know before he goes about to Purge a horse 96 To fat a lean horse in twelve or fifteen days 123 Another for the same purpose ib. Of Feavers, and how you may know e∣very sort of them one from another. 129 and 130 Fatning things in general 143 Lust to provoke, Simples good for it in general 148 G. Of Glisters and their Ʋses 90 Glisters for Costiveness 91 A Glister Laxative 90 A Glister Restringent 92 and 93 A Glister for a fat horse that cannot be kept clean ib.
A Glister in case of a desperate sickness ib. A Glister for the Pestilence and all Fea∣vers ib. A Glister for the Cholick ib. Advice given upon giving of Glisters, and what are to be put into them. ib. Laxative Glisters, what simples are to be put into them 94 Gelding of horses, how and in what Season is best 119 Green Ointments, several sorts of them 138. 139 and 140 Glisters what they are 146 H. Of the four Humors, Blood, Phlegm Choler and Melancholy 74 Health, twelve causes of it 76 Horse-Treacle how made 80 Halting, where to find the Grief either before or behind 102 Horse-Spice how made; If you intend to make use of it amend the fault, for there is left out of it a quarter of a Pound of Anniseeds, and a quarter of a pound of the Powder of Liquoris. ib. Of Hoofs and the several Kinds of them, viz. Brittle and rugged hoofr, long hoofs, crooked hoofs, flat hoofs, with broad Frushes, hoofs with narrow heels from 104 to 106 Of paring the perfect hoof and fore-Feet 106 Of paring the imperfect hoof, every one according to their Kind; First, of the broken hoof chap. 5, 6. 106 Of paring the rough and brittle hoof ch. 7. 108 Of Paring the long hoof, ch. 9. ib. Of paring the crooked hoof, ch. 11. 109 Of paring the flat hoof, ch. 13. ib. Of paring the over-hollow hoof. ch. 15. 110 Of paring the hoof that hath a broad Frush ch. 17 ib. Of paring the hoof that hath a narrow heel ch. 19. ib. Horse-Bread two sorts of it, to keep him in heart and strength of Body, &c. 116 A horse to be made not to Neigh, either in company, or when he is ridden 120 Humors drove back that flow too fast to a Wound you have in Cure▪ 140 Hair made smooth, sleek and soft. 153 Head perfumed, see Perfumes To make a horse follow his Master, and to challenge him amongst never so many People 154 Heam to expel, which is the same as the after-Birth is in Women; see General Simples good for it 150 K. Knitting Simples; see Conglutinating things L. Lameness, to Know where it lies, either before or behind 102 Loosening things in general. 143 M. The principal Members of a horse. 70
Mash, how made 97 Mithridate how made 80 Milk to cause, general Simples good for it 148 N. Neesing powder, Vide Perfumes for the Head. O. Oyls 69 Oyl of Oats with the Virtues of it. 130 Oyntments, Salves, Powders, and Waters 132 and 133 Oyntments green to make. 138, 139 140 and 141 Old Horses made seemingly young. 120 P. Planets, their Names 73 Physicking Observations, see for more of them in the second Part. 86 Purgations, and their several Ʋses. 96 Physicking a horse and how to Order him after he hath it. 99 Pills of all sorts, and Purgations. 99 and 100 Pu refactives 116 Powders Cordial how to make 1 5 A Powder made of honey and Lyme, that will dry up any Wound or Ʋlcer. 131 Pills Purging 13 Pills what they are for 146 Purgings, or Scouring Simples in Ge∣neral 141 Portion, what it is 146 A Plaister to dissolve and take away evil humours, which shall at any time fall down into the Legs of a horse. 135 Perfumes and Purgers of the head of all filthy and gross humours. 137 and 138 Purgings of all sorts, and they are five, viz. by Portions, by Glisters, by Sup∣positories and by Grass 146 Certain Principles concerning Simples 140 Prices of Drugs, see for them between the two Parts R. Rubarb, its Nature 94 Raking of a horse. 87 Roots 69 Rowling of Horses, and of the Ʋse thereof 11. 118 and 119 Riding, who first Invented it. 121 S. Shapes of a horse at large 67 Simples with Notes in general upon them 69 Sinews of a horse, their Number 70 Signes of the Zodiack, and Govern∣ment of them 73 Sickness dangerous, how it cometh. 7 Sickness accidental. 73 Sickness Cured, when it cometh, and to prevent it before it comes ib. Of Sickness in General, and of the Signes from whence it proceeds. 81 and 86 Sorrances, what they are in general, and Observations in the Cure of them. 88 Simples how mixed 87 Swellings hard and soft, and how you
are to use them, in the Cure of them. 89 Of Sores 90 Suppositories, the several sorts of them from 94 to 96 Scourings, what they are 97 Scourings by Grass, by Sorrage, by Sallow and Elm, by Thistles, by Malt▪ 98 Scouring of a little stronger Nature. ib. Of Shooing and paring all manner of Hoofs, and in what Point the Art of it doth consist 104 Shooing the perfect Hoofs and four Feet, and how the Shoo, Paring and Nail should be made 106 Of Shooing the rough and brittle hoof 108 Of Shooing the long Hoof 109 Of Shooing the crooked Hoof▪ ib. Of Shooing the flat Hoof ib. Of Shooing the over-hollow Hoof. 110 Of Shooing the Hoof that hath the broad Frush▪ ib. Of Shooing the Hoof that hath the narrow heel ib. Of Paring and shooing of the hinder Feet 111 Of shooing the Hoof that hath a false quarter ib. Of shooing and paring the Hoof that is hoof-bound, 112 Of making of planch-shooes. ib. Of paring and shooing for Enterfe∣ring▪ 111 Shooes with Calkins, Rings, Welts and turning Vices, and of the patten shoo 112 and 113 Stars, white and black, and how to make them 120 and 154 Suppository, what it is 146 A Suppository for inward Sickness 127 Salves, Unguents, powders and Wa∣ters 132 and 133 Scouring and purging things in ge∣neral 141 Particular Scourings of all sorts for Running Horses, whose Grease must necessarily be Molten, as also for a fat Horse 142 and 143 Sores and Ulcers of all sorts to wash, general Simples good for them. 148 Swellings and Risings in the Skin, hard or soft, general Simples good to take them away 149 Simples and their certain Principles. ib. Sweat to cause, general Simples good for it 150 Sores and Ulcers of all sorts to Cure, Simples good in general for them. 152 A stubborn Horse to be made go. 154 T. To Trim an unruly horse 154 V. Of the Vital Blood 71 Veins, their Number that you are to take Blood from ib. Veins opened, for what use ib. Veins taken up 90 Veins, for what cause they are taken up 116 Of Vomits 134 Wounds clensed, old or new, before you dress them 141
Wind to Expel Simples that are good for it in general 150 Venomous Beasts of all sorts to Cure, General Simples good for them. 151 ERRORS that hath Escaped the Press in the First Part of the Experienced FARRIER. PAGE 6. line 28. for Clod reade Clot. p. 21. l. 38. f. liter up Horse r. litter up your Horse. p. 44. l. 17. f. streight r. start. p. 52. l. 30. f. Horse. r. Hose. p. 59. l. 7. f. og r. long. p. 62. l. 33. f. Melander r. Malender. p. 72. l. 13. f. Crow-scab r. Crown-scab. p. 75. l. 19. f. Myly Mouth r. Mayly Mouth. p: 77. l. 32, f. heat r. heats. p. 97. l. 29. f. small r. well. p. 00. l. 29. and 30. f. add them to. r. add to them. p. 102. In the Receipt how to make Horse-spice, put into it A quarter of a pound of Liquoris powder, and a quarter of a pound▪ of Anniseeds. which are left out of the Receipt. p. 102. l. the last. f. grie. r. grief p. 114. l. 22. f. Chords. r. Cords. p. 120. l. 6. f. take of a little r. take a little. p. 125. l. 2. f. of Honey r. take Honey. p. 147 l. 6. f. and it will r. will. ib. l. 28. f. Flag in Mortar r. Flag braised in a Mortar. p. 149. l. 24. f. dispenseth r. disperseth. p 150. l. 15. f. Ladanum r. Labdanum. p. 154. l. 3. . so over r. throw over. p. 157. l. 1. f. Jallop r. Jallap. ib. A Parenthesis wanting to make it sense. p. 164. l. 16. f. Creauna r. Creanna. ib. p. l. 20. f. suppupuration. r. suppuration. p. 165. l. 3. f. eing r. being. p. 168. l. 20. is is wanting. ib. p. l. 30. Irish Slate 8. d. the pound r. 4. d. the pound.
THE EXPERIENC'D FARRIER. The First Part. The Shapes of a Horse. ☜ HE must have the Eyes and Joynts of an Ox, the Strength of a Mule, the Foot of the same, the Hoofs and Things of an Ass, the Throat and Neck of a VVolf, the Eare and Tail of a Fox, the Breast and Hair of a VVoman, the Boldness of a Lion, the sharp and quick Sight of a Serpent, the Pace of a Cat, the Lightness and Nimbleness of a Hre, a high Pace, a deli∣berate Trot, a pleasant Gallop, a swift Running, a rebounding Leap and Present, and be quick in Hand. The Colours of a Horse in Verse. If you desire a Horse thee long to serve, Take a Brown-bay, and him with Care preserve▪ The Grey's not ill, but he is prized far That is Cole-black, and blazed with a Star: If for thy self, or Friend, thou wilt procure A Horse, let him VVhite-Lyard be, he'll long endure, The Shapes of a Horse. Another VVay. 1. Ox. He ought to have three of an Ox, which is a fair and full Eye, a large Neck▪ and to be strong and short Joynted. 2. Fox. Three of a Fox, which is to have a comely and short Trot, small and long Eares, and a Bushy Tail. 3. Hart▪ Three of a Hart. which is to have lean and dry Legs, to be well risen before, and a lean Head. 4. Woman▪ Three of a VVoman, which is to have a fair and large Breast, to have a beautiful and full Hair, and gentle to his Rider and Keeper. A Proverb amongst Husbandmen. If you have a Foal with four white Feet, keep him not a day. If you have a Foal with three white Feet, make him soon away.
If you have a Foal with two white Feet, give him to thy Friend, If you have a Foal with one white Foot, keep him to his Lives end, ☞ These things are good to strow in a Horses Provender. Turmerick, white Lilly Roots chop∣ped small and dried. The Powder of Anniseeds, Licoris, Fennegreek, Bay-berries, Brimstone, Allum, Hemp-seed, Alacampane, or the Roots of Pollipodium of the Oak or Savin, Marshmallowes, Rhue, Hysop, Hore-hound, Colts-foot. If you give him the Herbs green, you must chop them small, if dry, beat them to powder, which Simples will keep him sound and in perfect Health; for their Vertues are to purisie the Blood, prevent Obstructions, open and resolve the Liver, cool the Blood, keep and preserve the whole structure of the body in sound and perfect Health. ☞ These things you are always to have in a readiness by you. Fennegreek a pound, Licoris half a pound, Bay-berries a quarter of a pound, London-Treacle one pound, Anniseeds a quarter of a pound, Cum∣min-seeds a quarter of a pound, Grains a quarter of a pound, Turmerick a quarter of a pound, Long-Pepper two ounces, Alacampane half a pound, Allum half a pound, Brimstone half a pound, green Copperas half a pound, Savin three handfuls, Chopt-hair a handful. ☞ These things Repeated over again, with their Vertues declared. Fennegreek, Licoris, Bay-berries, London-Treacle, Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, Grains, Long Pepper, Alacampane, all good for Colds. Colds. Turmerick, good to Purge the Blood, and to Cure the Yellows. Yellows. Brimstone, Alacampane, Allum, Savin, Chopt-Hair, good for the Wormes. VVormes. Throw these things a∣mong his Provender. ☞If you are ask's what fault your Horse hath, if you know him to be sound, you may answer him in this manner. He hath neither Splint, Spavin, nor wind, gall Scratches, Crepances, nor Rats-tails, Mules nor Cib'd heeles, Sellander, nor Mallender, Curb, Ring-bone, Quitter-bone, Hough-bonny, Sit-fast, Ambury, Viues, but good Eyes and good Thighs; Or if you can affirm him further to be sound, you may say he
hath neither Farcin, Foundred-foot, broken-wind, Moulten-grease, nor Running glaunders. Of the Office of the Breeder. The best Manner of Breeding. YOU are not to breed in Fenny, Moorish Pastures, nor in Lands too Fertile, nor too Barren, the Golden Number is the best temper, yet to incline a little to hardness, is better then much rankness, the one breeds Health and the other Diseaes. Let the situation be a little Hilly, and in some places stony and rocky, for they are very good for Colts to play on, and helpeth their VVind, and knitteth their Joynts, and harden∣eth and maketh tough their Hoofs; and no matter how rough and un∣certain it is, for it will make them the more sure footed. As much ground as will keep a Milch-Cow, will keep a Milch-Mare. Change of Groudns. You are to have three sorts of Grounds, one to Foal in, another to Summer in, and a third to VVinter in. The first to be without danger, the second not to be without shelter of Bushes, or under VVoods, to de∣fend from Stormes and Tempests; and the third is, to have good Ho∣vels, Sheds, Barnes, or Back-stables, wherein may be stored VVinter-Provision. You are likewise to Accommodate your Grounds with Par∣titions, to put each Cattel by themselves, as your young and old, rase or breeding Mares by themselves, your VVeanlings by themselves, your Fillies by themselves, and your stoned Colts by themselves, or else your Breed will come to nothing, and you may run the hazard both of your cost and pains. Choice of Stallions. You are to be careful, that neither your Stallion nor Mare have any of these defects, viz. Neither Moon-eyes, watery-eyes, or Blood-shotten eyes, neither Splint, nor Spavin, nor Curb, &c. Nor any Natural Imper∣fection, for the Colts will take them as Hereditary from their Parents. I shall advise you that you choose the best and ablest, the highest spirited, the fairest coloured, and the finest shaped, whether it be Nea∣politan, Trk, Spaniard, Barbary, English, Dutch, Polander, French or German, and that you would inform your self of all natural defects in the Stallion, (for it is impossible to find out absolute perfection) and to a∣mend them in the Mare, and what is amiss in the Mare, to see it Repaired in the Horse.
The Age of Stallions and Mares. A Stallien ought not to be younger then four years when he Covereth a Mare, and he will beget Colts from that Age to twenty. And a Mare may bring forth from three years old to thirteen, when she is four years she will nourish her Colt best, but after she is ten years she is not good, for commonly an old Mare-Colt will be heavy in Labour. Observations upon Covering. Let your Mare be Covered from the end of the first Quarter to the full of the Moon, or at the full, for those Colts will be more stronger and har∣dier of Nature. After the Change. It is not good for Mares to be Covered after the Change, for those Colts will be tender and nice. The Wain. Mark the VVain in that time the Mare was Covered, the same time of the Moon she will Foal. Burning. If your Mare hath been Covered, and the Colt Knit within her, if an∣other Horse covers her he burns her. Of Spaying a Mare-Colt. If a Mare-Colt be Spayed nine days after it is Foaled, she will prove (as some say) Fair, Gallant and well. Of Gelding of Colts. The time of Gelding is when the Moon is in the Wain, the Sign in Arie: or Virgo, the time of the year is early in the Spring or Fall. Horses will be better shaped, and in less danger of Gelding, if they be Gelt at nine or fifteen days old, if the Stones appear, or so soon as you find them fall down into the God. VVhat time a Mare is to take Horse. If your Mare be Covered of St. Lucies day, which is the thirteenth of December, then she will Foal about St. Thomas's day, the same Moneth in the year following.
How long time a Mare goes. During the time of her going with Foal, from the day of her Covering unto the day of her Foaling, is commonly twelve Months and ten dayes, unless it be a young Mare upon her first Colt, which may come sooner. How to Order her before she is Covered. You are to take her into the House about six weeks before she is Co∣vered, and feed her well with good Hay and Oats, well sifted, to the end she may have Strength and Seed to perform the Office of Generation. But if you would have her certainly conceive, then take Blood from both sides of her Neck, and let her bleed nigh a quart of either Vein, which you must do five or six days before you have her Covered; If you desire to have a Horse-Colt of your Mare, then let her be Covered when one of the first Masculine Signes do reign, which are either Aries, Taurus, Ge∣mini, Cancer, or Leo. But if she be Covered when any of the Feminine Signes be Predominate, as Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitaius, Capricornus, A∣quarius or Pisces, then be confident it will be a Mare, for it is so certain, that it seldom or never fails, especially if the VVind be either VVest or North, but VVest is best. The Manner of Covering her. You are to bring her out into some broad Place, and Tie her to a Post, then bring out some Stone Jade to dally with her, to provoke her to Ap∣petite, then let the Stallion be led out by two men, and let him leap her, and let him do it in the Morning Fasting, and when the Horse is dis∣mounting, throw a pale full of cold water upon her Shape, which by reason of the coldness will make her shrink in, and truss up her Body, and will make her retain her Seed the better; then take away the Stallion, and let her be put out of the Hearing of the Horse, and let her neither eat nor drink in four or five houres after, and give her a Ma and white water. If she stands to her Covering, you may know it by this, if she keeps a good Stomach, and does not Neigh at the sight of a Horse, or if she does not Piss often, or open and shut her Shape often; or that if her Belly, four days after her Covering, be more gant, and her Hair more slick and close to her skin, &c. How many Mares for one Horse. If you Cover abroad, one Horse will serve twelve Mares, if you expect
no other service from him; but if you keep him in the Stable where he hath extraordinary keeping, he will serve fifteen. How to Order a Mare after Covering to her Foaling. Keep her with the same Diet as before Covering, for three weeks or a Month after, lest the Seed be empaired before it be formed in the VVomb; and let her be kept sweet and clean without any Exercise, during three weeks or a Month, and to keep her in the House till mid-May, and not to turn her out before mid-May, and with her Feet well pared, and a thin pair of Shooes upon them, and take her in again the latter end of Sep∣tember, if not before, and keep her to the end of her Foaling, and let her be loose in the Stable with good store of straw with her, that so the Foal may fall the softer, for a Mare does usually Foal standing. How to help her if she cannot Foal. If she cannot Foal, hold her Nostrils so that she cannot take her wind; or if that will not do, take the quantity of a VVallnut of Madder, and dissolve it in a Pint of old Ale, and being warm give it the Mare, if both fail, take the help of some understanding Farrier. If she cannot avoid her Secundine, then boyl two or three Handfuls of Fennel in Running water, and take half a Pint of it with as much Sack, or for want thereof, a Pint of strong Beer or Ale, with a fourth part of Sallet Oyl, mix them together, and give it her Luke-warm into her Nostrils, and hold them close for a good space, or, for want thereof, give her good green Wheat or Rye, (but Rye is the best) and they are as effectual. Let her not eat her clean, for that is very unwholesom and will dry up her Milk. To Order her after Foaling. VVhen she hath Foaled, and licked her Foal, Milk and stroak her be∣fore the Colt doth suck, which will both cause her to bring down her Milk, but make it to multiply, and keep it that it doth not clod; which may cause her to become dry, which if there be cause, boyl as much Milk as you can get from her, with the Leaves of Lavender, or Spike, and bath the Udder with it warm till it be broken, and the Knobs and Knots dis∣solved. Let her water after Foaling be white water, which is Bran put into her water, and give her sweet Mashes; and a Month after her Foal∣ing give her a Mash, and put into it some Brimstone or Savin, which will be a great preservation to the Colt. And then if she be moderately la∣boured at Plough, or Harrow, the Mare and Colt will be the better, pro∣vided she be kept from Raw Meats while she remaineth in the Stable, =
which will both increase her Milk, and cause her Colt to thrive the better. And that you suffer not the Colt to suck when she is hot, lest thereby you Surfeit the Colt. How long Foals are to run with their Dams. Let them run with their Dams a full year at least, but if they be choice Foals, then two years, for the loss of the use of the Mare will be no loss, in comparison of the benefit you will receive by the Foal; but if you want Accommodations VVean at seven Months, but be sure to keep them well, for what they lose the first year they will hardly gain in three following; And at the VVeaning give them Savin and Butter for divers Mornings together, or else the Worm and Gargil will hazard to destroy them; besides, have an eye to the Strangle, for it is apt to essay them, and if not taken in time it will destroy them; The first VVinter spare neither Hay nor Corn, that is, Oats in the Chaff, or in the Sheaf, or give him any Offal that comes from any Grain whatsoever. The Time of Foaling look'd upon to be very improper, because in the VVinter-Season. The Time of Foaling, as I have said before, I would have in December or January, which most hold to be a very improper time, the VVeather being cold, and but little Grass, which of Necessity she must be Housed, and fed with hard Meat, which will dry up her Milk, and so starve the Foal: But to satisfie this Scruple, and to tell you, That Experience is the best Master, for certainly the VVinter-season must needs be the best both for the Mare and Foal, being kept in a warm House; and as for her Milk, she will have great plenty, being fed well, and that more nourish∣ing then that got at Grass, which will make him more lusty, and of greater Bone and Stature, and cleaner Limb'd, and more neatly Joynted and Hoof'd, and in better liking then that Colt Foaled in May or June, or any of the hotter Months, for though Grass doth yield great plenty of Milk, yet it is not so nourishing, because it is very thin and watery, therefore it will not yield so substantial Nourishment as the VVinter-food, if it be good, for though the quantity of Milk is not so great, yet it is of greater goodness; And besides, the pinching Cold, Rains and Floods in VVinter, will so Nip the poor Colt, and enfeeble the Mare in such desperate manner, that the wanting her former plenty of Food and dry Lodging, her Milk will decay when the Colt hath most need of it, by which means they must needs both fall into extream Poverty; And over and above all this, by his Running abroad with the Mare, he becometh so savage and wild, that if any Infirmity seize upon him, his own unruliness being so great, the Cure may be very difficult, for infinite are the Number that hath perished in this kind.
VVhen Mares are fit to take Horse. Observe their Chasing and Galloping up and down morning and even∣ing, and their throwing up of their Noses, and lifting up of their Tails, riding on one anothers Backs, often Pissing, or opening of their Shapes, and closing of them again, which are Signes of Lust. To know the true Shape, Spirit and Height of a Foal. The same Shape that it carries at a Month old, he will carry at six years old, if he be not abused in after-keeping, and as the good Shape, so the defects also. From the Shin-bone. A large Shin-bone, that is long from the Knee to the Pastern in a Foal, shews a tall Horse. From the space between his Knee and VVithers. Look what space he has between his Knee and VVithers, double that will be his height when he is a compleat Horse. From their Spirits to know their goodness. If they are stirring Spirits, free from affrights, wanton of disposition, and very active in leaping and running, striving for Mastery, prove ge∣nerally good mettl'd Horses, the contrary, Jades. From his Hoofs. If his Hoofs be strong, deep, tough, smooth, upright standing and hol∣low, he cannot be evil, for they are the Foundation of his Building, and lend Fortitude from all the rest. Therefore the Barbary-Horse is well known by his Hoofs, for there is no Horse hath naturally so good a Hoof as he. VVeaning of Foals. VVean your ordinary Foals at the end of seven Months, your better at a year or two, and let them not be within the hearing of one another, and keep them very high the second year; but the third and fourth put them to hard Grasing. Taming of Colts. You are to make them familiar to you from the first VVeaning, and so VVinter after VVinter (in the House) use them to familiar Actions, as Rubbing, Clawing, Haltering, Leading to water, taking up of his Feet, knocking his Hoofs, and the like. The Time to break Colts. The best Time to break Colts to the Saddle is at three years old, and the advantage, or four at the utmost. But he that hath the patience to stay to see his Horse full five, shall be sure to have him of longer conti∣nuance, and less subject to Disease or Infirmity, and on that (but by death) will hardly come to the knowledge of tyring.
Coiling of the Stud, or making of Election. I advise you by no means to make too early Coiling: for some Horses will shew their best Shape at two and three years old, and lose it at four, others not till five, nay, six, but then keep it ever; some will do their best days work at six or seven years old, others not till eight or nine. But be the time when it will, let him preserve for his own use the best; those that be defective, I mean, such as bring incurable desormities, gross Sorrances, as Spavins, Ring-boncs, imperfect Eyes, or the like, make away with them. Barren Mares. If you fnd any of your Mares grow into Barrenness, away with them, for though I could prescribe you Remedies, yet they are not worthy of your use. General Observations concerning Mares. In length and height a Mare groweth till she be five, and a Horse till he be six years old. Covering. VVhen a Mare is past two years old, she may be Covered, but the best time is after four years old. Bringing of Foals. Common Mares may bring Foals every year, but let your best bring but every second year, especially if they bring Horse-Colts. ☜ To make a Mare stink Foal. To make a Mare slink her Foal is to give her down her Throat with a Horn some water, with three Grig Eeles, which will make her slink with a great deal of safety. To make her stand to Horse. To make a Mare stand to Horse the better, is to let her stand by him two o three days before he cover her Stallion for Trotters. Let your Stallion for Trotters be either Nepolitan Courser, or Arabian, Turk, or Barbary, and for Amblers, either the Spanish Jennet, or the Irish Hoboy. Mares to Horse. Put your Mares to Horse, from the middle of March, till the middle of May, or middle June, the Moon having newly changed. To put your Horse into an empty House. It is good to put the Horse and the Mare for three or four Nights to∣gether in an empty house, and take him away in the Morning, and feed
him well, and feed your Mare sparingly; but especially give her but little water. Chasing the Mares. At the end of six Months chase not the Mares, for then they are a quickning, and may easily be made to cast their Foals. The VVall-Eye. The wall-Eye of a Horse or Mare doth never see perfectly, especially when the Snow is upon the Ground. Choice of Mares. For your choice of Mares you ought to respect their Shapes and Mettles, that they be beautifully fore-handed, and that they be of a mean stature, large and broad, and the Stallion of like shape, but somewhat broader and taller, and temper their Natures thus. Put unto the hot Horse the cool Mare, and to the hot Mare the cool Horse. If you will Elect a Horse for Service and Warlike Employment, then these are best. The Neapolitan, the Sardinian, the Courser, the Almaine, the French, the Jennet, or the Turk. Or if any of these Bastardized in themselves, or with a fair well Sha∣ped and Mettl'd English Mare. For Swiftness. If you will Elect for Swiftness, then The Arabian, the Barbary, which is a Horse of Africa. The Spanish, the Grecian, which is the Turky Horse. Or any of these Bastardized in them∣selves with our English Mares. For Travel. If you will choose for long Travel and Service. Then, the English, the Hungarian, the Swedeland, the Poland, the Irish. For Draught. If you will choose for Draught and Service. Then, the Flanders, the Friesland, or any of the Netherlands, either Bastardized in themselves, or with our English Rases, and these are excellent for Coach, for Cart, for Pack or any Burthen. If you will choose for Ease, then the Irish. To know whether your Mares be with Foal, or not. If you pour a spoonful of cold Vinegar or Water into her Ear, if she shake only her Head, it is a sign she is with Foal; but if she shake her
Head, Body and all, then it is a sign she is not with Foal. Or if she scoures, her Coat grow smooth and shining, and that she grows Fat, it is a sign that she holds. To make the Mare Conceive Male Foals. To make your Mare Conceive Male Foals, is to keep your Stallion proud, and your Mare poor; that his Lust mastering hers, he may only be predominate and chief in the Action. Of the Office of the Keeper. Of the Horse in general, his Choice for every several Ʋse, his Ordering, Diet, and best Preservation for Health, both in Travel and in Rest. Of the Nature of Horses in general. HE is Valiant, Strong and Nimble, and above all other Beasts most apt and able to endure the extreamest Labours, the moist quality of his Composition being such, that neither extream heat doth dry up his strength, nor the violence of Cold, freeze the warm temper of his moving spirits, for he withstandeth all defects of Sickness with an uncontrouled constancy. He is most Gentle and Loving to Man, apt to be taught, and not forgetful when an Impression is fixed in his Brain; he is watchful above all other Beasts, and will endure his Labour with the most empty Stomach, he is naturally given to much cleanliness, he is of an excellent Scent, and therefore not so much as to offend any man with his evil Sa∣vours. Your Choice of a Horse for the Wars. Choose him of a tall stature with a comely Head, and out-swelling Fore∣head, a large sparkling Eye, the white thereof covered with the Eye∣brows, a small thin Ear, short and pricking; if it be long, well carried, and ever moving, a deep Neck, a large Crest, broad Breast, bending Ribs, broad and streight Chine, round and full Buttocks, a Tail high and broad, neither too thick nor too thin, a full swelling Thigh, a broad, flat and lean Leg, short Pasterned, strong Joynted. Colours of a Horse. The best Colours are brown Bay, Daple-gray, Roand, Bright-Bay, Black, with a white near Foot behind, white sore-Foot before, white Star, Chesnut or Sorrel, with any of those marks, or Dun with a black List.
Horses for a Princes Seat. If you will choose a Horse for a Princes Seat, or for any Supream Ma∣gistrate, or any great Lady; then choose the finest shape, that is Nimble, with an easie Pace, and Gentle to get up, familiar and quiet in the com∣pany of other Horses, and let his colour be Milk-white, with red Frains or without, or else Dapple-grey, with a white Mane, and white Tail. Horses for Travel. If you choose a Horse for Travel, choose him for Strength, viz. His Joynts strong, his Pastornes short and streight without bending in his going, hollow and tough Hoofs, let him be of a temperate Nature, nei∣ther too furious, nor too dull. Hunting Horses. If you choose a Horse for Hunting, let his Shape be generally strong, and well knit together, making equal Proportions, for as unequal Shapes shew weakness, so equal Shapes shew strength and durance; your unequal Shapes, are a great Head and a little Neck, a big Body and a thin But∣tock, a large Limb to a little Foot, &c. Let him have a large and lean Head, wide Nostrils, open Chauld, a big VVheasand, and the VVind∣pipe streight. Running Horses If you choose him for Running, let him have all the finest Shapes that may be. Let him be nimble, quick and siery, apt to flie with the least mo∣tion; long Shapes are sufferable, for though they shew weakness, yet they assure sudden speed. Coach-Horses. If you choose him for the Coach, which is called the swift Draught, let his hape be tall, broad and well furnish'd, not gross with much flesh, but with the bigness of his Bones; let him have a strong Neck, a broad Breast, a large Chine, sound clean Limbs, and tough Hoofs. And for this purpose your large English Geldings are best, your Flemish Mares next, and your strong Stone-Horses tolerable. Pck-Horses. If you choose a Horse for Portage, that is, for the Pack or Hampers. Let him have a strong Body and Limb:, but not tall, with a broad Back, out-Ribs, full Shoulders and thick VVithers; for if it be thin in that Part, you shall hardly keep his Back from Galling, and be sure he take a large stride, for he that taketh the largest stride goes at the most ease, and rids his Ground the fastest. Cart or Plough. Lastly, if you will choose a Horse for Cart or Plough, which is the slow
draught, choose him that is of an ordinary height, for Horses in the Cart unequally sorted never draw at ease, but the tall hang up the low Horse. Let him be big, large Bodied and strong Limb'd, by Nature rather inclin'd to crave the VVhip, then to draw more then is needful. And for this purpose, Mares are most profitable, if you have cheap keeping for them, for they will not only do your work, but bring you yearly increase; be sure you take them well-forehanded, that is, good Head, Neck, Breast and Shoulders; for the rest, it is not so regardful, only let her Body be large, for the more room a Foal hath in her Dams Belly, the sairer are his Members. And be sure you never put your Draught-Beasts to the Saddle for that alters their Pace, and hurts them in their Labour. How to Order these several Horses. And first of the Horse for the Wars. During his time of teaching, which is out of the VVars, you shall keep him high; let his Food be good Hay and clean Oats, or two parts Oats, and one part Beans or Pease well dried and hard, half a Peck at a Morn∣ing, Noon, and at Evening is sufficient. In his days of rest, Dress him betwixt five and six in the Morning, and VVater him at seven or eight in the Afternoon. Dress him between three and four, and VVater him a∣bout four or five, and give him Provender always after watering; Litter him at eight, and give Food for all Night. The Night before he is ridden, about Nine at Night take away his Hay, and at four of the Clock in the Morning give him a Handful or two of Oats, which being eaten, turn him upon the Snaffle, Rub him all over with dry Clothes, then Saddle him and make him Fit for his exercise; and when you have done with him, bring him into the Stable all sweaty, as he is, and Rub him all over with dry VVisps, then take off his Saddle, and after you have rubbed him all over with dry Cloaths, put on his Housing-Cloth, then put on the Saddle again, and girt it, and walk him about gently while he be cold, then set him up, and after two or three houres fasting, put him to his Meat, then in the Afternoon, curb, rub and dress him, and water him, and order him as aforesaid. Ordering a Horse for a Prince, or great Ladies Seat. You must Order him in the time of his Rest, like unto the Horse for Service; and in his time of Labour like the Travelling Horse, only you are to keep him more choicely. I mean, in a beautiful manner, his Coat lying smooth and shining; if he come in sweating into the Stable, after you have rubbed him down take off the sweat with a Sword Blade, whose edge is rebated. Ordering of Travelling Horses at home and abroad. Feed him with good Hay in the VVinter, and good Grass in the Sum∣mer.
His Provender, let it be good dry Oats, Beans, Pease or Bread, ac∣cording to his Stomach; In the time of Rest, half a Peck at a Water∣ing is sufficient, in the time of Labour as much as he will eat with a good Stomach. Of Watering in the Morning. When you Travel him, Water two houres before you Ride, then rub, dress and lustily feed, then bridle up, and let him stand an hour before you take his back. Of Feeding betimes. In your Travel feed your Horse betimes for all night, that thereby he may the sooner take his rest. Moderate Travelling. Travel moderately in the Morning, till his wind be rackt, and his Limbs warmed, then after do as your Affairs require. Be sure at Night to water your Horse two miles before you come to your Journey's end; then the warmer you bring him to his Inn the better, walk not, nor wash not at all, the one doth beget Colds, the other Foundrings in the Feet or Body, but set him up warm, well stopt, and well rubbed, with clean Litter; Give no Meat whilest the outward parts of your Horse are hot or wet with sweat, as the Ear-roots, the Flanck, the Neck, or under his Chaps; but being dry, rub and feed him according to the goodness▪ of his Stomach. To get a Stomach. Change of Food begetteth a Stomach, so doth the washing the Tongue or Nostrils with Vineger, Wine and Salt, or warm Urine. Not to stop the Horses Feet with Cow-dung till they be cold. Stop not your Horses Feet with Cow-dung till he be sufficiently cold, and that the Blood and Humours which were dispersed, be setled in∣to their proper places. Look to his Back, Girts and Shooes. Look well to his Back, that the Saddle hurt not; to the Girts, that they gall not; and to his Shooes, that they be large, fast and easie. Not to eat nor drink when he is hot. Let him neither eat nor drink when he is hot, nor presently after his Travel. To Labour him moderately, when the Weather is either extream hot or cold. Labour him moderately when the Weather is either extream hot, or
extream cold, that so you may avoid extream Heats or sudden Colds. Not to Travel him too late. Travel him not too late, that your own eye may see him well dried, and well fed, before you take your own rest. The Saddle not to be presently taken off. Take not the Saddle from your Horses Back suddenly. Horse-bread very good Food. Horse-bread which is made of clean Pease, Beans or Fitches, feedeth exceedingly. River-water is not so good as standing-water. Let your Horses Meat and Drink be exceeding sweet and clean, Stand∣ing-water is better then River-water, for that is too piercing. Swine and Pullen is naught to be nigh a Stable. Let him lie clean and dry, keep your Stable sweet, let no Swine lie near it, nor let any Pullen come within it. Let the Light of your Stable be towards the South and North. Let the Light of your Stable be ever towards the South and North; yet so as the North-windows may in the Winter be shut close at Plea∣sure. To be Tied with two Reins. Let him be Tied with two Reins. To Ride him on stony wayes. Ride him often on stony ways, that he may the better feel his Feet, and harden his Hoofs. Wheat-straw, and Oat-straw, best for Litter. Let his Bed be of Wheat-straw above his Knees, the Barley-straw is the softest, yet a Horse will covet to eat it, which is unwholesom; Wheat-straw, though it be hard to lie upon, yet it is wholesom to eat, and as for Oat-straw, it is the best in the Superlative, for it is not only wholesom to eat, but soft to lie upon.
Of Dressing your Horse. Curry or Dress your Horse twice a day, that is before water; and when he is Curried, rub him well with your Hand, and with a Rubber, his Head should be rubbed with a wet Cloth, and his Cods made clean with a dry Cloth, otherwise he would be scabby between his Legs; you should wet his fore-top, his Mane and his Tail with a wet Mane-Comb, and ever where the Horses Hair is thinnest, there Curry the gentlest. Of the Stable. Let the Plaunchers of your Stable lie even and level, that your Horse may stand at his ease, and not prove Lame by too much oppressing his hinder Feet. A Mud-wall is naught to be nigh a Horse. Let not any Mud-wall be within your Horses reach, for he will natu∣rally covet to eat it, and nothing is more unwholesom. Chopt Straw is good to strow amongst his Provender. Give your Horse plenty of Garbage (which is Chopt VVheat-straw) both with his Provender and without, for it is a mighty Clenser of a Horses Body. Bottles of Hay to be Tied hard. Let your Hay-bottles be very little, and Tied very hard, for so your Horse shall eat with a better Stomach, and make least waste. To sprinkle the Hay with water is good, and to strow Fennegreek amongst his Provender. To sprinkle water upon your Hay is most wholesom, and to sprinkle Fennegreek upon your Provender, is as sovereign; The rst is good for the VVind, the latter for VVormes. Exercise good. Let your Horse have daily Exercise, for that begets a good Stomach to his Meat. Grafs is good once a year, to cleanse the Blood and cool the Body. Purge your Horse once a year with Grass, or green Blades of Corn called Forrage, for fifteen days together; yet before you purge him, in any case let him Blood, and whilest he is in Purging let him have no Pre∣vender. A Horse good store of Blood after Travel. A Horse after Travel hath ever more Blood then any Beast whato∣ever,
therefore it is good to take Blood from him to prevent the Yel∣lows, or other Diseases that may follow. What you are to do in Case of Necessity, coming late to your Inn. If you come late to your Inn, so that your Journey be great and earnest, and that your Horse will not eat till he hath drunk, and yet is hot notwithstanding, then let his Drink be Milk given in the dark, lest the whiteness make him refuse it; this is both cordial and pleasant: If you cannot get Milk enough, then mingle Milk with water luke-warm. To give him Mares Milk to drink if he be poor. If your Horse either by Labour, or any Surfeits be brought low, lean and weak, give him Mares Milk to drink many days▪together, and it will make him strong. The best-times to Water in the Winter. The best Houres to water your Horse in the Winter (when he is at Rest) is betwixt seven and eight in the Morning, or four or five in the Evening. Not good to wash a Horse if he be hot. It is not good to wash a Horse when he is hot, but you may wash him above the Knees, so that you do not wash his Belly; and that you ride him after he is washed, and so set him up and dress him. The purer the water is wherein you wash your Horse, the more wholesom it is, so that it be not too extream cold. To light at every steep Hill. When you Travel, at every steep Hill, light, both to refresh your Horse and your self. How a fat Horse is to have his Meat and his Water. Let a fat Horse have his water at four times, and not as much as he will drink at once, and let him stand two or three houres every day with∣out Meat. Rubbing is good for a Horse. Rubbing much, hard and well, doth profit, preserve, and it keeps both legs and body in strength, and he doth much delight in it, and it doth better then much Meat. Boiled Barley is good. Boiled Barley is a great Fatner of a Horse. To Pick his Feet after Travel. Cleanse and pick the Soles of his Feet ever after Travel, and stuffe them well with Ox-dung, and anoint his Hoofs with Grease, Tarr or Turpentine.
Much Rest naught. Much Rest is the Nurse and Mother of many Diseases. Be careful to look to your Saddle. When you Ride, look often to your Saddle and your Horses Shooes, and you shall find much more ease in your Journey. A Horse-Mans Rule. If you do intend to keep your Horse in his Skin, Go softly out, and come softly in. Riding softly. Ride moderately the first two houres, but after according to your oc∣casions. Trotters Oyl is good to help stiff Limbs. Trotters Oyl is an excellent Ointment, being applied very warm to your Horses Limbs, to nimble them, and to help Stiffness and Lameness. And Dogs Grease is better, therefore never want one of them in the Stable. To Bath his Legs with cold water, is good to Keep his Legs from Scabs and Swellings. Bath the Fore-legs from the knees and Gambrels downwards with cold water, for it is wholesom, and both comforteth the Sinews, and prevents Scabs and Swellings. To Wash at the Stable door, if Necessity requires. If foul ways compel you to wash your Horses Legs, then do it with a Pail of water at the Stable-door, rather then to endanger him in Pond or River; and for walking, rather Sit on your Horses back to keep his spirit stirring, then to walk him in your Hand, for he will soon catch Cold that way, the Wind and Air getting between his Saddle and Back. Dressing upon Travel and Rest. Dress your Horse twice a day upon Rest, and once upon Travel.
Blooding. Spring and Fall are the best times to take Blood from a Horse. Ordering of Hunting Horses. While he is at Rest, let him have all the quietness that may be, let him have much Meat, much Litter, much Dressing, and Water ever by him, and let him sleep as long as he pleaseth, keep him to Dung rather soft then hard, and look that it be well coloured and bright, for Darkness shews Grease, and Redness inward heating. Let Exercises and Mashes of sweet Mault, after his usual Scourings; or let Bread of clean Beans, or Beans and Wheat mixt together, be his best food, and Beans and Oats the most ordinary. ☜ Sir Robert Chernock's Manner of Hunting in Buck-season. He never takes his Horse up into the Stable during the Season, but Hunts him upon Grass, only allowing him as many Oats as he can well eat. And he approves of this to be a very good way, by reason that if there be any Molten Grease within him which violent Hunting may raise up, this going to Grass will purge it out; He hath Rid his Horse three days in a week during the Season, and never yet found any hurt, but ra∣ther good by it, so that you turn your Horse out very cool. The Ordering of your Running Horse, Let him have no more Meat then will suffice Nature, drink once in twenty four houres, and dressing every day once at Noon only; Let him have moderate Exercise Morning and Evening, Ayrings, or the fetching of his water, and know no other violence but in his Courses only. If he be very fat, scoure oft; if of reasonable stature, seldom; If lean, then scoure but with a sweet Mash only; let him stand dark and warm, having many Clothes and much Litter, and that Wheat-straw only. Let him be empty before you Run, and let his Food be the finest, lightest and quick∣est of Digestion that may be; The Sweats are most wholesom that are given abroad, and the Cooling most natural which is given before he cometh into the Stable. Keep his Limbs with cool Ointments, and let not any hot Spices come into his Body. If he grow dry inwardly, wash'd Meats is most wholesom. If he grow loose, give him Wheat-straw in more abundance. And be sure do every thing Neat and cleanly about him, which will Nourish him the better. Ordering of Coach-Horses. Let them have good Dressing twice a day, Hay and Provender their Belly-full, and Litter enough to tumble on. Let them be walk'd and wash'd after Travel, for by reason of their many occasions to stand still,
they must be inur'd with all hardness, though it be much unwholesom. Their best food is sweet Hay, or well dried Beans and Oats, or Bean∣bread; Look well to the strength of their Shooes, and the Galling of their Harness; Keep their Legs clean, especially about their hinder Fet∣locks; And let them stand in the House warmly Cloathed. Ordering of the Pack and Cart-Horse. They need no walking, washing, or houres of Fasting, only dress them well, look to their Shooes and Backs, and then fill their Bellies, and they will do their Labour. Their best Food is sweet Hay, Chaff or Pease, or Oat-hulls and Pease, or chopt straw and Pease mixt together; To give them warm Grains and Salt once a week will not be amiss, which will prevent the breeding of Wormes, and such like Mischief. The Office of the Rider and Groom, and of things belonging to him, Viz. His General and Particular Knowledge in Handling, Sadling, Mouthing, Backing and Riding of the Great Horse, or Horse of Pleasure. Of the Stable, and what it ought to be built with. TO begin first with the Winter-house of the Horse, the Stable: You ought to place it in a good Air, and to be made of Brick, and not Stone, for Brick is most wholesom and warmest, for Stone will sweat up∣on change of Weather, which begetteth damps, and causeth Rheums in Horses. There ought not to be nigh it any unsavoury Gutter nor Sink, no Jakes, Hog-sty or Hen-Roust to annoy it. The Rack ought to be placed neither too high nor too low, and so well-Placed, that the Hay∣dust fall not into his Neck, Mane nor Face. The Manger ought to be of an indifferent height, made deep, and of one entire Piece, as well for strength as conveniency. Let the Floor be Pitched and not Planked, and let there be no Mud or Lome-wall near it, for he will eat it, which will cause him to be sick, for Lome and Lime are suffocating things, and they will infect and putrifie the Blood, and endanger his Lungs, and spoil his Wind; Neither let any dung lie near his heels, for that will breed Cib'd and scabby heels.
Paving of Stables is better then Planked Stables for these Reasons. First, they are much more durable and lasting. Secondly, they are less charges by much. Thirdly, for him to stand continually upon a pitched Floor, it embold∣neth his Feet and treading the more. Fourthly, it is the most excellent thing that may be for Colts, who are unshod, for it hardeneth their Hoofs, so that by custom they will be as bold to go upon stones, rocky and hard ways, as Horses that are shod; neither will it suffer the Hoofs to grow abroad in the manner of an Oy∣ster; besides, the use thereof will make their Hoofs more tough, durable and hollow, insomuch that when they come to be shod, they will carry their Shooes much longer. To shew the Inconveniencies of a Planked Floor. First, it is more slippery, out of which reason a mettl'd Horse may be endangered, to be lamed or spoiled by some sudden slip, which a pitched Stable is not so subject to. Secondly, the Planks oftentimes shrinking, if the Horse be high Met∣tl'd and be subject to Curvet, he may break a Plank, and so Plunging may easily spoil or break his Leg. Thirdly, when you put forth your Horse to Grass in the Summer, the Sun will so dry the Planks, that they will warp and loosen the Pins, and make them give way, that so when Horses that have gone for some Months before, not being handled, become wild and unruly, that when they come into the Stable, and feel the Planks to give way under them, will fall to Flinging and Leaping till they have dislocated the Planks, and not only both endanger himself but his Fellows also. Fourthly, whereas you may imagine a Planked Stable warmer then a Paved one, I know the contrary, for your Pitched Floors have no Vaults or Channels under them, like as your Planked ones have, to carry away the water that the Horses make, by which means the Horses lieth over a dampish, moist Vault; and besides, the evil savour of the Horse-Piss will be ever in their Nose, which is very unwholesom and noisom, and many times the cause of many infirmities; neither can it be so warm as the other for chinks and holes, which are made by the Awger through the Planks, (which must always be kept open to let forth the Urine) to give way to the cold wind which cometh from thence, which cannot but be very unwholesom. Therefore I do affirm, that if your Groom do Lit∣ter up Horse well, so that he may lie soft and warm, he will prosper bet∣ter then upon a Planked Floor, provided it be laid even, not higher be∣fore then behind, more then will carry the water to his hinder-feet, where
there ought to be a small Gutter to carry it away, for by raising your Floor too much, his hinder Legs will swell, and so he will become Lame, by reason he bears too much weight on his hinder parts. Of the Care in the Choice of a Groom. After you have bred Colts according to my Instructions, and that that they prove to your Mind, then the next care you ought to have is of Grooms, which ought to be very expert in their Faculties, which consist∣eth their Making or Marring, for you cannot say that a Colt three or four years old can be a perfect Horse, till he come to be Handled and made fit for his Masters Riding, which is to be made Gentle, Shod, Backed, Broken, Ridden, Wayed, Mouthed, and in brief brought to his utmost Perfection. His Rider therefore must be an Expert and able Horse∣man, and his Keeper every way as sufficient, otherwise what defects you find in your Horse, are not to be attributed to him, but either to his Rider, or to his Groom; therefore let your care be, that they be both sufficient. How a Rider ought to be Qualified. If you desire your Colts to come to their utmost Perfection, then let your Rider be one who is Cried up to be an Experienc'd Horse-man; he must not be of life dissolute or debaucht, nor of Nature harsh, furious, cholerick or hair-brain'd, for the least of either of these Vices are very unseemly in a Person of this Profession; He must be Master over his Passions, for he that is not cannot make a good Horse-man. And it is not much to be wondred at, if a Horse fall into Imperfections or Vices, for these his evil conditions and faults are not so much to be imputed to the Horse, but to the Teacher, for he is not a good Horse-man that doth not bring his Horse to Perfection, by sweet and gentle means, rather then by Correction and severe Chastisements; yet not but that I allow of Correction, and that it is as necessary as Meat, if it do not exceed the limited Bounds of Moderation, and that it be done at the very instant when he offendeth, and doth justly merit the same, or else he will not know the Cause why he is Chastised; so on the other side, when he doth well, let hm be Cherished and made much of, which will encourage him to go forward in well-doing. What Manner of Person a Groom ought to be. The Groom must be a Man that must truly love his Horse, and so shape his course towards him, as that the Horse may love and dote upon him; for a Horse is the most lovingest Creature to Man of all
other bruit Creatures, and none more Obedient to him; Wherefore, if he be mildly dealt withal, he will be also reciprocal; but if he be harsh and cholerick, the Horse will be put by his Patience, and become Re∣bellious, and fall to biting and striking; For the old Proverb is, Pa∣tience once wronged, will turn into Fury. He must continually toy, dally and play with him, be always talking and speaking pleasing words unto him; He must lead him abroad in the Sun-shine, and then run, scope and shew him all the delight he can; he must duely Curry, Comb and Dress him, wipe dust, pick and clense him, feed, pamper and cherish him, and be always doing somewhat about him, either about his heels, or taking up his Feet, or rapping him upon the Soles; And he must keep him so well dress'd that he may almost see his Face upon his Coat; he must keep his Feet stopped, and daily Anointed, his Heels free from Scratches and other Sorrances, and to have so vigilant an eye upon him, to oversee all his Actions, as well feeding as drinking, that so no in∣ward infirmity may seize upon him, but that he may be able to discover it, and being discovered may seek for to Cure it. To Saddle and Bridle a Colt. When your Horse is made Gentle, take a sweet Watering Trench, wash'd and Anointed with Honey and Salt, put it into his Mouth, and so place it, that it may hang about his Tush; then offer him the Saddle; but with that carefulness that you do not affright him therewith, suf∣fering him to smell at it, to be rubbed with it, and then to feel it; then in the end to Fix it on, and Girt it fast, and at what part and motion he seems most coy, with that make him most familiar; then being thus Sadled and Bridled lead him forth to water, then bring him in, and after he hath stood a little Reined upon the Trench, an hour or more, take away the Bridle and Saddle, and let him go to his Meat till the Evening, then lead him forth as before, and when he is set up Gently, take off his Saddle and dress him, and cloath him up for all Night. The way to make him endure the Saddle the better, is by making it fa∣miliar unto him, by clapping the Saddle with your Hand as it stands upon his Back, to shake it and sway upon it, to dangle the Stirrops by his Sides, and to rub them on his Sides, and make much of him, and be familiar with all things about him, as straining the Crooper, fastning and loosening the Girts, or taking up and letting out of the Stir∣rops. Of Mouthing. When he will Trot with the Saddle obediently, then you shall wash a
trench of a full Mouth, and put it into his Mouth, and throw the Reins over the sore-part of the Saddle, so that the Horse may have a full feel∣ing of it; then put on a Martingal, and you shall buckle it at such length, that he may no more then feel it when he Jirketh up his Head, then take a broad piece of Leather, and put it about the Horses Neck, and make the two ends of it fast by Platting, or otherwise at the Withers and mid∣part before his Weasand, about two handfuls below the Throple, be∣twixt the Leather and his Neck, let the Mattingal pass, so that when at any time he shall offer to duck or throw down his Head, the Cavezan be∣ing placed upon the tender Gristle of his Nose, may correct and punish him, which will make him bring down his Head, and fashion him to an absolute Rein. Then Trot him abroad, and if you find the Reins or Martingal grow slack, straiten them, for where there is no feeling there is no Vertue. Of Backing. When you have Exercised your Horse thus, divers Mornings, Noons, or Evenings, and find him Obedient, then take him into some Ploughed Ground (the lighter the better) and after you have made him Trot a good Pace about you in your hand, and thereby taken from him all his wan∣tonness, look and see whether your tackling be firm and good, and every thing in his true and due place, you may then (having one to stay his Head and govern the Chasing Rain) take his Back, yet not suddenly, but by degrees, and with divers heavings, and half-raisings, which if he en∣dure patiently, then settle your self; but if he shrink or dislike, then forbear to mount, and chase him about again, and then offer to mount, and do thus till he be willing to receive you. Then when you are set∣led, and have received your Stirrops and Cherisht him, put your Toes forward, and he that stays his Head, ler him lead him forward half a dozen Paces, then Cherish him; then lead him a little further and Che∣rish him, and shake and move your self in the Saddle, then let him stay his Head, and remove his Hand a little from the Cavezan, and as you thrust forwards your Toes, let him move him forward with his Rein, till you have made the Horse apprehend your own Motion of Body and Foot, (which must go equally together, and with spirit also) so that he will go forward without the other Assistance, and stay upon the restraint of your own hand, then Cherish him, and give him Grass and Bread to eat, alight from his Back, then mount and unmount twice or thrice together, ever mixing them with Cherishings. Thus Exercise him till you have made him perfect in going forward, and standing still at your pleasure. Helps at first Backing. When this is effected, you may lay by the long Rein, and the Band a∣bout
the Neck, and only use the Trenches and Cavezan, and the Mar∣tingal, and let a Groom lead the way before you on another Horse, and go only streight forward, and stand still when you please, which will soon be effected, by Trotting him after another Horse, and bring him home sometimes after the Horse, and sometimes equally with him, and some∣times before, so that he may six upon no certainty, but your own plea∣sure; And be sure to have regard to the well-carriage of his Neck and Head, and as the Martingal slackneth so to streighten it. What Lessons for what Horse. When this Work is finished, then Teach your Horse these Lessons: As if he be for Hunting, Running, Travel, Hackney, or the like, then the chiefest things you are to apply your self to, are to preserve a good Mouth, to Trot freely and comly, to Amble surely and easily, to Gallop strongly and swiftly, to Obey the Hand in stopping gently, and Retiring willingly, and to turn on the other Hand readily and nimbly. But if you intend him for the great Saddle, or the use of the Wars, then al∣though the Lessons be the same, yet they are to be done in a more pun∣ctual manner. So that if any Horse can be brought to the best, the ea∣sier must needs follow with little industry. And it is a Rule in Horse∣man-ship, That no Lesson which belong to the Wars can be hurful, or do in∣jury to any Horse whatsoever, that is kept for any other purpose. Whence it cometh, that any Horse for the Wars may be trained for a Runner, or Hunter, at pleasure; but every Runner, or Hunter, will not serve the Wars; and every Horse-man that can make a Horse for the Wars, may be a Jocky when he pleases; but no Jocky (that I know) can make a Horse for the Wars. Therefore I will run a middle way, and sute my Lessons to both purposes. Helps and Corrections. Before you Teach your Horse any Lessons, you must know there are seven Helps to advantage him in his Lessons, to punish him for faults gotten in his Lessons. And they be, The Voice, the Rod, the Bit or Snaffle, the Calves of the Legs, the Stirrop, Spur, and the Ground. Voice. The Voice is an help when it is sweet and accompanied with Cherish∣ings, and it is a Correction when it is rough or terrible, and accompanied with strokes or threatnings. Rod. The Rod is an help in the shaking, and a Correction in the striking.
Bit or Snaffle. The Bit is an Help in its sweetness, the Snaffle in its smoothness, and they are Corrections, the one in its hardness, the other in its roughness, and both in slatness and squareness. Calves of the Legs Are Helps when you lay them to the Horses Sides gently, and Corre∣ctions when you strike them hard, because they give warning that the Spurs follow. Stirrop and Stirrop-Leathers. Are Corrections, when you strike it against the hinder part of the Shoulder, and they are Helps when you thrust them forward in a quick Motion. Spur. Is a Help when it is gently delivered in any Motion that asks quick∣ness and agility, whether on the Ground, or above the Ground, and a Correction when it is stricken hard in the sides, upon any sloth, or any fault committed The Ground. The Ground is an Help when it is plain and smooth, and not painful to tread upon; and it is a Correction when it is rough, deep and uneven, for the Amendment of any Vice conceived. Of large Rings, When your Horse will receive you to and from his Back gently, Trot forward willingly, and stand still obediently. Then intending him for the Wars, or other purpose, (for these Lessons serve all occasions,) you shall in some gravelly or sandy place, where his Footsteps may be discern∣ed, labour him within the large Ring, that is, at least fifty Paces in Com∣pass; And having Trod it about three or four times on the right hand, rest and cherish; then change the Hand again, and do as much on the left Hand, then rest and cherish; and change the Hand again, and do as much on the right Hand, ever observing upon every stop to make him re∣tire and go back a step or two. Thus labour him, till he will Trot his Ring on which Hand you please, changing within the Ring in the manner of a Roman S, and to do it rea∣dily and willingly; Then teach him to Gallop them as he did Trot them, and that also with true Footing, lofty Carriage and brave Rein, ever ob∣serving when he Gallops to the right Hand, to lead with his left fore∣foot, and when he Gallops to the left Hand, to lead with the right fore∣foot. Object. Now here is to be cleared a Paradox held by many of our
Horsemen, which is, That the Exercise of the Ring is not good for Running Horses, because it raiseth up his fore-feet, and make him Gallop painfully, and so an hindrance unto speed. Answ. But if they consider that this habit, (if it be taken) is soon broken, either by the Horse-mans hand or discretion, who hath Power to make him move as he pleaseth; Or if they will truly look into the benefit of the thing it self, they shall finde it is the only means to bring an Horse to the true use of his Feet, and the nimble carriage of them in all advantages. For every Runner of Horses will allow, that for an Horse (in his course) to lead with his right foot, is most proper, and when at any time he breaks or alters it, it must be disadvantage, because, (not well acquainted to lead with the other,) he cannot handle it so nimbly. Now at his first Backing, by the use of his Ring and Change of Hands, he will become so expert and cunning with both, that whatsoever mis∣chance shall alter his stroke, yet shall his speed and nimbleness keep one and the same goodness. Of Stopping. When you come to the place of Stop, or would stop, by a sudden drawing in of your Bridle-hand, somewhat hard and sharp, make him stop close, firm and streight, in an even Line; and if he err in any thing, put him to it again, and leave not till you have made him understand his error, and amend it. Advancing. Now if you do Accompany this stop with an Advancement a little from the Ground, it will be more gallant, and may be done by laying the Calves of your Legs to his Sides, and shaking your Rod over him as he stops. If it chance at first he understand you not, yet by continuance and la∣bouring him herein, he will soon attain unto it, especially, if you forget not to cherish him, when he gives the least shew to apprehend you. Retiring. After Stopping and Advancing, make him Retire, as before shewed. And this Motion of Retiring, you must both Cherish and Encrease, ma∣king it so familiar with him, that no Lesson may be more perfect; neither must he retire in a confused manner, but with a brave Rein, a constant Head, and a direct Line; neither must he draw or sweep his Legs one after another, but take them clean, nimbly and loftily, as when he Trot∣ted forward.
Of Bitting. When your Horse is come to Perfection in these Lessons, and hath his Head firmly setled, his Reins constant, and his Mouth sweetned; You may then (if you intend him for the Wars) take away his Trench and Martingal, and only use the Cavezan of four or three Pieces, that is, a Joynt or no Joynt in the midst, and to that Joynt a strong Ring, and a Joynt of each side, with Rings before the Joynts, to which you shall put several Reins to use, either at the Post or otherwise. Into his Mouth you shall put a smooth sweet Canon bit, with a French Cheek suitable to the Proportion of the Horses Neck; knowing that the long Cheek raises up the Head, and the short pulls it down. And with these you shall Ex∣ercise the Horse in all the Lessons before taught, till he be perfect in them, without disorder or amazement. Of streight Turns and Turnings. When he is setled upon his Bit, then you are to teach him to turn roundly and readily in the streighter Rings; and of these there are divers kinds, and divers methods to teach them. But I shall Fix upon two man∣ner of streight Turns, as the Perfection from whence all Turnings are de∣rived. The one is when a Horse keepeth his hinder Parts inward and close to the Post or Center, and so cometh about and maketh his Circumfe∣rence with his hinder Parts, opposing face to face with his Enemy. The first streight Turn. You shall to the Ring in the mid-part of the Cavezan, Fix a long Rein of two Fathom or more, and to the other Rings two other shorter Reins; then having Saddled the Horse, and put on his Bit, bring him to the Post, and put the Reins of the Bit over the fore-part of the Saddle, Bolsters and all, and Fix them at a constant streightness on the top of the Pomel, so that the Horse may have a feeling both of the Bit and Curb. Then if you will have him turn to the right hand, take the short Rein on the left side of the Cavezan, and bringing it under the fore-Bolster of the Saddle up to the Pomel, and there Fix it at such a streightness, that the Horse may rather look from, then to the Post on the right side. Then let some Groom or skilful Attendant hold the right-side Rein of the Cavezan at the Post, governing the fore-parts of his Body to come about at large: Then your self taking the long Rein into your hand, and keeping his hinder parts inward, with your Rod on his outward Shoulder, and some∣times on his outward Thigh, make him move about the Post, keeping his inward parts as a Center, and making his fore-parts move in a larger
Circumference. Thus you shall Exercise him a pretty space on one hand, till he grow to some Perfectness; then Changing the Reins of the Ca∣vezan, make him do the like to the other hand. And thus apply him divers Mornings, and cherishing him in his Exercise according to his de∣servings, till you have brought him to that readiness, that he will upon the moving of your Rod couch his hinder Parts in towards the Post, and lapping the outward fore-leg over the inward, Trot about the Post swift∣ly, distinctly, and in as strait a Compass as you can desire, or is conve∣nient for the motion of the Horse; And from Trotting you may bring him to Flying and Wheeling about, with that swiftness, that both the fore-legs rising and moving together, the hinder Parts may follow in one and the same instant. When you have made him thus perfect in your hand, you shall then Mount his Back; and making some skilful Groom govern the long Rein, and another the short, by the Motion of your Hand upon the Bit, and soft Rein of the Cavezan, keeping the Horses Head from the Post, and by the help of the Calve of your Leg laid on his Side, and your Rod turned toward his outward Thigh, to keep his hinder parts in∣to the Post, labour and exercise him till you have brought him to that Perfection which you desire. Then take away the long Rein, and only exercise him with the help of the short Rein of the Cavezan, and no other. After take both the Reins of the Cavezan into your hands, and exercise him from the Post; making him as ready in any place where you please to Ride him, as he was at the Post. The other streight Turn. Now for the other streight Flying Turn, which is to keep his Face fixt on the Post as on his Enemy, and to move about only with his hinder parts, you shall take the same helps of the long Rein, and the short Reins of the Cavezan, and govern them, as before shewed, only you shall not give the short Rein to the Post-ward, so much liberty as before, but keep his Head closer to the Post, and following his hinder parts with the long Rein, by the help of your Rod make him bring his hinder parts round a∣bout the Post; and observe, that as before he did Iap one foot over an∣other, so now he must lap the hinder Legs one over another. In this Exercise, exercise him as the former, then (after a perfectness) mount his Back, and labour him, as before shewed. Then lastly, leaving the Post and all other helps, only apply him in such open and free places as you shall think couvenient, for upon the finishing of this Work your Horse is made compleat, and can perform all things that can be required, either for the Service in the Wars, for the High-way, or any other Galloping Plea∣sure.
How to Help an ill Rein, and Cure a Run-away Jade. Many Horses are so evil -beholding to Nature, for giving them short Necks, and worse set-on Heads, and so little beholding to Art to amend them, which causes many a good Horse to be left Cureless of those two gross insufferable faults, which are either a deformed carriage of the Head, like a Pig on a Broach, or else a furious Running away, got by a spoiled Mouth, or an evil habit. The Help. If it be a young Horse at his first Riding, then to his Trench; if an old, then to his Snaffle, (for I speak not of the Bit) but a pair of Reins, half as long again as any ordinary Reins, and Loops to fasten and un∣fasten at the Eye of the Snaffle, as other Reins have. Now when you see that the Horse will not yield to your Hand, but the more you draw the more he thrusts out his Nose, or the more violently he runs away; then undo the Buttons of the Reins from the Eye of the Snaffle, and draw them through the Eyes, and bring them to the Buckles of the formost Girt, and there button them fast: then Riding the Horse in that man∣ner, labour him with the gentle Motions of your Hand, coming and go∣ing by degrees, and sometimes accompanied with your Spur, to gather up his Body, and to feel your Command, and in a short time he will bring his Head where you will place it. And for Running away, if you draw one Rein, you turn him about in despite of all Fury; and if you draw both, you break his Chaps, or bring them to his Bosom. In the end, find∣ing himself not able to Resist, he will be willing to obey. Another Help for uncnstant Carriage. There is another soul Error in many Horses, which these Reins also Cure, as this, When your Horse is either so wythie cragg'd (as the Nor∣thern Man calls it) or so loose and unsteady Necked, that which way so∣ever you draw your Hand, his Head and Neck will follow it, sometimes beating against your Knees, sometimes dashing against your Bosom, and indeed, generally so loose and uncertain, that a man knows not when he hath steady hold of him; A Vice wonderful incident to Running Horses, especially the furious ones. In this Case you shall take these long Reins, and as before you drew them to the Buckles of the Girts, so now Mar∣tingal-wise draw from the Eyes of the Snaffle, betwixt his fore-Legs to the Girts, and there fasten them. Thus Ride him with a constant Hand, firm and somewhat hard, Correcting him both with the Spurs and Rod,
and somtimes with hard Twitches in his Mouth when he errs; and with a few weeks labour, his Head will come to a constant carriage, provided, that you labour him as well upon his Gallop as his Trot, and leave him not till you finde him fully reclaimed. The Office of the Feeder. An Introduction to the Work touching the Limitation of time for Preparing the Running Horse. I will not dispute the several Opinions of Men in this Kingdom, touch∣ing the Keeping of Running Horses, because they are idle and frivolous. Only this I shall do, clear one Paradox, and that is the limitation of time, allowed for the making ready of a Horse for a Match or Wager. Some do affirm, that a Horse newly taken from Grass, being foul, can∣not be made fit under six Months: By which they Rob their Masters of half a years pleasure, thrust him upon a tyring Charge to make the Sport lothsom, and get nothing but a Cloak for Ignorance, and a few false got Crowns, that melt as they are possessed. Their Reasons. Yet as Hereticks cite Scripture, so these find Reasons to defend want of Knowledge. As, The danger of too early Exercise, the Offence of Grease suddenly broken, the Moving of evil Humours too hastily, which leads to mortal Sickness; And the Moderation, or Helping of these by a slow Proceeding, or bringing of the Horse into Order by degrees and time; Or (as I may say) by an ignorant Sufferance. These Reasons have shew of a good Ground, for too early Exercise is dangerous, but not if free from violence. To break Grease too suddenly is an offence insufferable, for it puts both Limbs and Life in hazard, but not if it be purged away by whole∣som Scourings. The hasty stirring up of Humours in the Body, where they superabound, and are generally dispersed, and not setled, cannot choose but breed Sickness; but not where Discretion and Judgement eva∣cuateth them in wholesom, sweet and moderate Ayrings. Long time Inconvenient. And for the Moderation of all these, by the tediousness of time, as two Months for the first, two Months for the second, and as much for the
last. It is like the Curing of the Gangreen in an old man; better to die then to be dismembred, better lose the price then bear the charge. For I appeal to any Noble Judgement, whose Purse hath experienced these Actions, if six Months Preparation, and the dependents to it, do not de∣vour up a hundred pounds wager. Now I allow but of two Months time at any time of the year whatso∣ever, for an old Horse, or an Horse formerly trained, for I speak not of Colts; if he does it not in two Months, he shall not do it in fifteen. But reply they, no Scouring is to be allowed, for they are Physical; they force Nature, and so hurt Nature; they make Sickness, and fo em∣pair Health. And that indeed nothing is comparable to the length of time, because Nature worketh every thing it self, and though she be longer, she hath less danger. I confess that Sibbesauce Scourings, which are stuff'd with poisonous Ingredients, cannot choose but bring forth Infirmity; but wholesom Scourings, that are composed of beneficial and nourishing Simples, nei∣ther occasion Sickness, nor any manner of Infirmity, but brings away Grease and all foulness, in that kindly and abundant sort, that one week shall effect more then two Months dilatory and doubtful forbearance, I call it dilatory and doubtful, because no man (in this lingring Course) can certainly tell which way the Grease and other soulness will avoid, as whether in his Ordure (which is the safest) into Sweat, (which is hazar∣dous,) into his Limbs, (which is mischievous) or remain and putrifie in his Body, (which is mortally dangerous) since the Issue of any, or all these fall out according to the strength and estate of the Horses Body, and the diligence of the Feeder. And if either the one fail in Power, or the other in Care, Farewel Horse for that year. All this Envy cannot choose but confess; only they have one broken Crutch to support them, which is, they know no Scouring, therefore they will allow of no Scouring. Against Barbarism I will not dispute, only I▪appeal to Art or Discre∣tion, whether Purgation or Sufferance, when Nature is offended, be the better doers. But they Reply by a Figure called, Absurdity, that whatsoever is given to any Horse more then his Natural Food, and which he will Naturally and willingly receive, is both improper and unwholesom, To this I An∣swer, the Natural Food of Man is Bread only, all other things (according to the Philosopher) are superfluous, and so to be avoided. At this Argument both Humanity and Divinity laughs. For other Helps, as Physick, divers Meats, and divers Means, ordeined for both, even by the Power of the Almighty himself, tells the Contemners hereof, how grossly they err in this foolish Opinion. Nay, allow them a little shadow of truth, that things most Natural are most beneficial, then it
must follow, that Grass or Hay, (which is but withered Grass) is most na∣tural, and so most beneficial. Now Grass is Physical, for in it is contain∣ed all manner of Simples, of all manner of Mixtures, as hot, cold, moist, dry, of all qualities, all quantities. So that whatsoever I give (which is good) is but that which he hath formerly gathered out of his own Na∣ture, only with this difference, that what he gathereth is in a confused manner, clapping contraries together so abundantly, that we are not able to judge where the Predominant Quality lieth; and that which we com∣pound is so governed by Art and Reason, that we know how it should work, and we expect the event, if it be not cross'd by some greater dis∣aster. But will they bind themselves to keep the Running Horse only with Grass or Hay? They know then the end of their Labours will be loss. Nay, they will allow Corn, nay, divers Corns, some nourishing and loose∣ning, as Oats and Rye; some Astringent and Binding, as Beans; and some Fatning, breeding both Blood and Spirit, as Wheat; nay, they will allow Bread, nay, Bread of divers Compositions, and divers Mixtures, some before heat, and some after, some quick of Digestion, and some slow, And if this be not as Physical as Scourings a good Horse-man gives, I repent me that I have said any thing. Nay, these Contemners of Scourings will allow an Egg, and that mixt with other Ingredients. And for Butter and Garlick they will use it, though it be never so fulsom; the Reason is, because their knowledge can arise to no higher a Stair in Physick; and Authorised Ignorance will ever wage battel with the best Understanding; Like foolish Gallants on St. George's day, who neither having ability to buy, nor Credit to borrow a Gold Chain, scorn at them that wear them; or Martin Mar-Prelate, that not having Learning worthy of a Deacon, found no felicity, but in Railing at Divine Fathers. There are another sort of Feeders, which in a contrary extream, run beyond these into mischiefs, and those are they that ov r-scoure their Horses, and are never at Peace, but when they are giving of Portions, (which they call Scourings) sometimes with∣out cause, always without order, bringing upon an Horse such intole∣rable weakness, that he is not able to perform any violent labour. From this too little, and too much, I would have our Feeder to gather a mean; that is, first to look that his Simples be wholesom: then to the occasion, that he be sure there is foulness: And lastly, to the Estate of Body, that he may rather Augment then decrease Vigour, so shall his Work be prosperous, and his Actions without Controulment. To con∣clude, two Months I allow for Preparation, and according to that time have laid my directions. Mine humble suit is, out of a sincere Opinion to Truth and Justice, so to allow or disallow, to refrain or imitate.
The first Ordering of the Running Horse. according to the several Estates of their Bodies. This Office of the Feeder, albeit in general it belong to all Horse-men, yet in particular it is most appropriate to the Feeder of the Running-Horse; because other general Horses have a general way of Feeding, these are Artificial and Prescript from, full of Curiosity and Circum∣spection, from which whosoever errs, he shall sooner bring his Horse to destruction then perfection. You are to have regard to three Estates of a Horses Body. The first is, if he be very Fat, Foul, or either taken from Grass or Soil. The second, if he be extream Lean and poor, either through over-Riding, disorder or other infirmity. And the third, if he be in good and well-liking estate, having had good usage and moderate exercise. If he be in the first Estate of Body, you shall take longer time for his Feed, as two Months at the least: for he will ask much labour in Air∣ing, great carefulness in hearing, and discretion in Scouring, and rather a strict then liberal hand in feeding, If he be in the second Estate of Body (which is poor) then take a longer time, and let his Airings be moderate, as not before and after Sun, rather to encrease Appetite then harden Flesh, and let him have a bountiful hand in Feeding, but not so much as to cloy him. If he be in the third Estate of Body, which is a mean betwixt the other extreams, then a Month of six Weeks, or a Fort-night, or less, may be time sufficient to dyet him for his Match. Now as this Estate participates with both the former, so it would borrow from them a share in all their Orderings, that is, to be neither too early, nor too late in Airings, la∣borious, but not painful Heatings, nourishing in Scouring, and constant in a moderate way of Feeding. To have an Eye to the particular Estate of a Horses Body. Now as you regard these general Estates of Bodies, so you must have an eye to certain particular estates of Bodies. As if an Horse be Fat and Foul, yet of a free and spending Nature, apt quickly to consume and lose his Flesh, this Horse must not have so strict a Hand, neither can he en∣dure so violent Exercise as he that is of an hardy disposition, and will feed and be fat upon all Meats and all Exercises. Again, if your Horse be in extream Poverty, through disorder and mis∣usage, yet is by Nature very hard, and apt both soon to recover his Flesh, and long to hold it; then over this Horse you shall by no means hold so li∣berai a hand, nor forbear that Exercise, which is of a tender Nature, a weak Stomach, and a free Spirit, provided always you have regard to his Limbs and the Imperfections of Lameness.
The first Fortnights feeding of an Horse for Match, that is, fat, foul, or either newly taken from Grass or Soil. If you Match a Horse that is fat and foul, either by running at Grass, or standing at Soil, or any other means of Rest, or too high feeding; you shall (after his Body be emptied, and the Grass avoided, which will be within three or four days) for the first Fortnight at leust, rise early in the Morning before day, or at the spring of day according to the time of the year; and having put on his Bridle washt in Beer, and tied him up to the Rack, take away his dung and other foulness of the Stabie; then dress him well, as in The Office of the Keeper. When that Work is finished, take a fair large Body-cloth of thick House-Wives Kersie, (if it be in Winter,) or of Cotton or other light stuff (if it be in Summer,) and fold it round about his Body, then clap on the Saddle, and Girt the foremost Girt pretty streight, but the other somewhat slack, and Wisp it on each side his Heart, that both the Girts may be of equal streightness. Then put before his Breast a Breast-cloth suitable to the Body-cloth, and let it cover both his Shoulders, then take a little Beer into your Mouth, and squirt it into the Horses Mouth, and so draw him out of the Stable, and take his Back, leaving a Groom behind you to trim up the Stable to carry out your dung, and to truss up the Litter. For, you are to understand that he is to stand upon good store of dry Litter both Night and Day, and it must be Wheat-straw or Oat-straw, for Barley-straw and Rye-straw are very unwholesom and dangerous, the one doth Heart-burn, the other causeth Scouring. When you are Mounted, Rack the Horse a Foot-pace, (for you must neither Amble nor Trot, for they both hurt speed) at least a mile or two, or more, upon smooth and sound Ground, and (as near as you can) to the steepest Hills you can find; there Gallop him gently up those Hills, and rack and walk him softly down, that he may cool as much one way, as he warmeth another. And when you have thus exercised him a pretty space, and seeing the Sun begin to Rise, or else Risen, Rack down either to some fresh River, or clear Pond, and there let him drink at his pleasure. After he hath drunk bring him gently out of the water, and so Ride him a little space with all gentle∣ness, and not according to the ignorance of some Grooms, ruh him presently into a Gallop, for that brings with it two Mischiefs, either it teaches the Horse to run away with you so soon as he is watered, or else refuse to drink, fearing the violence of his Exercise which follows upon it. When you have used him a little calmly, put him into a Gallop gently, and exercise him moderately, as you did before; then walk him a little space, after offer him more water; if he drink, then Gal∣him again (after calm usage;) if he refuse, then Gallop him to
occasion thirst. And thus always give him Exercise both before and after water. When he hath drunk sufficient, bring him home gently, without a wet Hair, or any sweat about him. When you come to the Stable Door, provoke him to Piss if you can, by stirring up his Litter under him, which if he do not a little custom will make him do it, and it is a wholesom Action, both for his Health and the sweet keeping of the Stable. This done, bring him to the Stall, and Tie him up to the Rack, and Rub him well with Wisps, then loose his Breast-Cloth, and Rub his Head and Neck with a dry Cloth, then take off the Saddle and hang it by, then take his Body-Cloth and Rub him all over with it, espe∣cially his Back, where the Saddle stood. Then Cloath him up first with a Linnen-sheet, and then over that a good strong Housing-Cloth, and a∣bove it his Woollen Body-cloth, which in the Winter it is not amiss to have loyned with some Cotton, but in the Summer the Kersie is sufficient. When these are Girt about him, stop his Circingle with small Wisps very loose, for they will be the softer. His Feet stopped with Cows dung. After he is Cloathed, stop his Feet with Cows dung, then throw into the Rack a little bundle of Hay, hard bound together, and well dusted, and let him eat it, standing upon his Bridle. When he hath stood an houre upon his Bridle, take it off, and Rub his Head and Neck very well with a Rubber of Hempen Cloth, for this is good to dissolve all gross and thick Humors from the Head; Then after you have made clean the Manger, take a quart of sweet, dry, old and clean dress'd Oats, for those that are unsweet breed infirmities; Those that are moist cause swelling in the Body; Those that are New breed Wormes; And they which are half-dress'd deceive the Stomach, and bring the Horse to ruine. Though the black Oat is tolerable, yet it makes foul dung, and hinder a Mans knowledge in the state of his Body. This quart of Oats you shall dress in such a Sieve as will let a light Oat pass thorough it, and if he eat them with a good stomach, let him have another, and let him rest till e∣leven of the Clock. Then Rub his Head and Neck as before, and dress him another quart of Oats, then leave him till one of the Clock, with the Windows close, for the darker you keep him the better, and will cause him to lie down and take his rest, which otherwise he would not, therefore you are to Arm the Stable with Canvass, both for darkness, warmth, and that the filth may not come near him. Then at one of the Clock use him as you did before, and give him another quart of Oats in the same manner, making of him clean by taking away his dung, and give him a little Knob of Hay, and leave him till the Evening. At the Even∣ing come to the Stable, and having made all things clean, bridle as in the Morning, take off his Cloaths, and dress him as before. Then Cloath,
Saddle, bring him forth, and urge him to empty; Mount, rack him a∣broad, but not to the Hills, if you can find any other plain Ground, and Air him in all Points as you did in the Morning. When you have Wa∣tered and spent the Evening in Ayring, till within Night, (for nothing is more wholesom and consumeth foulness, more then early and late Ayr∣ings;) Rack him home to the Stable door, and there alight and do as you did in the Morning, both within doors and without, and so let him Rest till Nine at Night; then at Night come to him, and Rub down his Legs well with Wisps, and his Face and Neck with a clean Cloth, and turning up his Cloaths Rub all his hinder parts, then give him a quart of Oats in the same manner as you did before, and after that a little bundle of Hay; then Toss up his Litter, and make his bed soft, and leave him till the next Morning. Then the next Morning do every thing to him, without the least Omission, as hath formerly been declared, and thus keep him for the first Fortnight, which will so take away his foulness, and harden his flesh, that the next Fortnight you may adventure to give him some Heats. Object. But to Answer an Objection that may be urged, touching the quantity of Provender which is prescribed, Being but a quart at a Meal, seeing there be many Horses that will eat a larger Proportion, and to scant them to this little, were to starve, or at the best to breed weakness. Answ. I set not down this as an infallible Rule, but a President that may be imitated, yet altered at Pleasure: For I have left you this Ca∣veat, that if he eat this with a good Stomach, you may give him another, leaving the Proportion to the Feeders Discretion. Four Considerations in giving of Heats. First, That two Heats in the Week, is a sufficient proportion for any Horse of what Condition or state of Body whatsoever. That one Heat should ever be given on that day in the Week, on which he is to run his Match, as thus; Your Match-day is a Monday, your Heating-days are then Mondays and Fridays, and the Monday to be ever the sharper Heat, but because it is the day of his Match, and there are three days betwixt it and the other Heat. If the day be Tuesday, then the Heating-days are Tuesdays and Saturdays; if Wednesday, then Wednesdays and Saturdays, by reason of the Lords day; if on Thursday, then Thursdays and Mon∣days, and so of the rest. You shall give no Heat (but in case of Necessity) in Rain or foul Wea∣ther, but rather to defer houres and change times; for it is unwholesom and dangerous. And therefore in case of Showers and uncertain Wea∣ther, you shall have for the Horse a loyned Hood, with loyned Eares, and the Nape of the Neck loyned to keep out Rain, for nothing is more dan∣gerous then cold wet falling into the Ears, and upon the Nape of the Neck and Fillets.
4. And lastly, observe to give the Heats, (the Weather being season∣able) as early in the Morning as you can, that is, by the Spring of day, but by no means in the dark, for it is to the Horse both unwholesom and unpleasant, to the Man a great Testimony of folly, and to both an Act of danger and precipitation. The second Fortnights Feeding. You shall do all things as in the first Fortnight, only before you put on his Bridle, give him a Quart of Oats, then Bridle him up and dress him, as before shewed, then Cloath, Saddle, Air, Water, Exercise and bring him home, as before shewed, only you shall not put Hay into his Rack, but give it him out of your hand, handful after handful, and so leave him on his Bridle for an hour, then rub him, and after other Cere∣monies, Sift him a Quart of Oats, and set them by, then take a Loas of Bread that is three days old, and made in this manner. The First Bread. Take three Pecks of clean Beans, and one Peck of Wheat, mix them together, and grind them, and bolt it pretty sine, and Knead it up with good store of Barm and Lightning, but with as little water as may be, labour it in the Trough very well, and break it, and so cover it warm, that so it may swell, then Knead it over again, and make it up in big Loaves, and so bake it well, and let it soak soundly, and when they are drawn, turn the bottom upwards, that so they may cool. At three days old give it him, for new Bread is hurtful, when you give it him, chip it very well, and cut some of it into small Pieces, and put them into his Quart of Oats you had formerly Sifted. About eleven of the Clock give him the same quantity of Oats, and let him rest till the Afternoon. At one of the Clock in the Afternoon, if you intend not to give him a Heat that day, Feed him with Bread and Oates as you did in the Forenoon, and so consequently every Meal following for that day. But if you intend the next day to give him a Heat (to which I now bend mine aim) you shall only then give him a quart of Oats clean Sifted, but no Hay, and so let him rest till Evening. At four of the Clock give him a quart of clean Sifted Oats, and after they are eaten, Bridle him up; Dress, Cloath, Saddle, Air, Water, Ex∣ercise, bring home and order, as before shewed, only give him no Hay at all. After he hath stood an hour upon his Bridle, give him a quart of Oates, and after they are eaten put on his Head a sweet Muzzle, and let him rest till Nine at Night. The Ʋse of the Muzzle. The Use of the Muzzle being rightly made, is to keep the Horse
from eating up his Litter, from gnawing upon Boards and Mud-walls, and indeed to keep him from eating any thing but what he receiveth from your own hands, they are made sometimes of Leather, and stampt full of holes, or else close, but they are unsavoury and unwholesom. Nay, in∣deed all Leather is unpleasant. Besides, they are too close and too hot for him The best Summer Muzzle, (and indeed best at all times) is the Ner-Muzzle, made of strong Pack-thread, and knit very thick and close in the bottom, and so enlarged wider and wider upwards to the middle of the Horses Head; then bound upon the top with Tape, and on the nether side a Loop, and on the farther side a long String to fasten it to the Horfes Head. The best Winter Muzzle (and indeed tolerable at any time) is made of double Canvass, with a round Button, and a square La∣tice Window of small Tape before both his Nostrils, down to the very bottom of the Muzzle, and upward more then a handful, and must also have a Loop and a String to fasten about his Head. At Nine of the Clock at Night, give him a quart of clean Oats, and when they are eaten, put on his Muzzle, and toss up his Litter, and so leave him. The next day early give him a quart of clean Oates, rubbed between your hands with some Beer or Ale, and when he hath eaten them, Dress him and Saddle him as before, and being ready to depart, give him a new laid Egg or two, and wash his Mouth after it with Beer or Ale, and so lead him away, and at the door provoke him to empty, then Mount and Rack him gently to the Course, ever and anon making him smell an∣other Horses dung. When you are come within a Mile of the starting Post, alight and take off his Body-Cloth and Breast-Cloth, and Girt on the Saddle again; then sending away your Grooms both with those Cloaths, and other dry Cloaths to rub with, let him stay at the end of the Course till you come: then your self Rack your Horse gently up to the starting Post, and be∣yond, making him smell to that Post, (which you call the weighing Post) that he may take notice of the beginning and ending of the Course. There start your Horse roundly and sharply, at near a three quarters speed, and according to his Strength of Body, Ability of Wind, and Chearfulness of Spirit, run him the whole Course through. But by no means do any thing in extremity, or above his Wind, but when you find him a little yield, then give him a little ease, so that all he doth may be done with Pleasure, and not with Anguish; For this manner of training will make him take delight in his labour, and so encrease it: The contrary will breed discomsort, and make Exercise irksom. Also during the time you thus course him, you shall Note upon what Ground he runneth best, and whether up the Hill or down the Hill; whether on the smooth, or on the rough, on the wet or on the dry, or on the level, or the Earth some∣what Rising: and according as you find his Nature, so manage him for
your own advantage. When you have Finished the Heats, and a little slightly Galloped him up and down to Rate his Wind and chear his Spirits, you shall then (the Groom being ready) Ride into some warm Place, and with your Glassing Knife, or scraping Knife, made either of some broken Sword blade, or some old broken Sythe, or for want of that, a thin piece of old hard Oaken wood, fashioned like a long broad Knife with a sharp edge, scrape off the Sweat of your Horse in every part (But∣tocks excepted) till there will none arise, ever and anon moving him up and down: Then with dry Cloaths Rub him all over (Buttocks except∣ed) then take off his Saddle, and having Glassed his Back, and rub'd it near dry, put on his Body-Cloth and Breast-Cloth, and set on his Saddle again and Girt it, then Mount and Gallop him gently, and ever and anon Rubbing his Head, Neck and Body, as you sit, then walk him about the Fields to cool him; And when you find he drieth apace, then Rack him homewards, sometimes Racking, and sometimes Galloping; and by no means bring him to the Stable, till you find him throughly dry. When you are come to the Stable-door entice him to empty, then set him up and Tie him to the Rack, and (as having prepared it before) give him this Scouring, made in this manner. The first Scouring. Take a Pint of the Syrup of Roses, or a pint of strong Honyed-wa∣ter, and dissolve into it of Cassa, Agarick and Myrrhe, of each an ounce, and Jumble them well together in a Viol-Glass. Then being Mul'd, and made warm at the Fire, and the Horse newly come from his Heat (as be∣fore shewed) give him this Scouring, for it is a strong one, and avoideth all manner of Molten Grease and Foulness. Ordering him after his Scouring. When you have given it him, rub his Legs well, then take off his Saddle, and if his Body be dry, run slightly over it with a Curry-Comb, and after that the French Brush, and lastly, rub him all over with dry Cloaths very well, and Cloath him up very warm, and if the Weather be very cold, to throw over him a loose Blanket. He must fast full two Houres after his Scouring, not departing out of the Stable, and keep him stirring therein, for it will work the better. After he hath Fasted on the Bridle two houres, then take a Handful of Wheat-Ears, and com∣ing to him, handle the Roots of his Ears, then put your Hand under his Cloaths next to his Heart upon his Flanks, and on the nether part of his things; and if you finde any new Sweat arise, or any Coldness arise, or if you see his Body beat, or his Breast move fast, then forbear to give him any thing, for it shews there is much soulness stirred up, on which the Medicine worketh with a conquering quality; the Horse is brought
to a little Sickness, therefore in this case you shall only take off his Bridle, put on his Coller, toss up his Litter, and absent your self, (having made the Stable dark and still) for other two houres, which is the utmost end of that Sickness. But if you finde no such offence, then give him the Ears of Wheat, by three or four together, and if he eat this handful, give him another, and so another or two. Then give him a little Knob of Hay well dusted, and draw his Bridle, and rub his Head well. An hour after give him a quart of clean Oats, and put two or three handfuls of spelted Beans amongst them, and see that they be very clean, and break amongst them two or three Shives of Bread clean chipt, and so leave him for two or three houres. At Evening before you dress him, give him the like quantity of Oates, Beans and Bread, and when he hath eaten them, Bridle him, Dress and Cloath him; for you shall neither Saddle, or Air him forth, because this Evening after his Heat, the Horse being foul, and the Scouring yet working in his Body, he may not receive any cold water at all. After he is drest, and hath stood two houres on his Bridle, then wash three pints of clean Oates in Beer or Ale, and give them him, for this will inwardly cool him, as if he had drunk water After he hath eaten his washt Meat, and rested upon it a little, you shall at his feeding times with Oates and spelt Beans, or Oates and Bread, or altogether, or each several, or simply of it self, according to the liking of the Horse, feed him that night in plentiful manner, and leave a Knob of Hay in his Rack when you go to Bed. The next day early, first feed, then dress, Cloath, Saddle, Air, Water and bring home as at other times; only have a more careful eye to his empty∣ing, and see how his Grease and Foulness wasteth. At his feeding times feed as was last shewed you, only▪but little Hay, and keep your Heating-days, and the preparation of the day before, as was before shewed. Thus you shall speed the second Fortnight, in which your Horse having received four Heats, Horse-man like given him, and four Scourings, there is no doubt but his Body will be drawn inwardly clean, you shall then the third Fortnight Order him according to the Rules following. The third Fortnights Feeding. The third Fortnight you shall make his Bread Finer then it was for∣merly. As thus, The Second Bread. Take two Pecks of clean Beans, and two pecks of fine Wheat, Grind them well, and Searce them through a fine Raunge, and Knead them up with Barm and great store of Lightning, and make it up as you did the
former Bread. With this Bread after the Crust is taken away, and being old, feed your Horse, as before shewed, for this Fortnight, as you did the former, putting it amongst his Beans and Oats, observing his Dressings, Airings, Feedings, Heatings and Preparations, as in the former Fortnight, only with these differences. First, you shall not give your Heats so violently as before, but with a little more pleasure, as thus. If the first Heat have violence, the se∣cond shall have ease, and indeed none to over-strain him or to make his Body sore. Next, you shall not after his Heats, give him any more of the former Scouring, but in stead thereof, instantly upon the end of the Heat, after the Horse is a little cooled and cloathed up; and in the same place where you Rub him, give him a Ball as big as a Hens Egg, of that Con∣fection which is mentioned in the Office of the Farrier, and goeth by this Title, The true Manner of Making those Cordial Balls, which Cure any vio∣lent Cold, or Glanders, which, &c. The fourth and last Fortnights Feeding. The fourth and last Fortnight you shall make your Bread much Finer then either of the former. The last and best Bread. Take three Pecks of fine Wheat, and one Peck of Beans, Grind them on the black Stones, and boult them through the finest Boulter you can get, then Knead it up with sweet Ale, Barm, and new strong Ale and the Barm beaten together, and the Whites of twenty or thirty Eggs; But in any wise no Water at all, but in stead thereof some small quantity of New Milk, then work it up. Bake it and Order it as the former. With this Bread, having the Crnst cut clean away, and with Oats well Sunned, Beaten and Rubbed between your Hands, then new Winnowed, Sifted and Dress'd, with the purest spelt Beans, and some fine Chiltern Wheat, with any Simple, or any Compound, feed your Horse at his Feeding times, as in the Fort∣night last mentioned. You shall keep your Heating-days the first Week or Fortnight, but the last Week you shall forbear one Heat, and not give any five days before the Match-day, only you shall give him strong and long Air∣ings. You shall not need this Fortnight to give him any Scouring at all. If this Fortnight Morning and Evening, you burn the best Frankincense in your Stable, you shall finde it exceeding wholesom for him, and he will take wonderful delight therein. In this Fortnight, when you give him any washt Meat, wash it in
the Whites of Eggs, or Muskadine, for that is most wholesom and less Pursie. This Fortnight give him no Hay, but what he taketh out of your hand after his Heats, and that in little quantity, and clear dusted. The last Week of this Fortnight, if the Horse be a foul Feeder, you must use the Muzzle continually; but if he be a clean Feeder, then three days before the Match is sufficient. The Morning, the day before your Match, feed well both before and after Airing, and water as at other times, before Noon and after Noon, scant his Portion of Meat a little; before and after Evening Airing, feed as at Noon, and Water as at other times, but be sure to come home before Sun-set. Late at Night feed as you did in the Evening, and give him what he liketh, according to his stomach, only as you can, forbear Bread and Beans. This day you shall Coul your Horse, Shoo him, and do all extraordi∣nary things of Ornament about him, provided that you do not give him offence to hinder his Feeding or Resting; For I have heard some Horse∣men say, that when they had shod their Horses with light Shoos, the Night before the Course, that their Horse hath taken such notice thereof, that they have refused to eat, or lie down. But you must understand, that those Horses must be old, and long Experienced in this Exercise, or else they cannot reach these subtil apprehensions. But to pass by Curiosity, as plating of Tails, and all other unnecessary Ornaments, whereby they do injury to the Horse, I shall advise you for necessary and indifferent things, that they be done the day before, then in the Morning of the Course, because I would have him that Morning find neither trouble nor vexation. The next Morning (which is the Match-day) come to him very early, and take off his Muzzle, Rub his Head well, right his Cloaths, and give them ease by wisping and using the plain Circingle, then give him a pretty quantity of Oats washed in Muscadine, or the Whites of Eggs, or if he refuse them, try him with fine dress'd Oats, mixt with Wheat, or Oates simple; when he hath eaten them, if he be a slow emptier, walk him abroad, and in the places where he uses to empty, there entice him to empty, which when he hath done, bring him home and let him rest till you have warning to make ready. But if he be a free Emptier, let him lie quiet. When you have warning to make ready, take off his Muzzle, and put on his Snassle well washed in Muscadine, but before you Bridle him (if you think him to empty) give him three or four Mouths full of washed
Meat last spoken of, then Bridle him up and dress him, and after pitch the Saddle and Girts with Cordwainers Wax, set it on and girt it gently, so as he may have feeling, but no straitness; then lay a clean Sheet over the Saddle, over it his ordinary Cloaths, then his Body-cloth and Breast-cloth, and wisp him round with soft Wisps, then if you have a Counterpane, or Cloth of state for bravery sake, let it be fastened above all. Being now ready to draw out, give him half a pint of Muscadine, and so lead away. In all your Leadings upon the Course, use gentle and calm Motions, suf∣fering him to smell upon any Dung, and in especial places of advantage, as where you find Rushes, long Grass lying, Heath or the like, walk in and entice him to Piss. But if you find no such help, then in especial places on the Course, and chiefly towards the latter end, and having used the same means before, break some of the Wisps under him, and entice him to piss. Also in your leading, if any white or thick foam or froth rise about the Horses Mouth, with a clean Handkerchief wipe it away, and carrying a Bottle of clean water about you, wash his Mouth now and then with it. When you come to the place of streight, before you uncloath, rub or chase his Legs with hard Wisps; then pick his Feet, uncloath, wash his Mouth with water, Mount his Rider, start fair, and leave the rest to Gods good Will and Pleasure. Certain Observations and Advantages for every Feeder to observe in sundry Accidents. There is no unreasonable Creature of Pleasure subject to so many dis∣asterous chances of Fortune, as the Horse, and especially the Running Horse, both by reason of the multiplicity of diseases belonging unto them, as also the violence of their Exercise, and the nice tenderness of their keep∣ing: and therefore it behooveth every Feeder to be Armed with such Ob∣servations as may concern Mischiefs, and those Helps which may amend them when they happen. Of Meat and Drink. The first Observation that I shall Arm the Feeder withal, is the true di∣stribution of Meat and Drink. Let him observe, if there be any Meat, Drink or other Nourishment which you know to be good for him, yet he refuseth it; in this case you are not to thrust it violently upon him, but by gentle means and cunning enticements win him thereunto, tempting him when he is most hungry, and most dry; and if he get but a bit at a time, it will soon encrease to a greater quantity, and ever let him have less then he desireth; and that the sooner he may be brought unto it, mix the Meat he loveth best with that
he loveth worst, till both be made alike familiar, and so shall the Horse be a stranger to nothing that is good and wholesom. Observations for Lameness. Our Feeder must observe, if his Horse be subject to Lameness or Stiff∣ness, to surbate or tenderness of Feet, then to give him his Heat upon smooth Carpet Earth, or to forbear strong Ground, hard High-ways, cross Ruts and Furrows, till extremity compel him. Observations from the State of his Body. Our Feeder must observe, that the strongest state of Body, (which I account the highest and fullest of Flesh, so it be good, hard, and without inward foulness) to be the best and ablest for the performance of these Wagers; yet herein he must take two Considerations; the one the Shape of the Horse Body, the other his Inclination and manner of Feeding. For the Shape of his Body. There be some Horses that are round, plump and close knit together, so that they will appear Fat and well Sha∣ped, when they are lean and in poverty. Others are raw-boned, slender and loose knit together, and will appear lean and deformed, when they are Fat, foul and full of gross Humours. From his Inclination. So likewise for their Inclination, some Horses (at the first) will feed outwardly, and carry a thick Rib, when they are inwardly lean as may be. There be others that will appear lean to the Eye, when they are on∣ly Grease. In this case the Feeder hath two Helps to advantage his know∣ledge, the one outward, the other inward. From his outward Handling. The outward Help, is the outward Handling and feeling the Horses Body, generally over all his Ribs, but particularly upon his short and hin∣dermost Ribs. If his Flesh generally handle soft and loose, and the Fingers sink into it as into Doun, then is he foul without all question; but if generally it be hard and firm, only upon the hindermost Rib is softness, then he hath grease and foul matter within him, which must be avoided, how lean and poor soever he appear in outward speculation. The inward Help is only sharp Exercise, and strong Scouring; the  will dissolve the foulness, the latter will bring it away.
Observations from the Privy Parts. Our Feeder must observe his Horses Stones, for if they hang down Side, or low from his Body, then is he out of lust and heart, and is either sick of Grease, or other foul humours; but if they lie close, couched up, and hid in a small room, then he is Healthful and in good plight. Observations for the Limbs. Our Feeder must observe ever the Night before he runs any Match, or fore heat, to bathe his Legs well, from the Knees and Gambrels down∣wards, either with clarified Dogs-grease, (which is the best) or Trotters Oyl (which is the next;) or else the best Hogs-grease, which is sufficient, and to work it well in with your hands, and not with Fire. For what he gets not in the first Night, will be got in the next Morning, and what is not got in the next Morning, will be got when he comes to uncloath at the end of the Course: So that you shall need to use the Ointment but once, but the rubbing as often as you finde opportunity. Observations for Water. Our Feeder shall observe, that albeit I give no directions for Watering him after the Hs, yet he may in any of the latter Fortnights (finding him clean, and his grease consumed,) somewhat late at Night, as about six of the Clock, give him water in reasonable quantity, being made luke∣warm, and fasting an houre af er it. Also if through the unseasonable∣ness of the Weather, you cannot water abroad, then you shall at your wa∣tering houres water in the house, with warm water, as aforesaid. If you throw a handful of Wheat-Meal, Bran or Oat-meal finely powdred (but Oat-meal is the best) into the water, it is very wholesom. Observations for the Ground to run in. Our Feeder shall observe, that if the Ground whereon he is to Run his Match, be dangerous and apt for mischievous Accidents, as strains, over∣reaches, Sinew-bruises and the like, that then he is not bound to give all his Heats thereon; but having made him acquainted with the Nature thereof, then either to take part of the Course, as a Mile, two or three, according to the goodness of the Ground, and so to run him forth, and a∣gain (which we call turning Heats) provided always that he end his Heat at he weighing Post, and that he make not his Course less, but rather
more in quantity then that he must run. But if for some special Cases, he like no part of the Course, then he may many times (but not ever) give his heat upon any other good Ground, about any spacious and large Field, where the Horse may lay down his Body and run at Pleasure. Observations from Sweat. Our Feeder shall take especial regard in all Airings, Heatings, and all manner of Exercises whatsoever, to the Sweating of the Horse, and the occasions of his Sweating; as if he Sweat upon little or no occasion, as walking a Foot-pace, standing still in the Stable, and the like, it is then apparent that the Horse is faint, foul sed, and wanteth Exer∣cise. If upon good occasion, as strong Heats, great Labour, and the like, he Sweat, yet his Sweat is white Froth, and like Sope-suds, then is the Horse inwardly foul, and wanteth also Exercise. But if the Sweat be black, and as it were only water thrown upon him, without any frothiness, then is he clean sed, in good lust and good case, and you may Adventure Riding with∣out danger. Observations from the Hair. Our Feeder shall observe his Hair in general, but especially his Neck, and those Parts that are uncovered, and if they lie slick, smooth and close, and hold the Beauty of their natural colour, then is he in good case; but if they be Rough or staring, or if they be discoloured, then is he inwardly cold at the Heart, and wanteth both Cloaths and warm keep∣ing. Many other Observations there are, but these are most material, and I hope sufficient for any Understanding. The Office of the Ambler. Observations in Ambling. THere is not any Motion in a Horse more desired, more useful, nor indeed more hard to be obtained unto by a right way, then the Mo∣tion of Ambling; and yet (if we will believe the Protestations of the Pro∣fessors)
not any thing in all the Art of Horsemanship more easie, or more several ways to be effected, every man conceiving to himself a several Me∣thod, and all those Methods held as infallible Maximes, that can never fail in the Accomplishment of the Work. Mens Opinions and Errors. But they which know truths, know the Errors in these Opinions, for albeit every man that hath hardly a smell of Horsemanship, can discourse of a way how to make a Horse Amble, yet when they come to the Perform∣ance of the Motion, their failings are so great, and their errors so gross, that for mine own part, I never yet saw an exact Ambler, I confess some one man may make a Horse Amble well and perfectly, nay, more then one, peradventure many, and thereby assume unto himself the name of Perfection, yet such a man have I seen erre grossly, and spoil more then his labour was able to recompence. But leaving Mens Errors, because they are past my Reformation, I will only touch at some special Observations, which in mine Opinion I hold to be the easiest, the certainest and readiest for the effecting of this work, and withal glance at those absurdities, which I have seen followed, though to little purpose, and less benefit, Ambling by the Plowed Field. There is one commends the new Plowed Lands, and affirms, that by toyling the Horse thereon in his Foot-pace, there is no way so excellent for the making of him Amble; but, he forgets what weakness, nay, what Lameness, such disorderly toyl brings to a young Horse, nay, to any Horse; because the Work cannot be done without weariness, and no weariness is wholesom. Ambling by the Gallop. Another will teach his Horse to Amble from the Gallop, by sudden stopping, a more sudden choking him in the Cheeks of the Mouth, thrust∣ing him into such an amazedness betwixt his Gallop and his Trot, that lo∣sing both he cannot choose but find out Ambling. But this Man forgets not alone the Error before spoken (which is too great toil) but also spoils a good Mouth, (if the Horse had one,) loses a good Rein (if there were any,) and by over-reaching and clapping one Foot against another, endangers upon every step an Hoof-breach or Sinew∣strain. Ambling by Weights. Another says there is no better way then Ambling by Weights, and
thereupon overloads his Horse with unmerciful Shooes of intolerable Weight, and forgets how they make him enterfere, strike short with his Hind-feet, and though his Motion be true, yet is to slow, that it is not worth his Labour. Another solds great Weights of Load about his Feet∣lock Pasterns, and forgets that they have all the Mischiefs of the former; besides, the endangering of incurable Strains, the crushing of the Crownet, and the Breeding of Ring-bones, Crown-scabs and Quitter-bones. Another Loads his Horse upon the Fillets with Earth, Load, or some other Massy substance, and forgets the swaying of the Back, the over straining of the Fillets, and a general disabling of all the hinder parts. Ambling in Hand, or not ridden. Another struggles to make his Horse Amble in his Hand, before he Mounts his Back, by the help of some Wall, smooth Pail or Rail, and by Chocking him in the Mouth with the Bridle Hand, and Correcting him with his Rod on the hinder Hoofs, and under the Belly, when he treadeth false, and never remembers in what desperate frantickness it drives an Horse, before he can make him understand his meaning, as Plauging. Rearing, Sprauling out his Legs, and using a World of Atick Postures, which once setled, are hardly ever after reclaimed; besides, when he hath spent all his labour, and done his utmost, as soon as he Mounts his Back, he is as sar to seek of his Pace as if he had never known such a Motion. Ambling by the Help of Shooes. Another finds out a new Stratagem, and in despight of all opposition in the Horse, will make him Amble perfectly, and thereupon he makes him a pair of hinder Shooes, with long Spurnes or Plates before the Toes, and of such length, that if the Horse offer to Trot, the hinder-Foot beats the fore-Foot before it. But he forgets that the Shooes are made of Iron, and the Horses Legs of Flesh and Blood, neither doth he remember with what violence the hinder-Foot follows the fore-Foot, nor that every stroke it gives can light upon any place but the Back-Sinews, then which there is no part more tender, nor any wound that brings such incurable Lame∣ness. Ambling by the Help of fine Lists. Another (out of quaintness more then strong Reason) strives to make his Horse Amble by taking of fine soft Lists, and solding them streight about the Cambrels, in that place where you Garter an Horse for a sti∣strain, and then turn him to Grass for a Fortnight, or more, in which time (saith he) he will fall to a perfect Amble, (for it is true, he cannot Trot but with pain, then taking away the Lists, the Work is finished.
But under the Correction of the Professors of this foreign trick, for it is a Spanish Practice; I must assure them, that if they gain their purpose, they must offend the Members; If they hurt not the Limbs, they lose their la∣bour; but however, this is most assured, that the Amble thus gained, must be disgraceful, or Ambling and cringing in the hinder Parts, without come∣liness, speed or clear deliverance. Ambling by the Hand only. Another (and he calls himself the Master Ambler of all Amblers) af∣firms, there is no true way of making an Horse to Amble, but by the Hand only, and I am of this opinion, could this secret be sound out, or could a Man make a Horse do all that he imagined; but Horses are Rebellious, and Men are furious, and the least of either of these spoils the whole Work; and it is impossible for any Man to adge an Horse to a new Motion, utterly unknown, against which he will not resist with his uttermost power. Be∣sides, to do this Action with the Hand only, it must only be done from the Horses Mouth, and that Mouth must of necessity be altered from his first manner of Riding; for to use all one Hand must preserve all one Motion, and then where is his Ambling, which was not known at the first Backing? Again, we strive at the first Backing of an Horse, to bring his Mouth to all sweetness, his Rein to all Stateliness, and the general carriage of his Body to all Comeliness. Now in this course of Ambling by the Hand on∣ly, the Mouth must be changed from the Chaps to the Weks o the Mouth, which is from sweetness to harshness, his Rein must be brought from con∣stancy to unconstancy; for the Eyes that did look upward, the Nose and Muzzle which was couched Inward, must be turned outward, and the ge∣neral comeliness of the Bodies Carriage must be brought to disorder and false treading; or else he shall never Accomplish the true Art of Ambling by the Hand only. Ambling by the Tramel. There is another, (I will not call him the best,) because his Error may be as great as any) and he will make his Horse Amble by the help of the Tramel only, which I confess is nearest, the best and most assured way, yet he hath many Errours, as followeth. Errors in the Tramel. First, he loseth himself in the want of knowledge, for the length of the Tramel, and either he makes it too long, (which gives no stroke,) or too short, (which gives a false stroke) the first makes an Horse hackle and shuffle his Feet confusedly, the latter makes him Roul and Twitch up his
hinder Feet so suddenly, that by Custom it brings him to a string-halt, from which he will hardly be recovered ever after. Another loses him∣self and his labour by misplacing the Tramel, and out of a Niceness to seem more expert then he is, or out of fearfulness to prevent falling (to which the Tramel is subject) places them above the Knee, and above the hinder Foot-hoof. But the Rule is neither good nor handsom; for if the Tramel be too long or loose, that is, gives no offence to the Sinews, and other ligaments, about which they must necessarily be bound, when they are raised so high, then they can give no true stroke, neither can the fore-Leg compel the hinder to follow it. And if they be so short or streight, that the fore-Leg cannot step forward, but the hinder must go equal with it, then will it so press the main Sinew of the hinder-Leg, and the Veins and Fleshy part of the sore-Thighs, that the Horse will not be able to go without halting before, and cringing and crambling his hinder-parts so ill∣favouredly, that it will be irksom to behold it; besides, it will occasion Sweatings, and draw down humours, which will be more noisom then the Pace will be beneficial. Another makes his Tramel of such course and hard stuff, or else Girts it so streight, or leaves it fretting up and down so loose, that he Galls his Horses Legs, and leaves neither Hair nor Skin upon them, at the best it leaves such a soul print and mark upon the Legs, that every one will ac∣cuse both the Horse and his Teacher of disgrace and indiscretion. As these, so I must conclude with the last Error of the Tramel, which is Mens Opinions, and though it be the most insufficient, yet it hath the greatest power to over-sway Truth, and that is, the Tramel is utterly un∣necessary and unprofitable, and the Defender worthy of no Employment, alledging the Land only to be excellent. The rrors I have already confuted; it now remains (after all these faults finding, that I shew the truest, easiest, and that way which is most uncontroulable for the making of an Horse to Amble, with all the grace∣fulness and perfection that can be required. The best way to Amble an Horse. When you are about to make an Horse Amble truly, and without con∣troulment. First, try with your Hand by a gentle and deliberate racking and thrusting of the Horse forward, by helping him in the Weeks of his Mouth with your Snaffle, (which must be smooth, big and full) and cor∣recting him first on one side, then on another with the Calves of your Legs, and sometimes with the Spur, if you can make him of himself strike into an Amble, though shuffling disorderly, there will be much labour sa∣ved; for that procivity or aptness to Amble, will make him with more easiness and less danger, endure the use of the Tramel, and make him find the Motion without stumbling or amazement: but if you finde he
will by no means either apprehend the Motions or Intentions, then struggle not with him, but fall to the use of the Tramel in this manner following. The Form of the Tramel. But before I come to the Use and Vertue thereof, I will shew you the form and substance whereof it ought to be made; because nothing hath ever done this Instrument more Injury, then false Substances and false Shapes. Therefore some make these Tramels of all Leather, and they will either reach or break, the first marrs the Work by uncertainty, the other loseth the labour. Another makes it of Canvass, and that galls. A third makes it of strong Lists, and that hath all the faults of both the former, for the softness will not let it lie close, and the gentleness makes it stretch out of all compass, or break upon every stumble. And as these, so there are a World of other useless Tramels, for you must understand, that touching the true Tramel, the Side-Ropes must be firm without yield∣ing an hair: The Hose must be soft, lie close, and not move from his first place, and the Back-band must be flat, no matter how light, and so de∣fended from the Fillets, that it may not gall. And this Tramel must be thus made, and of these Substances. First, for the Side-Ropes, they must be made of the best, finest and strongest Pack-thread, such as your Turky-thread, and turned by the Roper into a delicate strong Cord, yet at the utmost, not above the bigness of a small Jack-line, with a Noose at each end, so strong as is possible to be made; neither must these Side-Ropes be twined too hard, but gentle, and with a yielding condition, for that will bring on the Motion more easie, and keep the Tramel from breaking, now these Side-Ropes must be just thirty six Inches in length, and so equal one with another, that no difference may be espied. For the Horse which must be placed in the small of the Fore-leg, and the small of the hinder-Leg, above the Feet lock, they must be made of fine Girt-Web, which is soft and pliant, and loyned with double Cotton: Over the Girt-Web must be fastened strong Tabbs of white Neats Lea∣ther well Tallowed, and suited to an even length, and stamped with holes of equal distance, which shall pass through the Nooses of the Side▪Ropes, and be made longer or shorter at pleasure, with very strong Buckles. These Hose, the Girt would be four Inches in length, and the Tabbs ten. The Back-band being of no other use but to bear up the Side Ropes, would (if you Tramel all the fore-Legs) be made of fine Girt Web, and oyned with Cotton; but if you Tramel but one side, then an ordinary Tape will serve, being sure that it carries the side-Ropes in an even Line, without either Rising or falling; for if it rise, it shortens the side-Rope, and if it falls, it endangers tangling.
Thus you see what the true Tramel is, and how to be made; touching the use, it thus followeth. The true Ʋse of the true Tramel. When you have brought your Horse into an even smooth Path, without Rubs or roughness, you shall there loose the near fore-Leg, and the near hinder-Leg, then put to them the side-Rope, and see that he stand at that just proportion which Nature her self hath formed him, without ei∣ther straining or enlarging his Members, and in that even and just length, stay the side-Rope by a small Tape fastened up to the Saddle. Then with your hand on the Bridle, straining his Head, put him gently forward, and if need be, have the help of a by-stander to put him forward also, and so force him to Amble up and down the Road, with all the Gentleness you can, suffering him to take his own leisure, that thereby he may come to an understanding of his restraint, and your Will for the Performance of the Motion, and though he snapper or stumble, or peradventure fall now and then, yet it matters not, do you only stay his Head, give him leave to Rise, and with all gentleness put him forward again, till finding his own fault, and understanding the Motion, he will become perfect, and Amble in your Hand to your contentment. And that this may be done with more ease and less amazement to the Horse, it is not amiss (at his first Tramel∣ing) that you give your Side-Ropes more length then ordinary, both that the Twitches may be less sudden, and Motion coming more gently, the Horse may sooner apprehend it. But as soon as he comes to any perfectness, then instantly put the Side-Ropes to their true length. For an Inch too long, is a Foot too slow in the Pace; and an Inch too short causeth Rouling, a Twitching up of the Legs, and indeed a kind of plain Halting. When to alter the Tramel. When the Horse will thus Amble in your Hand perfectly, being Tra∣melled on one side, you shall then change them to the other side, and make him Amble in your hand as you did before. And thus you shall do, chan∣ging from one side to another, till with this half▪Tramel he will Run and Amble in your hand, without snappering or stumbling, both readily and swiftly; when this is attained unto, which cannot be above two or three houres labour, (if there be any tractableness) you may then put on the whole Tramel, and the broad, flat back Band, Trameling both sides equally, and so Run him in your hand (at the utmost length of the Bridle) up and down the Road divers times, then pause, cherish, and to it again; and thus apply him, till you have brought him to that Perfection, that he will Amble swiftly, truly and readily, when, where, and how you please; then
put him upon uneven and uncertain ways, as up-hill and down-hill, where there are clots and roughness, and where there is hollowness and false treading. When to Mount his Back. Now when he is perfect in your Hand upon all these, you may then ad∣venture to Mount his Back, which (if you please) you may first do by a Boy, or Groom; making the Horse Amble under him, whilest you stay his Head to prevent danger, or to see how he striketh. Then after Mount your self, and with all gentleness and lenity, encreasing his Pace more and more, till you come to the height of Perfection. And thus as you did be∣fore in your Hand, so do now on his Back, first with the whole Tramel, then with the half, and changing the Tramel oft, first from one side, then to another, then altering Grounds, till you finde that exquisiteness which you desire, and this must be done by daily exercise and labour, as twice, thrice, sometimes oftner in the day. When to Journey. When you have obtained your Wish in the Perfection of his stroke, the nimbleness of his Limbs, and the good carriage of his Head and Body, you may then take away the Tramel altogether, and exercise him without it. But this ExerciseI would have upon the High-way, (and not Horse∣courser like) in a private smooth Road, for that affords but a cousening Pace, which is left upon every small weariness; therefore take the High-way forward for three, four or five miles in a Morning, more or less, as you finde his aptness and ability. Now if in this journeying, either through weariness, ignorance or peevishness, you finde in him a willing∣ness to forsake his Pace, then (ever carrying in your Pocket the half Tra∣mel) alight and put them on, and so exercise him in them, and now and then give him ease, bring him home in his true Pace. This Exercise you shall follow day by day; and every day increasing it more and more, till you have brought him from one mile to many; which done, you may then give him ease, as letting him rest a day or two, or more, and then apply him again; and if you finde in him neither errour nor alteration, then you may conclude your Work is finished. But if any alteration do happen (as many phantastick Horses are subject unto,) if it be in the motion of his Pace, then with your hand reform it. But if that fail, then the use of the half-Tramel will never fail you. Now if the Error proceed from any other occasion, look seriously into the cause thereof, and taking that away the effect will soon cease; for you are to understand, that in this manner of teaching him to Amble, you
are forbidden no help whatsoever which belongs unto Horsemanship, as Chain, Cavezan, Musroul, Head-strain, Martingale, Bit, or any other ne∣cessary Instrument, because this Motion is not drawn from the Mouth, but from the Limbs. Many things else might be spoken on this subject, but it would but load paper, and weary Memory; and I am only at short Essays, and true Expe∣riments, therefore take this as sufficient. The Office of the Buyer, wherein is shewed all the Perfections and Imperfections that are or can be in a Horse. Observations and Advertisements for any Man when he goes about to buy an Horse. THERE is nothing more difficult in all the Art of Horsemanship, then to set down constant and uncontroulable Resolutions, by which to bind every Mans Minde to an unity of Consent in the buying of an Horse; for, according to the old Adage, What is one Mans Meat, is another Mans Poison; What one affects, another dislikes. But to proceed according to the Rule of Reason, the Precepts of the Ancients, and the Modern Pra∣ctice of our conceived Opinions, I will as briefly as I can, (and the rather, because it is a labour I never undertook in this wise before) shew you those Observations and Advertisements which may fortifie you in any hard E∣lection. The End for which to buy. First, therefore you are to observe, that if ou Elect an Horse for your Hearts Contentment, you must consider the end and purpose for which you buy him, as whether for the Wars, Running, Hunting, Travelling, Draught or Burthen, every one having their several Characters, and their several Faces both of Beauty and Uncomeliness. But because there is but one Truth and one Perfection, I will under the Description of the perfect and untainted Horse, shew all the Imperfections and Attaindures, which either Nature or Mischance can put upon him of greatest deformity. Let me then advise you that intend to buy an Horse, to acquaint your self with all the true Shape; and Excellencies which belong to an Horse,
whether it be in his natural and true Proportion, or in any accidental or outward increase or decrease of any Limb or Member, and from their Contraries, to gather all things whatsoever that may give dislike or offence. Election how divided. To begin therefore with the first Principle of Election, you shall un∣derstand they are divided into two especial Heads, the one General, the other particular. The General Rule. The General Rule of Election is, First, the End for which you buy; Then his Breed or Generation, his Colour, his Pace, and his Stature; These are said to be General, because they have a general dependence up∣on every Mans several opinions, as the first, which is the End for which you buy, it is a thing shut up only in your own bosome. Of Breed. The other, which is Breed, you must either take it from faithful report, your own knowledge, or from some known and certain Characters, by which one strain, or one Countrey is distinguished from another, as the Neapolitan is known by his Hawk-Nose, the Spaniard by his small Limbs, the Barbary by his fine Head and deep Hoof, the Dutch by his rough Legs, the English by his general strong knitting together, and so forth of divers others. Of Colour. As for his Colour, though there is no Colour exempt from goodness, for I have seen good of all, yet there are some better reputed then others, as the Dapple Grey for Beauty, the Brown Bay for Service, the Black with Silver Hairs for Courage, and the Liard and true mixt Roan for Counte∣nance. As for the Sorrel, the Black without White, and the unchangeable Iron Grey, are reputed Cholerick; the bright Bay, the Flea-bitten, and the Black with white Marks, are Sanguinists; the Black, White, Yellow, Dun, Kite-glewed and the Py-bald, are Phlegmatick; and the Chesnut, the Mouse dun, the Red Bay, the blew Grey, are Melancholy. Pace▪ as Trotting. Now for his Pace, which is either Trot, Amble, Rack or Gallop, you must Refer it to the end also for which you buy; as if it be for the Wars, Running, Hunting, or your own Pleasure, then the Trot is most tolerable, and this Motion you shall know by a Cross Moving of the Horses Limbs,
as when the fore-Leg, and the near Hinder-Leg, or the near fore-Leg, and the far Hinder-Leg move and go forward in one instant. And in this Motion, the nearer the Horse taketh his Limbs from the Ground, the opener, the evener and the shorter is his Pace; for to take up his Feet slovenly, shews stumbling and lameness; To tread narrow or cross, shews enter∣fering or failing; to step uneven, shews toil and weariness, and to tread long, shews over-reaching. Ambling. Now if you Elect for Ease, great Persons Seats, or long Travel, then Ambling is required. And this Motion is contrary to Trotting, for now both the Feet on one side must move equally together, that is, the far sore-Leg, and the far hinder-Leg, and the near fore-Leg, and the near hinder-Leg. And this Motion must go just, large, smooth and nimble; for to tread false, takes away all ease; to tread short, rids no Ground; to tread rough, shews rouling; and to tread un-nimbly shews a false Pace that ne∣ver continueth, as also Lameness. Racking. If you Elect for Buck-Hunting, Galloping on the High-way Post, Hack∣ney, or the like, then a racking Pace is required: and this Motion is the same that Ambling is, only it is in a swifter time, and a shorter tread; and though it rid not so much ground, yet it is a little more easie. Galloping. Now to all these Paces must be joyned a good Gallop, which naturally every Trotting and Racking Horse hath; the Ambler is a little unapt thereunto, because the Motions are both one, so that being put to a great∣er swiftness of Pace then formerly he hath been acquainted withal, he handles his Legs confusedly, and out of order, and being trained gently, and made to understand the Motion, he will as well undertake it as any Trotting Horse whatsoever. Now in a good Gallop you are to observe these Vertues. First, that the Horse which taketh up his Feet nimbly from the Ground, but doth not raise them high, that neither rouleth nor beat∣eth himself, that stretcheth out his fore-Legs, follows nimbly with his hinder, and neither cuteth under his Knee, (which is called the swift cut) nor crosseth, nor claps one Foot on another, and ever leadeth with his far fore-Foot, and not with the near, he is said ever to Gallop comely and most true, and he is the fittest for speed, or any swift Employment. If he Gallop round, and raise his fore-Feet, he is then said to Gallop strongly, but not swiftly, and is fittest for the great Saddle, the Wars and strong Encounters; If he Gallop slow, yet sure he will serve for the High-way, but if he labour his Feet confusedly, and Gallop painfully, then is he good for no Galloping Service; besides, it shews some hidden Lameness.
His Stature. Lastly, touching his Stature, it must be referred to the end for which you buy, ever observing that the biggest and strongest are fittest for strong occasions, and great Burthens, strong Draughts, and double Carriage, the middle Size for Pleasure and general Emploiments; and the least for Ease, Street-Walks, and Summer-Hackney. The particular Rule. Now touching the particular Rule of Election, it is contained in the discovery of natural deformities, accidental outward Sorrances, or in∣ward hidden Mischiefs, which are so many and so infinite, that it is a World of Work to explain them, yet for satisfaction sake, I will in as methodical manner as I can, shew what you are to observe in this occasion. How to stand to View. When a Horse is brought unto you to buy (being satisfied for his Breed, his Pace, Colour and Stature,) then see him stand naked before you, and placing your self before his Face, take a strict View of his Countenance, and the chearfulness thereof; for it is an excellent Glass wherein to be∣hold his Goodness and best Perfections. As thus, His Ears. If his Ears be small, thin, sharp, short, pricked and moving; or if they be long, yet well set on, and well carried, it is a Mark of Beauty, Good∣ness and Mettle: but if they be thick, laved or lolling, wide set and un∣moving, then are they signs of dulness, doggedness and evil Nature. His Face. If his Face be lean, his Forehead swelling outward, the Mark or Feather in his Face set high, as above his Eyes, or at the top of his Eyes, if he have a white Star, or white Ratch of an indifferent Size, and even placed, or a white Snip on his Nose or Lip; all are Marks of Beauty and Goodness. But if his Face be Fat, Cloudy or Skouling, his Forehead flat as a Tren∣cher, (which we call Mare-faced) for the Mark in his Forehead stand low, as under his Eyes; If his Star or Ratch stand awry, or in an evil posture, or instead of a Snip, his Nose be raw and un-hairy, or his Face generally bald, all are signs of deformity. His Eyes. If his Eyes be round, big, black, shining, starting or staring from his Head, if the black of the Eye fill the Pit or outward Circumference, so that in the moving, none (or very little) of the White appeareth, all are signes of Beauty, Goodness, and Material; but if his Eyes be uneven, and
of a wrinkled proportion, if they be little (which we call Pig-Eyed) both are uncomely signes of Weakness; if they be red and fiery, take heed of Moon-Eyes, which is next door to Blindness; if white and walled, it shews a weak Sight and unnecessary starting or finding of Buggards; if with white Specks, take heed of the Pearl, Pin and Web; if they water or shew bloody, it shews bruises; and if any Matter, they shew old over-Ri∣ding, festered Rheums, or violent strains. If they look dead or dull, or are hollow, or much sunk, take heed of Blindness at the best. The Best is of an old decrepit Generation: if the Black fill not the Pit, but the white is always appearing, or if in moving, the White and Black be seen in equal quantity, it is a sign of weakness and a dogged disposition. His Cheeks and Chaps. If in handling his Cheeks or Chaps, you find the Bones lean and thin, the space wide between them, the Thropple or Wind-Pipe big as you can Gripe, and the void place without Knots or Kernels; and generally the Jaws so great, that the Neck seemeth to couch within them, they are excel∣lent Signes of great Wind, Courage and Soundness of Head and Body. But if the Chaps be sat and thick, the space between them closed up with gross Substance, and the Thropple little, all are Signes of short Wind, and much inward foulness. If the void place be full of Knots and Kernels, take heed of the Strangle or Glaunders, at the best, the Horse is not with∣out a foul Cold. If his Jaws be so streight that his Neck swelleth above them, if it be no more then natural, it is only an uncomely Sign of short Wind, and Pursiness or Grossness; but if the Swelling be long, and close by his Chaps like a Whet-stone, then take heed of the Vives, or some o∣ther unnatural Impostume. His Nostrils and Muzzle. If his Nostrils be open, dry, wide and large; so as upon any straining the inward redness is discovered, and if his Muzzle be small, his Mouth deep, and his Lips equally Meeting, then all are good Signes of Wind, Health and Courage. But if his Nostrils be streight, his Wind is little; if his Muzzel is gross, his Spirit i dull; if his Mouth be shallow, he will never carry a Bit well; and if his upper Lip will not reach his nether, old Age or Infirmity hath Marked him for Carrion. If his Nose be moist and dropping, if it be clear water, it is a Cold; if soul Matter, then be∣ware of Glaunders: if both Nostrils run, it is hurtful; but if one, then most dangerous. His Teeth. Touching his Teeth and their Vertues, they are set down in a par∣ticular
Chapter; onely remember, you never buy an Horse that wanteth any, for as good lose all almost as one. His Breast. From his Head look down to his Breast, and see that it be broad, out∣swelling, and Adorned with many Features; for that shews strength and durance. The little Breast is uncomely, and shews weakness, the narrow Breast is apt to stumble, fall and enterfere before; the Breast that is hidden Inward, and wanteth the Beauty and division of many Feathers, shews a weak Armed Heart, and a Breast that is unwilling and unfit for any vi∣olent toyl or strong labour. His Fore-Thighs. Next look down from his Elbow to his Knees, and see that those Fore-Things be rush-grown, well horned within, Sinewed, Fleshy, and out∣swelling, for they are good signs of strength, the contrary shews weak∣ness, and are unnatural. His Knees. Then look on his Knees, and see that they carry a Proportion, be lean, Sinewy and close Knit, for they are good and comely; but if one be big∣ger and rounder then another, the Horse hath received Mischief; if they be gross, the Horse is Gouty; if they have Scars, or Hair-broken, it is a true mark of a stumbling Jade, and a perpetual Faller. His Legs. From his Knees, look down to his Legs, to his Pasterns, and if you finde them lean, flat and sinewy, and the Inward Bought of his Knee without Seames, or Hair-broken, then he shews good Shape and Soundness; But if on the inside of the Leg you finde hard Knots, they are Splinters; if on the out-side, they are Screws or Excressions; if under his Knees be Scabs on the inside, it is the swift cut, and he will ill endure Galloping; if a∣bove his Pasterns on the in-side you find Scabs, it shews enterfering; but if the Scabs be generally over his Legs, it is either extream soul keeping, or else a Spice of the Maunge; if his Flesh be fat, round and fleshy, he will never endure labour; and if on the Inward Bought of his Knees you finde Seams, Scabs or Hair-broken, it shews a Melander, which is a Can∣cerous Ulcer. His Pasterns. Look then on his Pastern-Joynt and his Pastern, the first must be clear and well Knit together, the other must be short, strong and upright stand∣ing;
for if the first be big or swell'd, take heed of Sinew-strains and Gourdings: if the other be long, weak or bending, the Limbs will be hardly able to carry the Body without tyring. His Hoofs. For the Hoofs in general, they should be black, smooth, tough, rather a little long then round, deep, hollow and full of Sounding: for white Hoofs are tender, and carry a Shoo ill; a rough, gross Seamed Hoof, shews old Age or over-Heating. A brittle Hoof will carry no Shoo at all; an ex∣traordinary round Hoof is ill for foul ways, and deep Hunting. A flat Hoof that is pumissed, shews Foundring; and a Hoof that is empty, and hollow sounding, shews a decayed Inward-part, by reason of some wound or dry Founder. As for the Crown of the Hoof, if the Hair lie smooth and close, and the Flesh flat and even, then all is perfect; but if the Hair be Staring, the Skin scabbed, and the Flesh rising, then look for a Ring∣bone, or a Crown-scab, or a Quitter-bone. The Setting on of his Head, his Crest and Mane. After this, stand by his side, and first look to the setting on of his Head, and see that it stand neither too high, nor too low, but in a direct line; that his Neck be small at the setting on of his Head, and Long, growing deeper to the Shoulders, with an high, strong and thin Mane, long, soft, and somewhat curling, for these are beautiful Characters: whereas to have the Head ill set on, is the greatest deformity; to have any bigness or swel∣ling in the Nape of the Neck, shews the Pole-evil, or beginning of a Fi∣stula; to have a short thick Neck like a Bull, to have it falling at the Wi∣thers, to have a low, weak, a thick or falling Crest, shews want both of strength and Mettle; to have much Hair on the Mane, shews intolerable dulness; to have it too thin, shews fury; and to have none or shed, shews the Worm in the Mane, the Itch, or else plain Maunginess. His Back, Ribs, Fillets, Belly and Stones. Look on the Chine of his Back, that it be broad, even and streight, his Ribs well compassed and bending Outward, his Fillets upright, strong and short, and not above a handful between his last Rib and his Huckle-bone, let his Belly be well let down, yet hidden within his Ribs, and let his Stones be well truss'd up to his Body, for all these are Marks of Health and good Perfection; whereas to have his Chine narrow, he will never carry a Saddle without wounding, and to have it bending or Saddle-back∣ed, shews weakness. To have his Ribs flat, there is not liberty for Wind. To have his Fillets hanging, long or weak, he will never climb an Hill
nor carry a Burthen. And to have his Belly clung up or gaunt, or his Stones hanging down, loose or aside, they are both Signes of Sickness, Tenderness, Foundering in the Body, and unaptness for labour. His Buttocks. Then look upon his Buttocks, and see that they be round, plump, full, and in an even level with his Body: or if long, that it be well raised be∣hind, and spread forth at the setting on of the Tail, for these are comely and beautiful. The narrow Pin-buttock, the Hog or Swine-Rump, and the falling and down-let Buttock are full of Deformity, and shew both an Injury in Nature, and that they are neither sit or becoming for Pad, Foot-Cloth or Pillion. His Hinder-Thighs. Then look to his Hinder-Thighs or Gaskings, if they be well let down even to the middle Joynt, thick, brawny, full and Swelling; for that is a great Argument of Strength and Goodness, whereas the lank slender Thighs shew disability and weakness. His Cambrels. Then look upon the middle Joynt behind, and if it be nothing but Skin and Bone, Veins and Sinews, and rather a little bending then too streight, then it is perfect as it should be. But if it hath Chaps or Sores on the In∣ward Bought or bending, then that is a Sellander. If the Joynt be swell'd generally all over, then he hath got a Blow or Bruise, if the Swelling be particular, as in the Pit or hollow Part, or on the inside, and the Vein full and proud; if the Swelling be soft, it is a Blood-spaven; if hard, a Bone-spaven; but if the Swelling be just behind, before the Knuckle, then it is a Curb. Hinder-Legs. Then look to his hinder-Legs, if they be lean, clean, flat and Sinewy, then all is well; but if they be fat they will not endure labour. If they be Swelled, the Grease is molten in them. If he be Scabbed above the Pa∣sterns, he hath the Scratches; if he have Chaps under his Pasterns, he hath Rains, and none of these but aro noisom. His Tail. Lastly, for the setting on of his Tail where there is a good Buttock, the Tail can never stand ill; and where there is an evil Buttock, there the Tail can never stand well; for it ought to stand broad, high, flat, and Couched a little inward. Thus I have shewed you the true Shapes and true Deformities, you may in your Choice please your own Fancies.
An uncontroulable Way to know the Age of an Horse. There are seven outward Characters, by which to know the Age of every Horse; As namely, his Teeth, his Hoofs, his Tail, his Eyes, his Skin, his Hair, and the Barrs in his Mouth. His Teeth. If you would know his Age by his Teeth, you must understand that an Horse hath in his Head just fourty Teeth, that is to say, six great Wong Teeth above, and six below on one side, and as many on the other, which maketh twenty four; And are called his Grinders; then six above and six below, in the fore-part of his Mouth, which are called Gatherers, and make thirty six. Then four Tushes, one above and one below on one side, and are called the Bit Teech, which make just fourty. Now the first year he hath his Foals Teeth, which are only Grinders and Gatherers, but no Tushes, and they be small, white and bright to look on. The second year he changeth the four fore-most Teeth in his Head, that is, two above, and two below in the midst of the Rows of the Gather∣ers, and they are browner and bigger then the other. The third year he changeth the Teeth next unto them, and leaveth no apparent Foals Teeth before, but two above, and two below of each side, which are all bright and small. The fourth year he changeth the Teeth next unto them, and leaveth no more Foals Teeth before, but one of each side, both above and below. The fifth year his sore-most Teeth will be all changed; but then he hath his Tushes on each-side compleat, and the last Foals Teeth which he cast, those which come up in their place will be hollow, and have a little Black speck in the midst, which is called the Mark in the Horses Mouth, and continueth till he be past eight years old. The sixth year he putteth up his new Tushes, near about which you shall see growing a little of new and young Flesh, at the bottom of the Tush: besides, the Tush will be white, small, short and sharp. The seventh year all his Teeth will have their perfect Growth, and the Mark in his Mouth will be plainly seen. The eighth year all his Teeth will be full, smooth and plain, the black speck or mark being no more but discerned, and his Tushes will be more yellow then ordinary. The ninth year his foremost Teeth will be longer, broader, yellower and fouler then at younger years, the mark gone, and his Tushes will be bluntish. The tenth year, the inside of his upper Tushes will be no holes at all to be felt with your Fingers ends, which till that Age you shall ever feel; besides, the Temples of his Head will begin to be crooked and hollow.
The eleventh year his Teeth will be exceeding long, very yellow, black and foul, only he may then cut even, and his Teeth will stand directly opposite one to another. The twelfth year his Teeth will be long, yellow, black and foul, but then his upper Teeth will hang over his nether. The thirteenth year his Tushes will be worn somewhat close to his Chaps, (if he be a much ridden Horse) otherwise they will be black, foul and long, like the Tushes of a Boar. His Mouth. See that he does not over-hang his upper Teeth over his nether, for though it be the Mark of an old Horse, yet sometimes a young Horse hath that Infirmity. See likewise that he is not too deep burnt of the Lampas, and that his Flesh lie smooth with his Barrs, for if it be too deep burnt, his Hay and Provender will stick therein, which will be very troublesom to the Horse. His Hoofs. If his Hoofs be rugged, and as it were Seamed one Seam over another, and many Seams; if they be dry, full and crusty, or crumbling, it is a sign of very old Age; and on the contrary part, a smooth, moist, hollow and well-sounding Hoof, is a sign of young years. His Tail. If you take your Horse with your Finger and your Thumb by the Stern of the Tail, close at the setting on by the Buttock, feeling there hard, and if you feel of each side of the Tail a Joynt stick out more then any other, by the bigness of an Hazel-nut, then you may presume the Horse is under two years old; but if his Joynts be all plain, and no such thing to be felt, then he is above ten, and it may be thirteen. His Eyes. If his Eyes be round, full, staring or starting from his Head, if the Pits over them be filled, smooth and even with his Temples, and no wrinkles, either about his Brow, or under his Eyes, then he is young, if otherwise you see the contrary Characters, it is a sign of old Age. His Skin. If you take his Skin in any part of his Body, between your Finger and your Thumb, and pull it from his Flesh, then letting it go again, if it sud∣denly return to the place from whence it came, and be smooth and plain without wrinkle, then he is young and full of strength; but if it stand, and not return instantly to its former place, then he is very old and wasted.
His Hair. If an Horse that is of any dark Colour, shall grow grissle only about his Eye-brows, or underneath his Mane; or any Horse of a whitish Co∣lour shall grow Meannelled with either black or red Meannels universally over his Body, then both are Signes of old Age. His Barrs. Lastly, if the Barrs in his Mouth be great, deep, and handle rough and hard, then is the Horse old; but if they be soft, shallow, and handle gently and tenderly, then is he young, and in good ability of Body. And thus much be spoken touching the Office of the Buyer. The perfect Shape of a Horse altogether. First, there is required that the Hoof be black, smooth, dry, large, round and hollow; the Pasterns streight and upright, Fet-locks short, the Legs streight and flat, called also Lath-legged, the Knees bony, lean and round, the Neck long, high reared, and great towards the Breast, the Breast large and round, the Ears small, sharp, long and upright, the Fore-head lean and large, the Eyes great, full and black, the Brows well filled, and shooting outwards, the Jaws wide, slender and lean, the Nostrils wide and open, the Mouth great, the Head long and lean, like to a Sheep, the Mane thin and large, the Withers sharp and pointed, the Back short, even, plain and double Chined, the Sides and Ribs deep, large and bearing out like the Cover of a Trunk, and close shut at the Huckle-bone, the Belly long and great, but hid under the Ribs, the Flanks full, yet gaunt, the Rump round, plain and broad, with a large space betwixt the Buttocks, the Thighs long and large, with well-fashioned bones, and those fleshy, the Hams dry and streight, the Trunchion small, long, well set on, and well couched, the Train long, not too thick, and falling to the Ground, the Yard and Stones small; And lastly, the Horse to be well-risen before. And to conclude, the perfect Shape of a Horse, according as a famous Horse-man hath described it, is in a few words, thus, viz. A broad Fore-head, a great Eye, a lean Head, thin, slender, lean, wide Jaws, a long high reared Neck, reared Withers, abroad deep Chest and Body, upright Pa∣sterns, and narrow Hoof; And this is the common, allowed and ap∣proved Shape of a perfect Horse, so that if any of those things be deficient in him, he cannot be said to be a Horse of a perfect Shape. Wherefore I conclude, that if a Horse be of a good Colour, well Marked, and rightly Shaped, and right also by Sire and Mare, it will be seldom seen that he would prove ill, unless his Nature be alienated and marred, either in the Backing and Riding, or else that he be otherwise wronged, by the means of an unskilful Groom. But I may in this Point be taxed to hold a Pa∣radox;
which helpeth Farcins, Yellows, Stavers, Scabs, Mainges, Agues, Feavers, Colds, Surseits, Glanders, or any other Malady, which may be any ways noxious to the inward part of the Body. And it also preventeth sudden Sickness, if you do suspect it. Fifthly, the opening of the two Plate or Breast-Veins do help the Anticor, Sickness of the Heart, Mor∣foundring, which is the Foundring in the Body by over-riding, whereby the Grease of the Horse is molten; it also preventeth Diseases in the Li∣ver, Lungs, and inward parts grieved; and sometimes Hurts in the Shoul∣der, which causeth Lameness before. Sixthly, we use to touch the two Thigh-Veins before, which helpeth▪Foundring in the fore-Feet, Mallenders, Splent, Screw, Ring-bone, and such like infirmities in the fore-Foot, and such other higher Parts. Seventhly, we use to take Blood from the four Shackle-Veins before, and this is very good for the Crow-scab, Ring-bone and such like Diseases. Eighthly, we use to strike the two Spur-Veins, which Cureth the Farcin in the Sides, Morfoundring, swelling under the Belly, which is a Disease called the Feltrick, and the like. Ninthly, we prick the two Toe-Veins, which do help Frettizing, Foundering, Hoof∣bound, beating of the Horses Feet by Riding upon hard and stony ways, and the like. Tenthly, we open the two Thigh-Veins behind, and this doth help the Grief of the Kidneys, swelling in the Hinder-Legs, Foun∣dring, Sellenders, Scratches, Kybes, &c. And it also helpeth Diseases in and about the Belly, as Pissing of blood, Pissing oft after great and extra∣ordinary hard labour, and the weakness of the Reins, the Back, Belly, Guts, or any other of the inward Parts, the Curb, Spaven, and such Dis∣eases which come of Rankness of Blood. Eleventhly, we sometimes do open the four Shackle-Veins behind, and this is very good against Foun∣derings, and other pains in and about the Feet. Twelfthly, we let Blood in the two Flank or Hanch-Veins, and this is most probable for all kind of Feavers, the Stones, Poverty and the Felter-worm. Thirteenthly, we draw Blood from the two Tail-Veins, which Cureth the Mange in the Tail, falling of the Hair, or Itch in the Tail. And these are for the most part all the Veins that are usually opened. So that the full sum or number of Veins which Farriers commonly open are thirty. Other Veins there are which are of a smaller proportion, and therefore not fit to be opened, I will not say that these Veins so opened doth Cure the Diseases absolutely; but it doth sometimes asswage the Malignancy of the Malady, sometimes it preventeth Diseases, and sometimes again it prepareth the Body, the better to receive such Physical Drinks which do inwardly Cure them, and such Salves, Oyls, Unguents, which do dry and heal up outward Infir∣mities, &c. How many Bones a Horse hath, and where they are Situated. All the Bones which every Horse hath, whereby to make up an Orga∣nical
Body are these, viz. He hath in his Head thirty nine or fourty Teeth; The Bones in his Head do Comprehend the Crocks and Handles of the Scull, albeit they be composed of parts and parcels of other Bones, also the two flat Handles, which from the Pallat and the Fork or Throat hath five; the Chine hath fifty two, the Breast one, the Ribs hath thirty six, the fore-Legs and fore-Feet hath fourty four, and the hinder-Legs and Feet fourty, so as the whole structure of the Body of a Horse, whereby to perfect a full Building of Bones, consisteth of about two hundred fifty seven, or two hundred fifty nine, if they be rightly computed; which do represent themselves altogether at what time the perfect Anatomy of a Horse is laid open. Of the Elements. The Elements are four, and they give Life and Nutriment unto Man, and all other living Creatures; They are these, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Their Nature. The Nature of Fire is to be hot and dry, Air to be hot and moist, Water to be cold and moist, and Earth to be cold and dry. Signes of the Zodiack Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius Ca∣pricornus, Aquarius, Pisces; These do all Govern the twelve Months of the year, and are placed above the Zodiack. Names of the Planets. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury and Luna. The Government of the Signes. Aries governs the Head, Taurus the Neck, Gemini the Shoulders and Armes, Cancer the Stomach and Breast, Leo the Heart, Virgo the Belly and Guts, Libra the Reins and Buttocks, Scorpio the Privy Parts, Sagittarius the Thighs, Capricornus the Knees, Aquarius the Legs, and Pisces the Feet. The best time to let a Horse Blood in. If there be no extraordinary cause, as in Case of desperate Sickness, or so; then Jan. the third and fifteenth, Feb. the fourth and ninth, Mar. the seventeenth and eighteenth, April the tenth and sixteenth, May the first and thirteenth, June the fifteenth and twentieth. But for July and August, by reason that the Canicular days be then predominant, Blood-letting is not so good, but only in urgent Case of Necessity. In Septemb. the eleventh and twenty eighth. Octob. the eighth and twenty third. Novemb. the fifth and
Seeds. Gather Seeds and Fruits when they be fully ripe, and they also last but one whole year. Rind or Bark. Gather the Rind or Bark of any Simple when the Herb is ripe, dry them, and they will last many years. The Office of the Farrier. What Points Consist the Office of the Farrier. IT Consists in four things, viz. Science, Experience, Knowledge and Handy Work; But I shall let pass the first three, and speak to Handy-Work, and that is, To Heat an Iron well, to Turn a Shoo well, to make and Point a Nail well, to Pare the Hoof well, to Cauterize well, to let Blood well, to be light and well-Handied, Bold and Hardy, and Dressing of a Horse well of such Ac∣cidents as may happen unto him. The Principal Members of a Horse. Some hold that there be four, and make the Stones or Gignitors one; but I say there are but three, The Liver, the Heart and The Brain; and if he be offended in any of these he will die; but if any other Member be∣sides these be hurt, he may live; and therefore the Stones or Gignitors can∣not be one of the Principal Members, for you cannot touch any of those three, but you kill him out-right, or desperately endanger him. Now the Stones may receive hurt, and if I despair of Curing them, I can cut them out, without peril of his life. Of the Sinews, and of the number of them. There are two Sinews, or Tendons, which are white, and begin at the end of the Nose, and extend themselves along the Neck, and along the Back, and make their extent to the four Legs, and take their ligaments in the fore-Feet. There are in every Horse twenty nine or thirty, great and small. The two great Sinews which I named before. It. Two Branches which are main Sinews that proceed from the Brain, and run down the Cheeks to the Teeth. It. There are from the Shoulders to the first Joynt of the Armes, or fore-Legs downwards, two great Sinews.
It. From the Knees to the Pasterns are four great Sinews, with the same number in the hinder-part. It. In the fore-part of the Breast, and above it, as well within as with∣out, are ten Sinews, some greater and some smaller. It. From the Reins of the Back to the Stones are four great Sinews. Lastly, one great main Sinew which runneth along to the end of the Tail. So as the full number of the Sinews are twenty nine, or thirty, which are to be discerned. But to speak properly, a Horse hath but one only Vein, which is that which we call the Median, or Lives Vein, which is in the Liver, being the true Fountain, Scource and great Tun, from whence the Canes, Conduit-pipes and little Veines, (as the smaller Rivers) do separate themselves, which do run through all the Parts and Members of the whole Body. Those Veins that do ascend to the Head and Body, are called Veins ascendent, and those which do run low as to the Legs, and lower Members, are called hollow or descendent Veins. Of the Vital Blood. Those are Veins which are Vessels of quick or running Blood, and is that, that when the Creature sleepeth, his Blood is in continual agitation, and never ceaseth. Of the Number of the Veins that you are to take Blood from. In the Neck, in the Weeping-Veins, under the Ears, and in six other places, of and about the Head; as in the Pallate-Veins, in the Tongue, in the Flank-Veins, in the Breast and Spur-Veins; In the four Members, to wit, the Legs, Thighs, Pasterns and Feet; also in sundry other Places, according as necessity shall require it, and in places which may the better kill the Maady of the said Horse. For what use you open the Veins. To open the two Temple-Veins easeth the pain in the Head, coming of Colds, Rheums, Feavers, Yellows and Stavers, Drowsiness, Frenzie, the sleepy Evil, falling Evil, or any grief in or about the Eyes or Brain. Se∣condly, we open the two Eyes or Weeping-Veins, being most sovereign for such Diseases whereunto the Eyes are subject; as Watery or Weeping Eyes, Blood-shotten, Pin and Web, Haw, or the like. Thirdly, we open the two Pallat-Veins in the Mouth, and those do Cure the Lampass, and any inward Sickness in the Body; as the Yellows, Stavers, Anticor, Sur∣feits, Drowsiness, Tiredness, or weariness of the Body; or if he hath any Malady in the Throat, as the Strangle, Quinzy, Kernels, Pustils, either within or without; it many times helpeth Inflammations, Glanders, or the like; For the eating or swallowing of his own Blood, is most wholesom and Sovereign in such Cases. Fourthly, we do usually open the two Neck-Veins,
for some may Object unto me, that many times Horses, who are of the best Colour, best Marks and truest Shapes, do nevertheless prove Arrant ades. I answer, I acknowledge all this to be true, for I have known Horses, who upon their first View, have been in extrinsecal shew so hopeful, as that they have promised what a man could expect from them, which notwithstanding when they have come to the Test, they have been a Scandal to their Sex; but this is not a thing frequent, for in every one of these who have thus miscarried, you shall have twenty prove right and answerable to your Minds. Rules to be Observed of putting a Horse to Grass, and of taking of him up again. Before you put your Stable-Horse to Grass, eight or nine days before, take Blood from him, the next day after give him the drink of Diapene, and a day or two after his Drink abate of his Cloaths by degrees, before you turn him forth, lest by doing them on the sudden he take more cold, and after his Cloaths are taken off, Curry him not at all, but let him stand in his dust, for that will keep him warm. Neither would I have you put him forth till the midst of May, at the soonest, for till that time Grass will not have Bite enough, (and let the day wherein you turn him forth be a warm Sun-shine day, and about the hour of ten) for Horses pampered in warm Stables, and kept close, will be subject to take cold. Taking of him up. Secondly, let him be taken up from Grass very dry, or else he will be subject to be Scabby, and that not later then St. Bartholomew's day, which is the twenty fourth of August, for then the Season doth begin to let fall cold dews, which causeth much harm to your Horse, and then beginneth the Heart of Grass to ail, so as the Grass which he then feedeth upon breedeth no good Nutriment, but gross, Phlgmatick and cold Humors which putrisieth and corrupteth the Blood, and take him up very quietly for fear of melting his Grease, for his Fat gotten at Grass is very tender, so that every little Motion dissolveth the same, whereby the Blood may be enslamed, and so be in danger of Sickness, if not of death. A day or two after you have him in the Stable, let him be shod, let Blood and drencht, as before is shewed you, for this preventeth Yellows, Stavers and such like Diseases, which the Gall and Spleen occasioneth, which the Heart and strength of Grass, (through the Rankness of Blood) doth en∣gender in his Body. But if you intend to be curious after you have taken him into the Stable, before you have either Blooded or Drencht him, you may clean him in this manner.
Of Cleansing or making a Horse clean. First, therefore if it be a hot Sun-shiny day, take him out of the Stable into a place convenient, and there trim him, then take ordinary soft wash∣ing Sope▪ and anoint his Head and every part of him all over therwith, and to have a care that none of it get into his Ears or Eyes, then wash him very well with warm water all over, then wipe him with a warm Linnen-cloth, and after rub him dry with woollen Cloaths, then Sope him all over again, especially his Mane and Tail, and wash him very clean with Buck-lee, with a Wisp or Woollen Cloth, and when you have sufficiently cleansed him, dry him as you did before, and so lead him into the Stable, and Cloath him up with a clean, thin, soft Cloth. And by this kind of trimming and cleansing him, you may so alter him, that the Owner can scarce know him. General Notes concerning some Simples. All manner of Marrows and Piths, of what kind soever they be must be kept by themselves in a dry cool place, and preserved from all Filth or Un∣cleanness, and from the annoyance either of Wind or Fire, and so they will last full out a whole year. Syrups, Powders, Pills, Electuaries and Ointments. You shall keep no Syrops, no sweet Electuaries, nor Pills, nor Powders, nor Conserves of Flowers, nor any Ointments, Sewets or Emplaisters, or Conserve of Fruits or Roots, will last fully out two years. Oyls. Of Oyls, some will last long, some must be new made: Oyls extracted out of Wood or Metals will last long. Roots. Gather Roots in Autumn, but take the small Sprigs from them, and make them clean and dry. Dry small Roots in the Shade and Wind, and great ones either in the Wind, or Sun, or by the Fire; Lay them in a dry place towards the South, and they will keep long, provided that neither Sun nor Moisture do injure them. Herbs. Gather all manner of Herbs when they do most lourish, and dry them in the Shade, except they be very moist and apt to putrifie, they last for the most part a whole year.
sixteenth, Decmb. the fourteenth and twenty sixth. And these days we hold to be the very best, unless dangerous and sudden Sickness do cause us to alter the same, for in Cases of Necessity no days are to be regarded or observed. More Observations of Blood-letting you may finde hereafter. Of the four Humors. Blood, Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy. Four Humors also there are, which be as it were four Children to the four Elements already spoken of: And these are, Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy, without which a natural Body cannot be made; for Blood naturally (if it be perfect) is hot and moist, but taketh most from Heat, and therefore is subordinate to Air; Phlegm is cold and moist, but the Principality thereof is Coldness, and therefore hath reference to Water: Choler is hot and dry, but his chiefest Nature is Heat, and therefore is Governed by the Element of Fire: Melancholy is cold and dry, but his chiefest condition is Driness, and therefore subjects it self to the Element of Earth. Now the Fountain of Blood is the Liver, which dispersing it self by the help of the Veins into all the parts of the Body, nourisheth and preserveth the same. Phlegm preoccupateth the Brain, being a cold and spungy substance, and the Seat of the sensible Soul. Choler inhabit∣eth the Liver, which being hot and dry, maketh a pleasing Harmony with the Blood. Melancholy resideth in the Spleen, which is the Receptacle and discharge of the Excrements of the Liver, from whence we may Col∣lect, that it hath its proper use and end: As for demonstration, Blood prin∣cipally nourisheth the Body, Phlegm occasioneth Motion of the Joynts and Members, Choler exciteth and provoketh the Belly to avoid its Excrements; And lastly, Melancholy disposeth the Body to an Appetite. Whereupon all the Learned Philosophers do with one unanimous Assent agree in this, That in every Natural Body there are four Principal Instrumental Members, from which all the Parts of an Organial Body are said to be Framed, and these are the Brain, the Heart, the Liver, and the Stones or Gignitors, and each one of these do Perform its true Function to all the particular Members of the Body; for the Sinews do receive their Sustentation from the Brain, and these are called Animal spirits; the Artries from the Heart, which are Vital spirits; the Veins from the Liver, which are Natural Parts; and the Seed-Vessels from the Stones or Gignitors, as the Place of Generation. Of a Horses Complexion, which is the most necessary Faces that a Farrier can judge of his Infirmities. To speak of the Complexions of a Horse in a particular manner, which is one of the most necessary Faces that a Farrier can behold, both for the judging of Horses Infirmities, and also for the true Compounding of his
Medicines for every disease; And therefore by the Colour of the Horse you are to judge his Complexion. For look which of the Elements is most Predominate in him, from that Element you may draw his Complexion; as thus, If he participate more of the Fire, then of any of the other Ele∣ments, then we hold him to be a Cholerick Horse, and his Colour is ei∣ther a bright Sorrel, a Coal black without any white, or an Iron Grey un∣changeable, that is, such a Crey as neither will ever turn a Daple-Grey, a White or a Flea-bitten, and these Horses are of Nature light, hot, fiery, and seldom of any great strength. These Horses are most subject to Pe∣stilent Feavers, Yellows and Inflammation of the Liver. Therefore every Farrier should be careful in his Composing of any Medicine for such a Horse, to purge Choler, yet very moderately, and not with any extra∣ordinary strength in the Potion or Drench, because the Horse being in his best strength, not reputed strong, should you apply any violent thing to him, that little strength being abated, there were great danger in con∣founding the whole Body. If the Horse participate more of the Air then of the other Elements, then is he of a Sanguine Complexion, and his Co∣lour is either a bright Bay, or a dark Bay, which hath neither scouling Countenance, Myly Mouth, no white Flank; Or a white Flea▪bitten, White Lyard like Silver, or black with a white Star, white rash or white Foot. These Horses are of Nature pleasant, nimble, free and of good strength. The Disease, to them most incident, is Consumption of the Liver, Leprosie, Glanders, or any disease that is infectious; They are of a good strong Constitution, and may endure strength in their Medi∣cines, especially any thing that cooleth the Blood. If the Horse participate more of the Water then of the other Elements, then is he of a Phlegmatick Complexion, and his Colour is either Milk white, a yellow dun Kite glewed, or a Pyde-ball, in whom there is an e∣qual Mixture of Colours. Otherwise, if the Bay, the Black or the Dun exceed the White, he is said to be of that Complexion of which the Colour is greatest. These Horses are of Nature slow, and apt to lose Flesh. The Diseases which are most incident unto them, are Colds, Head-ach, Rheums, Staggers, and such like. They are able to endure the reasonable strength of any Medicine, because of the abundance of Phlegm which is in them, sufficeth both Nature, and the Potion to work upon. All cold Simples are to them exceeding hurtful, so are also they which are violently hot in the third degree; The first, because it bindeth too soon; The latter, because it disperses too suddenly, therefore Simples of a moderate Mean are best. If the Horse participate of the Earth more then of the other Elements, then is he of a Melancholy Complexion; And his Colour is a Mouse∣dun, Russet, Chesnut, Ashie Grey, dark Bay, having long white Hai, like Goats Hair, growing on his Legs; These Horses are of Nature heavy and faint-hearted. The Diseases to them most incident, are Inflam∣mations
in the Spleen, Frenzie, Dropsey, and such like; They are com∣monly of better strength then they appear by their Actions, and are able to endure the strength of any reasonable Medicine; All cicatrizing and dry Simples are hurtful unto them, the cold and moist are the most profit∣able. Having thus shewed you these four Complexions, Cholerick San∣guine, Phlegmatick and Melancholy, together with their qualities and strengths; You shall understand now, that amongst Farriers there is another Complexion, or fifth Constitution, which is called the Compo∣sition, or Mixture of Complexions; that is, when a Horse doth participate of all the four Elements equally, and in due proportion, and this is the best Complexion, and the Horse that is of this Complexion is ever one of these Colours; that is to say, of a fair brown Bay, dabled, or not dab∣led, a Dable Grey, a Black full of Silver Hair, or a fair Roan red or black. And these Horses are of Nature most excellent, most temperate, strongest, gentlest and most healthful, though they may have any disease as the other hath, yet are they naturally inclined to no disease. But what infirmity soever falleth unto them, is meerly accidental, and not through any over∣flow of natural distemperature. All Medicines must be compounded for them according to the Nature of the Sickness, and the time of their Languishment; for if the Sickness be young and new bred, then are they able to receive any well Composed Receipt; but if it be old, and the in∣ward Powers and Faculties feebled, then you must be careful to help Na∣ture, by adding to every Medicine, of what Nature soever, some Simple of Comfort, that as ill Humors be clensed, so Strength may still be repaired and maintained. And thus much for Complexions. Twelve Causes of Health and long Life. 1. The First is Nature, good Digestion and good Nourishment. 2. The second is, Moderation in Feeding and Diet. 3. The third is, Moderate Labour. 4. The fourth is, moderate Use of Sleeping and Waking. 5. The fifth is, moderate spending upon Mares. 6. The sixth is, moderate Journeys. 7. The seventh is, wholesom Air. 8. The Eighth is, not to be exercised too soon after Grass. 9. The Ninth is, to be kept from raw and green Meats. 10. The tenth is, not to be suffered to eat or drink being hot. 11. The eleventh is, not to be neither washed nor walked at the end of his Journey. 12. The twelfth is, to give him with his Provender such Powders and Simples as are Prescribed you in all those Chapters, which are by me men∣tioned, but more particularly in Page 2. And though he dislikes them at first, yet by mixing a little and a little at a time, they will become natural to him.
Dangerous Sicness how it cometh. First, all Sickness cometh either by Heats in over-violent exercise, as when the Horse hath his Grease moulten, the Heart over-charged, the vi∣tal Blood forced from the inward Parts, and the large Pores and Orisices of the Heart are so obstructed and stopped, that the Spirits cannot return back to their proper places, so as the Organs of the Body cannot rejoyce, but by this means the Body must of necessity languish, founder and mor∣tifie. Secondly, dangerous Sickness cometh also by Colds, as by indiscreet and negligent keeping, as well before as after long and violent exercise, and then is the Head perplexed, the Eyes dulled and pained, the Roots of the Tongue inflamed and fwelled, the Lungs with Rheums tickled and offended, occasioning strong and laborious Coughing, and the Nostrils often Distilling, and pouring orth filthy and corrupt matter. Thirdly, dangerous Sickness cometh also by Surfeit of Food, either by eating too much or too little of what is good, or also of what is not wholesom; so as the first killeth, or at least debilitateth the Stomach, op∣presseth the Heart, and sndeth up those evil Fumes into the Head, by which are engendred the Stavers, Frenzies, and other mortal Diseases▪ The second putriies the Blood, and converts all its Nutriment into cor∣ruption, from whence proceeds the Yellows, Farcins, Feavers, Mainges, and other such like Pestilent, Leprous and Lothsom Diseases, which suffo∣cating the Heart, and clogging the Stomach, dilates and spreads it self universally over the whole Body, leaving no Member free, and confound∣eth every Faculty and Member thereof. Fourthly and lastly, dangerous Sickness come also by Accidents, as when a Horse receiveth some deep or perillous wound or Hurt, either in his Body, or elsewhere, in some vital or dangerous part, by means where∣of Nature is so far offended, as that incontinently a general Sickness seiz∣eth upon him, which if not prevented, Death immediately ensueth. Signes to Know these dangerous Sicknesses. If his Sickness proceed from the first, which are Heat, then are the Signes these, viz. The Heaviness of his Countenance, Swellings of his Limbs, especially of his hinder-Legs, Scouring and Loosness of his Body, in the begin∣ning of his Sickness, short and hot Breath, a Loathing and forsaking of his Meat. If from the second, viz. Cold; then the Signes are, A dejected Counte∣nance, Dulness or Sleepiness of the Eyes, Pustels or hard Knots under the Caul, yea, and many times insamed Kernels and Swellings so high as to the very Roots of the Ears, a rotten▪ moist, inward and hollow Cough, he many times Chewing betwixt his Teeth, some loose, filthy and phlegmatick matter, immediately after
his Coughing, which in some Cases is not an evil Sign▪ by reason that there∣by the Cold rotteth and goeth away; Whereas on the contrary side, for a Horse to Cough clear and dry, doth demonstrate a dry Cough, which hath long time lurked in his Body, which is difficult to Cure, which will so discover it self at last, that his Belly will shrink up, and when he drink∣eth Water will come forth of his Nose, and his Eyes will be either watery or mattery, and run continually, through pain he hath in his Head, pro∣cured by means of his Cold, and his Hair will be rough and staring, &c. If from the Third, which is Surfeit, then the Signes of his Sickness are these, A dulness of the Head, Eyes and Countenance, and that so violent, that he will not be able to lift up his Head from the Manager; A dull and dead Eye, and sunk into his Head, his Ears prickt upright, and the Tops of them cold, as also his upper Lips and his Sheath, his Pace reeling and staggering, and if he be too far gone he will be Mad, which you may know by his biting the Rack and Manger, or any Body that shall come nigh him; and sometimes bi∣ting of himself, and beating his Head against the wall, &c. But if the Malady be not got into the Brain, then you shall find by the yellowness of his Eyes, Lips and Tongue, that it is turned to the Yellows, which will so infect his Blood all over, that if not prevented suddenly he will soon come to the Dogs. Accidental. The sourth and last Ground of his Sickness is, if it proceed from Acci∣dental means, the Signes then are a perplexed and troubled Body, sweat∣ing at the Roots of his Eares, Flanks, behind the Shoulders, against the Heart, sometimes trembling all over his Body, and sometimes glowing and burning in his Vital Parts, as in the Temples of his Head, against his Heart, on the inside of his fore-Legs, and on the inside of his hinder-Legs; his Mouth will be dry and hot, his Tongue will be subject to be inflamed and furied, he will have a Loathing against meat▪ and a great drought to thirst, and drink cold Water, and to keep his Mouth in the same when he hath done drinking. To Cure Sickness before it comes, and to prevent it when it comes. First, when you finde it come, to let him Blood, and for three Morn∣ings together to give him the drink of Diapente, and keep him warm, and let him fast three houres after it, and then give him a Mash, and Hay after that. But in case Diapente is not to be had, then take Celandne half a handful, as well Roots as Leaves, well washed and picked, Wormwood and Rue of each half a handful, boil them in a Bottle of Ale or Beer to a quart, and strain it well, and put it into half a pound of sweet Butter, and two or three spoonfuls of Treacle, and give it him luke-warm. But secondly, to prevent it before it comes, is when you turn him to
Grass, to let him Blood likewise, and to give him the next day the Drink of Diapente, and so to abate his Cloaths (if he hath any) to harden him before you turn him to Grass, to prevent his taking of Cold. The Drink of Diapente. Take of Gentian, of Aristolochia rotunda, of Bay-berries, of Myrrh, and of the Shavings of vory, of each a like quantity, and let them be Pounded severally, and finely Searced, and after weighed, so as the quantity may be just and even, not any one less or more then another, and after you have mixed them very well together, put them into a Gally-pot, close stopped, as that no Air get into it, and so keep it for your use. How to use it. If you Drench him for a Cold or Glanders, give it him in Muscadine, if for other Maladies, then in sweet Sack, and the quantity must be a Pint and an half. But if you cannot get either Sack or Muscadine, then give it in strong Ale or Beer; the quantity of this Powder of Diapente must be two or three spoonfuls, unless to a small, sick and feeble Horse, then ac∣cording to your own Judgement, as you shall think requisite. The word Diapente is as much as to say Composition of five Simples. The Vertues of Diapente. It is the most Sovereign thing which can be given to a Horse by way of Drench, to Cure him of very many Diseases. It is good against all in∣fectious Maladies, as Feavers of what Nature soever, all sorts of Pesti∣encies, or contagious Colds, Coughs wet or dry, Glanders, Surfeits, inflam∣mations in the Blood or Liver, Frenzies, Yellows; it purisieth, refineth and purgeth the Blood from all infection and Corruption; it easeth the over∣flowing of the Gall, and the working of the Spleen; In a word, it Cureth whatsoever Diseases the Body of an Horse may be inwardly inclined unto. The making of the true Diahexaple. Take the Roots of round Aristolochia, wash them small, scrape them, and make them as clear as may be, then take Juniper-berries unexcorti∣cated, and Bay-berries excorticated; take the purest and best drops of Myrrh, and the finest shavings of Ivory, of each an equal quantity, beat all but the Myrrh together, and Searce them fine. Lastly, beat the Myrrh and searce it also, then mix them altogether, press it hard into a Gally∣pot, and keep it for your use.
The Vertues of Diahexaple. This Powder or indeed Mithridate, is most Excellent and Sovereign against all manner of Poison, either inward or outward, it Cureth the bi∣ting of venomous Beasts, and helpeth short wind and pursiness. It Mundisieth, Clenseth, Suppleth, and maketh thin all gross Humors, it healeth all diseases of the Liver and Stomack, helps Digestion, and be∣ing given in a Pint of Sack, it Cureth all Colds; it is good against Con∣sumptions, breaks Phlegm, helps Staggers and all diseases of the Head. Gerrard. It Recovers Tiring and Weariedness, and takes away Cramps and Convulsions, dries up the Scurvey, breaks the Stone, opens all inward Ob∣structions, and helps the Yellows, the Gargil and the Dropsey. Diascordies. It Cures all Diseases of the Lungs, as Glanders and Rottenness, gives ease to all Gripings and windiness of the Belly, provoketh Urine, takes away Infection, and kills Wormes. A Drink to open an Horses Body, and to Clense it. Take a Quart of New Milk, Sallet-Oyl, Honey, of each half a Pint, an Ounce of London. Treacle, and the Yolks of six Eggs, beat altogether, then put to it Licoras, Sugar-Candy, Anniseeds, (all in Powder) of each an Ounce, and infuse altogether, and so give it him, ride him after it, set him up warm, and let him fast two houres or more. How to make Diatessaron, Mithridates or Horse-Treacle. Take of the Powder of Diapente, two Ounces, and put it into a clean Stone-Mortar, and put thereto clarified or Life-Honey the like quantity; Let the Mortar be hot before you put them in, then with a Pestle of Wood work it till it come to a Treacle, then take it forth, and keep it in a Gally∣pot close stopped for your use. How to use it. Take half an Ounce of this Confection, and dissolve it in a Pint and an half of Muscadine, or sweet Sack, and give it him Blood-warm, and as you see occasion, you may add to it of London-Treacle an Ounce. The Vertues of it. It is good for all Poisons and infectious Diseases, and drives sorth all manner of Sickness from the Heart, and is good for all sorts of Feavers, and all other desperate and dangerous Sickness, taking first Blood from him if there be cause. How to make the Electuary of Diatessaron. ☞ Take Gentian, Bay-berries, Aristolochia rotunda, or Birth-wort, of each
two Ounces, all beaten to very fine powder; Put them into a Stone-Mortar, (as you did the other) with two pounds of clarified Honey, and work them together till they come to a Treacle, and when you have done, put it up into a Gally-pot, and keep it for your use close stopped, use it as you do the other. The Vertues of it. It resists Pestilence and Poison, and Cures the Biting of any venomous Beast; It is good for the Falling Sickness, Convulsions, and all cold Di∣stempers of the Brain; As also for Colds and Coughs wet or dry, Sur∣feits, Glaunders, Inflammation of the Blood and Liver, Yellows, and many other Diseases which a Horses Body is inclineable unto. A Drink given when you neither have Diahexaple, Diapente or Diatessaron. Take of Tarr two Ounces, of Honey an Ounce, black Soap two drams, and bay Salt a handful, incorporate them well together, then take two Egg-shells, the Crowns only being broken, so as you may get forth the Meat, and fill them full with this Medicine, and put them down his Throat, and walk or ride him gently up and down a quarter of an hour or more, warm Cloathed; that done, set him up warm, and Litter him well, and let his Drink be either Mashes or white Water for four or five days after, and let him fast three houres after his Medicine, and let his Hay and Provender be sweet and good. Signes of all Sickness in General. If you find in your Horse heaviness of Countenance, extream Loosness, or extream Costiveness, shortness of Breath, Loathing of Meat, dull and imperfect Eyes, rotten or dry Cough, staring Hair, or Hair unnaturally discoloured, a staggering Pace, frantick Behaviour, yellowness of the Eyes, of Skin, faint or cold Sweat, extraordinary lying down, or beating or looking back at his Body, alteration of qualities or gestures, not casting of the Coat, Leanness, Hde-bound and the like. All these are apparent Signes of distemperature and Sickness. The Diseases of a Horse is Known by the Signes he makes. If he be slower in Pace then he use to be, if his Eares hang down more then they are wont, if his Flank be more then usually hollow, if he burn between his Eares, or about his Pasterns, if in Travel his Stomach fail him, or his Mouth, that in his Labour do use to foam, become dry, all these are Signes of Sickness. By Hanging of his Head. If he hang down his Head, which was wont to be of a chearful Coun∣tenance, it is a Sign of a Feaver, Head-ach, the Staggers or ore Eyes.
By the Turning of his Head backwards. If he turn his Head backward to the place grieved, if it be to the right side, it is a Sign of Obstructions in the Liver, but if he turn it down to his Belly, it is a sign either of the Cholick, Bots or Worms. By Water Running from his Mouth. When Water runs from his Mouth, it is either a Sign of the Staggers or wet Cough. By his stinking Breath or stinking Matter from his Nostrils. If his Breath stinks, or foul Matter issues from his Nostrils, it is a sign of an Ulcer in the Nose or Head; but if the Matter be white, then it is a sign of Glanders: If the Matter be black, then it is a sign of the Mourning of the Chine, if there be any such disease. But if it be yellow, then it is the Consumption of the Liver: but if he cast little Lumps out of his Mouth, then it shews Consumption and Rottenness of the Lungs. By his Breath and Body being hot. If his Body and Breath be hot, it is a Sign of a Feaver and Heat of the Stomach, if therewithal he forsake his Meat, it is a Sign of the Inflam∣mation of the Liver, and either of dry or moist Yellows. By his hollow Temples. If his Temples be very hollow, it is a Sign of the Strangle or old Age. By shortness of Breath. Shortness of Breath, and beating of the Flank, is a sign either of a Feaver or the Strangle, but if the Passage of the Throat be stopped, it is a Sign the Film of the Lungs are broken, and the Spleen troubled, or else broken-Winded. By the Swelling about the Eares. If there be any thing Swelling about the Eares, it is a Sign of the Pole∣evil: Swelling under the Eares is a sign of the Vives; and Swelling in the Mouth, is a sign either of a Canker, Flaps or Lapas. By the Swelling under the Throat. Swelling under the Throat is a sign of the Glanders, and Swelling about the Tongue-Roots, a sign of the Strangle: but if there be about the Tongue-Roots nothing but little small Knots, like Wax-kernels, then it is a sign but of a Cold only.
By his Swelling about hi Body. Swelling on the left Side, is a Sign of a Sick Spleen; Swelling in the Belly and Legs, a Sign of the Dropsey; and Swelling in the Flank, of Cholick only. By his offering to Cough. To Couch, or to offer to Cough, it is a Sign either of the Glanders, or of a wet or dry Cough, of a Consumption or Foundring of the Body. By his Staggering. Staggering is a Sign either of a Feaver, of the Staggers, or of swaying in the Neck: but if he stagger or roul behind only, then is it a Sign either of Foundring of the Body, or of pain in the Kidneys. By the Hollowness of his Back. The Hollowness of a Horses Back is a Sign of a dry Malady, or the Dropsey. By his Trembling. Trembling is a Sign of a Feaver, or Foundring in the Body: and here is to be Noted, that if he trembleth after he hath drunk, he hath during the time of his Trembling a Fit of an Ague upon him, and after he hath done Trembling he will glow, and some Horses after their Burning will Sweat also. By the Staring of his Hair. Hair staring is a sign either of a Cold Stomach, or of Foundring in the Body, but generally o a Cold, or want of Cloaths. By his Staling with Pain. If he Stale with Pain, it is a Sign either of Foundering in the Body, the Wind-cholick or the Stone; and if the Urine which comes from him be yellow, it is a Sign of the Glanders; but if it be blackish and thick, it is a Sign of the Pain in the Kidneys. By his Leanness and Gauntness. Leanness and Gauntness is a Sign of Hide-bound, or of the Consum∣ption, of the dry Malady, of Foundring in the Body, Inflammation of the Liver, the Yellows, Cholick or Wormes. By his Loosness of Body. Laxativeness or Loosness of Body is a Sign of a hot Liver. By his Costiveness. Costiveness in the Body is a Sign of dry Yellows, or Diseases of the Gall.
By his stinking Dung. If his Dung stink, it is a sign of a hot Liver: if it have no smell, then of a cold Liver; but if it be undigested, then either of a Consumption, or of a dry Malady. By his Lying. If he desire to lie much on his left Side, then is he troubled with the Spleen, if on the right, then it is a Sign of Heat of Liver; and if finding no rest, it may be Bots, Wormes, Cholick, or Griping in the Belly; if when he is down he spreads himself abroad, it shews the Dropsey; if he groan when he is down, it shews either a sick Spleen, moist Yellows, Cholick, Bots or Film broken, if he be not able to rise when he is down, then either mortal Weakness, Foundering in the Body or Legs. By his striking at his Belly. If he strike with his Foot at his Belly, it is a Sign of the Cholick: but if when he striketh, he Fisk with his Tail also, then it is either Bots or rough Wormes. By his being Scabby. If he be Scabby and Ulcerous all over his Body, and about his Neck, it is a Sign of the Mange; if it be an Ulcer full of Knots, creeping about the Veins, it is the Farcy: if spreading abroad only in one place, it is a nker: if the Ulcer be hollow and crooked, it is a Fistula; but if it be a spungy Wart, full of blood, it is then an Anbury. By his Tongue. If his Tongue hang out and is Swoln, it is a Sign of the Strangle. By his eating and d inking much. If he eat much and drink little, it is a Sign of a Cold Liver; but if he desire to drink much and eat little, it is either a Sign of a Feaver, rotten Lungs, Heat in the Stomach, Heat in the Liver, or the dry Yellows. By his Dung. It is necessary to observe his Dung, for it is the best Tell-troth of his inward Parts; and you must not judge it by a General Opinion, but by a private discourse with your self how he hath been fed, because Food is the only thing that breeds alterations,—as thus— If he feed altogether upon Grass, his Dung hath one Complexion, as green; if upon Hay, then another, as a little more dark. If upon little Provender, then inclining to yellow. But to avoid both curiosity and doubt, observe well the Complexion of his Dung, when he is in best Health,
and the best feeding, and as you finde it alter, so judge either of his Health or Sickness, as thus— If his Dung be clear, crisp, and of a pale yellowish Complexion, hang∣ing together without separation, more then as the weight breaks it in fal∣ling, being neither so thin nor so thick, but it will a little flat on the Ground; and indeed, both in Savour and Substance, resembling a sound Mans Ordure, then is he clean, well fed, and without Imperfection. If it be well Coloured, yet fall from him in round Knots or Pellets, so it be but the first and second Dung, the rest good, as aforesaid, it matters not, for it only shews he did eat Hay lately, and that will ever come away first. But if all his Dung be alike, then it is a Sign of foul feeding, and he hath either too much Hay, or eats too much Litter, and too little Corn. If his Dung be in round Pellets, and blackish, or brown, it shews in∣ward Heat in the Body. If it be Greasie, it shews foulness, and that Grease is Molten, but cannot come away. If he void Grease in gross Substance with his Dung, if it be white and clear then it comes away kindly, and there is no danger: but if it be yellow or putrified, then the Grease has long layn in his Body, and Sickness will follow, if not prevented. If his Dung be red and hard, then he hath had too strong Heats, and Costiveness will follow, if not prevented; if it be pale and loose, it shews inward coldness of Body, or too much moist and corrupt feeding. Signes from the Ʋrine. Though the Urine be not altogether so Material as the Dung, yet it hath some true Faces, as thus— Pale Colour. That Urine that is of a pale yellowish Colour, rather thick then thin, of a strong smell and piercing condition, is an healthful, sound and good Urine; but if it be of an high, red Complexion, either like Blood, or in∣clining to Blood, then hath he had either two sore Heats, been over∣ridden, or ridden too early after Winter-Grass. High Complexion. If the Urine be of an high Complexion, clear and transparent, like old March Beer, then he is inflamed in his Body, and hath taken some Surfeit. White like Cream. If it carry a white Cream on the top, it shews a weak Back or Con∣sumption of the Seed. Green. A green Urine shews Consumption of the Body.
Bloody streaks. A Urine with bloody Streaks shews an Ulcer in the Kidneys, and a black, thick, cloudy Urine shews Death and Mortality. Of Sickness in general. Whensoever upon any occasion, you shall find your Horse droop in Countenance, to rorsake his Meat, or to shew any other apparent sign of Sickness, if they be not great, you may forbear to let Blood, because where the Blood is spent, the Spirits are spent also, and they are not easily recovered. But if the Signes be great and dangerous, then by all means let Blood instantly, and for three Mornings together, (the Horse being Fasting) give him half an Ounce of the Powder (called by me) Diahex∣aple, and by the Ialians, Rgina Medicinae, the Queen of Medicines, brewed either in a Pint of Muskai or  or a Pint of the Syrup of Su∣gar, being two degrees above the ordinary Molosses, or for want thereof Molosses will serve the turn, and where all are wanting, you may take ei∣ther a Pint of Dragon-water, or a quart of the sweetest and strongest Al∣wort, or in extremity, take a quart of strong Ale or Beer, but then warm it a little before the Fire. This must be given with an Horn, and if he hath Ability of Body, ride him in some warm place after, and let him fast near two houres after the Riding. At Noon give him a sweet Mash, Cleath very warm, and let him touch no cold water. The making of the Diahexaple you may finde in the Table. General Observations in the Physi king Horses. Know then first, that whensoever you give your Horse any inward Por∣tion or Glister, give it him no more then Milk-warm, for there is nothing more Mortal to a Horse then the Scalding of his Stomach, for a Horse of all living Creatures, can worse endure to receive inwardly hot things: Be∣sides, let his Drinks and inward Medicines be given him easily and gently, let in making too much haste you suffocate him, which if it do, you must then let his Head loose, and walk him up and down till the Passion be past. Now for the Administring of Pills, alls, and such like Medicines, little Advice is required, if they be not made too great, only if you take forth his Tongue first, and then put them up into his Mouth upon the end of a stick, then let go his Tongue again, which when he draws it into his Mouth, he must needs force the alls down his Throat. You are to Ad∣minister your Physick ermore fasting, unless upon urgent occasion, (as in case of sudden and dangerous Sickness) and the longer he be kept Fast∣ing from Meat and Drink, as well before he taketh as Physick as after, it will be the better, for by that means his Medicine will work the more kindly in his Body; for he ought to be kept from eating and drinking, at least three houres before and after.
Purging Balls how made and given. ☞ Take an ounce, or an ounce and a half of Aloes Succotrina, more or less, (according to the strength and Constitution of your Horse) powder it very well, and mix it with a little fresh Butter; Then divide it into three equal parts, and cover them all over with fresh Butter, to prevent the bitter taste of the Aloes: Make them about the bigness of a large Wall-nut, shaped thick in the middle, and sharp at both ends, and given him in the Morning fasting. If you think them not stiff enough with But∣ter alone, you may mix some Bran with it, and then they will be as stiff as Dough or Paste. What Exercise is meet with Physick. A little moderate Exercise is very necessary, whereby his Physick may work the better, and the sooner, as to Trot him easily about, or to walk him up and down under the Wind in the warm Sun about a quarter of an hour. Then bring him into the Stable, and Cloath him up warm, and Litter him well, and let his keeper be with him three or four houres, ob∣serving his Postures, and as occasion may require, to help him with all things necessary for his use. No Creature hath a moister Body then a Horse. Of Mixing your Simples. If your Horses Sickness be a Feaver, to mix always your Simples with warm Water, with Honey, or with Oyl; but if the Disease be Coughs, Rhenms, or any thing that proceedeth of cold Causes, then mix them with good Ale or Wine, but if he be brought low with Sickness, then mix them with Milk and Eggs. Observations upon Raking a Horse. Observe whensoever you Rake your Horse with your Hand, (which is to draw his Ordure out of his Fundament, when he cannot dung, that you anoint your Hand with Sallet Oyl, or Butter, or Hogs-grease: the like you must ever do when you put up any Suppository; but when you Ad∣minister any Glister, you shall then but anoint the Glister-Pipe. Observations upon Blood▪letting. Observe in Blood-letting, that you take not so much Blood from a Colt as an old Horse, and but the fourth part from a yearling oal, you must likewise have regard to his Age and strength, taking more or less, according to his Ability of his Body. Lastly, letting of Blood is either to divert Sickness and preserve Health, or to refresh and cool the Spirits, or to diminish Blood, or to prge Grease and bad Humours. Before you let him blood, moderately chae or exercise him, and let him rest a day before his blood-letting, and three days after, not forgetting that April and
October are the two principal Seasons for that purpose, unless urgent oc∣casion requires. He will bleed the better if you let him drink before you blood him, conditionally you do not heat him. When he is bleeding, put your Finger into his Mouth, and tickle him in the Roof thereof, making him chaw and move his Chaps, and that will force it to spin forth, which when he hath bled enough, according to your Discretion, rub the Horses Body all over therewith, but especially the Place where he is blooded on, for the Ancient Farriers hold that it is en∣dued with a certain natural Vertue to comfort the weak and feeble Mem∣bers of a Horse, and to dry up all evil Humours. And Tie him up to the Rack for an hour or two, lest he bleed afresh, for that will turn his Blood. Signes to know when he wanteth Bleeding. If he stand in need of Bleeding, his Eyes will look Red, and his Veins will swell more then ordinary; also he will have a certain Itch about his Mane and Tail, and still be continually rubbing them, and sometimes will shed some of his Hair also, he will now and then pill about the Roots of his Eares, or in those places where the Head-stall of the Bridle lies; His Urine will be red and high-Coloured, and his Dung will be black and hard; Also if he hath red Inflammations, or little Bubbles on his Back, or doth not digest his Meat well, or if the Whites of his Eyes be yellow, or the inside of his Lips, either upper or nether; Many other Signes there are of Bleeding, but let these suffice, &c. Of Outward Sorrances what they are, and of General Observations in the Cure of them. Outward Sorrances, according to my meaning in this place, are taken two manner of Ways, that is to say, either it is an evil state and compo∣sition of the Body, which is to be discerned, either by the Shape, Num∣ber, Quality or sight of the Member, evil affected and difeased: or else it is the Loosning and Division of any Unity, which as it may chance diversly, so it hath divers Names accordingly. For if such a Division or Loosing be in the Bone, then it is called a Fracture; if it be in any Fleshy part, then it is called a Wound or an Ulcer; if it be in the Veins, then a Rup∣ture; if in the Sinews, then a Convulsion or Cramp; and if it be in the Skin, then it is called an Excortication: And of all these severally I in∣tend to treat of in the Chapters following. Now for as much as in this General Art of Chyrurgery, or Sorrance, there are certain General Ob∣servations or Caveats to be held inviolate, I will before I proceed any fur∣ther, give you a little taste thereof. Burning. First, You shall therefore understand, that it is the duty of every good
Farrier, never to burn or Cauterize with hot Iron, or with Oyl, or to make any Incision with Knife, where there be either Veins, Sinews or Joynts, but either somewhat lower, or somewhat higher. Corrasives. It. You shall never apply to any Joynt or Sinewy part, either Resalgar, Arsnick, Mercury, Sublimate, nor any such violent Corrasive. Cauterizing. It. It is ever better to Lance with a hot Iron then a Cold, that is, it is better to Cauterize then to Incise. Blood. It. Blood doth ever produce white and thick Matter, Choler a waterish and thin Matter, but not much, Salt Phlegm great abundance of Matter, and Melancholy many dry Scabs. Bleeding. It. You must never let Blood, except it be either to divert Sickness, and preserve Health, or to refresh and cool the Blood, or else to diminish Blood, or to purge bad Humors. It. When you let Blood, take but the fourth part from a Colt, which you take from a grown Horse. Swellings. It. In all Imposthumes and swelling Sores, called Tumors, you must ob∣serve the beginning of the Grief, the increase of the Grief, the perfection and state of the Grief; And lastly, the declination and ending of the Grief. It. In the beginning of every such swelling Impostumes, (if you cannot quite destroy them) use Repercussive Medicines, if they be not near some principal part of the Body; but then not for fear of endangering Life, and in Augmentation; use mollifying Medicines, and suppling to Ripen them, and when they are Ripe, Lance them, and let out the Corruption, or dry them up, and in the declination of them, use cleansing and healing Medicines. Hard and soft Swellings. It. All Swellings are either hard or soft, the hard will commonly cor∣rode, the soft will continue long. It. If you thrust your Finger upon any Swelling upon a Horses Legs, then if it presently rise again and fill, then is the Hurt new and recover∣able, but if the Dent do remain and continue still behind, then is it an old Hurt, and cometh of cold Humours, and asks great Art In heal∣ing.
Sores. When Sores begin to Matter, then they heal, but if the Putrefaction be great, then beware they rot not inwardly. Cauterizing. All Cauterizing or Burning, with hot Irons, straineth things enlarged, drieth up what is too much moistned, dissolveth things gathered together or hardened, draweth back things which are dispersed, and helpeth old Griefs; for it repineth, dissolveth, and maketh them to run and issue forth Matter, as you may finde more at large hereafter. Burning. It. You must sometimes burn under the Sore, to divert Humours, and sometimes above, to defend and withhold Humours. It. It is ever better to burn with Copper then with Iron, because Iron is of a malignant Nature, Steel is of an indifferent Vertue betwixt both. Actual and Potential Burning, what it is. It. All Actual Burnings is to burn with Instruments, and Potential Burning is to burn with Medicines, as are Causticks and Corrasives. Of blowing Powder into a Horses Eyes. It. If you blow Powder into a Horses Eyes often, it will make him blind. Of taking up of Vins. It. By no means take up any Veins in the fore-Legs, unless great ex∣tremity compel you: for there is nothing will sooner make a Horse stiff and Lame. Many other Observations there are, which because they are not so general as these be, I think it meet to omit. Five things a Parrier ought Principally to know. 1. First, what Diseases a Horse is inclineable to. 2. Secondly, What be the Causes of every disease in particular. 3. Thirdly, How, and by what ways and means these Diseases do accrew. 4. Fourthly, The Signes how to distinguish and know them. 5. And Lastly, the means and manner how to Cure them. Of Glisters and their Ʋses. The Nature and Property of Glisters are divers, therefore every Far∣rier ought to know to what end they serve, and which hath Drugs or Simples, they ought to be compounded, for every Glister is to be made ac∣cording to the Disease. Now some are to ease Griefs, and to allay the sharpness of the Humours, some to Bind, some to Loosen, and some to
purge, and some to heal Ulcers. These Glisters by cleansing the Guts, re∣fresh the Vital Parts, and prepare the Body, (if the Body be not at that time Soluble) to make the Purgation work the better, which if you give your Medicine without giving a Glister before it, you may stir up and pro∣voke the peccant Humours, which by reason they cannot finde present way sorth, being hindred by Oppilations in the Guts, through Costiveness and Ventosity, and other Impediments, do attempt to make their Passage a contrary way, which cannot be done but with great hazard to the life of the poor Beast. Now for the Composition of Glisters, you shall understand that they be made of four things, that is, of Decoctions, of Drugs, of Oyl, of such like Unctuous Matter, as Butter, or soft Grease, and fourthly, of divers Salts to provoke the Vertue expulsive. A Decoction is a Broth made of certain Herbs, as Mallowes, Marsh-Mallowes, Pellory, Camomile, and sometimes of white Lilly Rots, and other such like things, which we do boil in Water to a third part, and sometimes we use in stead of Herbs and Water, to take the Fat of Beef-broth, of a Sheeps-Head, Milk, Whey, and some such kind of Liquor, mingled sometimes either with Honey or Sugar, according to the quality of the disease; the Glister being either Lenitive, that is to say, casing of Pain; or Glutinative, which is, joyning of things together; or else Abstersive, which is wiping away or cleansing of ilthy Matter. You ought to Administer according to the Age, Strength, Greatness and Corpulency of the Horse; for if he be a Horse of a strong and able Body, of large growth and stature, fat and lusty, we use to put into the Glister of the Decoction three Pints; but if he be of a small growth, weak, sick, feeble or lean, then we do put in a quart of the same at most. Of Oyl we use to put in half a Pint, of Salt two or three drams at most, and sometimes we put Verjuice, sometimes Honey, as we finde cause; Drugs we use, are Sene, Cassia, Agarik, Anniseeds, Oyl of Dill, Oyl of Camomile, Oyl of Violets, Sugar-Candy, &c. You ought not to exceed the quantity of three Ounces in one Glister at the most, neither must you exceed of Butter four Ounces, and let it not be above luke-warm when you give it him, let him be somewhat empty, and let him be Raked before you Administer it, give it him in a Glister-Pipe made for that purpose. Which ought to be twelve Inches in the Shank, which must be put home; and having the Confection within the Bladder, wring it with a very good strength into his Body, then draw out the Pipe by degrees cut of his Body, and not all at once, and clap his Tail close to his Tuel, and so hold it with your Hand close about half an hour at the least, to the end it may work in his Belly the better. A Glister for a Horse that is very Costive of Body, and cannot Dung. Take the Fat of Beef-broth a Pint and an half, of English Honey half a
Pint, adding thereto of white Salt two drams, mix them well together, and Administer it Blood-warm, and clap his Tail close to his Tuel, and there hold it for half an hour at least, and if then it will not work as I am confident it will, let him Trot about easily about half an hour, and set him up warm Cloathed and Littered, and let him stand upon his Trench four or five houres, during which time he will purge kindly, then unbit him and give him sweet Hay, and an hour after he hath eaten give him a Mash of Malt, and an hour after that, white Water, and let him drink no cold Water in a day or two after. The Vertues of it. The Nature of this Glister is, to open and loosen the Body, to bring away with it all offensive Humours, to remove Obstructions ingendred in the Body by means of excessive Heat; it cleanseth the Guts, and slicketh away all slimy Substance which is residing in the Guts. The Horse that received this Glister was a small Seotch Nag, and was grown weak and poor, and low of his Flesh, but if he had been a great, large, fat, healthy or Corpulent Horse, you might have made it stronger. Another Laxative Glister. Take the Decoction of Mallowes, and mix therewith fresh Butter four Ounces, or Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, and so luke-warm Administer it, and or∣der him as you did before. The Nature of it. This is of all the Glisters the most gentle, and is very Lenitive and a great Easer of pain, it is good for a Horse that is taken with any Con∣traction or Convulsion, and generally for any Costiveness in a Horse whatsoever, proceeding from any Surfeits or Sickness. Another Glister Laxative. Take Pellitory two Handfuls, or for want thereof, Melilot two Handfuls, or if you cannot get any of them, then two Handfuls of Camomile, but Pel∣litory is the best, boyl it to a Decoction, and add to it of Verjuice and Sal∣ter-Oyl, of each half a Pint, of Honey four Ounces, of Cassia two Ounces, mix altogether, and apply it Blood-warm Glister-wise. The Vertues of it. It will open the Body and Guts of the Horse very well, it will take from him all noxious and offensive Humours; it will carry away all spungy Matter; it will allay the sharpness of Humours; it will cleanse old Ʋl∣cers; it will refresh and comfort the Vital Parts. But if you find you have given him too great a quantity, so that he Purgeth or Scoureth too much, then you may give him this Glister Restringent.
A Restringent Glister. Take the aforesaid Decoction one Pint, and as much of Cows Milk (as it cometh warm from her) and put to it the Yolks of three New laid Eggs, well beaten and mixed with the said Liquor, and give it him Blood-warm. This is only to be applied to a Horse that is very Laxative, or that doth empty himself too much. A Glister for a fat Horse that cannot be kept clean. Take Mallowes three Handfuls, Marsh-mallow Roots cleansed and bruis∣ed, and Violet leaves, of each two Handfuls, Flax-seed three spoonfuls, as many of the Cloves of white Lilly Roots as you can hold in your hand: Boyl all these in fair water from a Gallon to a quart, and strain it, and put thereto of Sene one Ounce, which must be infused or steeped in the Liquor three houres, standing upon the hot Embers, then put to it of Sallet Oyl, half a Pint, and being Blood-warm Administer it. A Glister in Case of desperate Sickness. Take of the Oyl of Dill, Oyl of Camomile, Oyl of Violets, of Cassia, of each half an Ounce, and of brown Sugar-Candy in powder, three Ounces, then take half a Handful of Mallow-leaves, boyl them to a Decoction in fair Water, then strain it, and put to it all the fore-named Ingredients, and Administer it Blood-warm. This helpeth all Feavers, it is good a∣gainst the Pestilence, and all Languishing Diseases, most excellent against Surfeits, either by Provender or otherwise, and it will occasion great strength in a short time, if it be rightly made, and carefully given. A Glister for the Pestilence and all Feavers. Take the Pulpe of Colloquintida, half an Ounce (I mean the Seeds and Skin taken away) of Dragantium three quarters of an Ounce, of Centaury and of Wormwood, of each half a Handful, of Castoreum a quarter of an Ounce, boyl all these in three quarts of water to a quart, then strain it, and dis∣solve into the Broth, of Gerologundinum three Ounces, and of white Salt three Drams, of Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, and Blood-warm Administer it. A Glister for the Cholick. Take Salt water, or new made Brine two Pints, dissolve therein a pretty quantity of Sope, and so Blood-warm Administer it. Vertues. This is very good for the Cholick, or any Sickness or Griping in the Guts or Belly. And let this suffice for Glisters. Advice given upon giving Glisters. 1. Before you Administer any Glister, be sure to Rake him.
2. When you put in the Glister-Pipe, apoint it first with Butter or Sallet-Oyl, and that you put it in and out gently, and by degrees, you must an∣oint likewise the Hand and Arm. 3. Let him keep it above half an hour, by holding his Tuel close to his Fundament. 4. That you do Administer it but Blood-warm. 5. That you squeeze and press between your Hands the Bladder strongly. 6. And lastly, that you let him not drink any cold water in a day or two after, but let it either be a sweet Mash, or else white Water. ☞ What things are put into a Laxative Glister. Pellitory, Melile, Camomile, (but Pellutory is the best,) and of this would I make a Decoction, and to this Decoction would I put Sallet-Oyl, Ho∣ney, Aloes and Verjuice of the Crab, Brank-urfine, Mallows or Marsh-Mal∣lows, Fennel Roots, Parsley Roots, Jack by the Hedge. The Nature of the Principal Drugs. Agarick purgeth the Brain, Alloes the Breast and Body, Rhubarb purgeth the evil water, and it openeth the Liver, and helpeth Obstructions and Opilations, Aristolochia rotunda mollifieth the Breast, Liver and Lungs, and Baaury or Bay-berries do mortisie the peccant humours which do engender in the Breast or Entrails, near about the Heart; and Saffron (if it be discreetly given) doth marvellously comfort and enlighten the Heart. What the true Nature of Rubarb it. Rubarb hath two contrary Natures, for if you either scrape, grate or cut it, then it is a Loosner, for it dissolveth and openeth the Liver, and ex∣pelleth the Obstructions thereof; it expulseth all bad Humours in and a∣bout the Heart, Liver and Spleen; it cleanseth the Body, and sendeth a∣way the peccant Humours among the Excrements, and all such things as may annoy or offend the Entrails. But if you shall pound or beat it in a Mortar, or otherwise, the spirit whereof being a subtil Body, will Transire and flie away, whereby the Operation thereof will be to bind, and be no way profitable. The Nature of a Suppository. The Nature of Suppositories are to help a Horse that cannot well empty himself, for a Suppository causeth him to discharge himself of many su∣perfluous and evil Humours, which do disturb, annoy and distemper his Bod with their peccant qualities and conditions, for they breed bad  which oft-times good Diet cannot amend, and therefore must be sent away by Purgation, that is to say, by Suppository, or Glister, or Por∣tion,
A Suppository is but a Preparative to a Glister or Portion, and is of all other things the gentlest you can use; it will Loosen the Guts, which may be bound and clogged with dry, hot and hard Excrements, which a Glister will not so well do. The first Suppository. Take a Candle of four or five in the pound, and cut off three Inches at the smaller end, and anoint the biggest part of it either with Sallet-Oyl or fresh Butter, and so put it into his Fundament, then with your Hand hold his Tail to his Tuel about half an hour, by which time the Suppository will be dissolved, then take his Back and Trot him up and down till he do begin to empty and purge himself, for by this means it will work the better and more kindly. This is she most gentle of all Suppositories that can be given. This dissolveth all hard, dry and hot Excrements, and sendeth them forth, and besides, it suppleth the Guts. Another, if you find him so weak, that you dare not without the peril of his life, ad∣minister unto him any Portion, or Purging Medicine, then give him this Suppository. The second Suppository. Take of Common Honey six Ounces, of Salt-Niter one Ounce and a half, of Wheat-Flower, and of Anniseeds in fine Powder, of each an Ounce, boyl all these to a stiff thickness, and so make it into Suppositories, then take one of them and anoint it all over with Sallet-Oyl, and your Hand also, and so put it up into his Fundament the length of your Hand, then Tie his Tail betwixt his Legs, by fastening it to his Girts, and let it remain so half an hour, then ride and order him as before. This is good in case of Surfeits or inward Sickness. Suppository the third. Take a piece of Castle-Sope, and paring it, bring it into the fashion of a Suppository; and apply it, and order him as before is taught you. This is special good to purge Phlegm. Suppository the fourth. Take so much Saven as will suffice, and stamp it to a Mash, and stamp with it Stavesakar and Salt, of each two ounces; boyl these in common Honey so much as will suffice, till it be thick, and so make it up into Sup∣positories, and administer one of them as you did before, and order him o likewise. This purgeth Choler. Suppository the Fifth. Take an angry red Onion, and Pill it, and Jag it Cross-ways with your Knife, and so administer it, and order him as before. This purgeth Me∣lancholy.
Suppository the Sixth. Take common Honey a pint, and boil it till it be thick, and make it up into Suppositories as it cooleth, and administer it, and order him as before prescribed. This purgeth ill Humours, it cooleth and comforteth the Body very much, and causeth a good Appetite to Meat. Observations to be observed in Giving of Suppositories, Glisters or Portions. First, you must do it in a Morning Fasting, unless Necessity urgeth the contrary. Secondly, you must not at those times suffer him to drink any cold wa∣ter, no, not with exercise, but either sweet Mashes, or white water. Thirdly, It is very needful, that before you administer either of them, to Rake him. And Fourthly, That he be after kept warm. Of Purgations and their Uses. Purgation is an emptying and voiding of superfluous Humours, which do cumber, pester and disturb the Body with their peccant condition; which ill Humours do breed bad Nutriment, which when it will not be concoct∣ed and amended, either by fair means or by the help of Nature, then it must be compelled, forced and driven away by Purgation, Vomit, Glister or Suppository; but to speak only of Purgations, Purging of Horses are either by Pills, or Portions; Pills are any solid or substantial stuff fixed together in one Body, and being made into round Balls are cast down the Horses Throat. A Portion is when you give him any liquid purging Matter to drink, whether it be Purging Powders dissolved in Wine or Ale; or that if it be any other liquid stuff. Now Pills purge and make clean the Head and Brain, bringing Phlegm and other gross Humours down into the Excrements. And Potions cleanse the Stomach, Guts, and every o∣ther inward Member, VVhat a skilful Farrier ought to know before he goes about to Purge a Horse, he ought to consider the Nature of the Simples. Now the Art of the true Farrier is in choosing of the Simples, where∣of these Pills or Portions are to be compounded, and in skilfully applying the same. First, then he ought to know what ill Humours he is opprest with, as whether it proceed from Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy, and where they do most abound, and then what Simples are best to purge those Humours, and with what quality or temperament they are indued, for some Simples are most violent and next Cousins to strong Poisons, as Sca∣mony or Colloquintida: some again are gentle, as Manna, Cassia, Whey,
Prunes, and such like; and some are neither too violent nor too gentle, but of a Mean, as Rubarh, Agarick, Sene and Aloes. The Nature of the Disease, the Strength of the Horse, and the Climate he was bred in. You ought to consider the Nature of the Disease, the Strength of the Horse, and with them joyn the Nature, Strength and Quantity of the Me∣dicine, he must consider likewise the Climate wherein he was bred; And you are to make a difference between delicate and tender Horses, and strong and sturdy Horses, and in such Cases the quality and quantity is to be looked into of every Simple. The Climate likewise is to be respected, whether it be too hot or too cold, and you are not to administer as hot Simples in the Summer as in the Winter, nor so cold things in the Winter as in the Summer, you ought to have respect to the day, and to chuse that always that is most temperate, for too much Heat makes a Horse faint, and too much cold spoils the working of the Medicine. When he is to have his Portion. Give him his Portion in the Morning, after he hath fasted from Meat and Drink all the Night before. To Ride him after it. After he hath received his Portion, ride him gently after it, about an hour, and set him up, and let him stand on the Bit two houres after it, well Littered and Cloathed. If he be sick, let him lie down, but if that will do him no good, and that you finde him so sick that you fear his life, then give him a quart of warm Milk with a little Saffron in it, and he will do well, and give him no other Meat then a Math of Malt and white water to drink till his Medicine hath done working. How to make a Mash. Take half a Peck of Ground Malt and put it into a Pale, then put in as much scalding hot Water as will wet it very well, then stir it about half an hour, till tasting the Water you finde it as sweet as Honey, then being luke-warm give it to the Horse to drink. This Mash is only to be used after you have given him a Purge to make it work the better, or after hard labour, or instead of drink in the time of any great Sickness. Now to come to particular Receipts and Medicines themselves; and though the Ancient Farriers do make but two kinds, that isto say, Pills and Purgations; yet I divide them into three, that is to say, Scourings, Pills and Purgations. VVhat Scourings are. Scourings are those wholesom, Natural and gentle purging Medicines,
which stirring up no great Flux of Humours, do only keep the Body clean from such Evils as would arise and grow, being every way as wholesom in Health as in Sickness, and may most properly be termed Preparatives, or Preparers of the Body to entertain more stronger Medicines. Scouring by Grass. To speak of the most gentle and natural Scouring, which is Grass, which you are to give but for fifteen days together, and no more, for after that it Fatteth, the best Scouring Grass is a new Mown Meadow, for that will Rake his Guts very well, nor will he in such a place gather Flesh; but if you intend to Fat him, you are to take him out from thence, and put him into some other Pasture, where the Sithe hath not been. And this manner of Scouring will cause him to empty himself well of all his evil Hamours and Surseits, ease his Limbs marvellous well, do his Legs and Feet very much good, refine his corrupt Blood, and make him agile and full of Spirit. Next unto Grass is Sorrage, which is only the Blades of green Corn, as VVheat, Rye, Barley, and such like, being given him seven days and no more, which cleanseth and cooleth the Body very much, so doth the leaves of Sallows, and of the Elm-green Thistles, likewise being cut up and given him for about five days is a good Scourer. And the last of these gentle Scourings is the Mash of Malt as ascresaid; but as you are prescribed there to make it of a quarter of a Peck of Malt, you are to take a larger here (if you use it for a Scouring) a Peck of Malt, and put to it a handful or more of beaten Hemp-seed. A Scouring to be given after a Sweat. ☞ Take half an Ounce of Rozin of Jallop in Powder, half an Ounce of Cream of Tartar powdred, and half an Ounce of Licorish in Powder, make these up into Balls with fresh Butter, about the bigness of a small Wall-nut, and give him four or five at a time, in a Horn-full of Beer, one after another. Scourings of a little stronger Nature are these. To Mix with his Oats a Handful or two of Hemp-seed, or to take a Handful of the Powder of dried Box-leaves, and as much of Brimstone, and mix it amongst his Provender. These are to be used after Labour when he hath Sweat much. They Purge the Head and Stomach. These two Scourings work upon no Matter but what Nature will excel, they purge the Head, Stomach and Intrails, they kill all kind of VVormes, and dry up Phlegm. Scourings of a stronger Nature. Take of Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, of New Milk from the Cow a Pint,
brew it together, and give it him luke-warm, or else take a Pint of Mus∣cadine, and half a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him to drink, or the same quantity of Oyl and sack mixt together, and give it him luke-warm. Their Vertues. These Scourings clense the Head, Body and Guts, from all Phlegm or Molten Grease, which any violent labour hath dissolved, they are exceed∣ing good for any manner of Cold, or stopping of the Wind-pipes, and if you add to them good store of Sugar-Candy it will be the better. How to Order a Horse before you give him Physick. In Winter if his Body be purged, it must be prepared by Blood-letting with Artificial Diet; you are to keep him a day or two without Hay, Straw, or such like hard Meats, which will hinder the Working of the Physick, and he must be kept for a time from all manner of Meat, because Emptiness is a great help to Physical Operation, otherwise it may happen to do more hurt then good. Two or three days before you purge him, let his Meat be either Wheat or Rye-Bran, prepared like as has been taught you, or else good Bread made on purpose with Beans, Pease, and some Rye in it. Or else good sweet Oats clean Sifted, and let his Drink be white Water only. And that Morning you intend to give him his Purge, let him be Fasting from either Meat or Drink. The easiest sort of Pills. The easiest Pills are these, either take twenty Cloves of Garlick clean pill'd and bruised, then a quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, and so roul up the Garlick in four or five Balls, as big as two Wall-Nuts a piece, and throw them down his Throat one after another; or else take a quarter of a pound of Butter, and as much red Saunders, beat them very well to∣gether in a Mortar, and make them up in Balls, and give him them as you did the other; or else take a handful of Rosemary-leaves chopped very small, and mix them with a quarter of a pound of Butter, and make it into round Balls as the other, and give them the Horse; or else take five green Figs and put them down his Throat. The strongest sort of Pill. Take one pound of Lard laid in water two houres, and take no∣thing but two Ounces of the clean Fat thereof, and stamp it in a Mortar, and put thereto of Licorish, of Anniseeds, and of Fennegreek beaten to powder, of each one Ounce, of Alloes beaten into powder one Ounce, of Agarick half an Ounce, knead them altogether into Paste, and make three or four Balls of them, and give them the Horse. This Pill is not to be given but to a Horse of great Stature, and strong in Health of Body.
Purg tns that are the strongest Crsrs. 1. Take Myrrh and mix it with a Pint of white-Wine and it will purge all Sickness that proceedeth of  the Signs whereof his Belly will swell, be very hot, neither dang nor break Wind. Or 2. Take a Pint of Wine, and bea a raw Egg therein, and add to it a quarter of an Ounce of  and half an Ounce of Myrrh beaten to powder, and give it him luke-warm, and it will purge all inward Dis∣cases proceeding of  Or 3. Two spoonfuls of the powder of Diaente given with half a Pint of Swines Grease, purgeth all Diseases proceeding of  Or 4. Take as much black Sope as the bigness of a Wall-nut, a quart of new Milk, and a quarter of a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him luke-warm, and it purgeth all cold Infirmiteis, but it will make him exceeding Sick. Or 5. Take the Guts of a Tench or Barbel cut into small pieces, and give it him in a quart of white-Wine, and it will purge him from all Costive∣ness and pain in the Guts. Or 6. Rye being boiled so that it burst not, and dried again, and given him in stead of Provender, purgeth and killeth all manner of Wormes. Or ☞ 7. Take of Alocs Saccorina one ounce, two drams of Rozin of Jellop, Gentian, Aristolochia and Elecampane, of each a dram, mix them well in a quart of Ale, and two Ounces of Butter, with two Eggs whites, and all well beaten; shake in the Aloes last, when it is a little warm, and give it him. Or 8. Take of Radish Roots one Ounce, of the Root called Panax, and Scamony, of each half an Ounce, beaten altogether, and boiled in a quart of Honey, and give him two spoonnls of it to drink in a quart of Ale warm, and this will purge all gross Humours whatsoever. Or 9. Take Elecampane Roots boiled in Milk till they be soft, and add them to half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him luke-warm, and this will purge and cleanse any kind of Glaunders. Or 10. Take of sweet Sope a quarter of a pound, made up into Balls, and give them the Horse, and it will purge all Humours whatsoever, both vi∣clently and most abundantly. Or 11. Take of white-Wine a pint, or for want of that, a quart of New Ale, so much of the powder  of the best and choicest, as you may take up upon a shilling at four times, give it him warm. This will purge away his filth and lime, and carry away his peccant Humours which S feits hath ingendred. Or ☞ 12. Take an Ounce or better of the best Aloes, and after you have beaten it to very fine powder, then work it up with a little sweet Butter, and then divide it into three parts, and cover them all over with clear Butter, as big as a small wash-Ball, and give them in a Morning Fasting
upon the point of a Stick, and give him a Horn-full of warm Beer after them, and Ride him after them, and set him up warm. Prob um est. Or 13. Take of the strongest Ale-wort one quart, of ordinary Honey a quarter of a Pint, of London-Treale two Ounces, mix and brew alto∣gether well, and so give it him Blood-warm, and keep him upon the Trench warm Cloathed and well Littered six houres after, and let his Drink be white water or a sweet Mash: This both purgeth and com∣forteth, put into his Drink, either the powder of Brimstone, or of Fene∣greek or Turmerick, or  one or more together, according as he will be brought to like, which being well mixed, put into his Drink one spoonful at once. Or 14. Take of ordinary Honey, and mingle it with his Oats, which must be mixed by rubbing the Oats and Honey betwixt the Hands; let him eat his Oates thus mingled till you finde him quite Cured; which will be when he hath quite done Running at the Nose. This is one of the best and most certain Cordials that I know, for this disperseth all Phlegm and Choler; it also purgeth the Head, Brain and Blood, it venteth evil Hu∣mours, it causeth good Digestion, and freeth him from Glaunders, Colds, Catarrhs, Rhums, running at the Note, and the like. Or 15. When you let Blood you may save it in a Bowl or Dish, keeping it stirring to keep it from Clotting, and give it him to drink in a Drenching-Horn, mingled with a Handful of Salt. This is good for a Cold. Or ☜ 16. Take an Ounce of Aloes Succotrina beaten to powder, and as much of the powder of Rozin of Jallop as will lie upon a six pence, mix them well with a little fresh Butter, then divide it into three parts, and cover each part all over again with Butter, about the bigness of a good handsom Wash-ball, and give them him in the Morning Fasting, with a drenching Horn-full of strong warm Beer after every Ball; And order him as you have Directions for sick Horses. This is a very good Receipt to scour a Hide-bound Horse that is sick of Moulten Grease, and that does not thrive, nor Fill himself, nor carry a good Coat. Or ☜ 17. Take a handful of Groundsel, half a handful of dried (or less of green) Wormwood, and half a handful of Red Sage chopped very small, and boiled in three Pints of strong Beer or Ale; Then strain the Beer from the Herbs, and put into it a good Piece of Butter, with as much of the powder of Mechoan as will lie upon a broad shilling, and give it him luke-warm in the Morning Fasting, and order him as you do sick Horses. This Drink purgeth slime and Moulten Grease in Lumps, and makes a Horse thrive very well both in Winter and Summer. See the second Part for Purgations, for anothor of this kind. ☜ Bran, how Boiled and Prepared to give a Horse that hath a Cold; As also what Seeds you are to give him amongst his Provender for the Cure of it. Set a Kettle over the Fire almost full of water, and when it is ready to
boil put in your Bran, and let it boil about a quarter of an hour; Then take it off and cover it with a Cloth or Board, let it stand till it cool a little, and give it him early in the Morning as hot as he can conveniently eat it; At Night let his Meat be Oates and white Water, but be sure you put into his Provender the quantity of an Egg-shell full of these Powders grossly beaten (lest he blow them away) viz. Linseed, Cummin∣seed, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves, Fennegreek, Sileris-Montani, of each of these two Ounces, and of Brimstone six Ounces; but before you give him his Oates and Powders, give him white Water, and Rub him and Litter him well; Let him seed on Wheat-straw about an hour before you give him his Oates, and afterwards give him some Hay. This way of Feeding a∣bout eight or nine days together, will quite free him from his Cold, if it be not too violent. ☞ Horse-Spice how to make. These several Powders mixed together make it, viz. Rubarb one Ounce, Turmerick two Ounces, Eleoampane six Ounces, Brimstone four Ounces, Fennel-seeds four Ounces, Grains of Paradise four Ounces, &c. Put all these together in a Glass or Gally-pot, and keep them till you have occasion to use them. The quantity that you are to give your Horse, is either greater or smaller, according to the strength and Consti∣tution of your Horse; you are not to exceed above an Ounce at a time, mixed with a spoonful of the best Sallet-Oyl, and a spoonful or two of the Treacle of Jean, dissolved in a quart of strong Beer, which is very good for a Cold, and to make a Horse thrive. Or you may give him an Ounce of them in three pints of warm Beer or Ale, after Blood-letting, to pre∣vent Diseases. If you leave out the Rubarb, you may give him a greater quantity, for that is a great Purger. Rules to know where a Horse Halteth, either before or behind. If he do Halt before, his Grief must of necessity be either in the Shoul∣der, or Knee, or in the Shank, or in the Pastern, or in the Foot; if it be in the Shoulder, it must be either towards the Withers, or in the pitch of the Shoulder, you may know it in that he will a little draw his Leg after him, and not handle it so nimbly as he doth the other, if he cast his Leg more outward then he doth the other, it is a sign that he is Lame, and that the Grief lieth in his Shoulder; and if you take him in your Hand turn him short on either Hand, you shall finde him to complain of that Shoul∣der he is Lame of, and he will either favour that Leg, or trip in the turn∣ing, you may finde him Lame by his standing in the Stable, and he will hold out that Leg that is Lame more then the other; and if he complains more when you are on his Back then otherwise, then be sure the Grief lies in the Withers, and Gripe him hard, ▪and you shall perceive him to shrink, and perhaps offer to bite. If he tread thick and short before, then is the Grie
upon the Pitch of the Shoulder close to the Breast, which you may finde by setting your Thumb hard to the place, and by Thrusting him with it, if you would have him to go back, whereat he will shrink and put back his Leg, Foot and Body; if the Grief be in the Elbow, you may know it by pinching him with your fore-Finger and Thumb, and he will hold up his Leg and offer to bite; and these be all the Griefs that lie in the Shoul∣der of a Horse. If the Griefs lie lower, they must be either in the Knee, in the Skin, in the Pastern, or in the Foot. When in the Knee. If it be in the Knee, you may find it by his stiff going, for he will not bend it so nimbly as he doth the other. If it be in the Shank or Shin∣bone, you may see it, and likewise feel the same, it being then a Back-Si∣new strain, Splint, or some such like Sorrance or Annoyance If it be in the bending of the Knee, then it is a Mallender, which is also easily descried; when it is in the Pastern or Joynt, then you may know it by his not bending it so well as the other; besides, if you put your Hand upon the place, you shall find it very hot; if it be in the Foot, it must be either in the Cronet or in the Sole; if in the Cronet it is probable it came by some strain or wrench; if in the Heel, then it came by some over-reach, or else by some Disease in or about the Frush; If in the Sole, then it came by some Prick, Accloy, Retoire, Nail, Stub, Stone or Gravel. And thus I have shewed unto you the several ways that cause a Horse to be Lame be∣fore, and how to know and distinguish the places grieved, together with the occasion of every particular Grief. How to distinguish an old Grief from a New. You have three Ways to finde out his Lameness, in what Joynt, Limb or Member of the Body soever. 1. The first way is to cause him to be turned at the Halters end, on ei∣ther hand, suddenly and swistly, upon as hard a way as you can pick out; and if he have any Ach, Wrench or Grief in his fore-parts, it will appear: for when he turneth upon that Hand that the Grief is on, he will favour that Leg, and so run both towards you and from you, especially done at a little yielding Hill; and if he have any imperfection, he will soon shew it, for he will favour that Leg wherein the Grief resideth▪ But if you cannot finde it out this way. 2. Then your second way must be to take his Back, and Ride him till you have thoroughly heat him, then set him up for two or three houres till he be cold, then turn him at the Halters-end, or Ride him, and you may easily discover the least Grief that may be in him. 3. A third way there is, and that to know whether the Grief proceeds from a hot or cold cause, for if it proceed from a hot cause, he will Halt most when he is hot; but if it be of a cold cause, then he will Halt least when he is hot, and most ridden and travelled, and most at his
first setting sorth, whilest he is cold, and thus much for Lameness and Halting before. Now finding that his Lameness is not before, you may then conclude, if he be Lame at all it must needs be behind, and then it must of necessity be either in the Foot or in the nether Joynt, in the Pastern or in the Leg, in the Ham or in the Hoof, in the stiffling place or Joynt, or in the Hip. If the Grief be either in the Leg, Pastern or Foot, you may know it by the same Signes as I have inculcated to you already in the fore-Legs. If it be in the bending of the Ham it must be a Selander. If it be in the Hoof, then it is either a Bone or Blood-spavin, which is easie enough to be discerned, or else it must come of some Blow, Wrench or Strain, neither then will the swelling easily appear, which you may perceive either by the stiffness of the Joynt, or you may find the place to be hot and burning. If the pain lie in the stiffing place, you may know it by his Gate, for in his going he will cast the stifle-Joynt outward, and the Bone on the inside will be bigger then the other, besides his Toe will hardly touch the Ground. If it be in the Hip, which is upon the side of the Buttock; and if it be newly taken, you may know it in that he will go side-long like a Crab. And if it be an old Hurt, the Hip will be fallen lower then the other, and the flesh to shrink, which to discover it the sooner run him at the full length of the Rein, and he will be sure to favour that Leg the Grief is in; but if you find him to go upright without favouring any Leg, then take his Back and ride him till he be warmed, and then set him up till he be cold, and then lead or trot him in your Hand as you did before, and if he be lame at all he will be sure to complain. And so much for Lameness before and behind. CHAP. I. The True Art of Pairing and Shooing all mamr of Hoofs, and in what Point the Art of Shooing doth consist. The Art of Shooing consisteth in these Points, viz. in Paring the Hoof well, in making the Shoo of good Stuff, in well-fashioning the Web there∣of, and well-piercing the same, in Fitting the Shoo unto the Horses Foot, in making Nails of good stuff, and well-fashioning of the same; and fi∣nally, in well driving of the said Nails, and cleansing of the same. But sith neither Pairing nor Shooing is no absolute thing of it self, but hath respect unto the Foot or Hoof, (for the Shoo is to be Fitted to the Foot, and not the Foot to the Shoo) and there be divers kinds of Hoofs both good and bad, requiring great diversity, as well of Pairing as Shooing; it is meet therefore that we speak of the diversities of Hoofs, and then shew you how they ought to be paired and shod. CHAP. II. Of Hoofs and divers Kinds thereof. . Of Hoofs, some be perfect, and some imperfect. The perfect Hoof
is that which is round, smooth, tough and short, so as he may tread more on the Toe then on the Heel, and also right, and somewhat hollow with∣in, but not over-hollow, having a narrow Frush and broad Heels. The imperfect Hoof. The imperfect Hoof is that which lacketh any of these Properties be∣fore-said, belonging to a perfect Hoof. If the Hoof be not round but broad, and spreading out of the sides and quarters, that Horse for the most part hath narrow heels, and in continuance of time will be flat Foot∣ed, which is a weak Foot, and will not carry a Shoo long, nor Travel far, but soon surbate; and by treading more on his Heels then on his Toes, will go low on his Pasterns, and such Feet through their weakness be much subject to false quarters, and to Gravelling, which is most commonly seen in Flanders Horses, and such as are bred in moist Grounds. Brittle and rugged Hoofs. Secondly, if the Hoof be not smooth, but rugged and full of Circles, like Rams-horns, then it is not only unseemly to the Eye, but also it is a sign that the Foot is in no good temper, but too hot and dry, and that makes it to be Brittle, which defect is often seen in our English Horses. Long Hoofs. Thirdly, if it be long, then it will cause the Horse to tread all upon the Heels, and to go low on his Pasterns, and thereby to breed Widgall, whereunto the Jennets of Spain be much subject, by reason of their long Hoofs. Cro ked Hoofs. Fourthly, if the Hoof be not right but crooked. viz. broad without and narrow within, whereby the Horse is splay-footed, then it will cause him to tread more inward then outward, and to go so close with his Joynts to∣gether, as he cannot well Travel without enterfering, or perhaps striking one Leg so hard against the other, as he becometh Lame. But if he be broad within, and narrow without, that is not so hurtful, notwithstanding it will cause him to Gravel sooner on the out-side, then on the inside. Flat Hoofs. Fifthly, if the Hoof be flat and not hollow within, is most commonly seen in Frezons and Flanders Horses, then it breedeth such inconveniencies as are before declared in the first imperfect Hoof. And again, if it be ever-hollow, then it will dry the faster and cause him to be Hoof-bound, for the over-hollow Hoof is a streight narrow Hoof, and groweth upright, for though the Horse treadeth upright, and not on his heels, yet such kind of Hoofs will dry over-fast, unless they be continually stopt, and cause him
to be Hoof-bound, which Lameth him, making him to Halt, whereunto the Jennets and Barbary-Horses are much subject. Broad Frushes. Sixthly, If the Frush be broad, then the Heels be weak and so soft, as you may almost bend them together, and then he will never tread boldly on the Stones, or on hard Ground. Narrow Heels. Seventhly, Narrow Heels be tender, and he will at last grow to be Hoof-bound, to which defects the Jennets are most commonly subject. CHAP. III. Of Pairing the perfect Hoof and fore-Feet. First, Pair the Scat of the Shooe, as even and plain as may be, that so it may sit close, and not bare more on one place then another, and take more of the Toe then the Heel, for the Heels must be higher then the Toes, be∣cause all the weight of the Horses fore-Body lieth upon the Quarters and Heels of the fore-Feet. And therefore those Parts must be most maintain∣ed, and taken off with the Butteris as little as may be, for the Heels are na∣turally weaker then the Toes. But in the Pairing of the hinder-Feet is clean contrary, as you shall sinde hereafter in its proper place. CHAP. IV. Of Shooing the perfect Hoof and fore-Feet, and how the Shoo, Pairing and Nail should be made. Make your Shoo of Spanish Iron, with a broad Web, fitting it to the Hoof, and let the Spunges be thicker and more substantial then any other part of the Shoo, yea, and also somewhat broad, so as the Quarters on both Sides may appear without the Hoofs a straw bredth, to guard the Coffin, which is the strength of the Hoof, and when you come to the pier∣cing thereof, pierce it from the Quarter to the hard Toe, but not back∣ward towards the Heel, and that the holes may be wider on the out-side then on the in-side, and that the Circle of the piercing may be more distant from the edge of the Toe, then from the edge of the Quarter, whereas it beginneth because the Hoof is thicker forward then backward, and there∣fore more hold to be taken. Make your Nails of the same Iron as afore∣said, the Heads whereof should be square, and not fully so broad beneath as above, but answerable to the piercing holes, so as the Heads of the Nails may enter in and fill the same, appearing somewhat above the Shoo, and then they will stand sure without shogging, and endure longer, and that that which pierceth them be of the same Size as the Nails, that is to say,
great above and small beneath, which our common Smith, little regard, for they make the holes as wide on the inside as the outside, and their Nails of so great a Shouldering by driving them over-hard upon the Nail-hole, as that the Heads, or rather Necks of the said Nails cannot enter into the holes. For to say the truth, a good Nail should have no shouldering at all, but be made with a plain and square Neck, so as it may justly fill the piercing hole of the Shoo, for otherwise the Head of the Nail standing high, and the Neck thereof being weak, either it breaketh off or else bendeth upon any light occasion, so as the Shoo standeth loose from the Hoof, and is quickly lost. Moreover, the shanks of the Nails should be somewhat slat, and the Points sharp, without hollowness or flaw, and stiffer towards the Head above then beneath. And when you drive, drive at the first with soft strokes, and with a light Hammer, until the Nail be some∣what entred, and in Shooing fine and delicate Horses, Grease the Points of the Nails with fost Grease, that so they may enter the more easily, and drive the two Talon-Nails first. Then look whether the Shoo standeth right or not, which you shall perceive in beholding the Frush, for if the Spunges on both sides be equally distant from the Frush, then it standeth right, if not, then amend it and set the Shoo right, and standing right drive in another Nail, that done, let the Horse set down his Foot again, and look round about it, to see whether it fitteth the Horses Foot in all places, and whether he treadeth even or just on it or not, and if you see that the Shoo doth not furnish every part equally, but appeareth more on one side then another; Then lift up the Horses other Foot, that so he may stand steadily upon that Foot, and so standing strike him on the Hoof with your Hammer on that side that the Shoo is scant, and that shall make the Shoo to come that way. The Shoo standing streight and just, drive in the rest of all the Nails, to the Number of eight, that is to say, four on one side, and four on another, so as the Points of the Nails may seem to stand in the out-side of the Hoof, even and just one by another, as it were in a Circular Line, and not out of order like the Teeth of a Saw, whereof one is bent one way and another another way. That done, cut them off and clinch them, so as the Clinches may be hidden in the Hoof, which by cutting the Hoof with a point of a Knife, a little beneath the appearing of the Nail, you may easily do. Thus done with a Rape, pair the Hoof round, so as the edge of the Shoo may be seen round about. CHAP. V. Of Pairing of the imperfect Hoofs, every one according to their Kinds. And first of the broad Hoof. A broad Hoof, not being as yet grown to be too flat, may be holpen and kept from being flat, by the skill and diligence of the Farrier in well pair∣ing and shooing it. And therefore to pair it well, let him take as much
of the Toe with his Butteris as he can possibly, keeping it always under, but let him not touch the Quarters nor the Heels at all, unless it be to make the Seat of the Shoo plain, and let that be done so superficially as may be, so shall the Hoofs remain always strong. CHAP. VI. Of Shooing the Broad Hoof. Make a good strong Shoo, with a broad Web, and broad Spunges, and pierced as is before-said, fitting it to the Foot, being first pared as is a∣bovesaid, and from the Talon-Nail towards the Heel, let the Shoo appear a straws bredth without the Hoof, and set it on in such order and with such Nails as appertaineth unto the perfect Hoof, saving that you shall set five Nails on the out-side of his Hoof, and four on the in-side, because he weareth more without then within. CHAP. VII. Of Pareing the rough and brittle Hoof. This kind of Hoof is most commonly weaker without then within, and because it is for the most part hotter then the other Hoofs be, the Heels may be more opened then the other, that so they may be the more easily stopt with Cow-dung, or other Ointment to keep it moist, and also the raggedness on the out-side of the Coffin should be Filed away with a Rape, and made smooth, and also more often anointed then other Hoofs; and as for the rest of the Hoof it must be pared as the perfect one. CHAP. VIII. Of Shooing the rough and brittle Hoof. Make this Shoo neither too light, but so as it may well bear the Horse; nor yet too heavy, for then the Hoof being weak, will soon cast it, and pierce this Shoo, to be set on with nine Nails, five without and four within. CHAP. IX. Of Paring the long Hoof. The long Hoof may be holpen by cutting away the Toe, for the shorter foot a weak and slender Leg hath, the better. And to say the truth, it is the short foot that maketh the strong Leg, and the long Foot maketh the weak Leg, being forced thereby to tread all upon the Heel, and on the Pastern, and let the rest of the Hoof be pared like the perfect Hoof.
CHAP. X. Of Shooing the long Hoof. Make this Shoo as round as you can at the Toe, that the bredth may take away the evil sight of the length; and if the Foot be very narrow, then let the Shoo disbord without the hoof, and pierce the Shoo the deep∣er, and set it backward enough, because such kind of Feet dotread most on the Heels, and set the Shoo on with eight Nails, like the perfect Hoof. CHAP. XI. Of Paring the crooked Hoof. First, look on what side the hoof is highest and least worn, and then pare all that away, and make it equal with the lower side which is most worn, without touching the worn side at all, unless it be to make the Seat of the Shoo plain, and as for the rest, pare it like the perfect Hoof. CHAP. XII. Of Shooing the crooked Hoof. Make an indifferent strong Shoo with a broad Web, sitting it to the Foot, and Pare it not until you have laid the Shoo unto the Foot, to the in∣tent you may pare it to the Horses most Commodity, which shall be done, if you pare the scant side, which most commonly is the inside, more to∣wards the Toe, then the fuller or stronger side. And whereas the Hoof is weakest, there also make the Shoo strongest, and set on this Shoo with nine Nails, viz. five on the stronger side, and four on the weaker side. CHAP. XIII. Of Paring the flat Hoof, otherwise called the Promised Hoof. Make the Seat of the Shoo plain, and take somewhat of the Toe, but touch not the Heel nor the Ball of the Foot, but leave both them so strong as you can. CHAP. XIV. Of Shooing the flat Hoof, or Promised Hoof. Make this Shoo with a very broad Web, for the more it cover the weak Sole, the better, and let the mid-part of the Web that covers the Ball of the Foot be much thicker then the out-sides where the piercings be, and let it be so hollow as it touch no part of the Ball of the Foot, and let it be large and long enough in all places, so as the Horse may go at ease, and let it
be pierced round about the Toe, to favour the Heels, and make ten holes for ten Nails, viz. five on each side. CHAP. XV. Of Paring the over-hollow Hoof. Pare this Hoof round about, and especially the Seat of the Shooe, viz. round about by the Edges, to the intent the hollowness of the Hoof with∣in may not be so deep, but more shallow then it was before, and let it be al∣ways kept moist with stopping it, for fear of Hoof-binding, observing in your Paring so even a hand as may be, in all points like unto the perfect Hoof. CHAP. XVI. Of Shooing the over hollow Hoof. Make a light Shoo in such order and form as was said before, to serve the perfect Hoof. CHAP. XVII. Of Paring the Hoof that hath a broad Frush. Broad Frushes do cause weak heels, and therefore had need of little or no paring at all, and for that cause pare only the Toe, and also the Seat of the Shoo, so much as shall be needful, to the even standing of the Shoo, leaving the heels so strong as may be. CHAP. XVIII. Of Shooing the Hoof that hath a broad Frush. Make this Shoo stronger towards the Heel then towards the Toe, and also let the Web be somewhat broad towards the heels to save them from the Ground, and set on this Shoo with nine Nails, because most commonly it is a great Foot, and in all other points make it like the Shoo with the perfect Hoof. CHAP. XIX. Of Paring the Hoof that hath narrow Heels. Pare the Toe short, and make the Seat of the Shoo fair and plain, and open only so much, as there may be some little space betwixt the Frush and the Heel, for the less you take of the Heel, the better. CHAP. XX. Of Shooing the Hoof with narrow Heels. Make a light Shoo with a broad Web, and let the Spunges be so broad
as they may almost meet together, to defend the Heel from the Ground, and pierce it all towards the Toe, sparing the Heel so much as you can, and let the Shoo be long enough towards the Heels, and set it on with eight Nails, like the Shoo that fitteth the perfect Hoof. CHAP. XXI. Of Pairing and Shooing the Hinder-Feet. The Paring of the hinder-Feet, is clean contrary unto the fore-Feet, for the weakest part of the hinder-Foot is the Toe, and therefore in pare∣ing the hinder-Foot, the Toe must be always more spared then the Heels, but in all other points observe the order of paring, according to the per∣fection or imperfection of the Hoofs before declared. CHAP. XXII. Of Shooing the Hinder-Feet. Make the Shoo fit for the Hoof as is before-said, and let it be strongest at the Toe, and pierced nigher the Heel then the Toe, because the Toe is the weakest part of the Foot, and let the out-side of the hinder-Shoo be made with a Calkin, not over-high, but let the other Spunge be agreeable unto the Calkin, that is to say, as high in a manner as the Calkin, which Calkin is to keep him from sliding, but then it may not be sharp pointed, but rather flat, and handsomly turned upward, which is the best sort of Calkin. CHAP. XXIII. Of Shooing the Hoof that hath a false Quarter. If the Horse Halt, then make him a Shoo fitting to his Foot, tacking it on the Quarter on that side that his false Quarter is on. If he do not halt then make him a Shoo, with a Button or Shouldering on the inside of the Shoo, and next to the Sole of the Foot, somewhat distant from the false Quarter towards the Toe, and that shall defend the sore place, so as the Shoo shall not touch it. And with this kind of Shoo you may Travel your Horse where you will. CHAP. XXIV. Of Pareing and Shooing for Enterfering. Those Hoofs that enterfere, are most commonly higher on the out-side then on the in-fide, and therefore you should take off the out-side with a Butteris, to the intent that the in-side may be somewhat higher (if it will be) then the out-side, and then make him a Shoo fit for his Foot, which should be thicker on the in-side then on the out-side, and let that Shoo
never have any Calkin, for that will make him to tread awry, and the sooner to enterfere, and let it be prepared in such sort that it makes him not to enterfere. CHAP. XXV. Of Paring and Shooing the Foot that is Hoof-bound. First, Pare his Toe as short as may be, and pare the Sole somewhat thin, and open the Heels well, and make him a half-Shoo like a half-Moon. CHAP. XXVI. Of making the Planch-Shoo, or Pauncelet. The Planch Shoo maketh a good Foot and evil Leg, because it maketh the Foot to grow beyond the measure of the Leg. Notwithstanding, for a weak Heel it is marvellous good, and it will last longer then any Shoo, and it is borrowed from the Moyl that hath weak Heels and Frushes, to keep the Foot from Stones and Gravel. Notwithstanding, wo be unto that Horse that hath need of such a Shoo. CHAP. XXVII. Shooes with Calkins, Rings, Welts, and turning Vices, and of the Patten Shoo. Besides, all these kind of Shooes before recited, there be divers others, whereof some be made with high Calkins, some with Rings, some with Welts or Borders about, and some with Vices, some with Toes turned up∣ward, some with Heels turned upward, and of many other Fashions, which though they be not so needful, I thought good to speak somewhat of them. And first, as touching Shooes with Calkins, that though they be intended to keep the Horse from sliding, yet they do him more harm then good, in that he cannot tread evenly upon the Ground, whereby he many times wrencheth his Foot, or straineth some Sinew, and especially upon Stony ways, where the Stones will not suffer the Calkins to enter, the Foot slippeth with more violence; yet some do not think him well shod, unless all his Shooes be made with Calkins, either single or double, yet of two Evils, double is the less, for he will tread evener with double then single Calkins, but then let them not be over-long, or sharp pointed, but rather short and flat. And thus much for Shooes with Calkins. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Shooes with Rings. Shooes with Rings were first invented to make a Horse lift up his Feet high,
but such Shooes are more painful then helpful, and is an unhandsom Sight in Horses, which thing is incident to most Horses that have not sound Hoofs, for having tender Hoofs, they fear to touch the Ground that is hard. Now such kind of Horses that have naturally these tender Heels, some for want of discretion, do think to amond them by adding there∣unto high Calkins, or else Rings, and thereby cause him to have weaker Heels then he had before. Therefore I shall advise you to lay aside all these unprofitable Devices, and make all your Shooes, especially your sore-Shooes with Spunges, as hath been before taught. CHAP. XXIX. Of Shooes with Swelling Welts, or Borders about. In Germany and high Almany, the Smiths do make their Shooes with a swelling Welt round about the Shoo, which being higher then the Heads of the Nails, do save them from wearing, which are the best fort of last∣ing Shooes, for Mr. Blundevill travelled in those Countreys out-right above 500 Miles upon very stony Ground, yea, and upon Mountains, without removing Shoo or driving Nail, for the Shoo being made of well tem∣pered stuff, weareth equally in all parts, and the Horse treadeth evenly upon them. CHAP. XXX. Of Shooes with turning Vices, and also Joynt-Shooes. Some that use to pass the Mountains where Smiths are not easily to be found, do carry about them Shooes with Vices, whereby they fasten it to the Horses Foot, without the help of the Hammer or Nail, notwithstand∣ing they are more for shew then any good use. For though it fave his Feet from Stones, yet it so pincheth his Hoof as he goeth with pain, and doth perhaps do his Hoof more hurt then the stones do, therefore it is better upon such needful times to use the Joynt-Shoo, which is made of two pieces, with a flat Rivet-Nail joyning them together in the Tow, so that you may both make it wide and narrow to serve any Foot, therefore the Rider ought to understand to drive a Nail, and to have his Instruments about him, meet for carriage, without the which there are but few Gentle∣men of Almany that loveth his Horse, but can use those Instruments for that purpose as well as most Smiths. CHAP. XXXI. Of the Patten Shoo. Because every Smith knoweth the use of this Shoo, and how to make it, I shall not need to use many words, but only shew you that it is a ne∣cessary
Shoo for a Horse that is hurt in the Hip, or stiffle, or shoulder, which will make him bear upon that Leg the Grief is on, and consequently make him use it the better. In what Causes to Cauterize. An Iron with a Button. The Drawing Iron. Cauterization or giving of Fire is of two Natures, viz. Actual and Po∣tential. Your Cautery Actual is made by hot burning Instruments, with which you sear and burn those places which be requisite for the perfecting of the Cure you have in hand, which cannot be peradventure well Cured, but by giving of Tire; as in case of great Imposthumation, stenching of blood in Wounds, or in searing of Veins, Sinews, or the like, or else in case of dismembring, if other means be not at hand, whereby to stay the Flux of Blood without danger of bleeding to death. And if they that give Fire be not very skilful, I would advise them to practise upon Jades, and not Horses of price, to the end they may the better come to know how to carry their hand either lighter or harder, and also that they do make their Circles round, and their Lines streight and even. For this Actual Fire is a thing most necessary for them that do understand the Vertue thereof, and therefore ought to be very carefully applied, and never but upon very good Grounds; which in so doing, you shall find it to be a most Sovereign Remedy to hinder and stay all manner of Corruption, whereunto any Mem∣ber may be inclined; provided that in the handling of your Instrument you touch not Muscles, Arteries, Sinews, Ligaments, Chords, or the like; for so you may utterly lame, where you would set upright. For by this Actual Fire you shall Joyn and Conglutinate Parts and Members severed, dry up superfluous Moisture, and sick Members swelled, and bring forth all evil and putrefactious Matter, congealed and gathered into Knots, as, Wens, Biles, ustils, Exulceration, and the like: you shall also asswage old Griefs, and make perfect all such Parts of the Body as be any way Cor∣rupted: neither shall you need fear the encrease of any evil humours, by reason that the Skin being severed by means of the hot Iron, it doth Ripen and digest all manner of putrifaction and matterative stuff, whereby it venteth and passeth away much more easily, healing and qualifying all grief and pain, causing the Member which before was subject to Festering and to Gangreen, to become the sounder and stronger, and the worst that can be made thereof, will be but a little Eye-fore, by reason of a Scar which it leaves behind it. But then you must have a very great regard un∣to your Instruments, that they be made according to the nature and qua∣lity of the Place and Member which is to be Scared; for one fashion will not serve in all Causes: for as the Places which are to be Cauterized, are commonly different in shape and proportion, so ought the shapes and fa∣shions of your Instruments to be accordingly. You ought to have a care in the heating of them, for as they ought not to be too hot, so they ought
not to be too cold, for by that means you may inflame the place too much. Your Instruments are to be made of Iron or Steel, which are the best to work with, and to be preferred before Gold, Silver, Brass or Copper, be∣cause Steel or Iron will retain its own received heat longer then any other Metal, for the others, as they are the sooner made hot, so they are the sooner cold. Now Steel and Iron Metals are much more substantial and harder then the other Metals are, and though they are the longer a heat∣ing, yet they retain their heat the longer. Again, a man cannot tell when those other Metals are hot enough, as also when they be too hot, and if you put never so little water to them to allay their heat, they pre∣sently become too cold, the contrary whereof you shall find to be in the Nature of Iron and Steel. Cautery Potential. Now I will in a word handle Cautery Potential, which as the Cautery Actual burneth the Flesh by hot Instrument, even so doth Cautery Po∣tential burn the Flesh by Medicine, of which there are three sorts or de∣grees. Namely, by Corrosive, by Caustick, or by Putrifaction. Corrosive. Corrosive, is when that is applied to the wound, wherein is dead or proud Flesh to corrode or eat it away, by which means the wound is pre∣pared and made the more fit for Emplasters, Waters or Unguents, which do carnisie and make good Flesh, by which means the Wound which be∣fore was foul, is now become clean, healed up and made sound, and these corroding things are commonly Precipitates, Sublimatum, Arsnick, Resal∣gar, Leads white and red, Copper as white and green, Verdegrease, Allom, Viteral, Sandaracha, Chrysocollo, Origanum, Mercury, Aconitum, Capitellium, Romane, Vitrial, shaving of Ox or Harts-horn, red Coral, Spunge of the Sea somewhat burned, Ʋnguentum Apostolorum, Ʋnguentum Aegiptiacum, Ʋnguentum Caeraccum, Magistra, Sal niter, Cantharides, Apium, Aqua fortis, Siclamine, Melanacardium, and many more, that do burn, eat and corrode the Flesh, putting the poor Beast to a great deal of pain. A Caustick. A Caustick is a great Burner, for that being once put to the Skin, will in a short time make a Wound where none was before; for which we do use to make Issues, for Causticks are stronger and more violent then ei∣ther Putrifactives or Corrosives; for whereas Corrosives do work only upon Skin broken, and to corrode and eat out dead, proud, spungy and naughty flesh, and Putrifactives do Ripen, Mollifie and prepare the Wound for the Caustick, so Causticks do break Skin and Flesh, and all; and therefore it is more violent, and burneth worse then any of the two former.
Putrifactive. Now your Putrifactives are such Medicines as we do commonly apply to Swellings, which we do make for the most part of Medicines com∣pounded, as Poltesses, rosted Sorrel, white Lilly-Roots and the like, for such things are Drawers, causing swellings which be hard and Fleshy, to become soft and putrifactive, and to prepare Sorrances for the Causticks, whose nature is to break and open, what before the Putrifactive had ripe∣ned, which otherwise must have been done by Cautery Actual, or by In∣cision. And this I do think sufficient to be handled upon this subject. How to make Bread for a Horse to keep him in Heart and Strength of Body, and to Keep him from fainting in his Labour and Exercise, be it never so sore. Take Wheat-Meal, Oat-Meal and Beans, all Ground very small, of each a Peck, Anniseeds four Ounces, Gentiana and Fennegreek, of each an Ounce, Licoris two Ounces, beat themall to fine Powder, and searce them well, and add to them twenty new laid Eggs Whites, and all well beaten, and as much strong Ale as will Knead it up, then make your Leaves like to Horse-bread, but not too thick, and let them be well ba∣ked, but not burned, give it him not too new, and when you give it him give it him five or fix Mornings together, without any Provender, and thus you shall have him well winded, lusty, strong, hardy and healthy, whereby to be able to hold out and retain his Metal to the last. Another sort of Bread. Take of Wheat-Meal one peck, Rye-Meal, Beans and Oat-Meal, of each half a peck, Ground very small, Anniseeds and Licoris, of each one Ounce, and white Sugar-Candy four Ounces, beat all into fine powder, with the Whites and Yolks of twenty new laid Eggs well beaten and put to them, and so much white-Wine as will Knead it into a Paste, make them into great Loaves and bake them well, and after they be two or three days old, let him eat of this Bread, but chip away the out-side, Now the rea∣son I prefer Meal before Flower is, because Flower is much more hot and binding, and therefore the courser the Bread is, the better it is for the Horse. And the reason why I put Rye into my latter Bread, is, because Rye is a Loosner and a Cooler, and therefore it will make him the more soluble. For what causes Veins are to be taken up. As touching taking up of Veins, you shall understand that it is a thing very behoof-full, as that many times the most exquisite Farrier living shall not be able to perfect this Cure, but by that way and means, for unless sueh Veins be either taken up, or some way stopped, which are noxious to the
Cure, by feeding the Malady with its peccant Humours, the Farrier can never work by true Art. Again, Veins well taken up do prevent many Maladies, whereunto many Horses are much more propense then others are. And lastly, the taking up of Veins cureth some diseases which could otherwise never be cured. For the taking up of the Thigh-Veins sendeth away Spavens, Splents, Curbs, Kibed Heels, Swelled Legs, Scratches, Malen∣ders, Farcin in the Legs, and the like Sorrances; besides, it causeth all Pains, Aches, Strains, stiffness in the Limbs, &c. Take up the Shackle-Veins, and it preventeth the Quitter-bone, Ring-bone. Swelling in the lower Joynts, Founderings, &c. Wherefore for as much as ignorant People, whatsoever Opinion they may have of their super-abundant skill, yet they are very much to seek, in that they do so much exclaim against ta∣king up of Veins absurdly, affirming it to be a great means of Laming of Horses; but let them not mistake themselves, for assuredly it is the best and only Remedy against these and many more Maladies, and when they shall have made Trial, they will not be of so prejudicate an opinion. Of Roweling of Horses, and of the use thereof. The Roweling of Horses is so common amongst our simple Smiths, that they will Rowel him for any disease almost, without any sense or reason, whereby they needlessly torment the Horse, and bring a Flux of naughty humours down to the place, which causes him to be Lame, which might otherwise be sound. But this I must say of it, that if it be well used by a skilful Farrier, it is not only commendable, but causes great good to a Horses Body and Limbs. Helps got by Roweling are these. It separateth and dissolveth evil humours which are gathered together in any one place, it loosneth those parts which are bound, and bindeth those parts that are weakned, it strengthneth sick Joynts, and comfort∣eth whatsoever is oppressed with any cold Phlegm. The use of it in Ge∣neral is for inward strains, especially about the Shoulders or Hips, or else for great hard Swellings, which will not be mollified or corroded by any outward Medicine. Now if the Bruise be not taken away presently by applying to it some comfortable hot Medicine. There will arise a cer∣tain Jelly between the Pot and the Bone which offendeth the tender Gristle, which covers the ends of every Bone, which makes the Horse halt most vehemently. Now nothing will take this away but Roweling. Now the manner of Roweling is this. When you have sound out the certain place of his Grief, after you have cast him upon some soft place, make a little Slit a handful below the
place grieved through the Skin, no bigger then you can thrust in a Swans Quill into the same, then raise the Skin a little from the Flesh with your Cronet, and then put in your Quill, and blow all the Skin from the Flesh upward, even to the top, and all over the Shoulder, then stopping the Hole with your Finger and your Thumb, beat the place blown all over with a Hazel stick, and spread the wind with your hand into every place, and so let it go, then take some Horse-hair, or some red Sarcenet, half the bigness of a Mans little Finger, and put it into your Roweling-Needle, which should be at least seven or eight inches long, thrust it in at the first Hole, and put it upward, drawing it out above at least six inches, and if you please you may put in another above that, and then Tie the two ends of the Rowls together, and move and draw them to and fro in the Skin, not forgetting before you put them in, to anoint them with sweet Butter or Hogs Grease, and every day after likewise, for that will make the cor∣ruption run out the better. Now there are other Farriers think, that these long Rowels of Hair or Silk, do make a double Sore and a great Scar, therefore they make their Rowels of round Pieces of stiff Leather, such as is on the upper part of an old Shoo, with a round Hole in the midst, according to the form in the Margent, and then double it when they put it in, and then spread it open, and lay it flat between the Flesh and the Skin, and that the Hole in the Rowel may be just against the Hole in the Horses Skin, and once in two or three days to clense the Rowel, and to anoint it with Hogs-Grease or Butter, and so to put it in again. Another French way of Roweling, which is Reputed to be the best Way. Cut open the Skin with your Incision Knife the length of an Inch or more downwards; on the lowest part of the Horses Breast, close to the Side that he is lame on; then raise with your Finger or Cronet the Skin from the Flesh round about the Orifice, about the bredth of a six pence, which must be just the Size of the Rowel you put into it, whether it be made of the upper Leather of an old Shoo, or Horn of an old Lanthorn; but the upper Leather of a Shoo is best. The form of your Rowel must be in the shape of the Figure in the Margin, with a little Hole in the middle of it, wherein you must put a Needle and thread through it, as you find by the two Pricks on the top and bottom of the Hole. Then take a Quill and put it into the Hole, and do as you were taught in the Re∣ceipt before, viz. To blow and beat the wind upwards all over the Shoul∣der; when you have blown it as much as you think fitting, draw a Needle and Thread through the Rowel and Skin, closing the Rowel in the Slit, and let the Hole in the Rowel be right against the Slit you have cut, so that it may not move. Then run another stitch or two thwart the cut, as you see the manner of it by the Figure in the Margin; When you have stitcht it up, anoint it all over with Butter or Hogs Grease, and let the Rowel
remain in for about a week or more before you take it out, and he will do well. Instructions upon Rowelling. If you Rowel him for any Swelling, then put in your long Rowel the same way that the Veins run, and seldom or never cross-wise, and the more you blow the Skin for a Swelling, the better, for the Wind is that that causeth Putrifaction, and makes the festered Humours to dissolve and distil down from the secret hollows of the Joynts into those open places, where it falleth away in Matter, and so the Breast becomes cured. How to Geld Horses or Colts. You are to observe in the Gelding of Horses. First, the Age, Se∣condly, the Season of the Year. And lastly, the state of the Moon. For the Age, if it be a Colt, you may Geld him at nine days old, or Fifteen if his Stones be come down; for the sooner you Geld him the better, for Growth, Shape and Courage. Now a Farrier may Geld a Horse at any Age whatsoever, if he be careful in the Cure. The Season of the Year to Geld in. The best Season for Gelding is between April and May or in the begin∣ning of June at the furthest, or about the Fall of the Leaf, which is the latter end of September. The state of the Moon. Now for the state of the Moon, the fittest time is ever when the Moon is in the Wane: as touching the manner of Gelding, it is in this sort, whe∣ther it be Foal, Colt or Horse, after you have cast him upon some soft place, take the Stones between your fore-most Finger, and your great Finger, then slit the Cod, and press the Stones forth, then with a pair of small Nippers, made either of Steel, Box, Wood or Brazil, being very smooth, and clap the strings of the Stones between them, very near unto the setting on of the Stones, and press them so hard that there may be no Flux of Blood, then with a thin drawing Cauterizing Iron made red hot, fear away the Stone, then take a hard Plaister made of Rozin, Wax and wash'd Turpentine, well Molten together, and with your hot Iron Melt it upon the head of the Strings; then fear the Strings, and then Melt more of the Salve, till such time as you have laid a good thickness of the Salve upon the Strings, then loose the Nippers, and do so to the other Stone, and fill the two slits of the Cod with white Salt, and anoint all the out∣side of the Cod with Hogs-grease, and so let him rise, and keep him in a warm Stable loose, that so he may walk up and down, for there is nothing better for him then moderate Exercise. Now if you do perceive that he doth swell in his Cod, and sheath very much, then chafe him up and
down, and make him Trot an hour in a day, and it will soon recover him, and make him sound. To make a white Star either on your Horses fore-Head, or in any other part of his Body. After you have with a Razor shaved away the Hair so wide as you ☞would have the Star, then take of a little of the Oyl of Vitriol in an Oyster-shell, and dip a Feather or a piece of Silk into it, (for it will eat both Linnen and Woollen) and just wet it all over the place shaved, and it will eat away the Roots of the Hairs, and the next that comes will be white. You need not do it above once, you may heal it up with your Copperas water and green Ointment. To make a black Star or white Hairs black. Wash often the place you would have made black, with Fearn Roots, and Sage sod in Lye, and it will breed black Hairs in a white Horse. Or take Souter Ink, Galls and Rust beaten well together, and anoint the place therewith, and it will turn white to black. To make a Red Star. Take Aqua fortis one Ounce, of Aqua vitae a penni-worth, of Silver to the value of eighteen pence. Put them in a Glass, and heat them well therein, and then anoint the place very well therewith, and it will imme∣diately turn the Hairs to be of a perfect red Colour, but they will endure no longer then the casting of the Hair, which you must renew again if you intend it shall contiuue. To make a Horse seem Young. Take a small crooked Iron, no bigger then a Wheat-Corn, and having made it red hot, burn a little black hole in the tops of the two outmost Teeth of each side the nether Chap before, next to the Tushes where the Mark is worn out, then with an Awl-blade pick it, and make the Shell fine and thin, then with a sharp scraping Iron make all his Teeth white and clean; This done, take a fine Lancet, and above the Hollows of the Horses Eyes which are shrunk down, make a little hole only through the Skin, and put in the Quill of a Raven or Crow, and blow the Skin full of Wind, till all the hollowness be filled up, then take out your Quill, and lay your Finger upon the hole a little while, and the Wind will stay in, and he will look as youthful as if he were but six years old. To make a Horse that he shall not Neigh, either in company or when he is ridden. If either you be in Service of the Wars, and would not be discovered,
or when upon any other occasion, you would not have him to Neigh or make a Noise, then take a List of Woollen Cloth, and Tie it fast in many folds about the midst of his Tongue, and he will not Neigh nor make any extraordinary Noise, with his Voice, as hath been often tried and ap∣proved of. To Help a Horse that hath Laved or Bangle Earer. Take his Eares and place them in such manner as you would have them stand, and then with two little Boards or pieces of Trenchers three Fingers broad, having long strings knit unto them, bind the Ears so fast in the places where they stand, as that they cannot stir, then betwixt the Head and the Root of the Ear, you shall see a great deal of empty wrink∣led Skin, which with your Finger and your Thumb, you shall pull up, and with a sharp Pair of Scissers clip away all the empty Skin close by the Head, then with a Needle and red Sllk stitch the two sides of the Skin close together, and then with your green Ointment heal up the Sore. Which done, take away the Splints which held up his Eares, and you shall find, that in a short space his Eares will keep the same place as you set them without Alteration; And this you shall find to be as certain and true as the healing of a cut Finger. The first Inventors of Riding. Bellirophons, as some Men say, was the first that Invented Riding on Horse-back. And the Pelletrones, a People of Lapithia, found out after∣wards the manner of Bridles, Bits and Rings, to guide Horses withal. But they of Thessalia were the first that used the service of Horses in the Wars. The Receipt of making the Cordial Balls. The true manner of making those Cordial Balls, which Cure any vio∣lent Cold or Glaunders, which prevent Heart-Sickness, which purge away all Molten Grease, which recover a lost Stomach, which keep the Heart from fainting with Exercise, and make a lean Horse sat suddenly. Take Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, Fennegreek seeds, Carthumus seeds, Elecampane Roots and Colts-foot, of each of these two Ounces, beaten and searced very Fine, two Ounces of the Flower of Brimstone, then take an Ounce of the Juice of Licoras, and dissolve it on the Fire in half a Pint of white-Wine; which done, take an Ounce of Chymical Oyl of Anni∣seeds, then take of Sallet-Oyl, Honey, and of Syrup of Sugar, or for want of it, Molosses, of each half a Pint, then mix all these with the former Powders, and with as much fine Wheat-Flower as will bind and knit them altogether, work them into a stiff Paste, and make thereof Balls somewhat bigger then French Wall-nuts, Hull and all, and so keep them in a close Gally-pot, (for they will last all the year) yet I do not mean that you
shall keep them in the Pot in Balls; because they cannot lie close, the Air may get in, and do hurt; as also the strength of the Oyls will sweat out∣ward, and weaken the substance, therefore knead the whole Lump of Paste into the Gally-pot, and make the Balls as you have occasion to use them. The Form of the Balls. ☞ If you give them upon the end of a stick, you must make them sharp at both ends, and thick in the middle; But if you give him them in a Horn of Beer, make them about the bigness of a good big Wall-nut, and put down a Horn-full of strong Beer after every Ball, to clear his Passage, and to prevent sticking. The Ʋse of these Balls. Now for the Use of these Balls, because they are Cordial, and have di∣ver excellent Vertues, you shall understand that if you use them to pre∣vent ickness, then you shall take a Ball and anoint it all over with sweet Butter, and give it him in the Morning in the manner of a Pill, then ride him a little after it (if you please otherwise you may chuse) and feed and water him abroad or at home, according to your usual custom. And thus do three or four Mornings together. If you use them to Cure either Cold or Glaunders, then use them in the same manner for a Week together. If you use them to satten a Horse, then give him them for a Fortnight together. But if you use them in the Nature of a Scouring, to take away Moulten Grease and Foulness, then instantly after his heat, and in his heat. Again, if you find your Horse at any time hath taken a little Cold, as you shall perceive by his inward Rat∣ling, if then you take one of these Balls and dissolve it in a Pint of Sack, and so give it him, it is a present Remedy. Also to dissolve the Ball in his or∣dinary water, being made luke-warm, it worketh the like effect, and fat∣neth exceedingly. To give one of these Balls before Travel, it prevents tyring; to give it in the heat of Travel, it refresheth the weariness; and to give it after Travel, it saves him from all Surfeits and inward Sickness. A Reccipt to Fat a Lean Horse in twelve or fifteen days. First, Therefore to let him Blood if he wants Bleeding, then instead of Oats in the Morning give him Wheat-Bran prepared after this manner, Set over the Fire a great Kettle, and fill it almost full with fair water, and when it boyls put in your Bran, and let it boyl a quarter of an hour at least, then let it stand to cool, and in the Morning early give him of this Bran so hot as he can eat it, and let his drink be of the same water, and at night give him Oates and white Water, and let him be well Littered, and warm covered; but if it be in the Summer, his Stable ought not to be too
hot, and at Night with his Oats give him an Egg full of this Powder, with which you are to continue him for the space of eight days, or according as you shall see cause. You must understand, that Bran thus prepared, drieth up his naughty, gross and corrupt humours, and doth the better prepare the Body to assume Lust, Courage, Strength and Flesh, together with the help of the Powder, which is this. The Powder how to make a Lean Horse Fat. Take of Cummin, Fennegreek, Sileris-Montani, Nutmegs, Cloves, Gin∣ger, Linseed, of each two Ounces. Quick Brimstone six Ounces, make all these into Powder, and give him the quantity of an Egg-shell full with his Oats▪ every Night, but first let him be watered with white water, which is two or three handfuls of Bran stirred amongst his water, then Rub him, Litter him, and Cloath him well, and then give him some sweet Wheat∣straw in his Rack, and let himseed on that for an hour, then give him his Oats mixed with his Powder, and when he hath eaten them, give him Hay at your pleasure, remembring to keep him warm, but so as with Mode∣ration, and you shall find him amend exceedingly, but you must put into his Oats every time two handfuls of Nettle-seeds, for that is the thing that will principally cause him to Battle. It will also greatly avail to his amendment, if he be Aired every Morning and Evening, an hour after Sun-rising, and an hour before Sun-set, if the Weather be warm, and the Sun do shine. And this is the best Course you can take to set up a Lean and poor Horse. Another Receipt to make a Lean Horse Fat. Take of Elecampane dried, Cummin, Turmerick, Anniseeds, of each two Ounces, Groundsel half a handful, boyl all these together in a Gallon of Ale, with three Heads of Garlick well bruised and picked, then strain it, and give him a quart of it in the Morning fasting Blood-warm, and Ride him after it, but not to heat him, and thus do four Mornings to∣gether, and in a short time after (if the year be seasonable) turn him to Grass, and he will Fatten suddenly. But if the time of the year will not serve, and that you have a mind to raise him in the Stable, then give him amongst his Oats this Powder. Take of Elecampane dried, and of Cum∣min both alike, well beaten and searced, and when you give your Horse Provender, then give him half an Ounce of them well mixed amongst it for fourteen days together, and you shall find him to amend and prosper, after a strange manner: provided, that you give him seasonable Ayring, moderate Exercise, and Mashes and white Water. Of the Drink called Acopum. Take of Euforbium half an Ounce, Castoreum one Ounce, Adraces half a quarter of a pound, Bidellium half an Ounce and half a quarter,
Opoponax one Ounce, Fox Grease half an Ounce, Pepper one Ounce, Laserpitium three quarters of an Ounce, Ammoniacum half a quarter of a pound, Pigeons Dung as much, Galbanum half an Ounce, Nitrum one Ounce and a quarter, Spuma nitri three quarters of an Ounce, Ladanum a quarter of a pound, Pyrethrum, and Bay-berries, of each three quarters of an Ounce, Cardanum two Ounces, Seed of Rue half a quarter of a pound, Seed of Agnus Castus one Ounce, Parsley seed half an Ounce, dried Roots of Ireos, or Flower-de-luce one Ounce and a quarter, and half a quarter, of Oyl de Bay as much, of Oyl of Spikenard three quarters of a pound, of Oleum Cyprinum three quarters of a pound, and half a quar∣ter, the oldest Oyl Olive a pound and a half, Pitch a quarter of a pound and two Ounces, Turpentine a quarter of a pound; Melt of every of these that will be Molten, severally by themselves, and then mingle them to∣gether with the rest of the Ingredients, being first beaten to fine powder, and after they have boiled a little on the Fire, take it off, and strain it in∣to a clean Gally-pot, and so keep it for your use. And when you give your Horse any of it at any time, you must not give him of it above two spoonfuls in a Pint of Sack or Muscadine, and if by long keeping you find it wax hard then soften it with the Oyl of Cypress, so that it may be good and thick. The Vertues of it. It is both a Medicine and an Ointment, for it helpeth Convulsions in the Sinews and Muscles, it draweth forth all Noisom humours, and dis∣burdeneth the Head of all Grief, being put up with a long Goose Fea∣ther anointed in it, into the Nostrils of a Horse, it healeth, I say all man∣ner of Convulsions, Cramps, Numbness, and String-halts, Colds and Rhumes; it dissolveth the Liver, being troubled with Opilations and Ob∣structions, it helpeth Siccity and Aridity in the Body; it banisheth all weariedness and tiredness, if his Limbs be Bathed with this Medicine. And lastly, it Cureth all sorts of inward Diseases, if it be administred by way of a Drench, in Wine, strong Beer or good Ale. The Nature of it. It is hot in Working, otherwise it could not hold good in case of Sur∣feits, Tiredness, and of Convulsions, and the like, wherein consisteth its chief Vertues, being administred outwardly; but being administred inward∣ly, it is not altogether so hot, for it helpeth Feavers for the most part, and I think it is most safe, to give not above two spoonfuls of it in a quart of good strong Beer or Ale, though Mr. Markham adviseth to give four or five spoonfuls in Sack or Muscadine, which are hot things of them∣selves.
The Confection called Arman. To make this Confection, of Honey of Roses a pound and a half, as much as will suffice of the Crumbs of the whitest Manchet made into fine powder, then take of Cordial-powder of Nutmegs, and of Cinnamon of each an Ounce and a half, mix all these together, being first made into fine powder, then put it into a Gally-pot, and moisten it with Rose-Vi∣neger, that it may be of a thick substance like unto Pap, and so keep it for your use. When you use it, put some of it upon the end of a Bulls Pizel into his Mouth, and let him champ thereon; but if you give it for the Quinsey or Feaver, give him down two Hornfulls of it, and do this in the Morning fasting, and let him fast two or three houres after it. The Vertues of this Arman. It provoketh a good Appetite to Meat, and causeth good Digestion, and taketh away all Annoyances that troubleth the Stomach, it cooleth the inward heat in the Body, it helpeth all Agues and Feavers, and is most excellent against Surfeits; it is good for the Quinsey in the Throat, coming of Cold taken; and very good against the Gripings in the Belly or Guts, proceeding of Wind▪ This Confection was brought out of France. How to make the Cordial Powder which we have likewise from the French. Take Cynamon and Sugar, of each four Ounces, and of fine Bole-Ar∣moniack two Ounces: make them into very fine powder, and mix them well together, and keep it for your use in a Gally-pot close stopped. The Vertues of it. It is good for Sick Horses that are far spent with a Consumption in the Flesh and Liver, &c. For it is a most Restorative Cordial, comforting the Vital parts, and Spirits Animal, and restoreth it to Sanity. Another Cordial Powder, called, Electuarium Theriacum, by reason it hath much Treacle in it. Take Syrop of Violets, Syrop of Lemons, Syrop of Roses, of each half an Ounce, adding to it an Ounce of London-Treacle, (which is the best of all Treacles for Horses) mingle them well together, and it is a most Sovereign Cordial to be Administred to Horses that are sick and weak.
To make the black and red Aegiptiacum, which are both Corrosives. For their Natures are to Corrode and eat away all manner of Deal, Proud, Rotten and naughty Flesh, out of any old Sore or Ʋicer, and they do also cleanse and prepare a Sore, and make it apt to be healed with Carnifying or healing Slves. Take two pounds of Course English Honey, Verdegrease, Dyers Galls, and green Copperas, of each four Ounces, make them all into Powder, and mixed together, and put into an Earthen Pot, and set it upon the Fire, keeping it stirring, but so soon as it begins to boyl, take it off and let it cool, for if it boyl too long it will become red, which will not be so good. This black▪ Aegypiacum is good to dissolve the Hoos of a Horse, if they be too dry, or hard, so as it will cause the Corruption, if any be in the Foot, to ascend above at the Cronet, where the Hair is, and also to re∣store the Hoof of the Horse when the Sole is taken out, and in this Na∣ture you must use this Unguent, but only at the third dressing after you have taken out the Sole. The Red Aegiptiacum is thus made. Take course Honey two poun is, Verdegrease four Ounces, green Cop∣peras two Ounces, beat the Verdegrease and the Copperas very small to Powder, then put it into an Earthen Pot, and put unto it a little Vineger, and so boyl it very well till it become red, and keep it for your use. General Drenches, or Receip's for all inward Diseases, or Sickness. The Spaniards have this Receipt for all inward Diseases. Take Wheat-Meal twelve pounds, Anniseeds four Ounces in sine Powder▪ Brimstone in Powder three Ounces, Fennegreek in Powder three Ounces and a half, Cummin in Powder three Ounces, Honey two pounds, good Sallet-Oyl one pound and a half, of good Sack as much. These are all to be put into a Pot well nealed, and boyled until it be thick, and when it is cold to make it up into Plls or Balls, you must keep it stirring while it is a boyl∣ing, otherwise it will burn to, and when they are thus made into Pills, give him of them four or five Mornings together fasting. These killeth Wormes in a Horses Body, helpeth Diseases of the Lungs and inward parts, and is a very good Plaister applied outwardly. It is most useful in all cold causes, and it is so Cordial, that it will bring a lean and poor Horse unto Flesh and good state in a little time. Another Excellent Receipt for all inward Diseases. Take Wheat-Meal six pounds, or as much as will bring the Ingredients unto a sti paste, Anniseeds two Ounces, Cummin two Ounces, wild or
Bastard-Saffron two drams and an half, white-Wine four pint, Fennegreek one Ounce and two drams, Brimstone one Ounce and a half, Sallet-Oyl apint and two Ounces, English Hony one pound and a half▪ Make those things into powder that will beat to powder, then compound them together, and make it into a stiff Paste, and keep it in a Gally-pot close covered for your use. When you use it, make a Ball thereof as big as a mans Fist, and dissolve it in two Gallons of fair water, till it be all Molten, let him drink of this Morning and Evening so long as he please, and let him have no other water to drink, to the end he may be the better compelled to drink it, which in the end he will do and like it very well. This is good for many inward Infirmities, it raiseth and battleth a Horse much better then either Grass or Provender, and giveth him Life, Spirit and Stomach, and keepeth him in perfect Health. Another Receipt for all inward Diseases. Take Fennegreek, Turmerick, Grains, Anniseeds, Licoris, long Pep∣per, Cummin, of each half an Ounce, and of Saffron one dram; and of Herbs, take Celendine, Rue, Pelamontine, Hysop, Thyme and Rosemary, of all of them no more then will make half a handful, chopt small and boiled, first in a quart of good Ale or Beer, then put in your Spices finely powdred, and boil them again, then strain it and put to it the quantity of an Egg of sweet Butter, and an Ounce of London Treacle, and give it him Blood-warm, and Ride him moderately after it, and set him up warm, and let him fast three or four houres, and let his Drink be either a sweet Mash or white Water. This is very good against Feavers, Colds and the Yellows. Another Receipt for inward Sickness. Take Aristolochi Rotunda, Bay-berries, Gentian, Anniseeds, Ginger, and of Trifora Magna, of each an Ounce, beat all the Simples to very fine powder, and mix them well together, then take of white-Wine or good Ale or Beer a quart, then put into it one spoonful of all of them, with half a pnt of Sallet-Oyl, and of Mithridate two drams▪ warm these upon a Fire, and administer it Blood-warm, and Exercise him before and after his drink, but not to Sweat him, neither let him drink any cold Water in four or five days after, but either warm Mashes or white Water. This is most Sovereign for any inward Sickness, Droopings, forsaking of Meat, Feavers, Colds, Coughs or the like. A Suppository for inward Sickness. If he be so sick that you fear to give him any strong Medicine, and that Costive withal, then give him this Suppository. Take of Honey six Ounces, of Salt-Niter one Ounce and a half, of Wheat-Flower and of Anniseeds beaten into fine powder, of each one
Ounce, boyl all these into a hard thickness, and make it into Supposi∣tories, and after you have Anointed your Hand with Sallet-Oyl, and the Suppository likewise, convey it into his Fundament a pretty way, and Tie his Tayl betwixt his Legs to his Girts, or else hold it close with your hand about a quarter of an hour till it be throughly dissolved, and this will purge kindly, and Loosen his Guts, so that you may be the more bold to Administer what Drinks, Cordials, or other things, which you think most requisite for his recovery. Other General Drnhes to Cure all inward Sickness in Horses, which trouble the whole Body; of Feavers of all sorts, Plagues, Infections, and such like. Sickness in General are of two Kinds, one offending the whole Body, the other a particular Member, the first hidden, and the second visible. Of the first then, which offend the whole Body, are Feavers of all sorts, as the Quotidian, the Tertian, the Quartan, the Continual, and the Hectick. the Feavers in Autumn, in Summer, or in the Winter; the Feaver by Sur∣fet, Feaver Pestilent, Feaver Accidental, or the General Plague; they are all known by these Signes, much trembling, panting and sweating, a sullen Countenance that was wont to be chearful, hot Breath, sainting in Labour, decay in Stomach, and Costiveness in the Body, &c. First, let him Blood, then give him this Drink, Take of Sellendine Roots, leaves and all, a good handful, as much Wormwood and as much Rue, wash them well, then bruise them in a Mortar, then boyl them in a quart of Ale or Beer, then strain them, and add to them a pound of sweet Butter, then give it the Horse to drink luke-warm; or half an Ounce of the powder of Diapente, given in Sack or Ale, two or three Mornings together. Or give him three or four Yolks of new laid Eggs, beaten with seven or eight spoon∣fuls of Aqua vitae or Brandy. This is good when he hath his shaking Fit upon him. Or take four Ounces of Diapente, and mix it with four Oun∣ces of clarified Honey, and keep it in a close Glass, and give him half an Ounce thereof in Wine or Ale; or take of Licoras an Ounce, of Anni∣seeds, Cummin-seeds, and Elecampane Roots, of each half an Ounce, of Turmerick and Bay-berries, of each a quarter of an Ounce, of long Pepper and Fennegreek, of each two drams beaten small, and put five spoonfuls thereof into a quart of Ale, warmed with a little Putter or Oyl, and it is very Sovereign, for any Disease coming of cold Causes. Or Red Sage, Mint, Sellendine and Rue, boyled in Beer is good. Diatessaron is good simply of it self, so is Diapente, or Diahexaple. There are several particular Receipts which I might give you for every sort of these Feavers I have Named, but I think these in General may serve instead of a more particular Account, only observe this Note by the way. That you must in all hot causes administer cooling things, and in cold Cau∣ses hot things.
Signes whereby you may know every sort of Feaver. Signes in General to know a Feaver, is by holding down of his Head, he will quake and tremble, and when his trembling is over, he will burn, and his Breath be hot, he will breath fast, and his Flank will beat, he will reel, he will forsake his Meat, his Eyes will swell and be closed up, and watering, his Flesh will as it were fall from his Bones, and his Stones will hang down, he will desire to drink, yet not drink much, neither will he sleep, but more particularly. A Quotidian Feaver proceeds from hard Riding, being set up too hot in the Stable without Riding. Quotidian or every days Feaver is known by Blood-shotten Eyes, short and hot Breathing, panting, loathing of his Meat, and stiffness in his Limbs, and his Sickness will not last above six or eight houres in a day, and then he will be well again. Tertian Feaver proceeds from the same Causes as the Quotidian. The Tertian or every other days Feaver, is known by the Signes for∣merly spoken of, and this as the chiefest, that he will be sick as on Mon∣day, and well on the Tuesday, and sick on the Wednesday following. Quartan Feaver proceeds from the same Causes as the Tertian doth. The Quartan Feaver, as some Farriers call, a third days Sickness, as thus: If his Fit begin on the Monday, he will be well on the Tuesday and Wednesday, and sick again on the Thursday. There is no other Sign to know it, then the coming and going of the Fits. Continual Feaver proceeds from Heats and Colds. The Feaver continual is that which continueth without any Intermis∣sion, the Signes are want of rest, and falling away of the Flesh, besides certain Inslammations or Swellings, which will appear about his Withers and Flanks. Hectick Feaver proceeds from a sick Stomach, being Scalded with hot Drinks, hath lost the power of Digestion. The Hectick Feaver, which is the worst of Feavers, is known by this, that he will never eat with Appetite, and when you draw out his Tongue you shall find it Raw, his Flesh will be Loose and Flaggy, and his Body subject to trembling. All these Feavers do most commonly happen to a Horse in the Spring, because the new Blood is apt to be inflamed.
Autumn Feaver proceeds from new Blood being inflamed. The Signes of an Autumn Feaver, is known by the same Signes I have declared, for they are the same Feavers, only altering the time of the year. Summer Feaver. A Feaver taken in the Summer is the worst of all ordinary Feavers whatsoever, especially such as are taken in the Dog-days. The Signes of this Feaver are, that his Arteries will beat most palpably▪ and wheresoever he staleth, you shall perceive he sheddeth his seed also. Winter Feaver. A Feaver in the Winter is not so dangerous as the Feaver before-men∣tioned, yet if you do not remove it speedily it will continue long. The Signes are no other then hath been declared. Feaver by Surseit. The Feaver by Surseit is known by these Signes, he will beat upon his Back, his Breath will be short, hot and dry, and his Wind will draw only at his Nose with great Violence. Feaver Pestilential. The Feaver pestilential, is known by the holding down of his Head, forsaking of his Meat, shedding much water at his Eyes, and many times Swellings, or Ulcers, rising a little below his Ear-Roots. Feaver Accidental The Feaver Accidental comes by some blow or wound, by which any of the Vital Powers are let or hindred, which may bring him to a Feaver, then the Signes be, he will covet much to drink, but cannot, and his Flesh will fall away in an extraordinary fashion. How to make the Oyl of Oats. Take of Milk two Gallons, and warming it on the Fire, put to it a quar∣ter of a pound of burnt Allom, which will make it turn to Curds, then take out the Curd and strain the Whey, then take a quarter of a peck of clean Husked Oats that were never dried, and put them in the Whey, and set them on the Fire till they burst and be soft; then put them into Cullender to let the Whey run through them, then put the Oats in a Fry∣ing-Pan over the Fire, keeping them stirring, till you see the Vapour or Smoke of them ascend upwards, but as it were run about the Pan, then take them off and put them into a Press, and press them most exceedingly, and what cometh from them is the Oyl of them, which you must save in a close Glass.
The Vertues of it. This Oyl of all Medicines and Simples whatsoever, is the most Ex∣cellent and Sovereign for a Horses Body, as being extracted from the most Natural, wholesom and best Food which doth belong unto a Horses Body. This Oyl being given by four or five spoonfuls at a time in a pint of sweet Wine, or a quart of strong Ale, and some of the Whey poured into his Nostrils doth Cure the Glaunders before all other Medicines; it is also (given in the same manner) the best of all Purgations; for it purgeth a∣way all those venomous and filthy humours, which feedeth the most incu∣rable Farcy whatsoever. How to make the Powder of Honey and Lime; which is so great a Drier, that i will dry up any Wound or Old Sore. Take such a quantity of unslackt Lyme as you shall think fit, beat it in∣to very fine Powder, then take so much Honey as will make it up into a stiff Paste, then put it into the form of a thick Cake, or Loaf▪ and put it into an Oven, or burning Fire, till it be Baked or burnt glowing Red; then take it forth, and when it is cold, beat it into fine Powder, and then use it as occasion shall serve. If you mix amongst it the Powder of a burnt Shoo, it will be much the better. A Comfortable Drench. Make it of these Cordials, to wit, of Sugar, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nut∣megs, Saffron, Licoris, Anniseeds; beat all these into fine powder, adding thereunto white-Wine, and all these infused in an Earthen pot. An Operative Drink. Put in such a quantity of these things as you think requisite for the Strength of the Horse, viz. white-Wine, Sallet-Oyl, Alloes, Rubarb, A∣garick, Duke, or Duck-powder, Honey, Cordial-powder, &c. Several sorts of Charges. Take of black Pitch half a pound, of Mastick two Ounces, of Gal∣banum four Ounces, of fat Pitch and of Turpentine, of each half a pound, melt them into a Pot together, and when it is half cold charge the place up to the Hanch, and so overthwart the Reins of the Back, and if it be not Cured at the end of eight or ten days, take it off and apply this Ointment. Take of Oyl de Bay, Althea, tried Hogs-Grease, of each half a pound, incorporate them altogether, and therewith anoint and chafe the place grieved. [ the Second Part for the Best of Charges, I. W. marked in the Margent▪]
A Honey Charge for a Wrench or Slip in the Shoulder, Hp or other Member; for all sorts of Scratches, and for stiffness of Sinews hurt, or any other way offended, to asswage Swellings and Tumours, and to draw away all bad Humours. Take of Wheat-Meal two pounds, and put a little white-Wine unto it, and put it into a Kettle, as if you were to make a Poultess, and when it is well mixed, add to it of Bole-Armoniack in fine powder half a pound, of English Honey one pound, then set it upon the Fire and boyl it, keeping it continually stirring, and put to it in the boyling half a pound of black Pitch, keeping it stirring, and when you think you have boiled it enough, put to it of ordinary Turpentine, half a pound of Oyl de-Bay, Cummin, Althea, Sanguis Draconis, Bay-berries and Fennegreek, beaten to powder, and of Linseed-Meal, of each two drams, boil them altogether again, still keeping them stirring till they be well incorporate, and therewith Charge the grieved Member with it pretty warm, but not to scauld him. A Restringent Charge to be applied to broken Bones, or to Bones dislocated or out of Joyt, being first Set, and also to take moist Humours from weeping Wounds, and so to dry up bad Humours, which do pre-occupate the Body. Take of Oyl de-Bay four Ounces, Orpin, Cantharides, and Euphorbium, of each two Ounces, make all these into fine powder, and mix them with your Oyl de-Bay very well, and therewith charge the place grieved. This is also very good to charge the Swelling of a Back Sinew-strain. ☞ A celd Charge. Take Bole-Armoniack▪ Wheat-Flower, the white of an Egg, and Aqua∣vitae or white-Wine; beat all these together pretty thick, and lay it to the place grieved upon a brown paper, and when it is dry lay on fresh. You must keep that part out of the water, if you intend the Plaister should slay on. Of Salves, Ʋnouents, Powders and Waters. Take of Perosen, and of hard Rosin, of each one pound, of Frankincense, Virgin-Wax, or for want thereof, new Wax, and Sheeps Suet, of each half a pound, of old tried Hogs-grease one pound and a quarter, boil the Gums and Wax in half a pint of white-Wine, and then put into it your Sheeps Tallow and Hogs-grease, and when all is Molten and Incorporated to∣gether, strain it, and whilest it is yet hot put in an Ounce of Venice-Tur∣pentine, and so work all well together, which when it is cold, pour in the Liquor from the Salve, which put up into a Gally-pot for your use.
The Vertues of it. This is a most Sovereign Salve to heal any green Wound, (that is not come to an Ulcer) and so dry it up. Another most excellent Powder. Take unslacked Lyme, the dry dust of Tanners Oken Bark, and an old Shoo Sole burned to a Coal, of each alike, make them into fine Powder, and mix them well, and keep them in a Box for your use. The Vertues of it. This Powder healeth the Buds of the Farein after they be broken, and skinneth them, and if they be washed with the Juice of Vervine and strong Vineger, mingled together, and this Powder cast upon them, will heal and skin them. It healeth likewise and skinneth all other Sores. Another Oyntment. Take half a pound of tried Hogs-grease, a penniworth of Verdegrease beaten to fine Powder, give them two or three Walms on the Fire, then take it off, and put into it half an Ounce of Venice-Turpentine, and stir it well together till it be cold, this Ointment will heal any Wound or Sore in a Horse. Another Oyntment. Burn a good quantity of Roch-Allum, and as much bay-Salt, and burn that also, make them both together into fine powder. Then take of common Honey, and of sweet Butter, of each alike, as much as will suf∣fice, incorporate them altogether, by melting them over a gentle Fire, and with a Taint or Plaister apply it. And this Cureth any foul Sore. A good VVater. Take a pint of fair Water, and put into it of bay-Salt, and of green Cop∣peras, of each the quantity of a Hazel-Nut, first, made into fine powder, let them boil a little upon the Fire, with this wash your Sore before you do apply any of your Salves, Unguents or Powders. Another Salve. Take of common Honey, two Ounces, Roch-Allom, Verdegrease and Vinegar, of each an Ounce, make your Allom and Verdegrease into fine Powder, then take of ublimate finely powdered, two Ounces, boil them a little on the Fire, this laid Plaister-wise on the Wound once a day, or if the Wound be deep to Taint it with it, but before you dress it, wash the Sore with Water made of green Copperas and bay-Salt.
The Vertues of it. This doth not only Cure all sorts of Wounds in the Body, but the Foot also, and it cleareth any Wound from dead and proud Flesh. Another Salve. Take the Buds or the tender tops of the leaves of Elder, (or for want there of, the inner Rin of the Bark) one handful, and first shred, and after pound them very well, till you bring them to a Salve, and apply this to the Sore, binding a Cloth about it to keep it from falling off. The Vertues of it. This will Cure any Old or New Sore whatsoever in any part of the Body, as Galled Backs, Spur-Galls, Gravelling, Prick'd, being dressed every day once, and it will Cure a Ftula, if the Juice of it be injected in∣to it unto the bottom. An Oyntment. Take the White of a new laid Egg, and Sallet-Oyl, as much as will suf∣fice, and beat them well together, and before you apply it unto the Wound, pour into the Wonnd burnt Butter, and then lay on your Medicines with Hurds Plaister-wise. And this will Cure any green Wound. Another. An Ounce of black Sope, and as much Dogs Grease, with as much burnt Allom as will lie upon a six pence, melted upon the Fire together, is very good to heal or skin any wound or hurt, let the burnt Allom be put in last, when the others are melted. How to give a Horse a Vomit. Vomits are given to Horses newly taken from Grass, to bring away their gross and Phlegmatick Humours, which do abound in their Stomach and Head, which if they be not taken away in due time, may empair greatly the Health of the Horse. I never knew that Vomits were useful to a Horse till I met with a French Farrier, which I saw administred it to sun∣dry Horses, which did work very kindly. The Receipt is this. Take two of the greatest Roots you can get of Pollpodium of the Oak, washed and scraped very clean, and Tie it to his Snaffle, Trench or Bit, then let it be steeped in the Oyl of Spike all Night, and in the Morning fasting put on his Bridle with the same Roots, and Ride him about with it about an hour fair and softly, and if he be troubled with any Rheuma∣ick or Phlegmatick humour, or with any cold or silthy Matter, which
may annoy his stomach, this will force him to vent it at his Mouth and Nose, and it will cause him to Cough and Nez, where he will send forth a great abundance of silth and evil slimy stuff from off his Stomach and Head, as that in a very short time he will become very clean in his Body, for this will both refine his Blood, and exhaust all his watery Humours, which will make him found a long time after it. And this is not only to be applied to a Horse newly taken from Grass, but to any other Horse that hath taken Cold or to any Ketty, Foul, Foggy or Pursive Horse whatso∣ever. This may seem strange here amongst us, but let any man make trial, and he shall find it to be most admirable. Puring Pills. Take of Fresh Butter one pound, Alloes and Fennegreek, of each an Ounce, Life-Honey and white Sugar-Candy powdred, of each four Oun∣ces, Agarick half an Ounce, make all these into fine powder, and being well incorporated with the Butter and Honey, make Pills thereof, and give them to your Horse, and if he be but a small and weak Horse, you must give him but two parts of three, but if he hath a strong Cold and Cough withal. Then Take Fresh Butter, and of Mel-Rsrum, of each four Ounces, of Alloes and Sene, of each an Ounce, of Rubarb and Bay-erries, of each three Oun∣ces, Collquintida and S ffron, of each two drams, Codi l-powder one Ounce, Dk or Dtch-powder four Ounces, make them all into fine pow∣der, and mix them well with two Ounces of Mithridae, and with your Butter and Mel-Rosarum, beat and pound them well together, and make them up into Pills, and give them your Horse. This Receipt will purge him very well, though it heat him for some time, and let him be ordered as in other Physical Cures of the like Nature, and proportion your Pills according to the strength, greatness and corpulency of your Horse. A Plaister to dissolve and take away evil Humours, which shall at any time fall down in the Legs of your Horse. Take of Common Honey a pound, of Turpentine half a pound, of Ma∣stick in fine powder two Ounces, of Frankincense and Bole-Amiack made into fine powder, of each four Ounces, of Sngis Daconis three Oun∣ces, six new laid Eggs, of the strongest Wine-Vineger one pint, of the Flower of Rice seven Ounces, mix all these together, and hereof make a Plaister, and lap the Legs of the Horse from the Feet to the upper Joyns, and do this but four or five times, and you shall find that it will perform a strange and rare Cure. Of several sorts of Baths, and first of a Bath to dry up Humours. Take Sage, Rosemary, of each a handful, and of the Bark of the Root
of Bch three pounds, and of the Bks of young Emes, Oaks and Ash, of each a handful, of Np, Penvy-Royal, and of Coestnuts, the Rinds being taken away, of each a handful, three or four white Onions clean pilled and cut into small pieces or slices, Red Wine three Pottles, strong white-Wine Vineger two Pottles; Boyl all these together, and cause him to be walked a quarter of an hour till he be warm, then Bathe him with this Bath good and hot, and set him up warm, and let his Drink be either sweet Mashes or white Water, and thus Bathe him for three or four dayes to∣gether, and let him not be Ridden in any Water for eight or ten days after. The Ʋse or Vertues of Paths. Baths are somentations, which are the most comfortable things of any to the Joynts and Limbs of a Horse, for they dissolve all ill Humours, and give heat and warmth unto all the Members that are benumbed with Cold, or for want of Blood it comforteth and strengthneth them, and giveth very great case to the pained Sinews. Besides, it asswageth Swellings, in or about any part of the Body; for Legs swelling stiff, or benummed, or for any other Joynt pained or grieved, or for any String halt, Cramp or Convulsion. Which Bath to Cure all such Maladies is this. Bath 1. Take Muscadine and Sallet-Oyl, of each a pint, Bay-leaves and Rose∣mary, of each two handfuls, let them boyl half an hour, and when you are to Bathe your Horse therewith, rub and chafe the grieved place with a Wisp or Hair-Cloth a pretty while, then put the Foot into some broad Bowl or Pail, whereby to preserve the Liquor and Herbs, and Bathe him thus a quarter of an hour, which ended, bind upon the place a piece of Sheeps or Lambs Skin, with the Woolly side to the Leg, and let him stand so twenty four houres, apply this five or six times, and it will be a perfect Cure. Bath 2. ☞ A Bath to Cure all Gody and Guty Legs, which cometh either by Farcin, Scratches, or the like, &c. Take a quart or more of Chamber-ly, and put into it a Handful of Bay-Salt, a quarter of a pound of Soap, a pretty quantity of Soot, a handful or two of Misle-toe, Chopped small, boil them very well together, and Bathe the place very well therewith, and in three or four days Bathing it Morn∣ing and Evening, it will not only take down the Swelling, but prevent the Farcin. Bath 3. Another Bath for the same purpose. Take the Grounds of a Beer-Barrel, with the Barm, Smallage, Feather∣few,
Winter-Svoy, Corey, Mallowes, Ru, Se-l, Penny-Royal, Worm∣wood, Archangel, of each a good handful, and of the Leaves and Berries of Misle-toe three or four good handfuls, Sheeps Tallow one pound, tried Hogs-Grease half a pound, three or four Handfuls of Rye or Wheat-Bran, boyl them altogether, till the Herbs and Misle-toe become soft, and be sure you have Liquor enough, and a little before you take it from the Fire, put into it some Hay, with this Bathe his Legs; first one, then the other, as was before shewed, and when you have Bathed that Leg sufficiently, make a Thumb-Band of the Hay in the Bath, and rowl it about the Leg above the uppermost or middle Joynt, and put off the Herbs between the Thumb-band and his Leg, which done, pour on the Liquor remaining upon the Thumb-bands, and so Bathe him for so many days once, as you shall think requisite, and it will bring down the Swelling quite and make him sound. Bath 4. Another Bath very Excellent. Take Smallage, Ox-Eye and Sheeps Suet, of each alike, to a good quan∣tity, chop them small together, and after stamp them in a Stone▪Mortar, then boyl them with Mans Urine, and bathe the grieved parts herewith warm, doing as before with owl or Pail; then with Thumb-bands of soft Hay made, first wet in cold water, rap up the Member, as well above as below the Grief, and use it as often as you shall see cause. This Bath is very good for Swelled Legs upon Travel, or for any other Lameness which cometh either by stroke, strain or other Accident. Bath 5. Another Bath. Take Savin, and the Bark and Leaves of the Bay-tree, Pellitory, Rose∣mary, Sage, Rue, of each three Ounces, boyl these in a Gallon of white-Wine, until half be consumed; And Bathe your Horse as before is shewed. To bathe a Horse in Salt water, is very wholesom, both for the Horses Skin, and for any Disease in the Stomach. Bath 6. A Bath for a Horse that is Tired or over-Travelled. Take of Mallows, of Sage, of each two or three handfuls, and a Rose-Cake, boyl them together in water till it be all consumed, then add to it a good quantity of Butter or Sallet Oyl, and mix them together, and bathe all his fore-Legs therewith, and all the parts of his Body also, or to let him Blood, and with that Blood, Oyl and Vineger mixed together, pre∣sently to anoint his Body, helps most sorts of Infirmities. Of Perfumes or Purges of the Head of all filthy and gross Matter. Perfumes are necessary to be applied to Horses in Cases of Colds▪
Glanders, Rheums, Murs, Pzs, Catharrs, &c. For they do not only break a Cold, but dissipate congealed humours which do annoy the Head, Brain and Stomach of the Horse, and sometimes they expel and cause him to vent at his Nose and Mouth, much Filth and Corruption, which doth stop, clog and pester his Head and Body, and sometimes they do siccicate and dry up many bad Humours which are engendred in the Head and Brain. The Ingredients of which Simples wherewith we Persume sick Horses are many▪ As The Juice of Onions snuffed up the Nose draweth forth raw phlegmatick Humours. The Juice of Coleworts squirted up his Nose, or the Juice of red Beets. The leaves of the Wind-Flower stamped, and the Juice squirt∣ed up his Nose; or the Juice of Dazies purge the Head of filthy slimy Humours. The Juice of Sage draweth forth thin phlegm. The Juice of the Primrose stamped, strained and squirted up his Nose, is good to purge the Brain. The Juice of the small Cellendine purgeth the Head of foul and filthy Humours; The Juice of the Leaves or Berries of Ivy, that grows upon Walls, doth infinitely purge the Head; Fennel—Gya or Ferula snuf∣fed up the Nose, white Hellebore or Neesing—Root beaten to powder, after it is dried and blown up into the Nose, purgeth the Head and Brain from gross and slimy humours, wild white Hellebore hath the same Vertues; The Juice of sweet Mayem draweth forth much phlegm; The Juice of stinking Gladdon squirted up the Nose, draweth down to the Nose great store of filthy Excrements; Mustard-seed beaten to powder, and blowed up the Nose, purgeth the Head; The Juice of Sneeswort squirted up the Nose, bringeth from the Brain slimy phlegm; The Juice of the Leaves of Elder purgeth the Head; The Juice of Mercury purgeth the Head of all gross and vitious humours; Pellitory, Pimpernel, Rosemary, the smoke taken up his Nostrils, or take a Feather and anoint it in Oylde▪Bay, and thrust it up his Nose, is good for any cold or obstruction in the Head. The best Perfume of all. But the best Perfume of all is to take the best Olibanum, Storax, Benjamin and Franke cense, bruised grossly together, and strowed upon a Chasing∣dith of Coals, and let him receive the smoke of it up his Nostrils through a Tunnel, which will bring away abundance of tough Matter into water from the Head and Brain, insomuch that it will be almost ready to ex∣tinguish the Fire; It is a most excellent Comforter of the Brain, and brings a great chearfulness to the Heart, and rejoyceth the whole Body. The Green Ointment. The Green Ointment, which Cure Sores whether old or green, Ʋleers, Fi∣stulaes, Poll-evils, or what else; for where this Ointment cometh, no proud or dead Flesh will grow, no Flies will come near the place, or for
Horse or Mare-Filly that is Gelt or Splad, anoint but the place, and they will neither swell nor fester, for it doth not only heal soundly, but speedily also, provided you lay nothing upon the Wound or Sorrance, where the Ointment is administred, as neither Hurds, Lint, Plaisters or the like, un∣less you have occasion to taint a Wound which is deep, neither that for any long time, or too often; and besides, the seldomer the Wound is dressed, as once a day, or once in two days, it will heal the better and faster, especially if it be brought into good for wardness of healing. And together with this Ointment you may do well; wash the Sorrance with the Copperas water, which by reason it is always first to be used, you shall have it first, and the Green Ointment after it. The making of the Copperas water. Take two quarts of fair water, and put it into a clean Postnet, and put to it half a pound of green Copperas, of Salt a handful, of ordinary Honey a spoonful, and two or three Branches of Rosemary, boil all these till one half of the water be consumed, and a little before you take it from the Fire, put to it the quantity of a Doves Egg of Allom, then take it from the Fire and strain it into a Pan, and when it is cold put it into a Glass close stopped, and keep it for your use. And when you are to dress any Sore, first wash it very clean with this Water, and if the Wound be deep inject it with a Seringe. The Vertues of it. This Water will of it self Cure any reasonable Sore or Wound (but the green Ointment being applied after it is washed) will heal any old Ulcer or Fistula whatsoever, if they come to the bottom of them, and for green Wounds they have not their fellow; if you think good you may boyl it in Verjuice or Chamber-lye, one being a great Searcher, Cleanser and Healer, the other a great Drier. How to make the green Onment. Take a clean Skillet or Postnet, and first put into it of Rozin the quan∣tity of a Wallnut, which being Molten, put to it the like quantity of Wax, and when that is also Molten, put to them of tried Hogs-grease half a pound, and when that is Molten, put into it of common English Honey one spoonful, and when all these are Molten and well stirred together, then put in of ordinary Turpentine half a pound, and when that is dissolved, take it from the Fire, and put to it an Ounce of Verdegrease beaten to fine powder, and so stir it altogether, but be careful it run not over, for that the Verdegrease will cause it to arise, then set it again upon the Fire till  begin to Simper, then take it off, for if you let it boil too much it will turn red, and lose its vertue of Healing, and become a Corrasive, then strain it through a Cloth into some Earthen Pot, and keep it for your use close co∣vered.
The Vertues of it. This is the most Excellent Ointment that ever I knew, for de Grey hath done such rare Cures with it, that he hath been offered ten pounds for it. For it cleanseth a Wound be it never so foul, or infected with dead, proud, spungy or naughty Flesh it carnifieth and healeth abundantly, and withal so soundly and firmly, as that it doth never more break forth, it draweth forth Thorns, Splinters, Nails, and all such things in the Flesh, and in a word it Cureth all sorts of Sores and Wounds. ☞ Another Excellent Green Ointment made only in the Month of May, which Cu∣reth all sorts of Strains, Aches, Burnings, Scaldings and Swellings whatso∣ever, either in the Throator any other part of the Body. Take half a pound of each of these things here under-mentioned, viz. Rue, red Sage, Wormwood and young bay Leaves, beat them very well in a Mor∣tar; Then take four pounds of new Sheeps Suet, and work the Herbs and it very well together with your Hands, till they be incorporated and become as one Lump; Then put to them two quarts of Sallet-Oyl, and Work that also till it become all of one softness and colour; Then put it into a new Earthen Pan, and let it stand covered eight days; then boyl it over a soft Fire the space of two houres or more, keeping it stirring all the while; Then put into it four Ounces of the Oyl of Spike, and let that boyl as long; The way to know whether it be well boiled, is to put a drop of it upon a Plate, and if it be upon a fair Green, you may assure your self it is enough; Then strain it through a new Canvass, and keep it in an Earthen Pot for your use. This Ointment will hold very good seven or eight years. ☞ A very good Receipt to keep back Humours that flow too fast to a Wound you have in Cure, which will make it heal so much the sooner. Take two pints of white-Wine Vineger or Tartar, and put to it an Ounce or more of the powder of Bole-Armoniack, and of common Salt well dried the like quantity, the powder also of the Bur-dock Root, or the Juice of the Leaves, and wash the swelled place round about with it, once or twice a day, and it will be a great help in Order to its Cure. ☞ Another for the same Ʋse. After you have beaten a penniworth or more of Camphire very small, dissolve it in a Pint of Verjuice, and boyl it about a quarter of an hour, then put it into a Glass close stopped, to keep for your use, and use it as you have Directions in the former Receipt.
☜ To Cleanse a Wound Old or New before you dress it. Take more or less of white-Wine Vineger, according as you have oc∣casion, and put into it the powder of the Roots of Elder dried, or the Juice of the Leaves, with a spoonful of Honey, and a little powder of burnt Allom, and boyl it about half a quarter of an hour, and use it warm. ☜ Another sort of Green Ointment, which is good to heal any Wound Old or New. Take a handful of these Herbs here under-mentioned, viz. Rosemary, Wound-wort, Red Sage, Mug-wort, Comfrey, Rue and Southern-wood, &c. Cut them small, and boyl them in a pound and an half of May Butter, and the like quantity of Sheeps Suet; When you have boiled it according as you have Directions for the Boyling of Ointments in the lat∣ter End of the Book, strain out the Ointment from the Herbs, and put i into a Pot, and keep it for your use. ☜ Of Purging or Scouring Things in general. Turn-sole boiled in water gently purgeth the Body, Felt-wort or Bald∣mony, Alloes or Sea Housleek is the most convenient Medicine for the Stomach, that is the Seed of St. Peters wort, the seed of Tutsan or Park-Leaves do purge Cholerick Humours, Dodder that groweth upon Savory, Hedge-Hysop purgeth mightily waterish, gross and slimy Humours, Sca∣mony or purging Bind-weed, doth mightily purge, and it is very hurtful to the Body, if you do not mix it with Alloes, Colloquintida is a violent Purger, and is not to be used but upon some desperate Diseases, and then not to be given, unless it be mixed with some clammy things whereby the vehemency there of may be repressed, black Hellebore or Bears Foot, Hogs Fennel purgeth by Siege both Phlegm and and Choler, either of the Polli∣podies purgeth Choler and Phlegm. The Entrails of a Carp or Barble cut into pieces, and given him in white-Wine or Ale, or Rye sodden that it burst not, and dried and given him instead of Provender, an Ounce of Alloes made up in Balls of Butter, after it is finely beaten to Powder, purgeth excellently, Spurge boiled in Beer and given him, Hempseed, Fennegreek, Cassia, Honey, Sallet-Oyl, in Sack given him, the powder of Mechoacan boiled in Ale, or Ale-wort, London Treacle and Honey brewed together and given him, or Sene, A∣garick and Licoris boiled in Ale and given him, or Gentian sliced and boil∣ed in a quart of Beer till it come to a pint and given him.
Particular Scourings at large, and first of a Scouring for any Horse, sick or Sound, and especially for Running or Hunting Horses, whose Grease must necessarily be Molten. Take twenty Raisins of the Sun with the stones pickt out, ten slit Figs slit round-wise, boyl them in a Pottle of Running Water till the VVater is consumed and thickned, then take the powder of Licoris, Anniseeds and Sugar-Candy, finely searc'd, and mix it with the Raisins and Figs, stamp∣ing and working them together till they become a stiff paste, then making round Balls thereof of a pretty bigness, rowl and cover them all over with sweet Butter, and give as many of them to the Horse as you shall think meet for his Strength, provided that the day before, you give him such Exercise as will raise up his Grease, and that immediately before you give him this Medicine you also warm him throughly, that the Humours being again stirred up, the Medicine may work the more effectually. Another Scouring to purge a Horse from ail Grease, Glut or Filthiness within his Body, which I think may go for as good a Scouring as can be Invented by Art. Take of Anniseeds three Ounces, of Cummin seeds six drams, of Car∣thamus a dram and a half, of Fennegreek-seed one Ounce and two drams, of Brimstone one Ounce and a half, beat all these to fine powder and searce them, then take a pint and two Ounces of Sallet-Oyl, of Honey a pound and a half, and of white-VVine four pints, then with as much fine VVheat-Meal as will suffice, make all into a strong stiff Paste, and knead and work it well; this Paste keep in a Gally-pot close covered for your use; when your Horse hath been Hunted, and is at Night or in the Morning very thirsty, take a Ball of it as big as a Mans Fist, and dissolve it in a Gallon or two of cold VVater, and it will make the VVater look white as Milk, then give it him in the dark lest the Colour displease him; if he drink it, then feed him, but if he refuse it, let him fast till he take it, which assuredly he will do in twice or thrice offering, and when he hath once taken it, he will refuse all other drink for this, and you cannot give him too much nor too oft of it if he have exercise. It is an excellent thing for all inward Infirmities whatsoever. Another Excellent Scouring after any sore Heat, or for any fat Horse after his Exercise, with Directions how he is to take it, and how you are to Order him after it, with Cautions what to do when you give any Scouring. Take a quart of good Sack, and set it on the Fire in a Bason or Skillet, it
and when it is warm, take an Ounce of the clearest Rosin, being bruised very small, and by degrees little by little put it into the Sack, and keep it stirring for fear of Clotting, and when it is well incorporated into the Sack, take it from the Fire, and put into it half a pint of the best Sallet-Oyl, and in the cooling, stir them all very well together, then put  it an Ounce of brown Sugar-Candy beaten to powder, and being luke-warm, give it the Horse in the height of his Heat, as soon as you come home from Exercise, then Rub him well and Cloath him warm, and let him fast two houres after it, and keep him stirring in the Stable, for that will make Spirits work, for Rest doth but dull the Spirits. When you give him any Scouring, be sure that day to give him no cold water after it, for it is binding and knitting, and detaineth that soulness which the Scouring should take away. Another Scouring when others will not work. Take a quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, and so much of Castle-Soap, and half an Ounce of Alloes, beat them together, and add two spoonfuls of beaten Hemp-seed, and of Rosin half a spoonful, of Sugar-Candy an Ounce bruised, work them all into a Paste, and give it him in Balls imme∣diately after his heat, and when you have warmed him, and stirred up the Grease and Foulness within him. [There is in my second Part a very safe and easie Scouring.] If you have a desire to see more Variety of Purgations of all sorts, look back. ☜ Of Loosening things in General. Brank-ursin or Seed, Hemp-seed, Fennegreek-seed, the Juice of the white Beets, Coleworts, Spinage, Mercury, Succory, white Sope and Spurge brayed together and given him to drink, Sallet-Oyl given him in Sack or Ale, or Anniseeds, Linseeds and Piony boiled in Beer, or the Bark of the Elder-Tree bruised and mixed with old Ale and given him, or take of the Decoction of Mallows, Sallet, Oyl and fresh Butter, Benedicta Lax∣ativa, given him Blood-warm Glister-wise, or Rye thrown amongst his Provender, or Mustard-seed, or to anoint your hand with Butter or Hogs-Grease, and pluck away his Ordure, and then put into his Fundament a good piece of the great end of a Candle, or give him in Ale eleven Leaves of Lawrel stamped, the Seed of horned Poppey given him in Ale. All sorts of Docks being boiled are Loosners of the Belly, Marigold-Leaves, Burage, Bugloss, the Leaves of Hounds-Tongue boiled in Ale do mollifie the Belly, Syrop of Violets, black Hellebore or Bears Foot, Hogs Fennel Loosneth the Belly gently, Speraege or Asparagus. ☜ Things good to Fatten a Horse in general. Beans boiled in two Gallons of water till they swell or burst, and mix them with a peck of Wheat bran, and give it him in the manner of a Mash,
and it will Fat suddenly, or Coleworts sodden and mixed with Wheat Bran, and give them instead of Provender, or to give him in stead of his Provender, the Grain called Buck, or to give him Parched Wheat mingled with Ale, or Wheat Bran mingled amongst his Provender, but be sure to keep him well dressed and cleanly lookt after, for without clean keeping his Meat will do him but little good, and to give him a little Meat at once for fear you Cloy him. Or take Sage, Savin, bay-Berries, Earth-Nuts, Bears-Grease mingled with a quart of Wine or Ale, and give it him, or to feed him a Month together with scalded Bran, or take Cummin-seed, Fen∣negreek-seed, Siliris Montani, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed, of each two Ounces, quick Brimstone six Ounces, made all into line powder, and give him an Egg-shell full of it every Night in his Provender, and white Water after it, and put into his Oats with his powder a handful of Nettle∣seed, for that is a thing which will principally cause him to batten, and when he is Glutted with this Meat, then give him Bread, if he leave his Bread, then give him Malt, or any Grain that he will eat with a good Ap∣petite, or to give him many Mornings together half an Ounce of Brimstone finely beaten with a raw Egg, and a penny weight of the Powder of Myrrh in a quart of Ale, or to give him three Leaved Grass half green and half dry for many days together, or to give him Pepper, Saffron, Anniseeds, Turmerick, Treacle, Licoris, Penny-royal and Archangel, mingled in Milk with the Yolks of Eggs, Barley dried or Barley boiled till it burst is a great Fattener, but most of these ways will not breed Fat that will con∣tinue; but the best way to make him Fat, and to cause him to keep it, is to give him three Mornings together a pint of sweet VVine, and two spoon∣fuls of Diapente brewed together, for that will take away all Infection and Sickness from the inward Parts, then to seed him well with Proven∣der at least four times a day, viz. After his Water in the Morning, after his Water at Noon, after his Water in the Evening, and after his Water at nine a Clock at Night, and if you find that he eat not his Provender well, then to change it to another, and to let him have most of that Food he loveth best, and there is no question but he will grow fat suddenly. But if you will have a more particular Account, then turn to the Mirrour of all Medicines, to make the Leanest Horse that may be Fat, Sound and Fit either for Market or Travel, in the space of fourteen days, you may find before, with several other such like Receipts ensuing. An Explanation of several hard Words belonging to Chyrurgery. VVhat a Fracture is. If there be a loosening in the Bone, it is called a Fracture. VVhat a Wound is. If it be in any Fleshy part, it is called a Wound.
VVhat a Rupture is. If it be in the Veins, then it is a Rupture. What a Convulsion is. If in the Sinews, then it is a Cramp or Convulsion. What an Excortication is. If it be in the Skin, then it is called an Excortication. Of Giving of Fire, and there are two ways of it, the one Actual, and the other Potential; the First is done by Medicine, either Corrasive, Putrif active or Caustick. Cautery Actual. The Actual Fire doth burn the Flesh by Instrument, which stoppeth Cor∣ruption of Members, and stancheth Blood, provided the Sinews, Cords and Ligaments be not toucht, the Instruments to Cauterize, are Gold, Sil∣ver, Copper or Iron. Cautery Potential. The Potential Fire doth burn by Medicine, of which there are three sorts or degrees, namely, by Corrosive, by Caustick, or Putrifaction. The Corrosive. The Corrosives are Simple or Compound, the simple Corrosives are Roch-Allom, burnt or un-burnt, Red Coral, Mercury sublimed, Verde∣grease, Copperas white and green, and these Corroding things are called Precipitates, which are Eaters of dead Flesh. The Compounds are Ʋn∣guentum Apostolorum, Ʋnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Ʋnguentum Coraceum, with others. Medicines Putrifactive. Medicines Putrifactive are such Medicines, which are applied to Swel∣lings, which are made for the most part of Medicines Compounded, as Poultesses, rosted Sorrel, white Lilly Roots and the like. What a Caustick is. A Caustick is a great Burner, for that being once put to the Skin, will in a short time make a Wound where there was none before, and those things are Lye, Lime, Vitriol, Aqua-fortie and the like. Corrosives. Corrosives are weaker then Putrifactives, and Putrifactives are weaker then Causticks. Corrosives work in the soft Flesh, Putrifactives in the hard, and Causticks break the sound Skin. Thus you see the use of these things, you may apply them at your plea∣sure,
for these Cure all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulaes, Leprosies, Maungies, Scabs, and such like poisonous Infection. Of the several sorts of Purgings, which are Five, by Pills, by Porions, by Glisters, by Suppositories, and by Grass. What Pills are. Pills are solid or substantial stuff fixed together in one Body, and being made into round Balls are cast down the Horses Throat, which purge the Head and Brain from Phlegm, and other gross Humours down into the Excrements. What a Portion is. Portions are when you give him liquid purging Powders dissolved in Wine or Ale, or that if it be any other liquid stuff, now Portions cleanse the Stomach and Guts from such naughty Humours, which Glaunders, Colds and Surfeits have ingendred in the Body. What Glisters are. Glisters are given at the Fundament, and are made up of four things, that is to say, Decoctions, of Drugs of Oyls, and such like Unctious Matter, as Butter or Grease; And ourthly, of divers Salts to provoke the Vertue Expulsive. Now they are of several Natures, some to ease and appease Griefs, and allay the sharpness of Humours, some to Bind and some to Loosen, and some to heal, as in Cases of Ulcers and Old Sores within the Body, &c. What a Suppository is. A Suppository is only a Preparative to a Glister, and but only to cleanse and make loose the great Guts which cometh to the Tuel, and they help the disease of the Guts, being of Nature more gentle then Gli∣sters are, and may be applied when Glisters cannot. Purging by Grass. Purging by Grass, is either by green Corn, Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats or Tares, which is a great Clener and Cooler of his Body. What a Decoction is. A Decoction is a Broth made of certain Herbs, as Mallows, Mash-Mal∣lows, pellitory, Camomil, and sometimes of white Lilly Roots, and other such like things. Simples that are good to conglutinate and knit things together, either inward or outward. ☜ Iris Illyrica beaten and sifted, and mingled with pepper, Honey and Cur∣rants,
and given him to drink in Wine and Sallet-Oyl, Conglutinateth any inward Rupture or Burstness, Dragant, Saffron, the fruit of the Pine, with the Yolks of Eggs given him to drink with Wine and Sallet-Oyl, is good to Conglutinate any inward Member or Vein broken, the Roots and Seeds of Asparagus sod in water and given him, and after three days give him Opoponax with Honey and Myrrh, and it will Conglutinate any in∣ward Ulcer or Rupture whatsoever. The Bark of Ash beaten with Wine, and Plaister it, is a great Knitter of broken Bones, or the inward Bark of an Elm laid in Running water, and Bathe the place therewith, or the Roots of Rocket boiled in water, and plaister it, or Wilde Briony stamp∣ed and plaistered also, Hazel-tails and the Seeds of red Docks made into powder, and given him to drink is good, or Bugel is a Knitter of Wounds inward or outward, so does Lions-paw, or Self-heal, the distilled water of sow-Bread doth Knit any broken Sinew in the Body. Bole-Armoniack beaten to powder, and finely Sifted and beaten with the white of an Egg, and spread upon the Leg, and covered over with Flox, is very good for a Sinew-strain, and is a great Strengthner of the grieved place, where a Bone hath been out of Joynt, and put in again; The yellow Wall Flower strengthens any weak part out of Joynt. A Poultess made of brank-Ursin and applied is good, so is a De∣coction of the Root of Butchers-broom or Knee-Holly, with the Berries ☜made also into a Poultiss; the Root of the great Comfrey bruised and laid to them, doth consolidate and knit them together; The Decoction of the Leaves, Bark or Roots of Elecampane healeth them, being bathed therewith; The Roots of Eringo or Sea-holly boiled in Hogs-grease, and applied to them, draweth not only Bones out of the Flesh, but also Thorns, and healeth them again; An Ointment made of the Roots of Osmond-Royal or Water-Flag in a Mortar, with the Oyl of Swallows, and the place grieved anointed with it, is very good; Flix-weed doth consolidate broken Bones, so doth the leaves of the Holly-tree used in Fomentations, so doth Knot-grass and Moon-wort, the leaves of Mullen bruised and boiled in Wine, and laid to any Member out of Joynt, and newly Set a∣gain, taketh away all swellings and pains thereof; the Leaves of Nettles also bruised and laid to them refresheth them; the Juice of Plantine appli∣ed to any bone out of Joynt hindreth the Inflammation, swelling or pain that shall arise thereon; Solomons Seal knitteth any Joynt, which by weak∣ness useth to be often out of its place; Or the Decoction of the Root being bruised and infused in Wine all Night, and given him, much helpeth to∣wards the Cure; the Leaves of Turn-Sole bruised and applied to Bones out of Joynt is very good for them, &c. ☜ Simples that are good to clease the Blood. Avens, VVater-Cresles, or Brook-lime, Burage or Bugloss, Butchers broom or Knee-holly, Cardus Bnedictus, the red Dock, which is com∣monly
called Blood-wort, Fennel-seeds, Fumitory, Hops, VVall-Rue, or ordinary white Maiden-hair, Mustard-seed, the Root of the bastard Ru∣barb, Sage, Succory, Scurvey-Grass, Smallage, VVood-sorrel, Star-Thistle, Ladies Thistle, the yellow VVall-Flower, &c. ☞ Simples that are good in general to ex pel the dead Foal. Aheal, the Herb Alkanet applied to her Shape draweth it forth, An∣gelica, Brook-lime, or Water-Pimpernel, Centaury or sweet Chervil given her in Wine is very good. The powder of the Root of Cuckow∣point, or the Juice of it given in Wine bringeth it away, Flax-weed or Toad-Flax is good, Flower de-luce made up in a Pessary with Honey, and put up into her Body bringeth it forth, Germander, Hore-hound, Fila∣pendula or Drop-wort is good also given her; so is the Root of Master∣wort; Ground-pine is excellent good to expel it. The Decoction of the Leaves and Branches of Sage given is also good, so is the Juice of the yel∣low Wall-Flower, &c. ☞ Simples good in general to provoke Lust in Horses. The Decoction of Asparagus given him for some time, the seed of the Ash-tree powdred with Nutmegs is a great Increaser of it, Beans, Chest-Nuts, Cream of Cich-pease, or Cicers boiled in water and given. The Seeds of both the sorts of Clary, the pith of the stalk of the Burr-dock, before the Burr cometh forth; The weight of one Ounce of Cloves given in Milk provoketh it exceediugly; Bread made of Potatoes and Bean∣flower, and given him, is a great Provoker of it; The Roots of Chervil, the Roots of Fennel-gyant, Spear-mint, Mustard-seed, Nettle-seed; The seed of the wilde Rocket encreaseth it exceedingly, Raisins of the Sun, sweet Almonds, Pine-Nuts, the pizzle of a Bull or Hart, Boars stones dried and powdred, and given him amongst his Provender, &c. ☞ Simples good in General to increase Milk in Mares. The seed or leaves of Burrage or Bugloss, Cicers boiled in Milk, Cocks-Head the leaves or seed of Fennel, the seed of wilde Rocket, Sow thistles, the seed of Vipers, Bugloss given him in Ale, Dandelion, &c. Things good in General to wash all manner of Sores and Ʋlcers▪ ☞ Alehoof bruised with white-Wine and Allom, is very good to wash all sorts of them, Flixweed made into a Salve doth quickly heal them, how foul or malignant soever they be, the distilled water of the Herb worketh the same effect, but it is somewhat weaker. The Juice of Fox-Gloves doth cleanse, dry and heal them. The Juice of the Leaves or Roots of stinking Gladwin, and anoint any Scab or sore in the Skin, it taketh them
away. The Juice of Purslain is good to allay the heat in sores and hurts, Meadow sweet, Ragwort, the Juice of the green Herb of Tobacco, wilde Tansie boiled with Vineger and Honey is good to heal moist, corrupt and running Sores, &c. ☜ Simples that are good in General for all manner of swellings or risings in the Skin, viz. hard Knobs and Kernels, as also swelled Legs, Swellings under the Chaul, hard or soft, and to ripen them. Archangel stamped with some Salt and Vineger, and applied, dissolveth them, Bdelium (a kind of Gum) doth ripen them; The leaves of the Beech Tree is good to discuss hot swellings; Barley-meal and Flea-wort boiled in water, and made into a Poultess with Honey and Oyl of Lillies, cureth swellings under the Throat; Brine dissolveth hard swellings, Chickweed boiled in water very soft, adding to it Hogs-Grease, with the powder of Fennegreek and Linseed, and a few Roots of Marsh-mallows stamped in the form of a Cataplasm or Poultess, and applied, taketh away the swelling of the Legs, or any other part. Book-lime or water Pim∣pernel used in the like manner is also very good; the Decoction of Cole∣worts taketh away the pain and Ach, and allayeth the swellings in swollen Legs, wherein any gross or watery Humours are fallen, the place being bathed with it warm. Oyl of Camomil is good to dissolve hard and cold swellings, Cummin put into a Poultiss is also good for them; so is Chervil bruised and applied, Cinquesoyl boiled in Vineger helpeth all hard swellings, so does Clary and Cleavers boiled in Hogs-Grease do the like; Cocks-head bruised when they are green, and laid as a Plaister, dispenseth Knots and Kernels in the Flesh; the Juice of Colts-foot is good for all hot swellings and inflammations. Endive applied asswageth all Swel∣lings and Tumors coming of a hot cause, an Oyl made of the broad Flag Flower-deluce, mollifieth all manner of Tumors and Swellings in any part of the Body; As also of the Matrice, the Roots of stinking Glad∣win boiled in Vineger or the Grounds of Beer, and laid upon them, con∣sumeth them, the Decoction of the leaves of the Goose-berry bush cool∣eth them, Frankincense mingled with Honey, and applied, dissolveth hard swellings; the fresh Herb of Groundsel made into a Poultess, taketh a∣way the heat and pains of them, and used with Salt dissolveth Knots and Kernels; Henban asswageth all manner of swellings in the Cods or else∣where, if they be boiled in Wine, or the Grounds of Beer, and applied either of themselves, or by a fomentation warm. True-love or one Berry hath the same Vertues. Hore-hound boiled in Hogs Grease is also good for any swelling in any part of the Body; St. Jhs wort dissolveth swel∣lings, Knotgrass cooleth all manner of hot Inflammations breaking out by heat, Hedge Mustard is good for swellings in the Stones▪ The Decoction of Rag-weed, or Pellitory of the VVall is good, Rye-bread, or the leaves
thereof, ripeneth and breaketh Imposthumes and other swellings, so doth Wood-Sage, the leaves of Southern-wood boiled till they be soft, and stamped with Barley-Meal, and Barrows Grease, and applied to the place grieved is good for all cold Tumours. The Decoction of the Root of Scabins applied, doth wonderfully help all sorts of hard or cold swellings in any part of the Body, &c. ☞ Simples good in General to cause Sweat, given inwardly or applied outwardly▪ Mountain Calamint given inwardly, or applied outwardly, being boil∣ed in Sallet-Oyl, and the Body anointed with it, the Juice of Scabius given him with Treacle; Camomil used in Baths provoketh it, opening the Pores, and mitigating the Griping pains in the Guts and Bowels; the Juice of Bugloss mixed with Brandy, and the Body rubbed therewith is good, Master-wort or Herb-Gerrard is also good; Fennel-Gyant mixed with Sallet-Oyl, and the Body anointed with it. An Oyl made of Asa∣rabaca, with Landanm, by setting it in the Sun, and the Back anointed with it is good, Wood-sage, &c. ☞ Simples, and other things that are good to Expel the Heam in Beasts, which is the same as the after-Birth is in Women. Time, Winter-succory, penny Royal boiled in white-Wine and given, Common Horehound boiled also in the same Wine and given, Dittany given or put up in a Pessary, driveth forth the dead Foal, and expelleth the Secundine; Angelica driveth it forth also, so doth Parsley-seed, A∣lexanders, Hops, Fennel, Savin and bay-Berries, the powder of the in∣side of the wrinkled skin of the Gizzard of a Hen that Lays, dried and given in white-Wine is excellent, &c. ☞ Simples good in general to provoke or expel Wind. Alexander or House-parsley, Angelica seeds, Bay-berries, the seeds of the wild Carriots, Bishops-weed dissolveth it, Caraway-seeds, Cardamum seeds, sweet Chervil, Cummin taken inwardly, or given in Glisters is good for the gnawing of the Guts and Belly, Dill-seeds, the Herb Devils-bit boiled in Wine, Fennel-seeds, Filapendula or Drop-wort, Hemp▪seed, the Berries of Holly, Juniper-berries, the Root of Lovage, Lavender, Nep or Cat-mint, Nutmegs, wild Parsnix, or the Seeds or Roots of common par∣sley dissolveth it both in the Stomach and Bowels, China-Roots, Winter and Summer-Savoury, penny-royal given him in Sack, Burnet, Saxarage, stone-parsley, the seed of smallage, Time or Mother of Time, Vale∣rian, &c.
☜ Simples that are good in general for Cattel that are bewitched. Two drams of the berries or seed of True-love, or one berry beaten to powder, and given him for twenty days together restoreth him, Misle-toe growing upon Pear-trees and hung about the Neck is very good, Amara ulcis, gathered in its Influency, is also good for it used as before; Peony is good. The branches of the Holly-tree is reported to defend, not only from Witch-craft, but Lightning also, &c. ☜ Simples that are Cordials and Strengthners of Nature. Gentian strengthens the Stomach exceedingly, and keepeth the Heart from fainting; Clove Gilly-Flowers are great Strengthners both of the Brain and Heart, and are very good to put into Cordials for sick and weak Horses, St. Johns-wort, Juniper-berries strengthens the Brain, and all the Limbs of the Body; Marigolds strengthens the Heart, so doth Saffron and Mustard-seed; Give not above two drams of Saffron at a time when you use it; Mother of Time is a great strengthner of it, Red Roses doth not only strengthen the Heart, but Stomach and Liver, and the retentive Faculty, and mitigateth the pains that arise from Heat, Bugloss, Balm, Mo∣therwort, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, Anniseeds, Canary, &c. ☜ Simples that are good in general, either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly, for the Biting or Stinging of any venomous Beast, viz. Adders, Vipers, Spiders, Wasps, Bees and Hornets, &c. The Decoction of Agrimony given him, or the Juice of Alexander or Horse-parsley, Aristolochia rotunda or Birthwort, Asarabica, Balm, Wood∣bitony, the powder of the dried Leaves of the blew Bottle given in Plan∣tine-water, Comfrey, Bucks-horn, Plantine given him, with some of the Leaves laid to the hurt place is good against the Biting of Adders, the Juice of the Root of the Bur-dock, given him inwardly, and applied out∣wardly to the place bruised with Salt, is also very good for them to ease the pain thereof, Water-Caltrops, Cantaury, Campions, Flower-de luce boiled in Vineger and given is good, so is the Decoction of the Root of Common Elder; the seed of St. Johns wort given inwardly and applied outwardly is good for them; so is Sage, Rocket, Penny-royal, Pimpernel, Ground-pine, Marjorem, Summer-Savory taketh away the stinging of Bees or Wasps, the Root of Spignel, the green Herb of Tobaccho applied to the place bruifed; the Leaves of the Tamarisk Tree boiled in Wine and given him is good, so is Valerian and Vipers Bugloss, the Flower of Barley or Wheat-meal boiled in Vineger, applied to the place grieved, is very good to draw forth the Venom, the Juice of Mead or Trefoyl is also good for them, &c.
☞ A very large Account in general, of what Simples are good for all sorts of Sors or Ʋlcers, whether inward or outward, of what Nature soever. Agrimony, Alehoof boiled with a little Honey and Verdegrease, doth wonderfully cleanse them, and stayeth the spreading and eating of the Cankers in them; the Juice or the Water of Angelica is very good to wash them with, so is Anemone or Wind-Flower and Archangel, Arsmart is good for putrid Ulcers, Alloes beaten to powder and strewed upon them is also good, so is the Juice of Broom and Water-bitony, the Water or Juice of Bistort, or Snakeweed, or of the Leaves, Buds or Branches of the Bramble is very good to wash them with; the uice of the Leaves of the blew Bottle helpeth all Ulcers or Sores in the Mouth; Bugle, Burnet, wild Champions given inwardly, or applied outwardly, is very good, so is the Juice of Celandine and Centaury, the red berries of the VVinter-Cherries given inwardly, cleanseth the inward Imposthumes and Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder, and is also good for bloody and foul Urine; the Juice of the bruised Leaves of Chickweed, Cinquefoyl or omfrey is good to wash them with, Cuckoe-point, the Root of it in powder, or the Herb boiled in Sheeps or Cows Milk healeth the inward Ulcers of the bowels; the distilled VVaters of Cucumbers given inwardly is very good for Ulcers in the Bladder; the powder of the Root of both kinds of Fern strewed upon them, drieth up the moisture in them, and healeth them speedily, so doth the powder of Sow-Fennel, or Fig-wort, the Juice or the VVater of Flix-weed injected into them, doth cleanse and heal them up, Elecampane Root beaten to powder and mixed with Honey is also very good. Dill burnt and laid upon moist Sores cureth them▪ Franckincense is good to Fill up hollow Ulcers, Hemlock is good for all creeping Ulcers and Pustles that arise from hot and sharp Humours, by cooling and repel∣ling the heat. Take this Receipt for the Cure of all manner of Ulcers. Take the green leaves of the yellow Henbane, three pounds and a half of them, stamped in a Mortar, and boil it in a quart of Sallet Oyl, in a brass Pan, gently upon the Fire, keeping it stirring till the Herbs are black, and will not boil nor bubble any more, then you shall have a most excellent green Ointment, which being strained from the dross, put it to the Fire again, and add to it half a pound of Bees Wax, four Ounces of Rosin, and two Ounces of common Turpentine, melt them together, and keep them for your use. This will cure any iuveterate Ulcer, Botch, Burning, green Wound, and all Cuts or Hurts in the Head. The fresh leaves of Ivy boiled in white Wine doth wonderfully help to cleanse them; Juniper-Berries drieth up hollow Ulcers, and filleth them up with flesh; Knot▪grass, or the powder of the Herb or Seed, cools all Gangreens, Fistulaes, and foul and silthy Ulcers; Knape weed is a great Drier up of Moisture in them; Madder helpeth them in the Mouth, if
unto the Decoction you put a little Allom and Honey of Roses, Herb Mouse-Ear is very excellent to stay the Malignity and spreading of them; Pellitory of the Wall, penny-Royal bruised and put to Vineger cleanseth them; The Juice of Plantain is good for old Ulcers that are to be healed; The Juice of Purslain is good for Inflammations in the privy Parts; the pow∣der of Savin mixed with Honey cleanseth them, but it hindereth them from healing; The Juice of Rag-wort is very good also, &c. Burning Compositions. The gentlest is Ʋnguentum Apostolorum, next to it is Verjuice and Hogs-Grease beaten together; Next to this is Precipitate and Turpentine mixt together; Next to it is Arsnick allayed with any Oyl or healing Salve; Next to it is Mercury sublimate likewise allayed with some cooling Salve; and the worst is Lime and Soap, or Lyme and strong Lye beaten together, for they will corrode and mortifie the soundest part whatsoever. To make Hair smooth, sleek and soft. To do this, keep him warm at the Heart, for the least inward Cold will make the Hair stare, then make him Sweat oft, for that will raise up the Dust and Sweat which makes his Coat foul, when he is in his greatest Sweat, with an old Sword Blade scrape off all the white Foam, Sweat and Filth that shall be raised up, and that will lay his Coat even and smooth. And when you let him Blood, rub him all over with his own Blood, and so let it remain two or three days, and then Curry and Dress him well, and this will make his Coat shine like Glass. How to cast and overthrow a Horse. When you intend to Cast your Horse, bring him upon some even, smooth and soft place, or in the Barn upon some soft straw, then take a long Rope, and double it, and cast a Knot a yard from the Bought, then put the Bought about his Neck, and the double Rope betwixt his fore-Legs, and about his hinder Pasterns, and underneath his Fet-locks, then put the ends of the Rope underneath the Bought of his Neck, and draw them quickly, and they will overthrow him, then make the ends fast, and hold down his Head, under which you must be sure to have always good store of straw. Now if you would at any time Brand your Horse on the Buttock, or do any thing about his hinder-Legs that he may not strike, take up his contrary fore-Leg; and when you do Brand your Horse, see that the Iron be red hot, and that the Hair be both seared away, and the Flesh scorched in every place before you let him go, and so you shall be sure to lose no Labour.
☞ To make an unruly Horse stand still to be Trimmed, that will not be Trimmed with Barnacles. Take off one of his Stirrop-Leathers, and put it into his Mouth, and so over his Head as you do a Bridle, and girt up his Chaps very hard, and he will stand quietly to be Trimmed. ☞ Another to make an unruly Horse stand still to be shod. The common way is to put a pair of Barnacles upon his Nose, and Tye them very hard; but if you find that will not do, then at the same time put some round stones into his Eares, and Ty them up hard that they fall not out. ☞ How to make a stubborn Horse to go. Tye a small Cord or Line about his Stones pretty hard, and bring it be∣tween his fore-Legs, and let it be of that length that you may reach the other end of it with your Hand when you are upon his Back, and when you find that he will not go forward, Jerk him with your Line, which is the only means I know of to break him of his stubborn tricks. If he be a Gelding, then strike him with a long Rod that is burnt at one end, and this will help. To make a Horse follow his▪ Master, and finde him out and Challenge him amongst never so many People. Take a pound of Oat-Meal, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Honey, and half a pound of Lunarce, and make a Cake thereof, and put it into your Bosom next to your naked Skin, then run or labour your self till you Sweat, then rub all your Sweat upon your Cake, then keep him Fasting a day and a night, and give it him to eat, and when he hath eaten it, turn him loose, and he shall not only follow you, but also hunt and seek you out when he hath lost you, or doth miss you, and though you be enviroued with never so many, yet he will find you out and know you, and when he cometh to you spit into his Mouth, and anoint his Tongue with your Spittle, and thus doing he will ver forsake you. How to make a black Star or white Hair black. If you desire to make on a white Horse a black Star, you shall then take a Scruple of Ink, and four Scruples of the VVood of Oliander beaten to powder, incorporate this in as much Sheeps Suet as will suffice, and anoint the place therewith, and it will make any white Hair black, or take the Decoction of Fearn Roots, and Sage sod in Lye, and wash the place therewith, and it will breed black Hair, but you must wash the place very
oft therewith▪ Or take the Rust of Iron, Galls and Vitriol, and stamp them with Oyl, or else take Souter-Ink, Galls and Rust, and beat them well together, and anoint the place well therewith, and it will turn any white Hair to be black. Certain Principles touching Simples. As touching Simples, some are only to ease pain, as Linseed, Camomile, soft Grease, Suet of all sorts, or any other Oyl that is hot in the first de∣gree, and whensoever any of these Simples are compounded with their like, the Medicine is called Anodina or Lynogs. There are other Simples which are astonishing, benumbing or bringing asleep, as Opium, Mandrake, Poppey, Hemlock, and such like, which are gross and cold in the fourth degree, and whensoever any of these Simples are compounded with their like, then the Medicine is amongst Leaches called Narcotica. The third sort of Simples are such as incarnate, or breed Flesh, as Frank∣incense, Flour, Saffron, Yolks of Eggs, and such like, which are hot in the second degree; and whensoever any of these Simples are compounded with their like, then the Medicine is called Sacotica. The fourth sort of Simples are corroding, fretting and burning, as Ars∣nick, Resigallo, Mercury, Lime, and such like, which are hot in the fourth degree; and whensoever they are applied Simple or Compound, then the Medicine is called Corrosive. The fifth sort of Simples are those which be called Mollifying, and are four in Number. That is Green Mallows, white Mallows, Violets and Brank-Ursin. The last sort of Simples are those which are called Cordials, and are three in Number, viz. Violets and Bugloss of both kinds. And thus much touching the Nature, Use, Property and Operation of Simples. The End of the First Part.
☞ A TABLE Of the Price, Value and Virtue of most of the Prin∣cipal Drugs, both Simple and Compound, be∣longing to Farring, as they are frequently Sold at the Druggists in London, viz. Roots, Barks, Woods, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Juices, Gums, Rozins, Simples from Plants, Animals, their Parts and their Excrements; Minerals, Metals and Stones; Together with Chymical Oyls and Spirits; As also Treacles, Oyntments, Electuaries, Powders and Wa∣ters, &c. ROOTS. ANgelica strengthens the Heart, and is good against Pestilence and Poison. The price the Pound is—0 s. 6. d. Aristolochia Longa of long Birth-wort, brings away the Heam in See more of them in the Table of Simples.Beasts, (which is the same as the after-Birth is in Women) The price the Pound is—0 s. 9. d. Aristolochia Rotunda, of Round Birth-wort, Powdered and Given in Malaga Wine, is good for Ruptures, both of them Resist Pe∣stilence and Poison. The price the pound is—0 s. 9 d. Bistort is good against Pestilence and Poison, Bruises, Huxes and Staling of Blood. The price the pound is—0 s. 8 d. Costus Amarus and Costus Dulcis are both hot and dry, and are good to bring away Wind, given him; And boiled in Sallet-Oyl, and applied▪ outwardly to any Pain or Grief in the Legs, easeth it. The price of them the pound is—2 s. 4 d. Agarick, Look for it farther in Simples out of Plants, and for the Vertues of it in the Table of Simples.
You may give him two Ounces of it by it self. Jallop powdered, is very good to mix amongst other Powders; Correct it with Liquoris Powder, to prevent Gripig, to Purge a Horse. The price the pound is—3 s. 3 d. Turmentil is a kind of Cinquefoyl, and is dry in the third degree, but moderately hot; It is very good Given in Pestilential Diseases, and for Poison. See more of the Usefulness of it in the Table of Simples. The price the pound is—0 s. 8 d. China, see the Virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price the pound of the Lupid or Flinty, is—2 s. 6 d. The price of the best the pound is—3 s. 6 d. Ditany is hot and dry in the third degree; It bringeth away the Heam in Beasts; the price the pound is—3 s. 4 d. Doronicum Romanum is hot and dry in the third degree; It is a great Strengthner of the Heart, and is a very Sovereign Cordial; It preserves wonderfully against Pestilence and Poison, and is also good for the bitng of any venomous Beast. The price the pound is-5 s. 0 d. Elecampane, See the Virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price the pound is—0 s. 6 d. Eringo, see the Virtues in the Table of Simples the price the pound is—1 s. 0 d. Gentian, see the Virtues in the Table of Simples▪ The price the pound is—0 s. 7 d. Galangal, see the Virtues in the Table of Simples; the price the pound is—2 s. 4 d. Hermodactils purge Phlegm from the Joynts, and therefore they are good for the Diseases of them Their Vices you may correct with long Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, Mastick, &c. The price the pound is—1 s. 4 d. Hellebore, black and white; see for Bears-foot in the Table of Simples, and you shall there find the Ʋses of them; the price of them the pound are—1 s. 0 d. Liquorice, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price of it in the stick the pound is—0 s. 7 d. Mechoacan, is to be Corrected with Cinnamon; it is temperate, yet drying; it purgeth phlegm from the Head and Joynts; it is also very good for Coughs and pains in the Reins, and is also good a∣gainst the most pockey and inveterat Farcy that is; You may
safely give as much of the Powder of it, as will lie upon a Six-Pence; The Price of it formerly was about 5 s. but now it is worth 10 s. and hardly got for that. Meum is very good given in Pestilential Diseases, and is much of the Virtue of the Angelica Root, and is used in the room of it, when it cannot be got, the price the Pound is—3 s. 0 d. Poll Pody of the Oak, is a great Dryer up of superflous Humors from the Legs being Corrected with Fennel-seeds, Anniseeds, or Ginger, &c. The price the ound is—0 s. 6 d. Oice of Florence is hot and dry in the third degree; It resists Poison, and helps Shortness of Breath, the price the pound is—0 s. 8 d. Rubarb, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; it is worth from 4 s. to 48 s. the pound. Turmerick▪ see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the common Price in the Race is about 7 d. but now it is worth 1 s. BARKS. Cinnamon is hot and dry and binding; It strengthens the Stomach, and helps Digestion, Coughs and Destuction of Humors upon the Lungs, Dropsey and pain in Pissing; There is hardly a better Re∣medy to be given to a Mare or Cow that is Foaling or Calving, to ex∣pedite it, and to comfort them after it, then two drams of the Pow∣der given in white-Wine or Ale. The price of it the Ounce is—0. s 6 d. Cassi Lignea is somewhat more Oyly then C nnamon, and is much of the virtue of that only this is Losening, whereas the other is binding. The price of it the pound is—1 s. 6 d. Pomgranate-Rinds or Pill, cools and binds and is therefore very good to stay Fluxes or Scourings. It helps also Digestion, and strengthens the Stomach, the price the pound is—1 s. 0 d. Tamarisk Brk is good to strengthen weak and feeble Joynts, infused in Ale and gives, and the burnt Ashes of it made into an Ointment, and applied to the Place grieved, the price of it the pound is—1 s. 0 d. WOODS. Lignum vitae is a great Drier up of evil Humors, causeth Sweat, resists
Putrefaction, and is good for the Pockiest Farcy that is, as also for all manner of Scabs, Ulcers and Leprosie, give him inwardly in the Nature of a Diet-drink, (not exceeding a quart of it at a time), the price of it the pound is—0 s. 2 d. Saffafras is a very large and fair Tree growing in Florida, and smells very much like unto Fennel. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and is also a great Drier up of evil Humors, the Decoction of it, or some of the Chips, with Lignum vitae boild in a Horses Drink that is given for the Frc, is a great Furtherer of the Cure: It is very good also to open Obstructions and Stoppings in the Stomach, and is a great Strengthner of the Breast, if it be weakned through Cold, the price of it the pound is—0 s. 6 d. Sanders white the pound is—3 s. 6 d. Sanders yellow the pound is—2 s. 4 d. Sanders read the pound is—0 s. 6 d. They are all cold and dry in the second and third degree; They stop De∣stuctions from any part of the Body, helping Inflammations, and cools the Heat of Feavers, the yellow is accounted the best, but the Red is good enough to use for Horses. See more of the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, FLOWERS. Staechas or Stoechados is hot and binding, and opens stoppings in the Bowels, and is a very great strengthner of the whole Body. They are not much unlike in Shape and Sent unto Lavender, the price of them the pound are—1 s. 6 d. Belaufi is a Red Flower, and is very Binding, and is often given with very good success to stop Scourings and bloody Fluxes, the price the Pound is—2 s. 0 d. Clove-Gilliflowers strengthens the Heart, Liver and Stomach, Pro∣vokes Lust, and Resists Pestience, the Gardens do afford them you. Saffon, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the Pound is—30 s. 0 d. Metholet is good for the Reins, the price the Pound is—0 s. 10 d▪
FRUITS. Bay-berries, see the Virtues of them in the Table of Simples; the price the pound are—0 s. 4 d. Juniper-berries, see the vertues of them in the Table of Simpses, the price of them the pound are—0 s. 4 d. Gauls, see also the vertues of them in the Table of Simples; the price of the best the Pound are—0 s. 8 d. Raisins of the Sun helps the Inflammations of the Breast and Liver; they help Coughs and Consumptions, and cleanse and Loosen the All these within this Bracket are bought at the Grocers.Belly. The price of them are very well known by every good Housewife Nutmegs strengthens the Brain, Stomach, Liver and Body; They ease Pain in the Head, and stop Lasks or Loosness, the price the Ounce are—0 s. 5 d. Mace is a great Comforter of the Heart and Spirits; the price the Ounce is—0 s. 10 d: Cubebs, is a kind of Pepper that comes out of the Indies, its hot and dry in the third degree; They expel Wind, and cleanse the Stomach from tough and vitious Humours, and provoke Lust. The price the pound are—1 s. 0 d. Tamarinds are cold and dry in the second degree; They cool the Blood, Liver and Stomach, and purge Choler, and are also good for the Yellows. The price the pound are—0 s. 9 d. Mirtle-berries are dry in the third degree, they Loosen evil Humors; the Price the Pound are—1 s. 2 d. Long Pepper is hot and dry in the fourth degree; see the Vertues of all the sorts of them in the Table of Simples; the price the pound is—0 s. 8 d. SEEDS. Angelica-seeds, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples; the price the pound are—0 s. 9 d. Broom-seeds, see the virtue of them in the Table of Simples, the price the pound are—0 s. 9 d. Grains of Paradice, see the virtues of them also in the Table of Simples, the price the pound are—0 s. 7 d. Anniseeds, see also the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the pound are—0 s. 7 d.
Burdock-seeds, bruised and given in white-Wine or Ale causeth a Horse to stail freely, that could not stail before, the price the pound are—0 s. 4 d. Fennel-seeds are good for the same purpose; They cause also Milk in Mares, the price the pound are—0 s. 10 d. Cardamum-seeds heat and kill Wormes, cleanse the Reins, and cause a Horse also to stale. The common price of them is 3 s. 6 d. but now they are worth—6 s. 6 d. Staves-Acre, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—1 s. 0 d. Cummin-seeds, heat and dry. They stop Blood, expel Wind, ease Pain, and helpeth the Biting of venomous Beasts; And being outwardly applied in Plaisters, are of a discussing Nature, the price of them the pound are—0 s. 6 d. Fennegreek-seeds are also of a discussing Nature, they ease Inflammati∣ons both internal and external; they are also very good for Colds, given him amongst his Provender, or boiled amongst his Oates, keep∣ing his Body solvable, the price of them the pound are—0 s. 4 d. The price of them in powder is—0 s. 6 d. Linseed hath the same virtue as the Fennegreek, the price the pound is—0 s. 3 d. Common Nettle-seeds provoke Lust, and is a great Fattener of a Horse given him amongst his Provender; the price of them the pound is—0 s. 8 d. Pasley-seed, see the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—0 s. 4 d. Peony-seeds helpeth the Wilde Mare, Convulsions and Falling Sick∣ness▪ the price the pound are—1 s. 0 d. Plantine-seeds are good for the Plague and Pestilence, the price the pound are—0 s. 9 d. Saxafrage-seeds, see the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the pound are—1 s. 4 d. Poppey-seeds white and black provoke Sleep, the price of them the pound are—1 s. 6 d. Puslain-seeds, see the Table of Simples for the virtues of them, the price the pound are—1 s. 4 d. Lupines are a kind of small flat Beans, they ease the pain of the Spleen,
kill Wormes given inwardly, and being outwardly applied, cleanse filthy Ʋlcers and Gangrenes, helps Scabs, Itch and Inflammations, the price of them the Pound are—0 s. 10 d. SIMPLES out of PLANTS. You may Give one Ounce and a half of it by it self. Agarick purgeth Phlegm and Cholar, cleanseth the Breast, Liver, Sto∣mach and Reins, you are to Correct it with Powder of Ginger; the Price of he best the pound is—7 s. 0. d. The outward Parings of it the Pound is—1 s. 6 d. congealed JUICES, GUMS and ROZINS. Aloes Succotrina, see the Virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price of it the pound is form 1 s. 8 d. to 8 s. Barbadoes Aloes hath the same virtues as the other but is a great deal stronger, and therefore the better Purge for a Horse of the two for an Ounce and a quarter of it is a Purge strong enough for the strongest BodiedHorse almost that is; The price of the best the pound is—1 s. 8 d. Assloetida, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—1 s. 4 d. Camphire is cold and dry in the third degree, if beaten to Powder and mixed with Oyle of Olives, and the Temples anointed with it easeth the pain in the Head coming of Heat; It takes away also any hot In∣flammation in the Eyes, and cools any place that.' tis applied to. The price commonly the pound was 6 s. or 7 s. but now it being very scarce, it is worth 16 s. Bitumen, see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price of it the pound is—3 s. 0 d. Colophony the pound is—0 s. 4 d. Benjamin is a very good Perfume for a Horse Head that is stuffed with a Cold, the smoke being received up his Nostrils through a Tunnel, strowed upon a chaffing-dish of Coals. The price the pound of the best is—5 s. 0 d. The price of the course which is good enough for a Horse is—2 s. 6 d. GUM COPPAL and Gum Anime are in Nature much alike; It is good for pains and Meagrim in the Head, and to stop Desluctions that flow
from thence if it be used as the Binjumin. It is also a great Strength∣ner of the Sinws. The price of it the pound is—2 s. 6 d. Gum Lack see the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—1 s. 0 d. Gum Armoniack, or Amoniack, softends, draws and heats, dissolved in vineger, and applied Plaister wise, taketh away hardness in the flesh and made in o an Cintment with Sallet Oyl, is good to anoint the sff and wearied LImbs of a Horse; An Ource of it made up into a Pill according to Art, Loosneth the Belly, and is good for a Horse that stales Blood. The price the pound is—1 s. 6 d. Opopox is of a heating, mollifying, digesting quality. See more of the virtues of it in the Table of Simples. the price the pound is-5 s 4 c. Gum Arabick thickneth, cooleth and correcteth sharp humors, helpeth Burnings, and keepeth the Place from Blistering, the price the pounds is—0 s. 10 d. Opium is good to cause Sleep, but be very cautious how you use it, two or three Crains is enough to give him at a time, the price the pound is—12 s. 0 d. Gum Dragon is good for Coughs and Distillations upon the Lungs, and is also a good put into Poultisses to sodder Wounds together, especially Nerves and Sinews that be hart, the price the pound is—1 s. 6 d. English Liquoris Juice strengthens the lungs, and helpeth Colds and Coughs, and is better for use then the Powder of Liquoris, the price of it the pound is—1 s. 0 d. Spanish Liquoris-Juice is of far better use then the English, and hath the same virutes as the English▪ but more effectual for the Purposes aforesaid, the price of it the pound is—1 s. 4 d. Accatiae is a small Thorn growing in Egypt, out of the leaves and fruit wherof is drawn a Juice or Liquor, which being dried is called by this Name; it is cold and very Astingent and binding, and therefore is very good to stp Lasks, Loosness, or Scouring; The Apothecaties hath seldom the right, but instead thereof use the juice of Sloes, which they call by this Name; The price of the Right is worth five or six shillings, but of the common but one. 'Tis not so strong as Alloes Suc∣ceing. Rozin of Jallop is a very good Purge for a Horse; but if you think it too dear, you may use the Powder of the Root, the price of it the Ounce is about—4 s. 6 d.
Mastick, see the vertues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound according to its goodness is from 2 s. to 5 s. Manna is a very safe and gentle Purger, you may give him a quarter of a pound of it, or more, dissolved in a Pint of Canary, or four want of that, aquart of warm Ale or Beer; It is temperately hot and cleanseth the Throat and Breast. The price the pound is according to its good∣ness from 2 s. to 6 s but now it is so scarce that it is worth 11 s. Olibanum is hot in the second degree and dry in the first; You may give an Ounce of it safely at a time; It helps Loosess and the shedding of the Seed; It is also good for Colds and Coughs, and to make Plaisters of, the price the ound is—2 s. 0 d. Burguncy-Pitch is good applied as a Plaister, for all Pains coming of Buses or Dislocation, the price the pound is—0 s. 4 d. Bdelium, see the vertues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—5 s. 6 d. Gum Carauna outwardly applied is very good fo Aches and Swellings in the Nerve and Joynts, and also good  draw back humors from the Eyes▪ spread upon a Leather, and laid behind his Eares, the price the pound is—10 s. 0 d. Pitch common Mollifieth hard Swellings and bringeth them to Suppu∣puration; It cleanseth Ulcers and filleth m with Flesh; The Table of Simples will shew you more of the use of  the price the pound is—0 s. 2 d. Rozin, all the sorts of them are good to fl  holl wU cers and Wouns with Flesh and to comfort the Body oppressed with cold Griefs, the price of the best the pound is—0 s. 3 d. Stone-Pitch is very good to strenghten wak and swayd Backs, or Sinew-strains, applied in the nature of a Charge, with other strength∣ning Gums, the price the pound is—0 s. 5 d. Sangus Draconis in the Lup the Pound is:—3 s. 0 d. Sanguis Draconis is drops the pound is—4 s. 6 d. They cool and bind exceedingly and are very good given inwardly or applied outwardly, for the stopping of Fluxes of blood. Tartar French is the Excrements of Wine which sticks to the Vessel; it is hot and dry an cleanseth, the pricethe pound is—0 s. 6 d. Tartar Renish the pound is—0 s. 7 d. Frankincense applied to the Temples, stops the Rheum that flows to the Eyes, and also is very good to stop th bleeding of Wounds, though the Arteries be cut, if it be applied to them made up into a Salve or
Ointment. The price the Pound is—0 s. 4 d. Borax inwardly taken in small quantities, stops Fluxes and the Run∣ning of the Reins, and eing be atcn to fine Powder, and put into green Wounds, Cureth them specaily; The best is that that comes out of the Silver and Godl Mines, the Price the Pound is—2 s. 6 d. Turpentine common, see the vertues of it in the Table of Simples, the Price the Pound is—0 s. 3 d. If you intend to clcanse the Horse Reins, being soul, which you may know by the Mattering of his Yard, then make it up into Balls, accord∣ing to Art, with some Flower and Bole-Amoniack, and give him a Ball of it every Morning till you find him Cured. Turpentine Venice the best the pound is—1 s. 3 d. Tar is very good for a Cold given a Horse, mingled with the Flower of Brimstone, the Fat of Rusty Bacon and Honey, made up into Balls with some Powder of Liquoris, and given him for two or three Mornings together; It is also good to put into Salves for the Cure of Wounds; The price the pound is—0 s. 2 d. Gum Elmni is very good for Fractures in the Skull, and also for Wounds, and is commonly put into Plaisters for that purpose, the common price of it the pound when it is plenty is about 2 s. but now it is worth 3 s. 0 d. Eusorblum is a Gum that comforteth wounds; you may see more of the vertues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is 0 s. 8 d. Labdanum, is a Gum that is of a very heating Nature, yet mollifying; It is used in Plaisters to open the Mouth of Veins, and is also good to keep hair from falling off, and for pains in theEars, the price the pound is 1 s. 10 d. Myrrh is a Gum that heats and dries, yet opens and softens the Womb, given in∣wardly, and expels the Heam in Beasts, (which is t he same as the after-birth is in Women). It is also very good for Cold and Coughs, and outwardly ap∣plied fills up hollow Ulcers with Flesh. The quantity that you may give him inwardly with safy, is about two or three drams, with other Compounds; You may sie more of the verue of it, if you look into the Table of Simples, she price of it the pound is—2 s. 6 d. Storax Calamite is a sweet Gum, which helps Coughs and Distillations upon the Lungs. It is also a very good Perfume for Sickness in the Head, to draw a∣way evil Humors from thence, the price of the best the pound is—7 s. 6 d. Storax Liquid is much like Tarr. It is good put into Plaisters, to modifie hard Wounds and Swellings, the price the pound is—0 s. 8 d. Galbanum is a Gum that is hot and dry, and disussing applied to her Shape, ex∣pels the Heam; See more of the vertues of it in the Table of Simples; the price the pound is—2 s. 6 d.
ANIMALS, their Parts and Excrements. Issing glass is made of the Skin of Fishes; it is a very great Strength∣ner of a weak Back given inwardly, boiled in Milk with some fine Bole▪Armoniack; if you find it very clear and sweet when you break it, you may conclude that it is very good, the price of it the pound is—3 s. 6 d. Oysters newly opened and applied to a Pestilential Swelling, draweth the venom out of it, the price of these are very well known. Grashoppers bruised and given in Ale or Beer, is very good to ase the Griping Pains of the Guts and Bladder, every Meadow affords plenty of them, which you may have for Gathering. Cantharides are Spanish Flies, that will raise Blisters in any sound part of the Body, if they be bruised and applied, the price of them by the Ounce is—0 s. 3 d. Harts-Horn-Shavings resists Poison and Plague, provokes Ʋrine, and strengthens Nature very much, the price the pound is—1 s. 4 d. Ivory Raspt strengthens the Heart and Stomach, and helps the Yel∣lows, the price the pound is—0 s. 4 d. Ivory burnt strewed upon a Galled Back, or any raw place, drieth and healeth it up, the price the pound is—0 s. 10 d. Wax sotens, heats and fills up Sores with flesh put into Oyntments and used as a Salve, the price of the white the pound is—1 s. 6 d. The price of the Yellow is—1 s. 3 d. Honey is a most excellent cleansing thing, and profitable in all inward Ʋlcers and Wounds, in what part of the Body soever they be; It also opens the Veins, and strengthens the Reins and Bladder. The price the pound is—0 s. 6 d. A Stags Pizzle dried, and the powder given him in Ale, helps the Bi∣ting of venomous Beasts, stirs up Lust, and provokes Urine, the price the Ounce is—0 s. 6 d. The Bone that is found in a Stags Heart, being well dried and beten to powder, and given him in Ale, is also very good against Poison and Pestilence, the price of it the Ounce is—1 s. 4 d. MINERALS, METALS and STONES. Verdegrease, see the Nature of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—1 s. 8 d.
Allom Common the pound is—0 s. 3 d. Allom Roch is the best, see the virtues of them in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—0 s. 5 d. Bole-Armoniack is a certain red Earth which is cold and dry, and dri∣veth back evil Humors; It is also very good to stop Bleeding, either inwardly given, or outwardly applied, by strewing the powder of it upon Wounds; the Greasiest is accounted the best, the price of it the Common the pound is—0 s. 2 d. The pric of the best is—0 s. 4 d. Quick-silver is good given a Horse that hath his Guts Twisted by Wind, and is also good for the Farcy▪ you may give him with safety a quarter of a pound of it at a time with Sallet-Oyl, the price of it the pound is—3 s. 6 d. Brimstone, see the Table of Simples for the virtues of it, the price the pound is—0 s. 2 d. Flower of Brimstone is better then the common Powder, for any in∣ward use you apply it, Therefore I advise you wherever you meet with any of the common powder in your Medicaments, take this in the Room of the other▪ the virtues are the same with the common Brimstone, but more effectual in peration; 'Tis good for Colds, Coughs and rotten Lungs, as also for the Wormes, Yellows and Mange, the price the pound is—0 s. 6 d. Red Corral prepared according to Art, that is made into a very fine powder, and about as much of it as will lie upon a broad shilling given him in Claret or Beer, stops any Issue of Blood, Scouring or Run∣ning of the Reins, if it be often Repeated; you may see more of the virtues of it in the Table of Simples, the price the pound is—6 s. 0 d. Steel Filings cleanseth not only the Reins and Bladder from Gravel, but is also a great Purifyer and Sweetner of the Blood, the price the pound is—0 s. 6 d. White-lead is of a cold, dry and earthy quality; It helps inflammations and dries up evil humours, the price of it the pound is—0 s. 4 d. Lythargy of Gold and Silver binds and dries much, they fill up Ulcers with flesh, and heals them; the Gold is accounted the best, and is worth the pound—0 s. 5 d. The Silver the pound is—0 s. 3 d. Red Lead mixed with Sallet-Oyl, being beaten to a very fine Powder,
and the grieved place where the Pole-evil is anointed with it every day, and heated well in with a hot Fire shovel, will sink it, the price of it the pound is—0 s. 3 d. Lapis Haematites or Blood-stone, is good to stanch Bleeding inwardly and outwardly, being Ground very fine, and given him. It hath also many other Medicinal Vertues. The price the pound is—3 s. 0 d. Sal Prunella the pound is—0 s. 10 d. Mercury Precipitate the pound is—8 s. 0 d. Sal Armoniack is hot and dry in the fourth degree, the pound is 1 s. 0 d. Sal Jemma, see the vertues of it in the Table of Simples. the price the pound is—0 s. 4 d. St-Peter refined in the Lump evaporateth▪ It comforteth the Sinews, and taketh away tyring and weariness; The price in the Lump or Chrystallized the pound is—1 s 0 d. Tutia is a certain Mineral that is cold in the first, and dry in the second degree, and is very good for the defects in the Eyes, the price the pound is—2 s. 0 d. Vitriol, which we call Copperas is of two ▪Kinds. viz. Vitriol Ro∣manum, which we call green Copperas, and Vitriol Albium, which we call white Copperas; They are both hot and dry, but the white ac∣counted the stronger; They take away Scurfs and kill Scabs, boiled in Spring water, and the grieved place Bathed therewith, the price of the white the Pound is—1 s. 6 d. The price of the Green the pound is 2 s. 4 d. It is very good laid in Spring▪water (till it be Coloured) for sore Eyes Vitriol Common, or Copperas green and white, which is sold at the Colour-shops is worth about three half pence▪ or two pence the pound Irish Slate beaten to a very fine Powder, and about an Ounce of it given in a quart of warm le is very good for a Horse that hath been bruised by Falls, the price the pound is—0 s. 8 d. SIMPLES that you may buy heaper at the Druggists, t' en you can prepare them your selves. Elecampane Powder the best the Pound is—1 s. 2 d. Elecampane Powder the common the Pound is—0 s. 8 d. Liquoris Powder the best the Pound is—1 s. 4 d.
Liquor is powder the common the Pound is—0 s. 5 d: Red Sanders Powder the best the Pound is—1 s. 4 d. Turmerick powder the best the Pound is—0 s. 11 d. Powder of Ginger the Pound is—0 s. 6 d. PRICS of s veral Things bought of the GROCERS. Sugar▪candy white is good for sore Eyes, being beaten to Powder and blown into them, the price of it the pound is—1 s. 4 d. Sugar-candy brown is good made up with other Simples or Compounds for Colds or Coughs, the price the pound is—0 s. 10 d. Common Treacle is also very good for Colds, Coughs and Surfeits, made up with other Compounds or his Drink sweetned therewith, and a Lump of sweet Butter put to it, the price the pound is—0 s. 3 d. OYLS. Oyl of O rganum is very good for all manner of Swellings, occasioned by Bruises or Strains in the Nerves and Sinews the price the pound is—32 s. Oyl of Euphorbium helps Sinews and strengthens them, mollifying their hardness the price the pound is—32 s. Oyl of St. Johnswort is also very good for all Sinew-Strains and Swel∣lings in any part of the Body, the price the pound is—1 s. 6 d. Nv Oyl is good to strengthen the Nerves and Sinews, the price of the best the pound is—0 s. 6 d. The price of the Common is—0 s. 3 d. Oyl of Turpentine is good for Swellings, Bruises, Strains and old sores and Fulaes, the price the pound is—0 s. 6 d. 'Tis com∣monly adul∣terated with the Oyl of Turpentine. This is also adulterated. Oyl of Spike is also good for all manner of St ains, whether in the Shouder or Joynts, and also for all manner of Swellings in any part of the Body the price of the righ the pound is—1 s. 0 d. Oyl of Peter is very good for stains, hard swellings splints, spavins and ruises. The Places grieved being anointed with it, the price the pound is—2 s. 6 d. Have a care of the adul∣terate. Oyl of Exceter is also good for the same Distempers, the price the pound is—1 s 6 d. Oyl of sweet Almonds, helps Colds and Coughs wet and dry sweet∣ned with brown sugar Candy; it is good also for Ulcers in the Bladder and Reins, and is a great Enceaser of seed; if you give it inwardly, use new, for it will soure in three or four days, the price the ounce is—0 s. 4 d.
Oyl of Bays is good for the Cholick, and is a Sovereign Remedy for any Disease in any part of the Body coming of Wind or Cold, you may safely give him feur or five drops of it at a time, in any Com∣pound Medicine appropriated to that use, the price the pound is—1 s. 4 d. Have a care of the Adul∣terate. Oyl of Swallows is very good to anoint the Sinews of a Horse, that stumbles or ae shrunk, to stretch and make them give way again, and is also good for all manner of Bruises, Sprains and Strains, the price the pound is—1 s. 6 d. Chymical PREPARATIONS bought of the Druggist. Mercurius dulcis sub. the Ounce is—0 s. 6 d. Tartaum Vitriolarum the Ounce is—1 s. 0 d. Chymical Prices of CYLS and SPIRITS, which do Corrode and eat off dead and proud Flesh, and Dony Excrescences. Aqua fortis Singlethe Pound is—2 s. 0 d. Aqua fortis double the Pound is—4 s. 0 d. Oyl of Anniseeds the Ounce is—0 s. 8 d. Oyl of Organum the Ounce is—0 s. 3 d. Oyl of Tartar Deliq. the ounce is—0 s. 6 d. Oyl of Vitriol the ounce is—0 s. 3 d. COMPOUNDS or ELECTUARIES. Diascordium stops fluxes, and mightily strengthers the Heart, it is not so hot, but it may be Given to a sick Horse to provoke Sleep, one ounce of it is enough to give him at a time, dissolved in a quart of warm Beer the price the ounce is—0 s. 2 d. Diatessaron, see the virtues of it in the First Part; 'Tis worth the Pound at the Apothecaries 1 s. 8 d. but if you make it your self, you may make it for 1 s. Mithridate is good against Poison, provokes Sweat, is good for Con∣sumptions and Colds, helps the Cholick, by expressing the Wind, as also Ulcers in the Bladder, two or three drams is enough to give
him at a time dissolved in a quart of Ale or Beer, the price the pound is—6 s. 0 d. London-Treacle is a very good Cordial; It resists Poison, and is an excellent Antidote against pestilential diseases; it strengthens also a cold Stomach, and helps Ingestion; You may give him with safety two Ounces of it by its self, or more, (according to the strength and courage of the Horse) dissolved in a Pint of Sack, or for want of that a quart of  Ale or Beer sweetned with Honey. But if you put it into  where there are other compounds mixed with it, then  the price of it the pound is—2 s. 0 d. OYNTMENS. Ontment, is a most excellent  in the Nerves and Arteries coming of  as aso for old Buises-dead pasies, Chillness, Coldness or  or any particular Member, by hard Travel or otherwise; 'Tis indeed a mest precious Fewel both for Man or Beast, for any Dis∣ease in any part of the Body coming of cold; It is also very good for the Wn  if the Belly be anointed with as, and chase) and heated invery well; 'Tis sold at the Apothecaries by the Pound, for—1 s. 01 1 s. 2 d. Dialtlae is very good to moisten hard Wounds, and to soften hard Swellings, or any Bony Excrescence in the Flesh; It is sometimes given inwardly to a Horse or Cow, (with very good success) that is in great danger of loss of life, by licking up any venomous or poisonous thing, either at Hay or Grass, or when they have over-Gorged them∣selves by eating too much delicious food, as Clover-Grass, Turnep∣tops, or the like, which will cause them to swell so full, that they will be ready to burst. If you find him in this desperate condition, give him according to his Strength and Constitution, more or less of this Ointment, mixed with the like quantity of Castle-sope, dissolved in some warm Beer, and Ride or stir him afterwards, which will not on∣ly make him Piss freely, but also cause him to scoure, which is the best means I know of to be use for the preservation of his Lifoe. This is sold at the Apothecaries also for about 1 s. 8 d. the pound. If you desire to knew for your farther satisfaction, what things this ointments is made up with, take this Acceunt of them; They are these viz. Sallet-Oyl,
Marsh-Mallowes, Linseeds, Fennegreek-seeds, Bees Wax, Rozin and Turpentine. If he be a strong, lusty and healthy Horse, you may venture to give him two Ounces of each. But this I leave to the skilful Farrier, Discretion. Patch or Piece Grease, was formerly made by the Shoomakers from the shreds of their Leather boiled in Spring water, on the top of which a∣rises a certain Oyly Unctuous Matter which they skin off, and boil up with other Ingredients to a Salve. 'Twas many years ago frequently used to Liquor Boots and Shooes with, and only made by them for that purpose; But the more skilful in the Art of Farring hath found out a far better use for it, viz. The Curing of many outward Di∣stempers, which you shall have an Account of in its due time and place; This most excellent Receipt or Salve is almost quite lost to Posterity, for few or none can make it truly. I knew only but of one, and she is a Shoomakers Wife, who keeps this secret to her self, (and you cannot much blame her for it) by reason of the great profit and advantage she bath made by the sale thereof, having got many She has been dead about lafayear, but he Son contrives in the H use, and sells it.a fair Pound by it. Her Name is Mrs Harvey, and keeps a small Alchouse in Bedford-Bury street, near Covent-Garden, at the Sign of the Hornes. The Virtues of it. 'Tis a most Excellent Ointment of it self both for Man or Beast, for all Pains and Aches in the Limbs New or Old; As also for all manner of Stains and Swellings, in what part of the Body soever they be. But more powerful and effectual it is in Operation, for these several Di∣stempers. If it be used according to Markhams Direction, viz. To Melt ten Ounces of it on the Fire, and after you have taken it off put into it these several Oyls here under-written, viz. Oyl of Spike four ounces. Oyl of Origanum one ounce Oyl of Exceter an Ounce and a half Oyl of St. Johns-wort three ounces. Stir all these very well together and put it up into a Gally-Pot close coverd with a Bladder and Leather over that, and keep it for your use. A CAUTION: If you cannot get Piece-Grease use Goose Grease, but this is not half
so Powerful in Operation as the other. But this I must needs say of it, it is of such thin and subtil Parts, that it will quickly search to the bottom of the grieved Part. How you are to use it. Melt your Ointment over the Fire, and anoint the grieved place and rub and chafe it in very well with your hand, holding at the same instant before it a hot Brick-bat, or Fire shovel to make it sink in the better. Anoint it once in two days, but rub and chase it in twice or thrice a day, and give him moderate Exercise. The Price of this excellent Salve, as she commonly sells it for the Pound is—4 s. 0 d. SPIRITS. Spirit of Lavender is a most excellent Cordial, and may serve in the Room of many more; you may give him half an ounce of it in a quart of warm Ale or Beer sweetned with Honey or Common Treacle. This is sold at the Apothecaries by the ounce for—0 s. 4 d. Compound Powders bought of the Druggist. Horse Spice, see the Virtues of it in the Receipt how to make it in the First Part, the price the pound is—0 s. 6 d. Diapente, see also the Vertues of it in the First Part, the price the pound is—0 s. 10 d. Another single Powder. Carolina is a kind of Sea-Moss, that grows upon the Rocks; It is cold, binding and drying, and is good for hot Inflammations, and to kill Wormes, you may safely give him as much of the powder of it as will lie upon a shilling in Ale or Beer, the price the pound is—0 s. 4 d. WATERS. Treacle-Water hath the same vertues as the Treacle, the price the Pint is—4 s. 6 d. ☜ A Caution to the Farrier about the Buying of his Drugs. These several Drugs both Simple and Compound, which the Farrier makes use of in the Cure of any inward or outward Di∣stemper,
does commonly Rise or Fall according to the scarcity or plenty of them; And therefore I Advise you, whenever you have occasion to buy any of them, do not depend too much upon the Prices here set you, but get them as cheap as you can. For 'tis customary amongst the Druggists not to sell any thing, unless they get double, if not treble profit by what they sell, though withal I must tell you, they are here valued as near to their standing selling price as can be possibly, for Goods that do Rise and Fall, yet not∣withstanding this, I am perswaded to believe they yet get four pence out of every shillings worth of Goods they generally sell, &c.
THE SECOND PART OF THE EXPERIENC'D FARRIER. SHEWING, I. The Nature, Temperature and Vertue of most Simples, for the Cure of all inward and outward Diseases, never yet Printed in this Nature be∣fore. II. You have things in general, set down one after another, for the Cure of all diseases, which you may use as your discretion serves III. You have severally particular Receipts for the Cure of all Diseases. IV. Where you find the Hand Pointing, you shall finde such Receipts that were never before Printed. V. You have the Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples and their Juices. VI. You have the way of making and keeping of all necessary Compounds. VII. You have hot Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body. VIII. You have cold Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body. IX. You have the Properties of Purging Medicaments. X. You have the Properties of altering Medicaments. XI. You have a Table of all the Diseases of a Horse, either inwardly or outwardly, set down Alphabetically, where they do grow in any part of a Horses Body, and how you may know them, and what was the cause that bred them. XII. And lastly, you have in the Margent of these said Diseases, the Page quoted where to find the proper Cure for every of these Diseases, with many other things contained in this Book, not here inserted. The Second Impression much Enlarged and A∣mended by A. O. LONDON, Printed for Richard Northco: Adjoyning to St. Peters Alley in Cornhll; And at the Anchor and Marriner near London-Bridge. 1680.
☞ Purging Simples. Rubarb, Cassia, Tamarinds, Myrobalans, Aloes, Seeny or Senna, Me∣choachan Root, Agarick, Pollypody, Carthamus, Bastard or Spanish Saf∣fron, Dwarfs Elder, Ensula or Devils Milk, Hermodactils, Jallop, Tur∣bich, Scamony, Hellebore or Bears foot, Colloquintida, Spurge-Olive, Spurge-Flax, Lawrel, Soldanella, Turn-sole, &c. ☞ Binding-Simples. Look for them in the Table, at the latter End of the Book. ☞ Foreign Simples that are Heating. Ginger, Zedory or Set-wall, Galangel, Acorus or Water-Flag, Calamus Aromaticus, or the Ariomatical Reed, Costus, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Cloves, Cardamums, Cubebs, Kermes, Sanders, Sassafras, China-Root, Guiaccum or Lignum vitae, Sarsaparilla, Aloes wood, &c. ☞ Home-bred Heating Simples. Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Common, and Treacle Mustard, Rocket, Nettles, Flower-de-luce, or Orrice, Elecampane, Cyprus, Angelica, Lo∣vage, Hartwort, Gentian, Turmentil, Paeony, Madder, Rest-harrow, Sea-holly, Common-Grass, Liquoris, Sow-bread, Radish-roots, Anemone or Wind-Flower, Wall-Flowers, Tyme, Marjorem, Penny-Royal, Polium, Basil, Origanum, Mint, Calamint, Wormwood, Mug-wort, Balm, Hore∣hound, Bitony, Speedwell, Ditany, Sage, Clary, French Lavender, Scor∣dium, Rue, Gromel, Saxifrage, Aristolochia or Birth-wort, Asarabaca, Burnet, Germander, Ground-pine, Feather-few, St. Johns-wort, Hysop, Cranes-bill, Doronicum or Leopards-bane, Cardus Benedictus, Mother∣wort, black Chameleon Thistle, Valerian, Fumitory, Eye-bright, Cen∣tory, Rhaphonticum, Coriander, Wood-bine, Broom, Ashen-Keys, Misle∣toe of the Oak, poplar, Cummin-seeds, &c. ☞ Cooling Simples. Mandrake, Night-shade, Winter-Cherries, Henbane, Poppey, Housleek, Purslain, Dogs-Tongue, Plantine, Knot-Grass, Comfrey, Sorrel, Agri∣mony, Sower-dock, Primrose, Cabbage or Garden Coleworts, Flea-bane, Colts-foot, Hops, Bistort, Strawberry Bush, Cinquefoil, Goose-grass or Cleavers, Scabius, Cats-foot, Melilots, Fennegreek, Red Cicers, Lupins, Sumack, Myrtle, Yarrow, Tamarisk. Before you enter upon the Use of these Simples, (unless you know them very well) Look into the Table of Simples to see the Nature of them, for some of them are very pernicious, unless corrected by Art.
THE Nature, Temperature and Vertue of most Simples, ☜set down Alphabetically. As also some Drugs, Liquors, Seeds, Rozins and Juices, &c. A. AGaricum, or Agarick is a kind of Mushrom or Toad-stool. It is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree. It expelleth Humors, purgeth all phlegm and choler, and is good for the Liver and Kid∣neys; correct it with the powder of Liquoris. Agripa is an Ointment that is good against all Humors. Amoniacum is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second; it loos∣neth and dissolveth Humours. Allom, commonly called Roch-Allom, is hot and dry in the third degree, it is a drier up of Humors, and is good for fore Mouths, and old Cankers and Fistulaes, and killeth the Wormes taken inwardly. Alloes is hot, and that in the first and second degree, but dry in the third, it is extream bitter, yet without biting; it is the most Natural Purger of Man and Beast that is, for it strengthens the Heart, and revives the Spi∣rits; it is also of an Emplastick and Clammy quality, and somtimes bind∣ing, being externally applied. Sweet Almonds when they be dry be moderately hot; but the bitter ones are hot and dry in the second degree; there is in both of them a certain Fat and Oyly substance, which is drawn out of them by pressing of them. They provoke Urine, and is very good for the Lungs and Liver. Anniseed are hot and dry in the third degree, saith Galen, but others, that they are hot in the second degree, and much less then dry in the se∣cond degree; they are good to expel Wind, provoke Urine, stir up Lust, and is a great cleanser of the Breast from phlegmatick Humors. Astolochia, which we call Birth-wort or Harts-wort, is hot and clean∣seth, but if it be Rotunda, then it is so much the stronger, being hot and dry in the fourth degree, and draweth and purgeth thin Water and Phlegm, and is good to open the Lungs, and is good against all manner of Poison whatsoever, or the Biting of any venomous Beast. Armoniack, both draweth, cooleth and softneth. Arsnick of both kinds, is hot in the third, and dry in the first degree, it bindeth and eateth away proud and naughty Flesh, and is a very strong Corrosive.
Assafoetida, or Devils-Bit, is a stinking Gum that is hot in the third, and dry in the fourth degree, it cleanseth evil Humors, it is good for the Yel∣lows and Staggers in a Horse, a little piece of it being dissolved in Brandy, and put it into his Eares. Asphaltum, is Pitch that is mixt with Bitumen, it is hot and dry, and omforteth any swelling. Asponteo is hot in the first, and dry in the second, it cleanseth and draw∣eth, and is good to comfort the Stomach. Ashes are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and cleanseth mightily. Asrabacca is hot and dry with a purging quality, yet not without a certain kind of binding, the Roots are hot and dry, more then the leaves, they procure Urine. The black Alier Tree, the inner Bark of it is of a purging and drying quality, it purgeth thick phlegmatick Humours, and also Cholerick down∣wards, and also by vomiting, which must be used with care. Of Aller or Alder Tree, the leaves and bark of it are cold and dry, and Astringent, and is used against hot Swellings and Inlammations, especi∣ally of the Almonds and Kernels of the Throat, the bark of it is used a∣mongst poor Countrey Dyars, to Dye Cloth, Caps, Hoose and such like. The Ash Tree, the leaves and bark of it are dry and moderately hot, the Seeds are hot and dry in the second degree, they stop the Belly, being boiled in Vineger and Water, the Seds provoke Urine and stir up bo∣dily Lust. Aspdlls are hot and dry in the third degree. Anemones, all the kinds of them (which are Wind-Flowers,) are sharp, biting the tongue, and are of a binding faculty. Adders Tongue is dry in the third degree, and is good for Wounds in the Breast and Bowels, and is good for Ulcers and Inflammations. Arsmart▪ or Water-Pepper is hot and dry, yet not so hot as Pepper, is good for Ulcers, cold Swellings, Bruises, and to lay under the Saddle, to make tired Horses go. Alh, all the kinds of them are dry with little or no heat, and are en∣dued with a binding quality, they are good for green Wounds being brui∣sed and boiled in an Ointment; It is good for the Wormes, Gout, Cramp and Convulsions of the Sinews, provokes Urine, and is good for cold Griefs of the Head, biting of mad Dogs, Lethargy, Cholick, Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Stone, and expelleth the dead Birth. Archangel or dead Nettles are hotter and drier then Nettles, approach∣ing to the temperature of Hore-hound, and is good for the bleeding at the Nose, Ulcers, old sores, Bruises and Burnings, and to dissolve Tu∣mors. Alkanet, the Root of it is cold and dry, and bindeth, and because it is bitter it cleanseth away Cholerick Humours; the Leaves are not so for∣cible, yet they do bind and dry, and is good for the Stone, Yellows, Le∣prosie,
venomous Beats, Fluxes and Bruises by Falls, Wormes. Angelca is hot and dry in the third degree, and opnth and attenu∣ateth, digesteth and procureth Sweat, and is good against Poison, Plague, Cold, Wind, Cough of the Lungs, Strangury, short Windedness, stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, biting of mad Dogs, Ulcers and old ains. Alexanders or wild Parsley, the seeds & roots are less hot and dry then the Garden Parsley, they cleanse and make thin, being hot and dry in the third degree. They are good to consume Wind, provoke Urine, and is good for the Strangury, and opens the Obstructions of the Liver. Amara duls, which is woody Night-shade, the fruit and leaves of it are in temperature hot and dry, and cleansing and wasting away, it is good to remove Witchcraft, Tied about the Necks of Cattel, and is good to re∣move the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, difficulty of Breathing, Bruises by alls, congealed Blood, Dropsey, Yellows. Water-Ariny is hot and dry in the second degree; It is good to se∣cure and open; It maketh thin, thick and gross humors, and to expel and drive them forth by Urine, and therefore is good for the Dropsey; It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, kills Worms, Itch, Scabs, Flies and Wasps. It is good to strengthen the Lungs, and is good for a Cough and broken Wind in Cattel. Alehof or Grod-Ivy is hot and dry, and because it is bitter it scoureth and removeth stoppings out of the Entrails; It is good for inward Wounds, Pains and Gripings by Wind, Choler, Spleen, Plague, Poison, old pains in the Joynts, sore Mouth and Throat, Ulcers in the Privities, Itch, Scabs, Web in the Eyes, Redness and Wateriness in them, and Deaf∣ness. Amaranthus, which is called Flower Gentle, is good for the Running of the Reins and inward Bleeding. Garden Arrach, or Orach, is moist in the second degree, and cold in the first; It is a Loosner of the Belly, and fortifieth the expulsive faculty, and is good for Swellings of the Throat being bruised and laid to it, and being taken inwardly is good for the Yellows. Wild Arrach and stinking by smell, is good given inwardly for the Fa∣cy, and is good for any disease of the Womb. Ans called Colwo, or Herb Bnt, hath a drying and binding fa∣culty, with a certain salt quality, wherby they clense, the decoction of them Loosneth the Belly, and is good for the Diseases of the Chest and Breast; It is good for inward Wound, the Heart, a cold Brain, Obstructions, Cho∣lick, Fluxes, Ruptures, Plague, Poison. Agarick cometh of the Larch Tree, which is almost like a Pine-tree, and the leaves and bark is in temperature like it, but not so strong. It pur∣geth away gros and phlegmatick humors; it troubleth the stomach, therefore Gingr is to be Mixed with it; it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; it is good against short Windedness, Cough of the
Lungs, Consumption, comforteth the Stomach, and is good against Worms. Agnus Cstus, the leaves and roots of it are hot and dry in the third de∣gree, they are of very thin parts, and waste and consume Wind. B. Balm is hot and dry in the second degree, and it mundisieth and clean∣seth, it chear up the Heart▪ opens Obstructions of the Brain, and is a re∣medy against the stinging or biting of any venomous Beast, Mad dogs, the bloody Flux, Surfeit, short-windedness. The Brberry bush, the leaves and berries are cold and dry in the second degree, and as Gallen affirmeth, are of thin parts, and have a certain cut∣ting quality; they are good to stop Laks and bloody Fluxes, the inner Rind of the Tree is good to purge the Body of Cholerick Humours, and is good for Agues, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Yellows, Boyls, Scalding and the Farcin. Garden-Bzil is hot in the second degree, but it hath adjoyned with it a superfluous moisture, and therefore not very good to be taken inwardly, but being applied outwardly to the stinging of any venomous Beast, Wasps or Hornets, it taketh away the venom. Wilde Bazil, the seeds are hot and dry. Bazil Vlerian is dry in the second degree. Bay-berries are vehemently hot and dry, and are good for all manner of Rheumes, shortness of Wind, especially for any disease of the Lungs, they are good against Poison, Consumptions, Phlegm, helpeth Tiredness, Cramps, Stone, stopping of the Liver, the Yellows and Dropsey, and pro∣vokes Urine. Bdelium is a Gum that is brought out of Arabia and the holy Land, and is hot and dry; it softeneth and draweth away Moisture, and is good for all manner of hard Swellings whatsoever; it is most excellent for mix∣ture with a Poultess, against hardness and knots in the Sinews, and being drunk, breaks the Stone, and expels Urine. Beans are moderately cold and dry, and are very Windy, Ladies Bed∣straw is good for the Stone, and stays inward and outward Bleeding. White Bets are in moisture and heat temperate, and is a Loosner of the Belly, and is of a cleansing quality, and provoketh Urine. Red Beets are of a binding quality, and therefore good to stop the bloo∣dy Flux. Water Btony is hot and dry, and is good for Ulcers and Bruises. Whie Runnng Bitony smelling like Marjorum, is hot and dry in the third degree, it bindeth Wounds and Conglutinateth, and is good for Diseases of the Liver, for the Wormes, Old Sores and Wounds, and is commonly called Centauy. Beech-Tree, the leaves of it doth cool, and the Kernels of the Nut is somewhat moist, the leaves are good for hot swellings, and the Water that
is found in the hollow places of it, will Cure Man or Bast, of any Scurf, Scab, or running Tetters anointed therewith. Blites are of a cold and moist Temperature, and are good to stay Fluxes of Blood. Bilberries called by some VVhorts, and Whortle-berries, are cold, even in the latter end of the second degree, and dry also, and are of a binding quality; there is two sorts of them, a black and a red, the black are good for hot Agues, and to cool the heat of the Liver and Stomach, and do bind the Belly, the red are more binding, and stay any Fluxes of Blood whatsoever, used outwardly or taken inwardly. Byfoil or Tway-blade are often used for Wounds both green and old, and to Conglutinate and Knit Ruptures. Bitumen is the fatness of the Earth swimming above the water, which cast upon the Shore condensates and becomes hard, and resembles dry pitch, it discusses, mollifies, glutinates and defends from Inflammation; It takes away gross humors in all parts of the Body, and cures the Weak∣ness of the Sinews, Palsey, and diseases of the Arteries from a cold cause. Birch-tree, the Juice of the leaves is good to wash a sore Mouth or Throat, and is good to break the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder. Birds-foot, all the kinds of them are of a drying quality, and therefore very good to be used in Wounds drinks, and to be applied outwardly for the same purpose; but the paler Flowered Birds-foot is good to break the Stone in the Back and Kidneys, and helpeth the Rupture taken in∣wardly. Bishops-weed is hot and dry in the third degree, of a bitter taste, and something sharp withal; it provokes Lust, causeth Urine, is good for the Wind, and for the biting of venomous Beasts. Bistort or Snakeweed is cold and dry in the third degree, the leaves and roots are excellent good to resist Poison or Plague, and is good for all manner of Fluxes of blood whatsoever, and stayeth a Lask, is good for the Yellows, Ruptures, or Burstness and staling of blood. One blade is a very Cordial Herb, and will cause sweat, and is sove∣reign against the Plague, by expelling the Poison, and is an excellent VVound-herb for green and old wounds, and Sinews cut. The Bramble or black Bush, the flowers and leaves of the unripe fruit do very much bind and dry, and is good for all kind of Fluxes, the buds, leaves and branches of it, while they are green, are of good use in Ulcers and putrid Sores; the Root is good against the Stone in the Reins or Kid∣neys; the leaves of them are good for sore Mouths and Throats, or Quin∣sey, the powder of the dried leaves strewed on Cankers do wonderfully heal them. Burrage and Bugloss is in a mean betwixt hot and cold, the leaves and roots are good against Pestilential Feavers, Poison of venomous Beasts, Yellows, Itch, Tettars, Wormes, Weakness, Corruption, Cough, sore Mouth or Throat.
Blew-bottle is naturally cold, dry and binding; the powder of the dried leaves is good taken inwardly, is good for broken Veins, and given with Plantine water expelleth Poison or the Plague, the Juice of it is good to soddr green wounds together, and is good to heal Sores in the Mouth; And the Juice of the leaves dropped into the Eyes, taketh away the In∣flammation of them. Brak-ursine, Bears-breech and Acanthus is betwixt hot and cold, being somewhat moist, with a mollifying and digesting quality, as are these of the Mallow▪ and are good to put in Glisters to Loosen the Belly; the Decoction taken inwardly is good for the bloody Flux and Burstness; and is good for Hectick Feavers; Or applied made up in a Poultess, unite broken bones, and strengthens the Joynts that have been put out, and is an excellent Remedy for burnings by Fire. White Biony is hot and dry in all parts in the third degree, both the white and the black are furious Martial Plants, and purge the Belly with great violence, and therefore you are to Correct it, and then it is very good for all manner of Griefs in the Head, as also for the Joynts and Si∣news, Cramps and Convulsions, Dropsey, provoketh Urine, and is good for the Stone. Brook-lyme or VVater-Pimpernel is a hot and biting Martial Plant, and is of the same Nature as Water-Cresses, and are good to cleanse the blood, provokes Urine, and breaks the Stone. Butchers broom is hot in the second and dry in the first, and is of a cleansing Nature, it openeth Obstructions, provoketh Urine, expelleth Gravel and the Stone, and is good for the Strangury, Yellows and pain in the Head. Boom and Broom-rape, the Twigs, Flowers and feed of it are hot and dry in the second degree, they are of a thin Essence, and are of force to cleanse and open, and especially the feed which is drier, and not so full of superfluous moisture, it is good for the Dropsey, Cleanser of the Reins, Kidneys and Bladder from the Gravel and Stone. Bucks-horn Plantine is of a drying and binding quality, it is good against Poison, Stone in the Reins and Kidneys, stoppeth a Lask, and is good for a bloody Urine and bloody Flux. Bucks-horn is called Harts-horn, Herb-Ivy, Wort-cresses or Swines cres∣ses, their vertues are the same with Bucks-horn Plantine. Bugle is of a mean Temperature, and is good taken inwardly to dissolve Congealed Blood that is occasioned by Bruises or Falls, and is effectual in all VVound-drinks, it is good for Fistulaes, Gangrenes, the leaves of it being bruised and applied to them. Burnet is a drier and a binder, yet it is meanly cool, it is a most precious Herb little inferiour to Bitony, it stancheth bleeding as well inwardly as outwardly, and is good to stay the Lask and bloody Flux; It is good for all old Ulcers or Running Cankers and moist Sores, to be used either by
Juice or Decoction of the Herb or Root, the seed is also good for the same Purposes aforesaid. The Butter-bur or Petasitis is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin parts, the Roots is good against the Plague and Pestilential Feavers, by provoking Sweat, the Powder of the Root given in VVine is good to resist the force of Poison; It is good for VVheezing and difficulty of Breathing, kills flat and broad Worms. Bran is hot and dry, and dissolveth very much. Bur-deck is dry and wasting, the root is something hot, the leaves are cooling and moderately drying, and is good for old Ulcers and Sores, the Juice of the leaves or roots is good against the biting of any venomous Beast, the seed of it is most excellent to provoke Urine, being beaten to Powder, and drank in white-Wine or Ale, and remedieth the pains in the Bladder; It is good for Burnings, Cankers. Bu reds are cold and dry of Complexion. Vipers bugloss, all the kinds of them are cold and dry of Complexion. Sea Bind-weed is hot and dry in the second degree. Beares-oot or black Hellebore is hotter in taste then the white, and is in like manner hot and dry in the third degree; it is safer to be taken, being purified by the Art of the Alchymist, then given raw; the roots are good against all melancholy diseases, as Quartan▪Agues and Madness; It is good for the Falling Sickness, Leprosie, Yellows▪ pains in the Hip; the Root beaten to powder, and strewed upon Ulcers or putrified Sores, con∣sumes the dead flesh, and instantly heals them. It will help Gangrenes in the beginning, twenty Grains is a sufficient dose for one time, and let it be Corrected with half so much Cinnamon. The Root boiled in Vi∣neger is excellent good against Sabs, Mnge and Leprosie, a piece of it being put into a Hole made in the Ear of a Beast troubled with a Cough, or that hath taken any Poison, and taken out in twenty four houres, help∣eth them; And is very good also to Rowel Cuttel withal that hath the Gargel, and also for many other uses. Balmoy or Fltwart, the roots are hot, cleansing and scouring, some say it is likewise binding withal. Blom is hot and dry in the second degree, and is good for new and green wounds. Bishops-weed. Herb-VVilliam, Amtos, the seed is hot and dry in the latter end of the third degree; it is given against the biting of any venomous Beast; It causeth Urine, it is good against Poison, the Plague and all Pe∣stilential Feavers. Sweet Briar or Eglantine Balls are binding, and are good for bloody Fluxes, and is good to stop a Lask or Loosness. VVilde Briar-balls are greater Binders, and are good to stop a Lask and bloody Flux, and for staling of blood, and is a great Drier up of evil Humours.
Bucks-thorn or Laxative Ram, the Berries as they are in taste bitter, so they are binding, and are also hot and dry in the second degree, and doth purge thick phlegm and cholerick humors. The Box-tree is of a binding quality, and is good against the biting of mad Dogs. Bacca is cold and dry in the second degree, it closeth things opened, it softens hardness, filleth places empty, and do extenuate all excretions. The Flower of it is best, used for any inward use. Brimstone is hot and dry in the third degree, draweth and disperseth hu∣mors, killeth the Itch given inwardly, and outwardly applied it is good for Coughs and rotten Phlegm; It is good likewise for the Wormes, be∣ing mixed with a little Salt in his Provender; it helps Lethargies snuf∣fed up the Nose, heing beaten to powder. Blearmoniack is a certain red Earth, which is cold and dry, which draw∣eth and driveth back evil humors, and is also an excellent defence against Fluxes of Blood, and all manner of bleeding whatsoever, either taken in∣wardly, or outwardly applied. Brine, or Water and Salt is of the same Nature as Salt is, it is good given inwardly to kill Wormes, or applied outwardly to dry humors, and takes away swellings. C. All Cabbages and Coleworts have a drying and binding faculty, with a certain salt quality, whereby they cleanse, and being boiled in Broth opens the Belly, but the second Decoction binds; the Juice of them drank is good against the Poison of venomous Beasts, they are good against a Consumption, obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Stone, Swellings, Sores and Scabs, and the Juice being dropped into the Eyes with Honey is good to clear them. The Sea-Colewort is of a biting quality, the first decoction Loosneth, and is more cleansing then the other kind; the seed bruised and drank killeth Wormes, the Juice of them cleanseth and healeth Sores, dissolveth Swellings, and taketh away Inflammations. Calamint or Mountain Mint is of a fervent taste and biting hot, and of a thin substance, and dry after a sort in the third degree; it wasteth away thin humors, cuts and maketh thick humors thin; it is good for Ruptures, Convulsions, Cramps, shortness of Breath, torments and pains in the Sto∣mach, helpeth the Yellows, killeth Wormes given with Salt and Treacle, killeth Scabs either inwardly taken or outwardly applied, and killeth the Wormes in the Ears; the Juice being dropped therein. Camomel is hot and dry in the first degree, and of thin parts, and heat∣eth moderately, and drieth little; it mollifieth and dissolveth all Griefs, and especially for the Liver; it is good for Swellings, Cholick, Stone, Pains in the Belly, Cold, Yellows, Dropsey and Cramps.
VVater-Caltrops are of a cold Nature, and consisteth of a moist Essence, being made into a Poultess, are good for Inflammations, Swellings, Can∣kers, sore Mouths and Throats, they are good for the Farcin and Stone, especially the Nuts being dried, they resist Poison, and this biting of ve∣nomous Beasts. VVilde Champions are reserved to those of the Garden, they are good to stay inward bleeding, taken inwardly; and outwardly it doth the like to Wounds; it expelleth Urine and Gravel, and purgeth the Body of Cholerick humours, and is good against the poison of venomous Beasts, the Plague, &c. and is good for old Sores, Fistulaes and Cankers, to cleanse and heal them Cardus benedictus is good for pains in the Head, the Yellows and other Infirmities of the Gall, cleanseth the Blood, helpeth the Itch, biting of mad Dogs, and other venomous Beasts, and is good for Agues. VVilde Carrets are hot and dry in the second degree, expelleth Wind, provoketh Urine and causeth Lust; they are good for the Dropsey, Cho∣lick, Stone, for running Sores and Ulcers, the seed of them worketh the same effects as the roots do. Caraway-seeds are hot and dry in the third degree, hath a moderate sharp quality, whereby it breaketh Wind, provoketh Urine; the seeds are good for Colds in the Head and Stomach. Cellandine is hot and dry in the third degree, the Juice of it put into the Eyes cleareth them from Films and Cloudiness, which darkneth the Sight, it is good in old filthy creeping Ulcers, to stay their Malignity of fretting and running, and to cause them to heal the more speedily: It heals also Tettars, Ring-wormes and spreading Cankers, the powder of it mixed with brimstone killeth the Mange, it is good taken inwardly for the Yel∣lows, and openeth the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall. The lesser Cellandine, called Pilewort, is hot and dry, and more biting and hotter then the greater, and cometh nearest in faculty to the Crow-foot, it is good taken inwardly for the Farcin, and to be applied outward∣ly for the same Disease. The ordinary Centaury purgeth cholerick and gross Humors, openeth the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, helpeth the Yellows, killeth Worms, is good for Cramps and Convulsions, against venomous Beasts, it cleanseth foul Ulcers, and killeth spreading Scabs; all the Centaurys are much of one and the same Nature, only take this Observation, That in Diseases of Blood use the red; if of Choler, use the Yellow; but if of Phlegm or Water, the White is best. VVnter-Cherries, the leaves are cool, and are used in Inflammations, but not opening as the Berries and Fruit are, which draw down the U∣rine, and expel the Gravel and Stone out of the Reins, Kidneys and Blad∣der; it is also good for all Imposthumes in them, likewise to cleanse them, and is good for bloody and foul Urine.
Chervil is of temperate heat and moderate driness, but not so much as the Parsley; it warms the Stomach, and is good to dissolve congealed blood in the Body; it is good for the Stone, the wilde Chervil applied dissolveth Swellings in any part of the Body. Sweet Chervil or sweet Cicely, the Roots warmeth the Stomach oppressed with Wind and Phlegm, and is good for the Consumption of the Lungs, it is good against the Plague, the Juice of it is good to heal Ulcers. Chest-Nut-tree, the Fruit is dry and binding, and is neither hot nor cold, but in a mean between both, the inner Rind that covereth the Nut is of so binding a quality, that it will stop any Lask or Loosness whatsoever, and likewise the bloody Flux. Earth Chest-Nuts are hot and dry in quality, and also binding in qua∣lity, but the seed is hotter, they provoke Lust exceedingly, the seed pro∣voketh Urine. Chickweed is cold and moist, and of a waterish substance, it cooleth without binding, and is good for all Swellings and Imposthumes whatso∣ever, Itch, Scabs, Cramps, and is good for Ulcers and Sores in the privy Parts. Bastard Chickweed is like to the other in Vertue and Operation. Cinquefoil, or Five-leaved Grass, the Roots of it are dry in the third de∣gree, and without biting, for they have very little heat and sharpness, it is good given inwardly for Agues, and to cool the heat of Pestilential Fea∣vers, the Juice of it drunk for certain days together, Cureth the Quinsey and Yellows; It is good for the Falling Sickness, Cough of the Lungs, the Roots boiled in Vineger is good for all hard Swellings, Knots and Ker∣nels, and Lumps growing in any part of the Flesh, and all Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire, and all sorts of running and foul Scabs, and is good for Ruptures or Burstings used with other things, taken inwardly or outwardly applied, and is good likewise for to stay bleeding of Wounds, inwardly taken or outwardly applied. Garden Clary, or more properly Clear-Eye, is hot and dry in the third degree, the feed put into the Eyes doth clear them of Motes, and takes out the red spots out of them; It is good for Swellings, and draweth forth Splinters and Thornes out of the Flesh; the Powder of the Root put up the Nose purgeth the Head and Brain of much Rheum and corruption; It is a great Strengthner of the Back, the Juice of it drank in Ale or Beer expelleth the secundine. Wilde Clary is hotter and drier then the Garden Clary, the seeds provoke lust, warmes the Stomach, scatters congealed Blood in any part of the Body, and helps dimness of Sight, being put into the Eye, and there let it remain till it drop out of it self, and it will cleanse the Eyes from putri∣fied matter, and by often using of it will take off a Film. Cleavers or Goose-grass is moderately hot and dry, and somewhat of in parts; it is good for the biting of any venomous Beast, for the Yel∣lows;
it stayeth Lasks, bloody Fluxes and bleeding Wounds, being brui∣sed and laid to them, as also to close up green Wounds; the powder of the Herb dried and strewed upon old filthy Ulcers helpeth them, and be∣ing boiled with Hogs-grease, helpeth all hard swellings about the Throat, being anointed therewith. It is a great Cleanser of the Blood and Strengthner of the Liver. Clowns wound-wort is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, and is a most excellent Wound-herb for all green Wounds, and is a Stancher of Blood, and will dry up fluxes and humors in old fretting Ulcers and ankers that hinder the healing of them; A Syrup made of the Juice of it is infe∣riour to none for inward Wounds, Ruptures of Veins, and Pissing of Blood. Cocks-head, red Fitching or Medick Fitch▪ the green leaves bruised and laid as a Plaister disperseth knots or kernels in the flesh, and being dried and taken in Wine helpeth the Strangury; and being anointed with it provoketh Sweat; it is a good food for Cattel to make them give good store of Milk, so is Alder and Medick Fitch. Columbines are thought to be temperate, between heat and moisture, the Leaves are used in Lotions for sore Mouths and Throats, the seed openeth the obstruction of the Liver, and is good for the Yellows. Colts-foot, the leaves of it while▪ it is green have a drying quality and are somewhat cold, but the dried leaves are not so biting; they are good for Wheezings and short-windedness, Agues, Inflammations and Swellings, St. Anthonies Fire and Burnings. Comfrey is cold and dry, and of an earthly quality, the use of this is the same with Clowns wound-wort; the great Comfrey help∣eth a bloody Urine, and is good for all inward Wounds, Bruises, Hurts and Ulcers of the Lungs, is good for the falling or shedding of the seed, and is good made into an Ointment for all pains and old Aches. Coral-wort cleanseth the Bladder, and provoketh Urine, expels the Gravel and Stone, and easeth pains in the Sides and Bowels; it is good for inward Wounds, especially for those in the Breast and Lungs, and is good for outward Wounds made up in an Ointment, it stops Fluxes, and is good to dry up the watery humour that is in Ulcers, that hinder their Cure. Red Corral bindeth and meanly cooleth, and is very effectual against Issues of Blood, and easeth the difficulty of staling, and is good for the Falling Sickness. Costmary or Alecost, or Balsam-herb, is hot and dry in the second degree, & provoketh Urine as well as Maudlin; it purgeth choler and phlegm, and is good for Agues, and dries up all thin Rheums from the Head and Stomach. Of Cud-weed or Cotton-weed, their kinds are of a binding and drying quality, and are good for defluxions of Rheums from the Head, and to stay all Fluxes of Blood whatsoever; it helpeth the bloody Flux, and is good for inward and outward Wounds, Hurts and Bruises, and is good for burst∣ness, the Wormes and old and filthy Ulcers.
Crabs-Claws is a great strengthner of the Reins; it is good for St. An∣thonies Fire, and all Inflammations and Swellings in Wounds, and an Ointment made of them is good to heal them. It is a most excellent thing for bruised Kidneys, and upon that account Pissing Blood. Winter-Cresses is hot and dry in the second degree, the seed causeth Urine, and drives forth Gravel, and helps the Strangury; the Juice of them made up into the form of an Ointment, with Wax, Oyl and Tur∣pentine, cleanseth foul Ulcers. Banck-Cresses, the seeds are of a fiery temperature, and doth extenuate and make thin, they strengthen the Brain, and is little inferiour to Mu∣stard-seed, and are good to stay those Rheums that fall down from the Head upon the Lungs; It is good likewise for the Yellows, and the paint in the Hip. Sciatica-Cresses are hot and dry in the fourth degree, like to Garden-Cresses both in smell and taste; they are good to put into a Poultess to help all old Pains and Griefs in the Hips or Joynts, and other parts of the Body that is hard to be Cured. Garden-Cresses are sharp and biting, and therefore it is hot and dry, whilest it is young and tender, the seeds are much more biting then the Herb, and is hot and dry almost in the fourth degree, and is good for Pains in the Hip, and hard Swellings and Inflammations. Dock-Cresses are of nature hot, and somewhat obstersive, and clean∣sing, the Juice of them is good for ulcerated Sores. Water-Cresses are hot and dry, they cleanse the Blood and Humors, serve in all other uses in which Brook-lyme is available, as to break the Stone, and to provoke Urine, and cleanse Ulcers. Cross-wort is of a binding and drying quality, and is a most excellent Wound-herb, both inwardly taken and outwardly applied, it sendeth forth Phlegm out of the Stomach, and is good for Ruptures and Burstness. Crow-foot is a fiery hot Herb not fit to be given inwardly unless it be Corrected, it will draw a Blister as well as Cantharides. Cuckow-Point, or VVake-Robin is hot and dry in the third degree, it is good given against the Plague or Poison, being mixed with Vineger, it is good for short-windedness and Cough of the Lungs, it is good to pro∣voke Urine, is good for the Itch, Ulcers, and to take away the Pin and Web in the Eye. Calamus is of a hot heating quality, saith Dioscordes; but Gallen and Pliny affirms, that they have thin and subtil parts both hot and dry, it pro∣voketh Urine, expelleth Poison, and is good for inward Bruises, and the Juice of it strained with Honey taketh away the dimness of the Eyes. Corneflag is of force to waste, consume and dry, as also of a subtil and drying quality, being stamped with Frankincense and Wine, draweth forth Splinters out of the Flesh; It is likewise good for hard Swel∣lings.
Cowslips of Jerusalem is of the temperature of great Comfrey, and is somewhat more drying and binding. Colloquintida is hot and dry in the latter end of the second degree, and therefore it purgeth, cleanseth and openeth, and performeth all those things that bitter things doth, but that the strong quality that it hath, is as Gallen saith, of more force then all the rest of the Operations, there∣fore it is not rashly to be used, but upon some desperate Diseases. Cranes-bill is cold and somewhat dry, with some binding quality, it hath power to joyn and sodder together, and is therefore good for Burst∣ness and broken Bones. The seed of Garden Cummin is hot and dry in the third degree, and hath also a binding quality, and is good for the Wind, the Chest and Lungs, and all Raw Humors, and is good to put into Plaisters and Poul∣tesses for Swellings. The seed of Cockle is hot and dry in the latter end of the second de∣gree, and is good against the Yellows. Camock is hot in the third degree, it cutteth and maketh thin, the Bark of the Root given in white-Wine causeth Urine, and breaketh the Stone, and drives it forth. Cyprus-Roots, long and round, are of a hot Nature, the Ashes of them burnt is good for Ulcers in the Mouth, Cankers, &c. Cypres, the fruit and leaves are dry in the third degree, and Astringent, the Nut being stamped and drunk in Wine, stoppeth the Lask and bloody Flux. Cassia Fistula or Pudding-Pipe, the Pulpe is moist in the latter end of the third degree, it gently purgeth Cholerick Humors and simy Phlegm. Cochinile is given alone, and mixed with other things in malignant dis∣eases, as Pestilential Feavers and the like, and is a great Cordial. Cynamon hath power to warm, and is of thin Parts, it is also hot, dry and Astringent, it breaketh Wind, provoketh Urine, and is good against the fretting pains of the Guts and Entrails, proceeding of cold Causes. Cloves are hot and dry in the third degree, they strenghen the Sto∣mach, Liver and Heart, provoketh Urine, the Oyl of them taketh away the Pin and Web in the Eye. China Roots is thought to be moderately hot and dry, it strengthens the Liver, removes the Dropsey, Cures malignant Ulcers and Scabs, and is good in a Consumption, and for the Farcin. Copperas are of two sorts, green and white, they are hot and dry, but the white is much the stronger, they are great Driers up of evil Hu∣mours, being outwardly applied they kill likewise Scurfs and Scabs. Costus hath an heating and attenuating quality, it is good to help Strains, Convulsions and Cramps, killeth Wormes, and is good against the biting of Vipers, and against Windiness in the Stomach. Calafonia or Colofonia, doth incarnate Ulcers, and doth Conglutinate things that are separated.
Camphopa is a kind of Gum which is cold and dry in the third degree, and preserveth the Body from Putrefaction, and bindeth Humors, it is good against Poison, Plague and Feavers. Cantharides are certain Spanish Flies which are hot and dry in the third degree, they increase Lust taken inwardly, and being applied outwardly to any part of the Body they will raise Blisters. Cardamonium is not, and extenuateth Humors, and being mixt with Vineger killeth Scabs. Castorum is hot and dry, and purgeth much. Cerusa is a white Ointment made of Oyl and white Lead; It is cold and dry in the second degree, and is a great healer and shealer of Scabs. Cito or Cisto is dry in the second degree, and bindeth much. Citrons or Cithrons are cold and moist in the second degree, they do cleanse and pierce. Camry is cold, and conglutinateth and bindeth, and is good against Ruptures. Castro or Cosse, being bitter, is hot and healeth Ulcers. Cane-reed is hot and dry in the third degree. D. Daisies are cold and moist, being moist in the end of the second de∣gree, and cold in the beginning of the same. They are good for Wounds in the Breast, and therefore sitting to be made into Oyls, Ointments and Plaisters, as also into Syrups; the great and wilde ones is a very good Wound-Herb, and the distilled water of them both is good to refresh the inward parts and to allay the heat of choler; They are good for Ulcers. Swellings, Kernels, Bruises by Falls, Ruptures, Burstings and all Inflam∣mations. Dandelyon, vulgarly called Piss-a-beds, is like in temperature with Suc∣cory, that is to say, of wilde Indive, it is cold, but it drieth more, and doth withal cleanse and open▪ by reason of the biting quality it hath, and therefore is good for the Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, Spleen and Yel∣lows; the distilled water of it is good to allay the heat of Pestilential Feavers, and to wash Sores. Darnel is hot in the third degree, red Darnel drieth with sharpness. The Meal of it is good to stay Gangrenes. Cankers and putrid Sores; It kil∣leth Ring-wormes and soul Scabs; If it be used with Salt and Radish∣roots, with Brimstone and Vineger, it dissolveth Knots and Kernels, and being boiled with Wine, Pigeons dung and Linfeed, dissolveth those that are hard to be dissolved; Darnel Meal draweth forth Splinters and broken bones, being applied as a Poultess; the red Darnel boiled in Wine stayeth the Lask and bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes of Blood. D ll is hot in the end of the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the same; or in the end of the first degree; it provoketh Urine, and is
good against Windiness; it is good to case Swellings and Pains. Devils-bit is somewhat bitter, and is of a hot and dry temperature, and that in the latter end of the second degree; it is good against the Plague and all Pestilential diseases; as Poisons, Feavers, and biting of venomous Beasts; It is good for Bruises either inward or outward; it is good to expel Wind, drive forth Wormes. The distilled Water of it is good for green Wounds, old Sores, and cleanseth the Body inwardly, and the Seed outwardly, from Sores, Scurss and Itches. Docke, all of them are generally cold a little, and moderately, and some more. They do all of them dry, but not after one manner, yet some are of opinion that they are dry in the third degree: The red Dock clean∣seth the Liver, but the yellow is best to take when the Blood is afflicted with choler. The Seeds of most of the kinds do stay Lasks and Fluxes of all sorts; they are good for the itch and breaking out of the Skin, if it be bathed therewith. Dodder is of the Nature of the Herb on which it groweth; is more dry then hot, and that in the second degree; It is a Purger of Choler and Phlegm from the Head, Obstructions of the Liver, Gall and Yellows. Dogs-grass, Quich-Grass; or Couch-Grass, opens Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, stopping of Urine, and easeth the pains of the Belly, In∣flammations, and wasteth the Stones in the Bladder, and Ulcers thereof. Also being boiled, the seed doth more provoke Urine, and stayeth the Lask; it is a good Remedy against all Diseases coming of stoppage. Doves-foot or Cranes-bill is cold and somewhat dry, with some binding quality; It is good for the Wind; Cholick and Stone▪ the decoction thereof in Wine is a good Wound-drink for inward Wounds, Hurts or Bruises, and is good to cleanse and heal outward Sores, Ulcers, Fistulaes and green VVounds, and is excellent for Ruptures. Ducks-meat is cold and moist in a sort in the second degree; it is good for Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire. Dragons is under Mars, and therefore the best way to use it is after it is distilled, and then the VVater of it cleanseth all internal parts of the Body, and so it doth the external from Scurfand Scabs, and being drop∣ped into the Eye taketh away the Pin and VVeb, and is good against Pe∣stilence and Poison. Dogs-tooth is of a very hot temperament, and of an excrementitious Nature. The Roots of all the Daffodils are hot and dry in the third degree. Dyars-weed is hot and dry of Temperature, the Root as also the whole Herb heats and dries in the third degree; it cuts, attenuateth, opens and disgests; It is good for the biting of venomous Beasts and Poison, taken inwardly or applied outwardly. Bastard-Dirtany is hot and dry in the second degree, and of a wasting, attenuating and opening quality, and is good for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder.
Dropwort or Filipendula is hot and dry in the third degree, opening, cleansing and a little binding; All the kinds of them have the same fa∣culty, unless it be the pernicious Drop-wort; they are good against pains in the Bladder, and break the Stone. E. Elder is of a drying quality, glewing and moderately disgesting; It pur∣geth choler and phlegm, both the inward Rind and the Berries, and the Dropsey; the Bark of the Root worketh more powerfully then either of them; it is good against the biting of any venomous Beasts, the Juice of it asswageth the hot Inflammations of the Eyes, and all manner of Burnings and Scaldings, being laid to the grieved place. Dwarf-Elder called Dane-wort▪ and Wall-wort, it is of Temperature hot and dry in the third degree, it doth waste and consume by Purging of Choler, and Phlegm and Water, and is more powerful then the com∣mon Elder, and hath all the Properties of it. The Elm-Tree, the Leaves and Bark of it is moderately hot, with a cleansing Faculty, the Leaves bruised and applied healeth green Wounds, it is good to Cure a Scurf, Ruptures, broken Bones, Swellings and Burn∣ings. Endive and Succorie are cold and dry in the third degree, and withal somewhat binding, it is a fine cooling and cleansing Plant; the Garden Endive is colder, and not so dry and cleansing; the Juice or the water of it is good to cool the excessive heat of the Stomach and Liver, or any inflammation in any part of the Body, and being applied outwardly it is good for Ulcers, hard Swellings and Pestilential Sores. Elecampane is hot and dry in the third degree, especially when it is dry, for being green and full of Juice it is full of superfluous moisture, which somewhat abateth the heat and dry quality thereof; It is good for Colds and Coughs, and to warm a cold Stomach, Wind, short-Winded∣ness, Wheezing, Stone in the Bladder, resisteth Poison, the Plague, Cramps, Convulsions, Wormes, Cankers, Fistulaes. Ensula, or Devils-Milk, is hot, sharp and drying, and draws choler from the Joynts. Eringo or Sea-holly, breedeth Seed exceedingly, and is hot and moist, it is good for the Yellows, Dropsey, Cholick, provoketh Urine, expel∣leth the Stone; the Roots bruised and applied outwardly is good for the Farcin, or taken inwardly for the same disease; it is good for broken Bones, and to draw thornes out of the Flesh; the Juice dropped into the Ears helpeth the Impostumes in them; the distilled water of it is good for all the Purposes aforesaid. Eye-bright is hot and dry, but yet more hot then dry; the Juice or the Water of it is good to help all Infirmities of the Eyes that cause dim∣ness.
Elusa is a Herb like a Spunge, and is hot in the fourth degree; it dri∣eth and cleanseth exceedingly, and of some is called Wolfes Milk. Excrusion is that which we call Oxicration, it is a certain Composition of Aceto and Water, and is good to allay Swellings and Tumors. Eggs, the Whites are cold and the Yolks are hot, and doth strengthen and incarnate, the shells beaten to powder and given in Beer or Ale, is very good to expel the Stone out of the Bladder. F. Fern, both the kinds of them, Male and Female, are hot and dry, and somewhat binding, their Vertues are both alike; the Roots of them are good to kill Wormes, the green leaves purge the Belly of cholerick Hu∣mors; An Ointment made of the Roots, bruised with Hogs-Grease is good for the Wounds in the flesh, the powder of them is good to dry up moistures in malignant Ulcers. The Water Ferne or Osmond-Royal is hot and dry, but lesser then the former, and hath all the Vertues the other hath, but more effectually, and is good for Wounds or Bruises, and the like; the decoction thereof being drunk or boiled in an Ointment or Oyl, as a Balsam or Balm, is very good for Bruises, or Bones broken and out of Joynt; it is good for the Cholick, for Ruptures, The Decoction of the Root in Wine provoketh Urine exceedingly, and cleanseth the Bladder and Passages thereof. Featherfew heateth, it is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second; it expelleth the Secundine being drunk. It is good for a Cough, and to cleanse the Reins of the Bladder, and to expel the Stone out of it. It purgeth phlegm and choler, is good for the Head-ach and Wind-cholick, and performeth all that bitter things can do. Fennel-seed is hot in the third degree, and dry in the first; it openeth Obstructions and stoppings of the Bladder, and maketh the Stone to a∣void by Urine. It is good for all manner of gross humors, and is good for the Liver and Lungs, and is of the same Nature as Anniseeds are. Sow-Fennel, or Hogs-Fennel, the kinds of the Herbs, especially the yel∣low sap of the Root, is hot in the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the third; it is good against Wind in the Belly and Stomach; It Loos∣neth the Belly gently, and purgeth Siege both by phlegm and choler. Fennel-Gyant is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, and is Astringent and binding, and is good for the bloody Flux. Filipendula or Dropwort, vide Dropwort. Green Figs serve to ripen Tumors, soften and consume hard swellings, and are good for Pursiness, Coughs and Diseases of the Lungs, the De∣coction of the leaves, and the place washed with it, is a most excellent Remedy for the Leprosie, Scurf, Scabs or Running Sores. Fuss-balls do dry, and are good to lay to a Gall'd Back. The yellow Water-Flag or Flower-de-luce, and all the kinds of them are
very Astringent, cooling and drying, and helps all Lasks and Fluxes, whe∣ther of Blood or Humors; it helps all foul Ulcers, the Juice being applied to them. Flax-weed or Toad-Flax, all the kinds of them are of the same Tempe∣rature with wild Snap-Dragons, whereof they are kinds; it provokes U∣rine, opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, helpeth the Yel∣lows, expelleth Poison, driveth forth the dead▪ Foal, and is good to cleanse soul and cankerous Ulcers and Fistulaes. Flea-wort, it is cold and dry, the Fryed-seed taken stayeth the Flux and Lask of the Belly; the seed is good for hot Agues and burning Feavers, and other Inflammations; It is good for the diseases of the Breast and Lungs caused by heat; It is good for the Head-ach and all hot Impost∣humes, and breakings out of the Skin; it is good for old pains in the Joynts, &c. Flix-weed drieth without any manifest sharpness of heat; It is good for Lasks and bloody Fluxes, and for all Issues of Blood whatsoever; it is good for broken bones to consolidate them together, it heals all sores and putrified Ulcers. Flower-de-luce is hot and dry in the third degree; it purgeth choler and tough Phlegm, helpeth the Yellows and Dropsey; it easeth the pains in the Belly, and is good for the Liver and Spleen; it is good for Cramps, all manner of Poison, provoketh Urine, helpeth the Cholick, and is good to comfort all cold Joynts and Sinews, and is good for Ulcers and Fi∣stulaes. Fluellin or Lluellin is of a binding quality, and is good for hot Swel∣lings, Wounds, Ulcers and Cankers, and is good to stop a Lask and bloo∣dy Flux. Fox-Gloves, in that they are bitter are hot and dry, with a certain clean∣sing quality; the Juice of it is good to heal green Wounds and old Sores, to cleanse, dry and heal them; It purgeth the Body of tough Phlegm, and is good to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, is good for the Farcin, and other breakings out in the Skin. Fumitory is cold and somewhat dry of Operation, and cleanseth by U∣rine. It is good for the Liver and Spleen, Yellows, Stavers, Plague, ore Mouths and Throat, and all manner of Breakings out in the Skin. The Furz-bush, or Fuzen-bushes, are hot and dry of Complexion, and is good to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; the seeds are good to cleanse the Reins from the Gravel or Stones, provokes Urine, and is good against the Yellows. Frankincense hath power to bind, saith Dioscordes, it is good for Wounds Old and New, and also for Ulcers. Flax or Line, the seed thereof is hot and dry, and it ripeneth and mol∣liieth.
Fitches are hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, and they do open and cleanse; see Oblibanum. Herb Frankincense, the seeds and roots are hot and dry in the second degree, and are of a digesting, dissolving and Mundifying quality. Feltwort or Baldmony, the Roots are hot, cleansing and Scouring, some say it is likewise binding and of a bitter Taste. Fennegrck is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, and is a Loosner of the Body, and is good for Colds, and a Killer of Wormes. G. Gentian Felt-wrt or Baldmony, there are two sorts of them, and both under the dominion of Mars, they both resist Poison and Pestilence, strengthens the Stomach, the powder of the dried Root is good against the biting of a mad Dog, or any other venomous Beast, opens Obstru∣ctions of the Liver; it is good taken inwardly against Bruises by Falls, provokes Urine exceedingly, is good for Cramps, it expectorates tough Phlegm, and kills Scabs, and all manner of fretting Sores and Ulcers, kil∣leth Wormes, is good for the Farcy and Yellows taken inwardly. The root made into the form of a Tent is good to open Sores, being put therein. Garlick is very sharp, and hot and dry in the fourth degree, it causeth Urine, is good against the biting of a mad Dog, and any other venomous creature, purgeth the Head from tough Phlegm, killeth Wormes, helpeth the Lethargy, is a Preservative against the Plague, is good for foul Ul∣cers, breaketh Imposthumes and other Swellings, and for all those Dis∣eases the Onion is also effectual, but they are better applied outwardly then received inwardly, because they have their Vices as well as their Vertues. Clove-Glliflowers are so temperate, that no excess, neither in heat, cold, driness nor moisture can be perceived in them; they are great Strength∣ners both of the Brain and Heart, and are very good for to be put into Cordials for hot Pestilential Feavers, and expel Poison. Stock Glliflowers are referred to the Wall-Flower, although in Vertue they are much inferiour. Garden Gemder is of thin parts, and hath a cutting faculty; it is hot and dry almost in the third degree; it opens and cleanseth, for it opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and difficulty of Urine; It is good against Poison, Ulcers, Cramps, Agues, Falling Sickness, Head-ach, Yellows and Wormes. VVater Germander is hot and dry, and hath a bitter taste, harsh and earthly. Stinking Gladwin is hot and dry in the third degree, it purgeth choler and phlegm, the powder or Juice of it put into the Head draweth forth much corruption, and being given inwardly is good for Cramps; It is
good for the Strangury, provoketh Urine; the Roots are very good in Wounds, and draweth forth Splinters or Thornes out of the Flesh, the Roots boiled in Vineger dissolveth any hard Swelling or Tumor; the Juice of the Leaves and Roots heal the Mange, and all other running and spreading Scabs. Golden Rod is hot and dry in the second degree, and cleanseth with a certain Astriction or binding quality, and is good for the Stone in the Reins and Kidneys; it is good taken for inward bruises, and outwardly applied for outward ones; it stayeth Bleeding in any part of the Body, and of Wounds also, the Fluxes of Humours, the bloody Flux, Ruptures. It is an excellent Wound-Herb, inferiour to none, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, and is good for all Sores and Ulcers whatsoever, whether they be in the Mouth or Throat. Gout-wort Cures all manner of pain in the Hip or Joynt-aches. Gromel, the seed of it is hot and dry in the second degree; it is good to break the Stone, and to avoid it out of the Reins and Bladder by Urine, and helpeth the Strangury. Gum Armoniack outwardly applied, dissolves hard Knots and Swel∣lings in any part of the Body, and inwardly given cures hard Milts, and frees from Obstructions, moves Urine, and fetcheth forth Stones. Winter-Green is a very good Wound-herb, and is good taken inwardly, being bruised for Ulcers in the Kidneys or Neck of the Bladder; it stay∣eth also Fluxes whether of Blood or Humours, as the Lask, bloody Flux, bleeding Wounds, and taketh away Inflammations, and is good for foul Ulcers, Cankers and Fistulaes. Groundsel hath mixt Faculties, it cooleth and disgesteth; it is a uni∣versal Medicine coming from heat, whatsoever they be; it is good against the Yellows, Falling Sickness, provokes Urine, expels Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys, is good for Griping in the Bowels and Cholick, and dissolveth any hard Knobs and Kernels in the Body. English Galingale hath a heating quality, and some do reckon it to be hot and dry in the second degree: the greater Galingale Roots are hot and dry in the third degree, but the lesser are somewhat hotter; it is good for cold Griefs in the Stomach, strengthens the Brain, and comfort∣eth the Sinews. Ginger heateth and drieth in the third degree, and is good for the Sto∣mach, answering the effects and qualities of long Pepper. Glass-wort is hot and dry, the Ashes of it are both drier and hotter, even to the fourth degree, and have a Costick and burning quality. Green-weed or base Brome are hot and dry in the second degree; they are thought to be in vertue equal with the Broom, the Dyars use it very much to dye withal. Galls are dry in the third and cold in the second; they cleanse and mn∣difie, they keep back Rheums and such like Fluxes, and doth dry up the
same, and are good to stop Lasks and bloody Fluxes, and the falling out of the Fundament. Grains of Paradice are hot and dry in the third degree, they comfort the weak, cold and feeble Stomach, and helpeth the Ague, Farcin and Falling Sickness. Gum Lacke is hot in the second degree, and comforteth the Heart and Liver, and openeth Obstructions, expelleth Urine, and is good for the Dropsey and Yellows, and expelleth the Stone out of the Reins and Bladder. Fresh Grease is hot and moist in the first degree, and mollifieth, ripeneth and healeth Wounds, Imposthumes and Ulcers. Galbanum is a Gum which is hot in the third degree, and dry in the se∣cond: it softeneth, stoppeth and draweth away evil humours, and is good against Colds, the Fume taken up the Head, as also for the Dizziness thereof. H. Hearts-ease is obscurely cold, but more evidently moist, and of a fat and slimy Juice, like that of the Mallow, for which cause it moisteneth and suppleth, but not so much as that, it is good for the Inflammations of the Lungs and Breast, Scabs and Itch. Hearts-Tongue is of a binding drying Faculty, strengthens the Liver, and is good for the Lask and bloody Flux, and is good against the biting of Serpents. Hawk-weed, all the kinds of them are somewhat dry, and somewhat binding, and is good for the heat of the Stomach, the Fits of the Ague, the Wind, provoketh Urine, is good for the biting of venomous Beasts, the Dropsey, the Wind-Cholick, and is good to digest thin Phlegm from the Chest and Lungs, it is good for Ulcers, Burnings, Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire, and being made into a Poultess, is good for Cramps and Pains in the Joynts. The Hawthorn-Berries are very binding, therefore are good to stop a Lask, the Berries dried and drunk in white-Wine is very good against the Stone and Dropsey, the Seed bruised after it is cleared from the Down and drunk, is good for the tormenting pains of the Belly. Hemp is hot, the Seed consumeth Wind, it is good for the Yellows, o∣peneth the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and is good for hot In∣flammations, the Seed Loosneth the Belly, strewed amongst a Horses Pro∣vender, and allayeth the troublesom Humours of the Bowels. Hedge-Hysop is drying, and is good outwardly applied to pains in the Hips or Joynts, and is good to cleanse old and filthy Ulcers. Herb-Robert is good for the Stone, and to stay all inward Flowings of Blood, and is a great Healer of green Wounds, and is good for old Ulcers. Herb True-love, or One-berry is exceeding cold, and the Leaves or Ber∣ries
is good to expel Poison of all sorts, as also the Plague and Pestilence, is good for the Cholick, green Wounds, and to cleanse old and filthy Ulcers, and is good to discuss all Swellings in any part of the Body. Hore-hound the white and the black are hot in the second, and dry in the third degree, it helpeth the Obstructions of the Liver, openeth and Purgeth, and is good against Colds, Consumptions, short-windedness, an Expeller of Poison, and a Cleanser of old Sores and Ulcers, cleareth the Eye-sight, and snuffed up the Nostrils, is good for the Yellows. Horse-tal is of a binding Faculty, and doth moderately dry, and is good to Cure Wounds, nay, though the Sinews be cut asunder, and is good not only for all inward Ulcers of the Bladder, but all outward Sores, provoketh Urine, helpeth the Stone and Strangury, and is good for all Lasks and bloody Fluxes, and Pissing of Blood, or Bleeding at the Nose. Housleek or Sengreen are of a cooling Nature, and is good for all inward Heats as well as outward, as in the Eyes and other parts of the Body, it cooleth all hot Inflammations, as St. Anthonies Fire, Scaldings and Burn∣ings, Cankers, Tetters, Ring-wormes, &c. Hounds-tongue, but especially the Root is cold and dry, it is good for Coughs and short-windedness, the biting of mad Dogs, and is good for green Wounds, and is good inwardly for the Farcy. Holly-holm or Hulver bush, the Berries are hot and dry, and of thin parts, they expel Wind, they purge the Body of gross and Phlegmatick Humours eaten not dried, but if they be dried and beaten to powder and eaten, they bind the Body, and stop Fluxes, and the Lask, the Bark of the Tree and Leaves are good in Fomentations for broken Bones and Mem∣bers out of Joynt. Heath-bush hath a digesting Faculty, the Flowers and Leaves are good to lay upon the biting of venomous Beasts, and the Bark and Leaves may be used for the same Causes as Turmerick is. Harts-horn is dry, yet it strengthneth very much, and expelleth Poison. Honey is hot and dry in the second degree, it cleanseth the Stomach and Entrails, stoppeth Humours and incarnateth Wounds, and cleanseth also the Reins and Bladder. Hyacinths do little cleanse and bind, the seeds are dry in the third de∣gree, but the Roots are dry and cold in the first. Hellebore, vide Bears-foot. I. St. Johns-wort is hot and dry, being of substance thin, and is a most ex∣cellent Herb for inward Bruises, or Hurts, or outward Wounds, it is good to open Obstructions, dissolve Swellings, and strengthen those Parts that are weak and feeble, it is good for Bleedings inward or outward, for the
biting of any venomous Creature, and is good to cast forth the Stone in the Bladder by Urine. Ivy that groweth upon Walls or upon Trees, it hath a certain binding and cold substance, and somewhat biting, the Flower of it is good for the bloody Flux and Lask; the Leaves or Flowers outwardly applied, is good for the Nerves and Sinews; the yellow Berries of them are good for the Yellows, and killeth the Wormes, is good for the Plague, pro∣vokes Urine, breaks the Stone; It is good for to cleanse foul Ulcers, Sores and green Wounds, or for Burnings and Scaldings; The Juice of the Berries and Leaves squirted up the Nose, purgeth the Head from Rheum, and cureth the Ulcers therein, and is good given for a Surfeit. The uniper Bush is hot and dry in the third degree, the Brries are also hot but not so dry; they are good against Poison, Plague, the biting of any venomous Creature, provokes Urine, is good for the Dropsey, strengthens the Stomack, expels Wind; they are good for the Cough, Shortness of Breath, Consumptions, Pains in the Belly, Ruptures, Cramps, and strengthens all the Members of the Body; A Lye made of the Ashes of the Wood, and the Body Bathed therewith, is good for the Mange, and all manner of Scabs, the Berries break the Stone, and brings a Horse to a Stomach, and is good for the Falling Sickness. Jack by the Hedge, or Sauce alone, is hot and dry, but much lesser then Garlick, the seed boiled in Wine is a good Remedy against the Wind-Cholick or Stone, the green Leaves are good to heal Ulcers. Iris is a Root that is hot and dry, it cleanseth and ripeneth, and is good against Colds, and purgeth Ulcers. Iron-Rust is hot and dry in the second degree, it comforteth and retain∣eth evil Humors. K. Knot-Grass, all the kinds of them are cold in the second degree, and dry in the third, and are of a binding quality, it is good to cool the heat of the Stomach, and to stay any Flux of Blood or Humours, as Lask, bloody Flux, it is good for the Falling of the Seed, provoketh Urine, helpeth the Strangury, and expelleth the Gravel and Stone, it killeth Wormes, is good to cool all manner of Inflammations, and to expel the Poison or Venom of any venomous Creatures; it helpeth Gangreens, Fistulaes, Cankers and Ulcers, and is good for fresh and green Wounds, and to strengthen broken Joynts and Ruptures. Kidney-wort, or VVall-penny-royal, or VVall-penny-wort, the distilled water of it given▪ is good to allay all hot Inflammations of the Stomach and Liver, or Bowels, and being outwardly applied, is good for outward Heats, Inflammations and St. Anthonies Fire, and healeth ore Kidneys, torn and fretted by the Stone, provoketh Urine, is good for the Dropsey, it helpeth the bloody Flux, and Cureth green Wounds, and stayeth their Bleeding.
Knape-weed helpeth to stay Bleeding at the Mouth and Nose, and o∣ther outward parts, and all inward Bleedings of Veins, and also the Flux of the Belly and inward Bruises, it is good for Ruptures taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, it drieth up the noisture of all Cankerous and Run∣ning Sores, and healeth them up gently. Knee-holm or Butchers broom, the Roots which are chiefly used, are hot and meanly dry with a thinness of Essence, the decoction of it provoketh Urine, breaketh the Stone, and driveth forth Gravel; It raiseth up tough Phegm that sticketh at the Chest and Lungs, and the Berries of it is good for the Yellows. L. Ladies Mantle is good for Inflammations and to stay Bleedings, Fluxes of all sorts, and helpeth Ruptures and Bruises, it is one of the best Wound-herbs that is both inwardly taken and outwardly applied. Lavender is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, it is good for all the Griefs of the Head and Brain, that proceed of a cold cause, it strengthens the Stomach, and freeth the Liver and Spleen from Obstru∣ctions, expelleth the dead Foal and Secundine, the Flowers distilled and so used, are good to cause Urine, and to ease the pain of the Cholick, it is good for the Falling Sickness. French Lavender hath a cold and earthly substance, by reason wherèof it bindeth, it is of force to take away Obstructions, to extenuate and make thin, to cleanse and to strengthen not only all the Entrails, but the whole Body also. Sea Lavender is very Astringent or Binding, the Seed beaten to pow∣der, and given in Wine or Beer helpeth the Cholick and Strangury, and stayeth all Fluxes of Blood. Lavender-Cotton is hot and dry in the third degree, it resisteth Poison, and helpeth the biting of any venomous Creature, the Powder of it is good for the Mattering of the Yard, it killeth the Wormes and Scabs. Ladies Smecks or Cuckoc-Flowers, all the sorts of them are hot and dry in the second degree, they differ not much from the Water-Cresses, they provoke Urine, break the Stone, and warm a cold Stomach. Lttice is a cold and moist Herb, but not in the extream degree of Cold; they Loosen the Belly being boiled. It is good for the pains of the Bowels coming by choler, they are naught for short-Windedness and the Lungs. Water-Lilly, the seed of it hath a drying force, the leaves and flow∣ers of it are cold and moist, and cool all Inflammations both inward and outward; the Seed as well as the Fruit stayeth Fluxes of Blood or Hu∣mors, either inward or outward, and is good for the Mattering of the Yard.
Lilly of the Valley, called Conval-Lilly or May-Lilly, the distilled water of it helpeth all Inflammations in the Eyes, and the Pin and Web. White Lillies, which are the Garden Lillies are hot, and partly of a subtil substance; but the root is dry in the first degree, and hot in the second, they expel Poison, and are very good in Pestilent Feavers. An Ointment made of the Roots with Hogs-Grease is good for Scabs, and unites Sinews when they are Cut, and is a great Clenser of Ulcers, the Oyl of it is good to bring any Head-swelling to ripeness to break. Licoris is very familiar to the Body of Man or Beast. It hath a certain binding quality, which warmeth and cometh nearest of all to a mean temperature, and because it is sweet it is meanly moist. It is good for a Cough, shortness of Breath, and for all the Griefs of the Breast and Lungs; And for the Diseases of the Kidneys and Ulcers in the Bladder; It is good for the Strangury; Heat of Urine, the fine Powder of it blown into the Eye helpeth the Pin and Web. Common Liver-wort is good for all the Diseases of the Liver, both to cool and to cleanse it, and helpeth all Inflammations in any part of the Body; the Yellows, Mattering of the Yard; it is good for Tettars, Sores and Scabs. Loose-strife or Willow-herb is good for all manner of Bleedings inward and outward, as bloody Fluxes and bleeding Wounds. Lovage is hot and dry in the third degree. It openeth and disgesteth Humors, provoketh Urine, warmeth a cold Stomach, is good for the pain in the Belly coming by Wind, resisteth Poison, is good for the Quinsey, taketh away the redness of the Eyes. Lung-wort, which is a kind of Moss growing on sundry sorts of Trees, is good for Coughs, Diseases of the Lungs both in Man and Beast, and is a most excellent Remedy boiled in Beer for broken-winded Horses. Leeks, Scallions or Onions are hot and dry, and do attenuate and make thin, and Loosen all evil Humors in the Body. Ʋnslack Lime is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it drieth and cor∣rodeth. Lawrel and Bays are hot and dry, they cleanse and mundifie. Lee is hot and dry in the fourth degree; it is very adustine, cleansing and piercing. Lithargirto is of two Kinds, one of the colour of Gold, the other of Silver; it is dry and bindeth, softneth, incarnateth, cooleth and clo∣seth up Wounds. The golden Colour is the best. M. The Root Madder, which the Physicians and Diars use, is disputed whether it bind or open; As it is of an obscure binding force, so it is of nature and temperature cold and dry; it is of divers thin parts,
by reason whereof the colour doth easily pierce; it is good for inward Bruises, or outward Bruises; It is good for the bloody Flux, provokes Urine, Cures the Yellows, by opening the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; And anointed with Vineger Cures the Tettar or Ring-worm. VVhite Maiden-hair, all the kinds of them are dry, and maketh thin, and is between heat and coldness; it is good for a Cough, shortness of Breath, the Yellows, Diseases of the Spleen, stoppage of Urine and Stone, (In all which Diseases the Wall-Rue is as effectual) stayeth both Bleedings and Fluxes of the Stomach and Belly, being green it Loosneth the Belly, and avoideth choler and phlegm from the Stomach and Liver, cleanseth the Lungs and Blood, and being boiled with Camomil, dissolves knots, allayeth swellings, and drieth up moist Ulcers; the Lye made thereof is good to cleanse the Skin from Scabs, and from dry and Run∣ning Sores. Golden Maiden-Hair hath all the Vertues of the former. Of Mallows and Marsh-Mallowes, either of them hath a certain heat and moisture, and the leaves and roots of them boiled in water with Parsley and Fennel-roots openeth the Belly, and are good for hot Agues, they are used in Glisters, the Juice of them given is good for the Falling Sickness; the leaves bruised with Honey, and laid to the Eyes, taketh a∣way the inflammation of them; it is good against Poison: A Poultess made of them, and applied, is good for all hard Tumors, Inflammations, Impostumes and Swellings; it is good for Scaldings and Burnings, and for St. Anthonies Fire. Marsh-Mallows are more effectual in all the Dis∣eases before mentioned, and in Decoctions and Glisters, to ease all pains of the Body, making the Passages slippery for the Stone to descend. Maple-te, the Decoction of the Leaves and Bark strengthens the Li∣ver, and to open Obstructions of it and the Spleen, and to ease the pain proceding thence. Myrobalas prge gently Melancholy, and comforteth the Heart and Liver. VVilde Majore doth cut, attenuate and make thin, dry and heat, and that in the third degree, strengthens the Stomach, helps the Cough, Con∣sumption of the Lungs, cleanseth the Body of Choler, expelleth Poison, and is good for the biting of venomous Beasts, helps the Dropsey, Scabs, Mange, Yellows. Sweet Marjoreni is excellent good for all the infirmities of the Head▪ squirted up the Nose, and taken inwardly, is good for to comfort a cold Stomach, and the Diseases thereunto belonging, and being outwardly applied is good for the Obstructions of the Liver, and being put into an Ointment, it warmeth and comforteth the outward parts, as the Joynts and Sinews, for Swellings, and for places out of Joynt. Marigolds are hot almost in the second degree, especially when they be dry, and are much of the Nature of Saffron, the Juice of the Leaves
mingled with Vineger, and anoint a hot swelling with it asswageth it, they comfort the Heart and Spirits, and expelleth any Pestilent or Ma∣lignant quality that may annoy them. Master-wort, the Root is hotter then Pepper, and therefore good in all cold Diseases, or Griefs of the Stomach and Body; it is good for Rheum, shortness of Breath, and expelleth the Stone by Urine, casts out the dead Foal, it is good for the Dropsey, Cramps, Falling Sickness, Poi∣son, provokes Sweat, it cleanseth and healeth all green Wounds. Sweet Maudlin, the Vertues of it is the same with Cost-mary, or Ale∣cost, and therefore I refer you unto Costmary for satisfaction. Medlars are cold, dry and binding, the Leaves are of the same Nature, they are good to stop all Fluxes of Blood inwardly given, and the dried Leaves beaten to powder, and strowed upon bleeding Wounds, stayeth the bleeding of them, and healeth them up quickly; the Stones of them made into powder, and given in white-Wine, wherein Parsley Roots hath layn, inusing all Night, doth break the Stone in the Kidneys, and help to expel it. Melilote or Kings Claver is hot and dry in the first degree, it hath a cer∣tain binding quality, besides a wasting and ripening quality; it is good for spreading Ulcers; it is used to be put into Glisters, the Flowers of it with Chamomel, to expel Wind, and into Poultcsses to asswage Swellings, with the Juice of it with Oyl, Wax▪ Rosin and Turpentine, is made a most Sove∣reign drawing Emplaister, the Herb boiled in Wine breaketh the Stone. French and Dogs Mercury are hot and dry in the second degree, and hath a cleansing Faculty; the Juice of it purgeth choler and watery hu∣mors, it is good for waterish Eyes; it cleanseth the Breast and Lungs from Phlegm; the Juice put up the Nostrils, purgeth the Head of Ca∣tarrhs and Rheums, helpeth the Yellows; it helpeth all Running Scabs, Tettars, Ring-wormes, and being applied as a Poultess allayeth all Swel∣lings and Inflammations, and given in Glisters it evacuates from the Belly all offensive humors. The Dogs Mercury, though it is less used, may serve to the same purposes to purge waterish humors. Of all the Mints, Spear-Mint or Heart-Mint is the most wholesom, it hath a heating, binding and drying quality. The Juice taken in Vineger stayeth inward bleeding, dissolveth mpostumes being laid to with Barley Meal, and applied with Salt, helpeth the biting of a mad Dog; it is good in all manner of breakings out of the skin, and is good against Poison. Nep or Cat Mint hath the same faculties with the other. Horse-Mint is hot and dry, it dissolveth Wind in the Stomach, helpeth the Cholick and short-windedness; it is good against the biting of ve∣nomous Beasts; the Farcy taken inwardly, and squirted up the Nostrils▪ purgeth the Head of evil humors. Misletoe, the Leaves and Berries are hot and dry, and of subtil parts, the Bird-lime doth mollisie hard Knobs, Tumors and Impostumes, ripeneth
and discusseth them, and being mixed with equal parts of Rosin and Wax, heals old Ulcers and Sores; Missletoe bruised, and the Juice put into the Eares, healeth the Impostumes in them in a few days. The Missletoe of the Oak being given inwardly, Cures the Falling Sick∣ness, or hung about his Neck. Money-wort, or Herb Two-pence; it is moderately cold, it stays Lasks and bloody Fluxes, Bleedings inwardly or outwardly, and is good for all Wounds inward or outward. Moon-wort is cold and drying more then Adders Tongue, and is good for all manner of Wounds both inward and outward; it stayeth all inward Bleeding, as Veins broken, bloody Fluxes, and the like; it consolidateth all Fractures and Disocations; it is good for Ruptures; it is reported that it will unlock Locks, and unshooe Horses that tread upon it. Tree-Moss is cold and binding, and is the more binding according to the nature of the Tree it grows upon; that of the Oak is the most bind∣ing, and is good to stay Fluxes and inward Bleedings. Moss boiled in Milk, with the powder of Anniseeds, Elecampane and Licoris, is a most excellent Medicine for a Cold or Cough. Mechoachan-Root is hot and dry in the second degree, and purgeth fil∣thy humors; It is very safe, and is good for inveterate Coughs, Cholick, Dolour and the Farcin. Ground-Moss is dry and astringent, without any heat or cold; It break∣eth the Stone, and driveth it forth by Urine, being boiled in white-Wine and given, and being boiled in Water and applied, easeth all Inflammati∣ons and pains coming of a hot cause. Mother-wort is hot and dry in the second degree, by reason of the clean∣sing and binding quality. It is a very great Comforter of the Heart, pro∣voketh Urine, cleanseth the Chest from cold Phlegm, and killeth the Wormes in the Belly; it warmes and dries up the cold humors in the Body, and helps the Cramp and Convulsions of the Sinews. Mouse-ear is hot and dry, of a binding quality; it is good for the Yel∣lows, it is good for the Stone and pains in the Bowels, and is a very good Herb for inward or outward Wounds; it is good for the Dropsey, and stayeth the Fluxes of Blood both outward and inward; the Juice of it is good to stay the spreading of all fretting Cankers and Ulcers whatso∣ever. Mugg-wort is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat bind∣ing, it expels the dead Foal, it breaks the Stone, and is good for stoppage of Urine; the Root made up with Hogs-Grease to an Ointment▪ taketh away Wens and hard Knobs. The Mlbeerry-Tree; the Mulberry is of different parts, the ripe Ber∣ries, by reason of their slippery moisture, doth cleanse and open the Body, the unripe fruit is cold and dry in the second degree; the Bark, but chiefly the Root is hot and dry in the third degree; the unripe fruit being
binding, is good to stop Lasks and bloody Fluxes, the Bark of the Root killeth the broad Wormes in the Belly; the Juice made of the Berries is good for Inflammations and Sores in the Mouth or Throat. Mullein doth dry, the Leaves are of a digesting and cleansing quality, the Root is good against Lasks and Fluxes of the Belly; it is good for Burstness, Cramps and Convulsions, for old Coughs; the Decoction of the Root in red Wine, or in Water wherein Steel hath been quenched, doth stop the bloody Flux; it opens the Obstructions of the Bladder and Reins, the powder of the dried Flowers is good for the pain of the Cho∣lick; the Decoction of the Roots and Leaves are good to dissolve Tu∣mors, Inflammations or Swellings; the Seed bruised in Wine draweth forth thornes and splinters. Common Mustard-seed doth heat and make thin, and is a Loosner of the Belly; it also draweth forth, and is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it cleanseth the Blood, strengthens a weak Stomach, and heats it if cold, and is very good for the Head; it draweth forth splinters and bones out of the Flesh, provokes Urine, resisteth Poison; it is good applied out∣wardly, to fetch out cold or any other pain of the Body or Joynts, and is good for all Scurfs or wilde Scabs. Hedge Mustard is good for Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, and for Coughs, shortness of Breath, Yel ows, and is used commonly in Glisters, the seed is good against poison or venom. Millet is cold in the first degree and dry in the third, and is of a thin substance, the Meal of it mixed with Tar, and applied to the biting of any venomous Beast, is good to take out the venom. The Myrtle Tree consists of contrary substances, a cold Earthliness, it hath a subtil heat and drieth; the Leaves, Fruit and Juice doth bind out∣wardly applied, and inwardly taken stayeth all Issues of Blood. Mstck is good to draw forth splints and nails out of the Flesh, it bind∣eth and strengthneth weak parts, and is good for old or new strains, and inwardly taken strengthens the Stomach, and is good to stop the Distil∣lation upon the Lungs. Mlva is cold and moist, it stoppeth, softneth and mitigateth pain. Malva visus is very dry, it softneth, loosneth and mitigateth. Mace is dry in the third degree, without heat, and only bindeth, it is a comforter of the Heart and Spirits. Mana is of equal temper, hot and dry, it openeth, mollifyeth and in∣carnateth. Mariaton or Martiaton is a hot Unguent against all cold humors; it helpeth the grief of the Sinews, purgeth cold watery matters, and ripen∣eth Tumors. Marrow, of what kinde soever, is cold and moist, and mollifieth Ul∣cers; Now the best Marrow is that of a Hart or old Stag, the next that of a Calf, the next that of a Sheep, and the last that of a Goat.
Myrrhe is a sovereign Gum, it is hot and dry in the second degree, it conglutinateth, bindeth and cleanseth Wounds; it is good against all colds, it killeth Wormes, and helpeth Pursiness, for though it doth cleanse much, yet it doth not exasperate the Arteries, also it doth incarnate; it helps all diseases of the Lungs, the cholick, stops Fluxes. Morcosita or Marcasita is hot and dry, it comforteth, bindeth and melteth humors. The fruit of the Myrtle-tree is dry in the third degree, it doth bind good, and loosen evil humors. N. Narlwort or VVhitlow-grass is good for Imposthumes in the Joynts. Neepe or Cat-mint, is good for the Head ach, coming of cold causes, all Catarrhs, Rheumes; It is good for windiness of the Stomach and Belly, Colds, Coughs and shortness of Breath; the Juice given inwardly is good for Bruises, the Decoction of it is good to bathe Scabs with. Nettles are of temperature dry, a little hot scarce in the first degree, they are of thin and subtil parts; the eed provoketh Urine, and expel∣leth Grael and Stone out of the Reins and Bladder; It is good against the biting of venomous Beasts, biting of mad Dogs; the Juice of them is good to cleanfe Sores, Fistulaes and Wounds; and such as are freting, corroding and eating Scabs and Manginess; it is good for to strengthen those Places that are out of Joynt, and is good for Aches and Defluctions of humours upon the Sinews. The seed of them is a most excellent thing to fatten a Horse, being strowed amongst his Provender. Common Night-shade is wholly used to cool hot Inflammations, either inwardly or outwardly, and is no way dangerous to use as the other Night-shades are. It is good to wash a sore Mouth with, as also all cor∣roding and fretting Ulcers and Fistulaes; A Cloth wet in the Juice, and applied to any swelling taketh it away; have a care you take not the deadly Night-shade for this; if you know it not, you may let them both alone. The Roots of Narcissus or Daffadill are hot and dry in the second de∣gree, and are of such wonderful oualities in drying, that they glew to∣gether great Wounds, either in the Flesh, Veins, Sinews or Tendous; They have also a certain cleansing and attractive Faculty; It taketh a∣way the aches and pains in the Joynts, and stamped with Hogs-Grease and Leaven, bringeth to maturation hard Impostumes, and stamped with Darnel-meal and Honey, draweth forth thornes and scabs out of any part of the body; the Juice of the Root drunk is good for the Cough and Cholick. Neesing-root or Neesing-wort is hot and dry in the third degree, and hath been taken for a wilde kind of Pellitory of the Wall. Navel-wort or Penny-wort of the Wall is of a moist substance, somewhat
cold, and of a certain obscure, binding quality. It cooleth, repelleth and driveth back, scoureth, consumeth and wasteth away. Nutmeg is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent; it breaketh Wind, and is good for all cold Diseases of the Body. Nutshells burnt are hot and dry, and do skin and stop the Flux of Matter. Nasturiu is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it burneth, draweth, melteth and killeth Wormes. Nitrum is of the same Nature as Salt-Peter is, and it mundifieth ex∣ceedingly. O. The Leaves and Bark of the Oak and Acorn-Cups do bind and dry in the third degree, being somewhat cold withal; the powder of the Bark or Cups stayeth all manner of Fluxes and Lasks, and stayeth the Mattering of the Yard; the Acorns procure Urine, expel Poison; the distilled wa∣ter of the Oaken Buds are good taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, to asswage Inflammations, and stop all manner of Fluxes. It is good in Pestilent and hot Feavers; it cooleth the heat of the Liver, breaketh the Stone of the Kidney, the Water found in old hollow Oaks, is good to anoint oul Scabs. Oats are naturally dry, they do dry, bind, cleanse and comfort all the inward parts, and is the only Simple that agrees with the Composition of a Horses Body, and therefore the Oyl of them is the only absolute and perfect Medicine that can be Administred for any inward Sickness; You are taught how to make it in my first Part. Oaken Apples are hot and piercing, and much of the Nature of Galls. One berry-Herb, True-love, or Herb-Paris is very cold, whereby it re∣presseth the rage and force of poison, both the Berries and powder of the Herb. One-blade, half a dram of the Powder of the Roots is a Sovereign Re∣medy against the Plague, and is a very good Wound-herb. Orhis, which is called Dogs-Stones, they are hot and moist of operation, and provoke lust very much, and kill Wormes. Onions are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and do attenuate and make thin, they help the biting of a mad Dog and other venomous creatures; used with Honey and Rue, they kill Wormes; the Juice of them is good for Burnings and Scldings. Orpins are cold and dry, and of subtil parts▪ and is seldom used inward∣ly, but is used outwardly to cool all hear or inflammations upon any hurt or wound, and is good for Scaldings and Burnings, the Juice of it and Sallet-Oyl being beaten together and anoied therewith; And the Juice of it mixed with Honey, and given down his Throat; you shall find it a better and sooner Cur then a Dogs-turd.
Orpiment is a kind of Metal, of which the Artificial is called Arsnick, is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, it Bindeth, Corrodeth, Burneth and Fretteth, and is a Corrosive. Opium is cold and dry in the fourth degree, and is a Liquor made with Poppy, dried and mixed with Saffron, and doth astonish and provoke Sleep. Olbanum is hot and dry in the second degree, and warmeth, bindeth, closeth and incarnateth Wounds. Oyl of Olives or Sllet-Oyl, is of a very temperate Nature, and chan∣geth its quality according to the Nature of the Simples mixed with it, it is a Cleaner of the Body by a gentle way of Purging from Molten-Grease, and expelleth Poison. Opoponax is a Gum that is hot in the third, and dry in the second de∣gree; It purgeth thick Phlegm from the remote parts of the Body, viz. Brain, Joynts, Feet, Nerves and Breast, and strengthens all those parts if they be weak; It helps also old rotten Coughs, Gouts, swellings of the Spleen, Strangury, difficulty of Pissing; You may give six drams of it Corrected with Mastick, and dissolved in Vineger. P. Parsley is hot and dry, but the Seed is more hot and dry, which is hot in the second degree and dry almost in the third, the Root is of moderate heat, it provoketh Urine, and breaketh Wind in the Stomach and Bowels, and Loosneth the Body by opening the Obstructions of the Liver, it break∣eth the Stone, expelleth Poison, and is good for the Yellows. Parsley-Pirt or Parsley Break stne, is hot and dry, and of a cutting quality, it provokes Urine, and break▪ the Stone, and helps the Stran∣gury. Parsnip-oots are moderately hot, and more dry then moist, it procures Lust though windy, provoketh Urine; but the wilde Parsnip hath a more cutting, attenuating, cleansing and opening quality, and is of more use in Physick; it helpeth the biting of venomous Creatures, or dissolveth Wind in the Stomach and Bowels, the Seed is of more use then the Root, the Countrey-People call them Madneps. Cow-Parsnips, the Seed of them are of a cutting quality, and is good for a Cough, short Windedness, Falling Sickness, Yellows, the Root scraped upon a Fistula, taketh away the hard skin growing thereon, the Seed given cleanseth the Belly from tough Phlegm. Pellitory of Spain is very hot and burning, and is the best Purger of the Head that is from pains, the Powder of it being blown up his Nostrils. Pellitory of the Wall cleanseth and bindeth, it is good for an old and dry Cough, short Windedness, Stone, Gravel, Wormes, and is put into Glisters to mitigate the pains coming by Wind; it is good for the Ob∣structions
of the Liver and Spleen, it is good for a sore Throat, it asswa∣geth hot Swellings, Impostumes, Burnings and Scaldings by Fire or Wa∣ter, or all other hot Tumors or Inflammations, it cleanseth foul rotten Ulcers and Scabs. Penny-royal, both the sorts of it are of a drying Faculty and of subtil Parts, it maketh thin tough Phlegm, and warmeth any cold place where it is applied, it expelleth the dead Foal and Secundine; it helpeth the biting of venomous Creatures, it cleanseth soul Ulcers, it is good for Cramps, Convulsions of the Sinews, the Cough, Dropsey and Yel∣lows. Pony Male and Female doth gently bind with a kind of sweetness, it is a little hot, but it is dry and of subtil parts, it is good for the Falling-Sickness, the Root being hung about the Neck, and some of the Juice of it given inwardly, and is good for the Night-Mare. Pepper-wort or Dittander is good for old pains and griefs in Joynts; and for Scabs. Perwincle is hot in the second degree, and somewhat dry and binding, it is good to stop Fluxes of Blood, and all manner of Bleeding inwardly and outwardly. St. Peters-wort is of temperature hot and dry, and is of the same Na∣ture as St. Johns-wort, but somewhat weaker, it purgeth Cholerick Hu∣mours▪ helpeth old Pains and Griefs, and Burnings by Fire. Pimpernel, both the sorts of them are of a drying Faculty without bi∣ting, and somewhat of adrawing Faculty, in so much that it will draw forth splints out of the Flesh, and purgeth the Head put into the No∣strils, they are a great Cleanser of Ulcers, and a Sodderer up of Wounds, it is good for the Plague, and all Venom taken by Venomous Beasts, and Mad Dogs, it opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, provoketh Urine, expelleth the Stone and Gravel, the Juice of it cleareth the Sight. Ground-Pine or Champitys is good for the Strangury, and all Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, and gently openeth the Body, casteth out the dead Foal; It is good for all Pains in the Joynts, Dropsey, Yellows, Poi∣son, Falling Sickness, to cleanse foul Ulcers, and to sodder up the Lips of green Wounds. Water Plantine is cold and dry of Temperature, is good against Burn∣ings or Scauldings, and is good to stay Fluxes of Blood. Rib-wort Plantine is cold and dry in the second degree as are the other Plantines, the Vertues are referred to the kinds of Plantine. Land Plantine is of a mixt Temperature, for it hath in it a certain wa∣terish colour, with a little harshness and coldness, and is therefore cold and dry in the second degree, the Juice of it is good for all pains in the Bowels, and stayeth the Distillation, Rheum in the Head, and is good for all manner of Fluxes of Blood, inwardly taken or outwardly applied,
it is good for shortness of Breath, and Consumption of the Lungs; the Seed is good for the Dropsey, Falling Sickness, Yellows, Stoppings of the Liver, the distilled water of it is good to cool the hot Inflammation of the Eyes, and taketh away the Pin and Web; It is good for all manner of Burnings and Scauldings, is good for ore Mouths, and is good for all Ul∣cers and Cankders; it is good for all manner of Scabs, Tettars and run∣ning Sores, and is a very good Wound-Herb, either inwardly taken or outwardly applied. Polipody of the Oak, Polipody of Fern, Indian Polipody, are dry with∣out biting, it purgeth Choler and Phlegm, and is good for the Cholick, it is good against a Cough, shortness of Breath, and distillations of thin Rheums upon the Lungs. Poppies of all sorts are cold, it is a great causer of Sleep, it stayeth the Flux of the Belly, the Leaves or Heads made with a little Vineger and brought to a Poultess with Barley-meal and Hogs-grease, cooleth Inflam∣mations and St. Anthonies Fire. Prim or Privet, the Leaves and Roots of it are binding, and is good to wash sore Mouths, to cool Inflammations, and to dry up Fluxes, and is good for Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, and all Swellings and Im∣postumes, and is good against all Fluxes of the Belly and Stomach, and bloody Flux. Pepper is hot in the third degree. All the sorts of them heateth, pro∣voketh Urine, digesteth, draweth, disperseth and cleanseth the dimness of the Sight, and is good to be put into Medicaments for the Eyes; It is an Expeller of Poison, and is good for all diseases of the Breast and Lungs, helps Wind, is good for the Cholick. Pitch is drawn from the Pine-tree, by the force of Fire, and is the last Running, and Tarr is the first, which is the thinner; it is hot and dry, and Tarr more hot, and stone Pitch more drying, it conglutiuateth and gathereth together. Petrolium is a certain Oyl made of Salt Peter and Bitumen, and is hot and dry in the second degree, healeth Wounds, and comforteth weak Members. Philonium, of which there are two kinds, Philonium Romanum, and Phi∣lonium Persicum, and are excellent Positions, and most comfortable in the loss of Blood. Pomegranat is cold and dry, provoketh Urine, and is good for the Stomach; the Rind, Seed or Flowers of them beaten to powder and given, stop the Lask and all Issues of Blood. Pomecitron, the Rind of it is good against all Poisons. Q. Queen of the Medows, Medow-sweet, or Mead-sweet, is cold, dry and binding, and is good for all manner of inward or outward Bleedings;
It helps the Cholick, stayeth the Flux of the Belly, healeth old Ulcers, Cankers and Fistulaes; the distilled water of it is good for the Inflam∣mation of the Eyes. R. Radish, Horse-Radish and Garden-Radish, are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second; they drive forth the Gravel and Stone out of the Bladder by Urine. Horse-Radish is hot and dry in the third degree, and hath a drying and cleansing quality; It killeth Wormes, and being bruised and laid to old Griefs taketh them away, and is a Provoker of Urine, and likewise good for the Dropsey. Rag-wort is called St. James-wort or Stagger-wort, is hot and dry in the second degree; It cleanseth, disgesteth and discusseth; The Juice of it is good for Ulcers in the Mouth or Throat▪ for hard Swellings, Impost∣humations and Quinsey; it is good to stay Catarrhs, thin Rheums and Distillations from the Head into the Eyes, Nose or Lungs; the Juice is good to heal all green Wounds, and to cleanse and heal all filthy Ulcers in any part of the Body; it is good for all Pains and Aches in any part of the Body likewise. Rattle-Grass, there is two sorts of it, the red and they yellow; the Red is good to heal up Fistulaes and hollow Ulcers, and stay the Flux of Hu∣mors to them, and other Fluxes of Blood, being boiled in red Wine and given. The yellow Rattle-grass is good for a Cough, and dimness of Sight, the Seed being put therein. Rest-harrow or Cammoack, is hot in the third degree, it cutteth and maketh thin; it provoketh Urine and driveth forth the Stone, which the Bark of the Root doth very powerfully. It is good to open the Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen, and is good for a Rupture. The wilde Rochet is hot and dry in the third degree; it provoketh U∣rine exceedingly, expelleth Poison, killeth Wormes and other noisom creatures that breed in the Body. Wintr-Rochet or Cresses, is hot and dry in the second degree, the Seed of them provoketh Urine, helpeth the Strangury, and expels Gravel and the Stone. It is a good Wound-herb inwardly given, or outwardly ap∣plied: It cleanseth▪ and healeth foul Ulcers and Sores by the drying qua∣lity they have. Roses of all sorts, the leaves and the flowers of them consist of divers parts, as binding, yet moist and watery, they come very near to a mean temperature; the white and the red are very binding, and those that are not full blown, do cool and bind more then those that are blown; they being dried and baten to Powder, stayeth the Lask and Pissing of Blood, the Red strengthens the Heart and Stomach, asswage inflammations, the
Mattering of the Yard and Fluxes of the Belly, the Beards of them are binding and cooling. Rosa Slis or Sun-dew, the water of it distilled helps a salt Rheum distil∣ling from the Lungs, Wheesing, shortness of Breath, the Cough, and to heal Ulcers in the Lungs, comforteth the Heart. Rosemary is hot and dry in the second degree, and of a binding quality, and is good against all Fluxe, of Blood, and cold diseases of the Head and Stomach; It is good for the Lethargy and Falling Sickness; It opens the Obstructions of the Liver, and is good for Windedness of the Belly; It is good for dim Eyes, Yellows, Cough, Consumption. Rubarb the best, which is the Indian, hath two contrary Natures, for if you either cut, scrape or grate it, then it is a Loosner, for it dissolveth and openeth the Liver, and expelleth the Obstructions thereof; It ex∣pulseth all bad humors in and about the Heart, Liver and Spleen; It cleanseth the Body, and sendeth away the peccant humors among the Ex∣crements, and all such things as may annoy or offend the Entrails. But if you shall pound and beat it in a Mortar, or otherwise, the Spirit there∣of being a subtil Body, will Transe and flie away, whereby the Operati∣on thereof will be to bind, and no way profitable. Garden Patience or Monk Rhubarb, is a kind of dock bearing the Name of Rhubarb, for the purging quality therein; It purgeth Choler and Phlegm, the Seed binds the Belly and stayeth any Lask or bloody Flux, the distilled water of it is good to eanse and heal soul Ulcers, and to allay the nflammation of them. Bastard Rhubarb hath all the Properties of the Monks Rhubarb, but more effectually for inward and outward Diseases; It Cureth the Yel∣lows, the Seed boiled in Wine helpeth the Farcin, the Stone, provoketh Urine, helpeth the dimness of the Sight; It is a Cleanser and Cooler of the Blood. The Properties of the English Rhubarb is the same with the other, but much more effectual, and hath all the Properties of the Indian Rhubarb, except the force of Purging, wherein it hath but half the strength; it pur∣geth the Body from choler and phlegm; it cleanseth the Stomach, Liver and Blood, opening Obstructions, Curing the Yellows, Dropsey, clean∣seth the Reins, being taken with Venice Turpentine. Medow Rue bruised is good for old Sores; It is a Loosner of the Body; It is good for the Yellows and Plague. Garden Rue is hot and dry in the latter end of the third degree, and the Wilde in the ourth; it is of thin parts, it consumeth Wind, and disgesteth gross and tough Hamors, provoketh Urine, is good against Poison, the Plague, the pains and gripings of the Belly. It is good for the Cough, Wind-cholick, Wormes, Dropsey, stops Bleeding; It is good for the Far∣cin, Scabs, Tettars and Ring-wormes. Rupture-wort is dry, closeth up and fastneth; It is good for the Rup∣tures,
Fluxes, Mattering of the yard, Strangury, stopping of Urine, Stone and Gravel. It is good for all Griping Pains in the Stomach and Belly, Obstructions of the Liver, Yellows, Wormes, Wounds. It stayeth the defluctions of Rheums from the Head, and drieth up the moisture of Fi∣stulaes and Ulcers. Reeds are hot and dry in the second degree; and are Drawers out of splints and thornes out of the Flesh. Rye is hotter then Wheat, and is more forcible in wasting and consuming away; It ripeneth Imposthumes, Boyles and other Swellings. All the Rozins are hot and dry; the Rozin of the Cedar-tree is the hotter, the Rozin of the Pitch-tree is not so sharp and biting, and there∣fore not so hot; the Rozin of the Firr-tree is in a mean between both; the liquid Rozin of the Pine is moister; The Rozins which are put in Plaisters, which is our common Rozin, stoppeth, softneth, cleaseth, draw∣eth and purgeth wounds; and is good against cold Causes. Risigallo is a Composition of old Sulphur, or Orpiment and unslackt Lime, and is a most strong Corrosive. S. Saffron is binding, it is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree; It strengthens the Heart, is good for the Consumption of the Lungs, and shortness of Breath; it is an excellent thing in Epidemical diseases, as the Plague, and is good for the Yellows. Garden Sage is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, or in the latter end of the second. It is good for the Head and Brain, strength∣ens the Sinews, restoreth Health; It is good for a Cough, biting of Ser∣pents, expelleth Wind, drieth the Dropsey, and is a Cleanser of the Blood. It is good to put into a Water to wash a sore Mouth withal, and is good for old Cankers and Sores. Wood-Sage is hot and dry, yet less then the common Sage, being hot and dry in the second degree. It disgesteth and discusseth Swellings and Knots in the flesh. It is good for Ulcers, Sores, Burstness, green Wounds, and provoketh Urine. Solomons Seal is binding, the Roots of it is good in Wounds and Hurts, to cleanse them, and to dry and restrain Fluxes of Humors and bloody Flux and Lask; It is good for Ruptures and Burstness taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, and is good for inward and outward bruises. Sanicle is bitter, and hath a certain binding quality, so that it clean∣seth and strengthneth, and is hot and dry in the second degree, and in some Authors hot in the third; It is a most excellent VVound-herb, either outwardly applied, or inwardly given, and is good for Ulcers and Impostumes in any part of the Body. It is good to stop a Lask and all Fluxes of Blood, either inwardly or outwardly. It is good for the Ulceration of the Kidneys, and pains of the Bowels and Ruptures. It
is good in binding, restraining, heating, drying and healing, as Comfrey, Bugle, Self-heal, or any other of the Consounds, or Vulnerary Herbs whatsoever. Sarasens Consound or Sarasens Wound-wort, is dry in the third degree, with some manifest heat; It is a good Wound-herb, and is good for the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, Yellows, Dropsey, for all Ulcers of the Reins, or other inward Wounds and Bruises, and for Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, and pains in the Stomach. Sawce alone, vide Jack in the Hedge. VVinter Savory and Summer-Savory is very good for the Cholick, the Summer-kind is the best; it expelleth Wind in the Stomach and Bowels; it provoketh Urine, it cutteth tough Phlegm in the Chest and Lungs; the Juice dropped into the Eyes cleareth the Sight, if it proceed of thin cold humors, distilling from the Brain, and being used in a Poultess is good for old Aches and Pains in the Hips and Joynts coming of cold. Savin is hot and dry in the third degree, of subtil parts; It cleanseth old Ulcers, being dried and mixed with Honey; It is good to break Car∣buncles, Plague-Sores, Farcin, Wormes, Scabs, Itch and Running Sores, Cankers, Tettars, Ring Wormes; it kills the quick Foal, and expels the dead. Common Saxafrage, the Root and seed thereof is of a warm and hot Composition, it cleanseth the Reins and Bladder, and dissolveth the Stone, and expels the Gravel by Urine, helps the Strangury, cleanseth the Stomach and Lungs from phlegm. Brnet Saxafrage, the Seed, Leaves and Roots of the great and small, are hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin and subtil parts, they have the same Properties as Parsley hath in provoking Urine, and easeth the pains of the Cholick, breaks and avoids the Stone by Urine, and is good against Venom, and is good for Cramps and Convulsions, the Juice of it dipped into Wounds drieth up the moisture of them. Scabius. three sorts there are of it, though there be many others, yet these be most Familiar, and the Vertues of these and the rest are much a∣like, it is hot and dry in the latter end of the second degree, or near hand in the third, and of thin and subtil parts. It is good for Coughs, short Windedness, and all other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, ripening and digesting cold phlegm, and other tough Humors, it ripeneth also all in∣ward Ulcers and Impostumes, it is good for running and spreading Scabs, Tetters and Ring-wormes. English Survey-Grass is evidently hot and dry, very like in taste and quality to the Garden-Cresses, it openeth and cleanseth the Blood, the Liver and Spleen; it openeth Obstructions, and Evacuateth cold, clammy and Phlegmatick Humors both from the Liver and Spleen, the Juice of it is good for soul Sores in the Mouth. Self-eal is of the temperature of Bugle, moderately hot, dry and some∣thing
binding; It is a most excellent Herb for inward and outward Wounds or Bruises in any part of the Body, it stayeth the Flux of Blood in any Wound, and cleanseth soul Ulcers and Sores. The Service-Tree, the Berries are cold and binding, it is good to stay bleedings of Wounds, Lasks and Fluxes of Blood. Shepherds Parse is cold, dry and very much binding, it help all Fluxes of Blood, either caused by inward or outward Wounds, and also Flux of the Belly, and bloody Flux, or Pissing of Blood, is good for the Yellows, and being made into a Poultess helps Inflammations, and St. Anthonies Fire, an Ointment being made thereof is good for all Wounds in the Head. Smallege is hotter, drier, and much more Medicinable then Parsley, it openeth the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cleanseth the Blood, provokes Urine, helps the Yellows, Agues, the Juice is good for sore Mouths and Throats, cleanseth all the foul Ulcers and Cankders, being washed therewith; The Seed is good to expel Wind, kill Wormes, the Roots are effectual to all the Purposes aforesaid, and is stronger then the Herb. Sope-wort or Bruise-wort is hot and dry, and a little Scouring; the Juice is good to heal up green Wounds; it provokes Urine, expels the Gravel and Stone, and is good for the Dropsey. The Sorrels are moderately cold, dry and binding; the common Sor∣rel is good to cool hot Diseases, Inflammations or heat of Blood, for it puriieth it, it killeth VVormes, and is a Cordial to the Heart, which the Seed doth more effectually, being more drying and binding, and therefore stayeth the humors of the bloody Flux, and Flux of the Stomach; It is good to resist Poison, expelleth the Gravel and Stone, helpeth the Yel∣lows. The Juice of it with Vineger killeth the Itch, Scabs, Tettars, Ring▪wormes and the like. VVood-Sorrel is cold and dry, like Sorrel, and serves for all the Pur∣poses that the other Sorrels do, and is more effectual in hindring the Pu∣tresaction of Blood, and Ulcers in the Mouth and Body, and cooleth Heats▪ Inflammations and Pestilential Feavers, or other contagious Sick∣ness. Sow-Thistles are of a mixt temperature, for they consist of a waterish substance, cold and binding; the Milk of them is good for short winded∣ness, and causeth the Stone and Gravel to be avoided by Urine; it helpeth the Strangury, it causeth Milk in Cattel. Southern-VVood is hot and dry in the third degree; the Seed is an An∣tidote against all deadly Poison, and is good to kill VVormes; it is good to draw forth thornes out of the Flesh; the Ashes of it drieth up old Ul∣cers that are without Inflammation. Spignel provokes Urine, helpeth the Strangury, and all Joynt Aches, the powder of the Root with Honey breaketh tough Phlegm, and drieth
up the phlegm that fasteneth upon the Lungs; the Roots are good against the biting and stinging of venomous Beasts. Spleen-worts are of thin parts, and are in a mean temper; it is good for the Spleen, helpeth the Strangury, wasteth the Stone in the Bladder, and is good for the Yellows. Straw-berry leaves do cool and dry with a binding quality, they are good for all hot inflammations and swellings, applied outwardly, and being inwardly given, after they have been boiled in Vineger, doth cool the Liver and Blood, and asswage all inflammations in the Reins, pro∣voketh Urine, and allayeth the heat and sharpness thereof, stayeth the bloody Flux. The Juice of the leaves are good to make a Lotion for a sore Mouth or Ulcerstherein. Succory and Endive are cold and dry in the second degree, and withal somewhat binding, they cleanse phlegmatick and waterish humors out of the Stomach, opens the Obstructions of the Liver, Gall and Spleen, is good for the Yellows, heat of the Reins, Urine and Dropsey; the water or the Juice of the bruised leaves applied outwardly, allay swellings, in∣flammations and St. Anthonies Fire, and to wash Pestilential sores. Wilde Succory agrees in nature and temperature with the Garden Suc∣cory, and as it is more bitter, so it doth more strengthen the Stomach and Liver. Stone-crop, Prick Madum▪ or small Housleek, grows upon the ground with divers branches, with thick and whitish green leaves; it is cold in quality, and somewhat binding, and therefore very good to stay deflucti∣ons that flow from the Eyes; it stops Bleeding both inward and outward, helps Cankers and all fretting Sores and Ulcers; it abates the heat of Choler, expels Poison, resisteth Pestilent Feavers, and is good for Agues, you may take it inwardly for all these Diseases. It is good likewise for the Farcin. Snap-Dragon, all the sorts of them are hot and dry, and of subtil parts. Star-wort is of a mean temperature in cooling and drying; it is good for the falling of the Gut by the Inflammation of the Fundament, and is good for the Falling Sickness. White Sattin Flower, the seed of it is hot, dry and sharp of Taste, the seed of it is good for the Falling Sickness; There may be made of it an excellent Ointment of the leaves of it, and Sanicle stamped together, ad∣ding thereunto Oyl and Wax. Sea Star-wort is hot and dry in the third degree; the roots of it given in white-Wine, driveth forth by Urine watery and gross humors, and therefore it is good for the Dropsey and Poison, and is good for all in∣ward and outward Wounds. Saves-Acre, the seed of it is extreme hot, almost in the fourth degree, being beaten to Powder, and mixed with Oyl or Lard, kills Lice, Itch
or Mange in Man or Beast. It is dangerous to give it inwardly. Sncese-wort, all the kinds of them are hot and dry in the third degree. Star of Bethlehem, the kinds of them are temperate in heat and driness, the Roots of them roasted and applied with Honey in the manner of a Poultiss, healeth old eating Ulcers, and softneth and discusseth hard Tu∣mors. Spinach is cold and moist almost in the second degree, but rather moist, it Loosneth the Belly, but maketh it windy. Set-well, vide Valerian. Sene is of a mean Temperature, neither hot nor cold, yet inclining to heat, and dry almost in the third degree; It is of a purging faculty, and that in such sort that it is not troublesom, having withal a certain binding quality, which it leaveth after the Purging. All Spurges are hot and dry almost in the fourth degree, of a sharp and biting quality, fretting and consuming; the Milk and Sap is in more special use then the fruit and leaves, the Root is of least strength, the strongest is that of the Sea. Scammony, the Juice doth mightily purge, and is the strongest Purger whatsoever, and is very hurtful to the Stomach, if you mix it not with Alles, or some other things, to correct the evil qualities of it. The Sycamore-tree, the fruit of it is somewhat sweet of taste, and is of temperature moist after a sort, and cold, as be the Mulberries. The Li∣quor that issueth out of the Bark of this Tree, in the beginning of the Spring, before the Fruit appeareth, taken up with a Spoon or Spunge, and dried or made up into a Cake, and kept in a Gally-pot, mollifieth and closeth Wounds together, and dissolveth gross humors, and is good in∣wardly given, or applied outwardly against the biting of Serpents; it doth soon putrifie. Storax or Stirax is a sweet Gum, which is of a heating, mollifying and concocting quality; It is an excellent Perfume for the Head, and draw∣eth many evil humors from thence, as Colds and other Sicknesses in the Head. Sanguis Draconis is supposed to come from the Dragon-tree, it hath an Astringent faculty, and is good to stay Fluxes of Blood. Sloes, vide black Thorn. Scallions are hot and dry in the second degree, they are good for Scabs, and for the Lungs. Sarsafras or Ague-Tree, the boughs and branches thereof are hot and dry in the second degree; the Rind is hotter, the Root is the best part of it, it procureth the same effects as Cinnamon doth. Sanders white, red and yellow, are all cold and dry in the second r third degree; They are of an Astringent and strengthning uality. They drive back Humors, and stop Defluctions from any part,
helps Inflammations, and cools the Heat of Feavers. The yellow is ac∣counted the best. Snals with shells are of the same Nature as Snails without Shells are. Snails without shells do conglutinate very much, and is good to put in Medicines for Ruptures; the distilled water of them is good for a Con∣sumption. Sandevoir is most excellent for dim or Rheumatick Eyes, being laid a∣steep in Running Water. Soap is hot, it draweth orth Splinters and Nails; it mollisieth, drieth, cleanseth and purgeth. Salnitre, some use for this Salt Peter, it is hot and dry, and evaporateth; it comforteth Sinews, and taketh away tiredness and weariness. Salgemma is a kind of Salt which is hot and dry, it cleanseth and bindeth. Sallows or VVillows bindeth and drieth vehemently. Sal is hot and dry in the second degree, cleanseth and killeth Wormes. Sagina, or Saggina, or Sorge, of some called Pannicum Indicum, is only hot and dry. Slmoniack is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and cleanseth. Sarcocolla is a Gum of the kind of Euphorbium, and is hot and dry in the second degree; it cleanseth, incarnateth and comforteth wounds. Sevadalce is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree, it cleanseth and openeth. Serapino is a Gum of Ferula, it is hot in the third, and dry in the second degree; it mollifieth, loosneth and is good for Colds. T. Tarre is drawn out of the Pine-tree, and is the first Running, Pitch is the second, it is hot and dry in the second degree; it is good against Colds or evil Humors gathered together in the Breast, and draweth Wounds. It is outwardly applied with other Ingredients to the Scratches, and is good to anoint a Horses Nose with, to keep the Infection of the Plague from him. English Tobaccho killeth Wormes, a little of it chopped small or beaten to Powder, after it is very dry, and put amongst other Medicines. It is good for the Stone in the Kidneys to help the Pain, and to expel the Gra∣vel; It is good boiled, in Chamberly with Brimstone, Allom and green Copperas, to kill the Mange or all manner of Scabs; the Oyl of it is good for all manner of Aches, Cramps and Convulsions; a Pipe filled with it, and put into a Horses Fundament, which the wind of his Body will draw it out, is a very good Glister for all manner of Wormes there, and to cleanse his Body. Taminds are cold in the third degree, and dry in the second; they are very temperate, and gently purge adust Humors.
The Tamarisk▪Tree hath a cleansing and cutting Faculty, with a ma∣nifest driness; it is somewhat binding, it is good for inward Bleedings, Cholick, Yellows, biting of venomous Beasts, the decoction of it with some Honey is good to stay Gangrenes, and fretting Sores and Ulcers, and to kill Nits and Lice being washed therewith, the Wood or Bark is good for all the Purposes aforesaid, as well as the Branches; it is good given to a Horse to kill the Farcin. Garden Tansie that smells sweet, is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third▪ and that without smell is hot and dry, and of a mean Tempe∣rature, it is good to consume Phlegmatick Humors, the decoction of the Common Tansie opens all Stoppings, is good for the Strangury, it expels Wind, the Seed is good for the Wormes, being boiled with Oyl is good for shrunk Sinews and Cramps. Wilde Tansie is cold and dry almost in the third degree, having a bind∣ing quality; It stayeth the Lask and all Fluxes whatsoever; it is good for Burstness, and is good for all Joynt-Aches or Pains; it is good for in∣ward or outward Wounds, and to heal Running Sores, it cooleth the hot Fits of the Ague be it never so violent, the distilled water of it dropped into the Eyes, or a Cloth wet therein, taketh away the heat and inflam∣mation of them. Of Thistles in general, all of them provoke Urine, the Juice of them will cause Hair to grow where it is fallen off. Treacle Mustard and Methridate Mustard both purge the Body upwards and downwards, it breaks inward Imposthumes; It is a very good An∣tidote against Poison, Venom and Putrefaction; it is also available in many Cases, the Common Mustard is used, but somewhat weaker. The Black-thorn or Slo-Bush, all the parts of it is cooling, and binding, and drying, and good to stay Bleeding at the Mouth and Nose, stop the Lask of the Belly or Stomach, bloody Flux, and to ease the pains of the Bowels and Guts, that come by overmuch Scourings, the Leaves are good to put into Lotions, to wash a sore Mouth or Throat with, wherein are Sores or Kernels, and to stay the defluctions of Rheums to the Eyes or o∣ther parts, and to cool the heat of them. Thorough-wax or Thorough-leaf is of a dry Complexion, and is good for all sorts of Bruises and Wounds inward and outward, and old Ulcers and Sores likewise; the decoction of the Herb or the Powder of it taken inwardly, and the leaves bruised and applied outwardly, is good to Cure Ruptures and Burstings. Thyme is hot and dry in the third degree, it is a great Strengthner of the Lungs, it purgeth the Body of Phlegm, and is good for short-winded∣ness, an Ointment made with it is good for hot swellings, it comforteth the Stomach, and expels Wind. VVilde Thime or Mother of Thime, is of Temperature hot and dry in the third degree, it is of thin and subtil parts, cutting and much biting,
provokes Urine, easeth the Griping pains in the Belly coming by Wind; it is good for Cramps, Ruptures and Inflammations of the Liver, it is good for the Lethargy, Pissing of Blood, Coughing, strengthens the Sto∣mach, expels Wind, and breaks the Stone. Turmentil or Serfoyl is binding, and therefore good to stay all Fluxes of Blood or Humors, whether at the Nose or Mouth, or any Wound in the Veins or elsewhere; It resisteth Poison, Plague, Pestilential Feavers, and contagious diseases, and expelleth the Venom from the Heart by Sweating, there is not found any Root more effectual to help any Flux of the Belly, Stomach, Spleen or Blood, then this taken inwardly or applied outwardly; it opens the Obstructions of the Liver, helpeth the Yellows, it is good made into a Plaister to strengthen the Reins of the Back; it is good for Ruptures and Bruises by Falls taken inwardly or applied out∣wardly; and 'tis a most excellent Wound-herb applied outwardly to rotten Sores and Ulcers any where of the Body, or for any inward Wound, it dissolves hard knots and kernels any where about the Body. Turnsole or Heliotropium purgeth Choler and Phlegm boiled with wa∣ter and given, and being boiled with Cummin helpeth the Stone of the Reins or Bladder, provoketh Urine, the Herb bruised and laid to any old Pain in the Joynts taketh it away, the Juice of it is good to take away Wenns, and to dissolve hard kernels or knobs in the Flesh. Medow Trefoyl or Honey-suckles is cold and dry, and are good to put into Glisters, it is good in a Poultess for Inflammations and Swellings, the Juice dropped into the Eye taketh away the Pin and Web, and taketh a∣way the Blood-shotten of them▪ Hart-trefoyl is a great Strengthner of the Heart, fortifieth it against Poi∣son and Pestilence, and defending it from the noisom vapors of the Spleen. Pearl-Trefoyl, it differs not from the Common▪sort, save only it hath a white spot in the Leaf like a Pearl, and is of great Vertue against the Pin and Web in the Eyes. Tubich is a Root that is hot and dry, and purgeth by moderate draw∣ing, (f it be corrected,) gross, viscid and putrid Phlegm from the Brain, Breast, and remote Parts and Junctures. Tutsan or Park-leaves, the faculties are such as St. Peters-wort, which declares it to be hot and dry; it purgeth humors, it is good for burnings by Fire; it is a very good Wound-herb, either inwardly given or out∣wardly applied. Tartar is the Excrement of Wine which sticks to the Vessel, and is hot and dry in the third degree, and only cleanseth. Turpentine is hot in the second and dry in the first, it doth draw, skin, incarnate and conglutinateth things together, and is good for the Mat∣tering of the Yard given inwardly, being made up by Art into Balls, with Flower and bole-Armoniack. Thuris Cortex is dry in the second degree and bindeth.
Trifora Magna is a certain Composition which will provoke Sweat, helpeth Griefs in the Stomach, and taketh away all cold Rhumes. Tutia Preparata is a certain Mineral that is cold in the first, and dry in the second degree, and is very good for sore Eyes. Turmerick is hot in the third degree, and openeth Obstructions, it is good against the Yellows, and all cold Distempers of the Liver and Spleen, and Fattens by a certain hidden quality. Tastil wilde is cold in the third and dry in the first degree, and com∣forteth and bindeth. V. Garden Valerian is hot but not much, provoketh Urine, being dried and given, helpeth the Strangury, it is good for short Windedness, the Roots of it being boiled with Licoris, Raisins and Anniseeds, helpeth to open the Passages▪ and expectorates the Phlegm easily; it is good for the Plague, and those that are bitten and stung by any venomous creature; it expelleth Wind, and being boiled in white-Wine and dropped into the Eyes, taketh away the dimness of Sight, or any Pin and Web; it healeth any inward sores and wounds, and also all outward wounds and hurts, and draweth out splinters and thornes out of the Flesh, the Herb being bruised, and laid to the place grieved. VVilde Valerian some hold, that being dried and beaten to Powder, pur∣geth upwards and downwards. Both the Vervaines are very dry, and do meanly bind and cool; it is an excellent Herb for the Womb, and all the cold Griefs belonging there∣unto, as Plantain doth the hot. It is hot, dry and bitter, opening Ob∣structions, cleansing and healing; It is good for the Yellows, Dropsey, the defects of the Reins and Lungs, and all inward pains and torments of the Body; it is good against the Plague, and the venom of venomous Beasts, against Agues, the Wormes, the diseases of the Liver and Spleen, and all diseases of the Stomach and Lungs, Coughs, shortness of Breath, and to cleanse the Bladder from all evil humors, that engender the Stone, it healeth all Wounds both inward and outward, stayeth Bleeding, and healeth old Ulcers in any part of the Body being used with Honey; It is good for Swellings used with Hogs-grease, the distilled water of the Herb or uice dropped into the Eyes, cleanseth them from Films. The Branches of the Vine and the Leaves do cool and mightily bind, and stayeth Bleeding in any part of the Body, and are good to stop a Lask and bloody Flux, the Leaves are put into Lotions for sore Mouths, and be∣ing put into a Poultess with Barley-Meal, cools nflammations of Wounds. All the Violets are cold and moist while they are fresh and green, and will cool any heat and distemper in the Body, either inwardly given, or outwardly applied, Impostumes▪ also and hot Swellings, they purge the Body of Cholerick Humors, the Powder of the Purple Flower helpeth the Quinsey and Falling Sickness; it is good for the Liver, Yellows and hot Agues.
The sorts of Vipers Grass, are hot and moist as are the Goats-beards, it is very good for the Plague, poison of venomous Creatures, falling Sickness▪ Of Wall or Vipers Buglss, the several sorts of them are cold and dry of Complexion, it is good against the biting of Vipers or any other venomous Beasts, and also against poison or any poisonous Herbs, the Roots comfort the Heart, tempers the Blood, allays the hot Fits of Agues. Vineger, especially if it be of Wine, is cold and piercing, to wit, cold in the first, and dry in the third degree, it cuts Phlegm. Vermilion is a certain Metal drawn from Quick sulphur, and Quick-sil∣ver, it draweth, healeth, incarnateth, bindeth and comforteth Ulcers. Verdegrease is hot and dry in the third degree, and is a Corrasive that eateth away dead and proud Flesh, and is good to be put into Ointments for green Wounds, or for the Scratches. Green and white Vitriol may be taken inwardly, a few drops of it with other things for the Farcin, and outwardly applied to take away Wenns or hard Kernels, or to eat away a Quitter-bone or Splint, or to take off Warts from the hands; if you will stay the eating of it, or that you will have it eat no further then where you lay it, wet all round where you lay it with water, you must take it out of the Glass with a Feather, or a piece of Silk Tied to a stick, for it will eat both Linnen and Woollen. The white is the strongest, but the green is most safe for any use. Vitriola Caleanthum is reckoned amongst Metals, and is a kind of Inkey Earth, it draweth and fretteth. Vitriola Herba is an Herb that groweth on the VVall, and is taken for Pellitory on the Wall. W. Wall▪flower or Winter-Gilliflower, all the kinds of them are of a clean∣sing faculty, and of thin parts. The yellow kind works more powerfully, and are of more use in Physick; it cleanseth the Blood, and freeth the Liver from Obstructions, expelleth the Secundine and dead Foal, stayeth Inflammations and Swellings, comforteth and strengthneth any weak part out of Joynt, cleanseth the Eyes from Films, and cleanseth also filthy Ul∣cers in the Mouth, and is a good Remedy for all Aches and Pains in the Joynts and Sinews, and is good for the Farcin. The VVallnut-Tree, the Bark of it doth bind and dry very much, and the leaves are much of the same▪Temperature, they kill the VVormes in the Belly, with other things put to them; they help the biting of a mad Dog, or the venom or poison of any Creature; the Kernels of them when they are old are very Astringent, and will stop a Lask; the Oyl of the Kernels taken inwardly helpeth the Cholick, and expels VVind; the di∣stilled water of the green husks, before they be ripe, is good to cool the heat of Agues, as also to resist the Infection of the Plague, being applied to the sores; it cooleth also the heat of green VVounds and old Ulcers, being Bathed therewith.
Wold, Weld, or Dyars-weed, is hot and dry of Temperature, also the whole Herb heats and dries in the third degree; it cuts, attenuates, re∣solveth, opens, disgests; it is good taken inwardly, or applied outwardly against the venom of venomous Beasts, as also for the Plague or Pesti∣lence, and is good for green Wounds. Wheat is hot and dry in the first degree; it hath a certain clammy, stopping quality; the Oyl of it pressed out between two thick Plates of Iron, healeth all Tettars and Ring-wormes, used warm. The green Corn chewed and applied to the place bitten by a mad Dog healeth it; Sliced Wheat-bread, soaked in Red Rose-water or Spring-water, and ap∣plied to the Eyes that are hot, red and inflamed, or blood-shotten helpeth them. And hot Bread applied to the Kernels of the Throat, healeth the Kernels thereof; the Flower of it mixed with the Juice of Henbane stay∣eth the Flux of Humors to the Joynts, and being boiled in Vineger help∣eth the shrinking of the Sinews, the Flower of it mixed with the Yolk of an Egg, Honey and Turpentine, doth draw, cleanse and heal any Bile, Plague-sore or foul Ulcer; the Decoction of Wheat-bran is good to Bath those Places that are bursten by a Rupture, and the said Bran boiled in Vineger, helpeth all Swellings and Inflammations, it helpeth the bi∣ting of Vipers and all other venomous Creatures. Wasers put in water and given, stayeth the Lask and bloody Flux. The Willow-tree, the Leaves, Flowers, Seed and Bark, are cold and dry in the second degree, and binding; they are used to stay bleeding of VVounds, and all other Fluxes of Blood; it helpeth to stay all thin, hot and sharp distillations upon the Lungs; the Leaves bruised with some Pepper is good for the VVind-cholick. The water of the VVillow-tree received of a Branch cut, is good for dimness of Sight, for Films, and to stay the Rheumes that fall into them, provokes Urine being stopped; the Flowers of it boiled in white-VVine hath an admirable faculty in drying up of humors. The Bark worketh the same effect. VVoad is dry and without sharpness, the wilde VVoad drieth more, and is more sharp and biting; it is so dry and binding, that it is hardly fit to be Given inwardly; an Ointment made thereof stancheth bleeding, and is good in such Ulcers as are bound with moisture, for it takes away the corroding and fretting humors; it cools Inflammations, quenches St. An∣thonies Fire, and stayeth defluctions of Blood in any part of the Body. VVood-bind or Honey-suckles are cleansing, consuming and disgesting; the Flowers are good for the Lungs, provokes Urine, helps Cramps, Convulsi∣ons, Palseys, and whatsoever Grief comes of Cold or Stopping; the Flowers are more effectual then the Leaves, & the Seed is as effectual as the Leaves. Pond-weed doth bind and cool like as doth Knot-grass, but his Essence is thicker then that; it is good against consuming and eating Ulcers, and all hot Inflammations. VVormwood is hot and dry in the first degree, just as hot as the Blood;
it remedies Choler, provokes Urine, helps Surfeits, Swellings in the Belly, and is the best Herb for the Yellows that is; Take of the Flowers of Wormwood, Rosemary and black Thorn, of each a like quantity, half that quantity of Saffron boiled in Beer or Ale, and this now and then used will keep a Horse in perfect Health; Wormwood is good against Poi∣son, Quinsey, biting and stinging of venomous Creatures, Cholick, Wormes, and to keep Clothes from the Moths; it helps the Spleen, strengthens the Heart, and heats the Stomach. VVillow-Herb, vide Loose-strife. Wallwort, or Danewort, vide Dwarf-Elder. Woodroff is of Temperature like unto our Ladies Bed-straw, but not so strong, being in a mean between heat and driness; it prevaileth in Wounds, as Cruciata and other vulneary Herbs doth. The Leaves and Berries of the Wafering Tree are cold and dry, and of a binding quality; the Decoction of the Leaves is good to Seringe a sore Mouth with, and is good for the Diseases of the Gums, and fastneth loose Teeth. VVormes do conglutinate and comforteth Sinews. VVhite Lead is a great drier and shealer of Scabs, and is good put into Medicines, for Scratches, and for Sellanders and Mallenders. Y. Yarrow, called also Nose-bleed, Milfoyl and Thousand-leaf, it cleanseth and is meanly cold, but it most of all bindeth; An Ointment of it Cu∣reth wounds, and is good for Inflammations; It is good for the bloody Flux. The Ointment is good not only for VVounds, but Ulcers likewise and Fistulaes, especially such as are bound with moisture. The Hair be∣ing washed with the Decoction, stayeth the shedding of it, taken inwardly is good for the Mattering of the Yard, and the Juice of it is most excel∣lent, or the decoction of it injected into the Yard with a Syringe, to stop the extreme flowing of the Seed, although the Issue dorh cause In∣flammation and Swelling of the secret parts, and though the Spermatick Matter do come down in great quantity, as hath been very well proved. VVater Yarrow is of a dry Faculty, by reason it taketh away hot In∣flammations and Swellings. Z. Zuche, which are called Gurds▪ are cold and moist in the second de∣gree, and allayeth all manner of Inflammations, or hot Swellings. Softning or dissolving Herbs are Four, viz. Mallows, Marsh-mallows, black Violet and Bears-breech.
THE EXPERIENCED FARRIER. The Second Part. ☞ Before you Enter upon the Drenching and Physicking of Horses; Take these Directions with you. I. THAT all Diseases are Cured by their Contraries, and all parts of the Body are maintained by their like, viz. If Heat be the Cause of the Distemper, then appropriate those Medicins that are cold to it; If cold, then give hot; If Wind be the cause of Illness, then finde out in your Table of Simples proper Medicines for that Disease, and use them according to Directions. II. Apply not the Medicines to one part of the Body, that are appropri∣ated to another part, viz. If the Brain be over-heated, use not such Me∣dicines as cool the Heart and Liver. III. If you give distilled Waters for the Disease you intend to Cure; Give such Water as is distilled out of the Herb proper for that Disease, and sweeten it with the same quantity of Syrup as you give Water, made also of the same Herb, or some other proper for the Disease. IV. If the Disease of the Body lie remote from the Stomach and Bow∣els, then use Pills or Balls, which is the most proper Physick for the Di∣stemper, because they are longest in digestion, and therefore the most fit to carry off the Disease by degrees. V. Rather be found faulty on the safer side, by giving your Physick too weak then too strong. VI. Consider the natural temper of your Horses Body that is afflicted, and support it in that, or else you weaken and destroy Nature, in stead of Repairing it; as the Heart is hot, the Brain cold, so apply your Simples accordingly. 7. Those Medicines that are hot in the first degree, are just of the heat
and temper of the Blood, and therefore most wholesom and proper for the Body. VIII. All Medicines that are opening and provoke Urine, are best given in white-Wine or Ale, for they are of an opening Nature, and a great Strengthner of the Reins. IX. All Medicines that are given to stop any Loosness or Scouring, let him fast three houres or more before he receive them. X. Let your Medicines be proper to the humor offending▪ or else you will weaken Nature, not the Disease. XI. If the Humor offending be thin, that you intend to remove, then let your Medicine be gentle; but if it be thick and tough, then give him some cutting and opening thing the Night before, to prepare his Body the better for his Purge the next day. XII. Have a care how you use binding Medicines, when you purge tough humors. XIII. If your Horse be bound in his Body, either Rake him with your Hand, (being first anointed with Sallet Oyl, Hogs-Grease or sweet But∣ter, before you pull his baked or hard dung from him) or else give him a Glister before you give him a Purge. XIV. You must consider the strength and stature of your Horse, and accordingly prepare your Medicines, either stronger or weaker. XV. If you give your Horse a Drench for a Cold, you usually give him of these sorts of Powders. viz. Fennegreek, Liquoris, Bay berries, Anni∣seeds, Cummin-seeds, Grains of Paradice, Long Pepper, Elecampane, Turmerick, &c. But be sure you exceed not above three Ounces of them in his Drench at one time. XVI. If you give a Horse a Scouring that is very strong and lusty, you may venture to give him with safety an Ounce or more of the best Bar∣badoes Alloes, (which is the strongest sort of Aloes that is) powdred and made up into Balls with fresh Butter, as you have Directions after∣wards. XVII. If you give Aloes Succotrina, you may give an Ounce and an half of it. (because it is of a weaker Nature than the other) dissolved on the Fire in half a Pint of white-Wine, and brewed afterwards in a quart of strong Beer, with about two Ounces of fresh Butter put into it, which by reason of the Loosning and Opening quality it hath, will cause the Aloes to work so much the sooner and better. This Proportion is to be given only to a large and strong constitutioned Horse, a less quantity will serve a smaller. ☞ An Advertisement about the several sorts of Aloes, and how you may know not only their Goodness, but also distinguish them one from another. There are four several sorts of them, and differ only in Purity, viz. Aloes Caballina, Aloes Hepatica, Aloes Barbadoes, and Aloes Succotrina.
1. Aloes Caballina is a yellowish sort of Aloes, much of the colour of a boiled Liver, and is somewhat dearer, stronger and better then Aloes Hepatica. This is seldom sold by it self, but kept only to mix amongst the black and courser sort of Aloes, to give them a good colour. 2. Ales Hepatica is much of the same kind with the Caballina (for they come over mixt together) but is of a blackish Roziny colour when Re∣fined, which is accounted the best colour. 3. Aloes of Barbadoes is found out but of late years, but is accounted the strongest sort of all the kinds of them; If it be of a duskish sad brown, and hath an Eye of yellow amongst it, you may conclude it to be good; but the most common colour is black like unto Pitch; An Ounce of either of these three is a Purge strong enough for most reasonable Horses. 4. Aloes Succotrina is the weakest, but best of all the kinds of them; If you break it thin, and find it of a clear Roziny colour, and transparent, you may be satisfied 'tis the very best. This is four times dearer then the other sorts, and is also Given to Horses, (but in a larger quantity) by those that value not their Purses. XVIII. If you make your Balls of the Powder of Aloes and Butter, mix it not all at once with the Butter, but work it up in a little at first, and then divide it into three equal parts, and cover every part over with fresh Butter, about the bigness of a small Wash-ball, which will prevent the bitter taste of the Aloes from offending him when you give them, give him a Horn-full of warm Beer after every one of them, not only to prevent sticking, but to clear his Passage, the better for the remaining Balls. But the best Way of making of Balls of Aloes for a Scouring you may find after the best Receipt for the Glanders, within a leaf of the latter end of the Book. XIX. If you put London-Treacle at any time into your Horses Drinks, put not above one Ounce of it at a time where there are other Ingredi∣ents, but if you give it by it self, you may give him two Ounces of it dis∣solved in a pint of Sack, or for want of that a quart of good Ale or Beer. XX. When you physick your Horse at any time, give him his Hay so spa∣ringly over-night, that he may stand two or three houres at the Rack∣staves, and let him fast three or four houres after he hath taken it. XXI. 'Tis good to stir him a little after he hath taken his Drink, which will make his physick work so much the better. XXII. If you are about the Cure of any outward Wound or Sore, the best way to Expedite it, is to keep the place warm▪ which is done by clapping a plaister of Burguna-Ptch over the Medicine, which will be a means to deend the grieved part from the Air or VVind. XXIII. If a Horse hath swolln, or Gourded Legs, and hath been poi∣soned with the Medicines of other Farriers, and is fallen into your hands for Cure; then be sure before you undertake to meddle with him, to
wash his Legs very well with warm▪ Whey, (or for want of that, Milk, but Whey is best) for this will clear off the venom and poison of their Medicines, and make the Cure more facile and easie to be effected. ☞ Directions how to Order a sick Horse. Whensoever you find your Horse sick at any time, either of Feaver, Farcy, Molten-grease, Cold, or any other Distempers, &c. and that you have given him something in Order to his Cure, and yet you find his Sto∣mach so bad, that he falls from his Meat, then to recover it again, and to strengthen and keep up his weak and feeble spirits give him first, (to bring him to a Stomach) half a Pint of white-Wine, Vineger or Verjuice luke∣warm, sweetned with two or three spoonfuls of Honey, well dissolved in it over the Fire. And about three or four houres after it, give him the common Cordial for Horses, which is made of a quart or three Pints of strong Beer, with a good big Toast of Houshold Wheat-bread crumbed into it gross and well boied. Before you give it him, while it is cooling, put into it two or three spoonfuls of Honey, and about two Ounces of fresh or salt Butter, and let him have it luke-warm; Give him at Night a Mash of Malt, or Oats, that are boiled till they are bursten. After he hath eaten them, let him feed upon Hay for about an hour or more, then give him warm-VVater to drink, with a handful or two of VVheat-Bran stirred amongst it; The next morning give him his Cordial again, and at Nine or Ten of the Clock warm-VVater and Bran, and boiled Oats, and now and then a Cordial of white-VVine and Honey, and moderate Exercise once or twice a day, (if he be not too weak to walk.) This is the only Method that I know of that you can use for the Recovery of a sick and weak Horse, and for to Remedy his Costiveness which does usu∣ally attend Sicknesses. 2. The longer he Fasts after you have given him his Drink, (condi∣tionally he be in good heart and strength) the better effect it will have in working upon the Disease for which it was given. For three or four houres is time long enough to fast, but if he be a sick, feeble and weak Horse, then two houres is enough. 3. After he hath Fasted according to his strength, give him some com∣fortable thing to Recruit his Spirits; a a▪ Mash of Malt, boiled Oats, saled Bran, &c. which will be a means to put Heart and strength into him again, which his Drench and Fasting may in some measure have weaked. 4 If you use your Horse to scalded Bran, Mashes of Malt, or boiled Oats, and have boiled Fennegreek amongst them▪ or given him it at any time amongst his Provender, he will be the more ready and willing to take his Oats thus prepared, (which is very good after any Drench you have given him.) viz. To boyl a quarter of a pound of Fennegreek with half a
peck of Oats till they burst, and throw them into the Manger scauld∣ing hot, and though he cannot well eat them till they be somewhat cold, yet the steam that doth arise from thence is very wholesom to open and comfort his Head and Brain, and to free him from Colds and Stuffings therein. If you find him nice and not willing to eat them, decoy him with a little Wheat-Bran strowed upon them, which to the liking he may have to that, possibly may cause him to lick them up both together; The Water that is drained from his Oats put into a pale of cold Water by it self, and give it him to drink luke-warm, after he hath fed a little while upon Hay. An Advertisement, not only touching the Ʋsefulness of the general Simples, set down in Order one after another, in the First and Second Part, for the Cur of all inward and outward Diseases, but also of the Table of Simples. Wherever you Meet with such Simples in the First and Second Part, imagine not that they were put there to no other end nor purpose, then to blot or blur Paper with, or that they were intended only to make the Book swell large and big, to bring profit and advantage to the Book∣seller. I confess to the ignorant and unskilful it may appear so, by rea∣son of their want of Knowledge and Judgement, to discern and appre∣hend the several Uses for which they were written. But if the ingenious and skilful in the Art of Farring, (to whom these things were principally intended) consider them, and seriously weigh the Nature and Virtue of every one of them, (as their Table of Simples will acquaint them with) they will quickly come to understand their usefulness, and readily em∣ploy them to the same end they were first designed and intended for, viz. Not only to emprove their Knowledge and Understanding in the Nature of them as to the Autherick, but also as to the Practick, in bettering their skill in the Physical Uses of them, conditionally they will be so ingenious as to compound and fit up their several Juices or Powders into Medica∣ments according to Art, as their Genius and Inclinations may lead them. Neither are they placed here because there wants Receipts for the Cure of all Diseases, either inward or outward; but for the general good of all (as I have said before) that will be studious to divert and recreate themselves in compounding and making up of new Medicines proper and suitable to the Diseases they intend them for; so that here you see, that so long as you have this Magazin or Storehouse of Nature to come to, this Book will never be old, but be always fresh and new, unto those that will resort unto it for their Emprovement.
☞ To make Oyl of Camomil, which is very Sovereign for any Grief in the Limbs, which proceeds from a cold Cause. Take a good Handul of Camomil, and bruise it in a Mortar, then put it into a quart of Sallet-Oyl in some convenient Vessel it for your use▪ and let it remain therein three days and three Nights, then strain out the Oyl from the Camomil, and put into it some fresh Herbs, and let them stand also the same time, then change it twice more as you did before, and your Oyl is made. ☞ To make Oyl of Spike, which is good for all manner of Sinew-strains, or Pains or Aches in the Limbs. Take the Flowers of Spike, and wash them in Sallet-Oyl, then stamp them well, and put them into a Canvass Bag, and press out what Oyl you can get, then put it into a Glass and set it by, and it will clear of it self, and wax fair and bright, and smell very strong of the Spike. You may make Oyl of other Herbs after this manner. ☞ To make Oyl of Mastick, which is good for any cold Grief. Take two Ounces of Mastick, and two Ounces of Olibanum, and boyl them in a quart of Sallet-Oyl to a third part, then put it into a Canvass Bag, and press out what Oyl you can get as you did the other, and let it stand by you about twelve or fourteen days, and it will be perfect. ☞ Comphensive Termes Explained▪ 1. The Five greater opening Roots are, Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Sparagras and Knee-holly. To which may be added, Garliek, Onions, An∣gelica, Liquoris, Gentian, Cichoxy, En∣dive, Celandine, Squills and Master-wort. 2. The Five lesser opening Roots, are, Eringo, Grass, Capers, Rest-Har∣row and Madder. To which you may add, Turmerick, Birthwort, Ele∣campane, Horse-radish, and Polli∣podium. 3. The Five softning Herbs, are Marsh-mllows, Mallows, Mercury, Violet-leaves and Beets; To which you may add, Pellitory of the Wall; Coleworts, Arach, Melliolet and white Lillies▪ 4 The Hairy Herbs are, Maiden-Hair, Wall-Ru, Spleen-wort, Harts∣orn and Trichomanes; The greater are Peony, Lavender, Rosemary, Sage and Poppey. 5. The four Cordial Flowers are, Borrage, Bugloss, Roses and Violets. To which you may add Saffron, Ma∣rigold, Spickn, Rosemary, Clove∣gilliflowers and Poppy. 6. The four greater hot Seeds are,
Annis, Cummin, Caraway and Fennel. To which you may add Cardamoms, Grains of Paradise, Pepper and Mu∣stard-seed. 7. The four lesser hot Seeds are, Amom, Bishops-weed, Parsley and Crros. To which you may add, Cubebs, Dib, Rochet, Smallage and Ersimum. 8. The four greater cold Seeds are, Cucumber, Gourd, Citul and Millon; To which you may add, Poppy, Hen∣bane, Night-shade and Hemlock. 9. The four lesser cold Seeds are, Endive, Letice, Succry and Purslain. To which you may add Cmkweed, Dandelion and Plantine. 10. The three hot Flowers are, Camomil, Mlilot Oris or Flower-de∣luce; to which you may add, Saffron, Lavender and Rosemary. 11. The four hot Ointments are, Martiarum, Aragon, Althaea and Agrippae; to which may be added, Nervinum, Laurinum, Anodynum and Amarum. 12. The four cold Ointments are, Rosarum, Album Camphorinum, Po∣puleon, Rfrigerans Galeni; to which may be added, Sumach, Night-shade, Pomatum and Diaphompholigos, which are all bought at the Apo∣thecaries. ☞ The Gold and Hot Ointments Repeated over again, with their Vertues belonging to them. 1. Martiarum, is good for all cold Diseases of the Body, as Palseys, Convulsions, Cramps, stiffness of the Nerves and Joynts, Falling Sickness, Lethargy, &c. 2. Aragon hath all the Virtues of Martiarum. 3. Althaea softens, dissolves and asswages pains in any part of the Body, and is good against stiffness and contracting of the Nerves, helps Palseys and Convulsions, and is good to conglutinate and closeup the Mouth of Wounds. 4. Agrippae is very excellent for all watery Tumors in the outward parts, by anointing them therewith; it kills Wormes, and expels water by Purging. 5. Nervinum, is good for the Nerves, to comfort, strengthen and a∣mend their defects, proceeding from cold and dead Palseys, Convulsions, Cramps, Numbness, Bruises and old Aches, &c. 6. Larinum, is good for all cold and moist Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins and Joynts; it helps weariness, and is good for all old Aches and pains, and other Diseases. 7. Anodynum, is good to asswage Tumors, Inflammations, and easeth pain in any part of the Body. 8. Amarum, anointed on the Belly and Chest, and between the Shoul∣ders, expells water, and kills Wormes, opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, provokes Urine, the Shape being also anointed with it expels the Heam.
9. Rosatum, is of a fine cooling Nature, very useful for all Gaulings of the Skin, and frettings accompanied with cholerick Humors, Tettars, Ring-wormes, and is good to mitigate Diseases of the Head coming of Heat. 10. Album Camphoratum, is an excellent cold Ointment to asswage pain, and is a great Drier, and is good for Scabs, Burnings and hot Inflam∣mations, Chasings, Frettings or Gaulings of the Skin; it dries up Ul∣cers, and takes away their Itching in the time of healing. 11. Populeum is very cooling Ointment, which softens and eases pains. 12. Refrigerans, cools and moistens, and is good to Cure Inflammati∣ons, Tumors, Wounds and other Maladies, proceeding from hot and dry Diseases. 13. Sumach is good for the Falling of the Fundament, and helps Pain and Weakness in the Back consolidates Ruptures, &c. 14. Night-shade, is a very cooling Ointment. 15. Pomaum, is a softning, cooling and asswaging, and comforteth weary Limbs. 16. Di phompholigos, cools, dries, heals and skins, Wounds, Sores and Ulcers, &c. These are all very costly Ointments, and are to be used only by the Rich, which value not their Purses; yet the honest and plain Farrier hath far more cheap, and every whit as good, proper and useful Medicines for the Cure of the said Distempers as the others are, conditionally he takes the pains to look them out, which he may here and there find scattered throughout the whole Work. ☞ Of the Ʋse of Atimony. Crude Antimony is a Mineral much like unto Lead, the best coming from Trasilvaia and Hungaria, and is known by its bright and long Flakes; 'Tis an excellent thing to put into a Horses Provender, to cleanse and purifie his Blood, and to free his Body from olds, or other Distempers, that lie hid and lurking therein to destroy him; The man∣ner how you are to use it, is to beat it very small, and then Sift it through a ine Sieve, then strow about a quarter of an Ounce of it Morning and Evening, (for about a Month together) in a quarter of a Peck of his Oates, being first wet with good Ale or Beer. 'Tis sold at the Druggist for 6 d. the pound. The Filings of Steel Needles is also very good for the said Distempers, used after this manner. ☞ General things good for the Joynts and Sinews, that hath in them any Ach, or Numbness, Weakness or Swelling. If it proceed from a hot Cause, you must apply cooling things to it, but if from a cold Cause, hot things.
The Oyl that is pressed out of Almonds is a great Mitigater of Pain, and all manner of Aches, Aquavitae, Archangel, Alhal, Balsam, Bur∣gundy Pitch spread upon Leather, and aid to the Place grieved, draweth forth all manner of Pain▪ Burnet, Brandy, Bay-leaves, Brank-urin, the Oyl of Chamomel, the bruised Roots of Comfrey, Cowslips, Chickweed, Centaury, Cow-Parsnips, Germander, Hawk-weed, Mallows or Marsh∣mallows, Mug-wort, Mullen Penney-royal, purslain, the great Leaved Dock, Saxafrage, English Tobacco, Garden Tansie, wilde Mother of Thyme, Sow-Fennel, Flower-de luce, Turpentine, Rag weed, stamped very small, and Boiled with some Hogs-grease, to the consumption of the Juice, and at the end of the Boiling it, add to it Mastick and Olibanum▪ and anoint the place with it. Pepper, Saffron, Garlick, Rosemary, Frankincense, Myrrh, Sciatica Cresses, wilde Tansie, Spignel, yellow Wall-Flower, Nep, Catmint, Herb Gerrard, Mustard-seed, &c. Particular Receipts for Aches. Take Accopium and mix it well with Sack, and chase it very well in with your Hand, and if it be of a cold Cause, it will take it away at three or four times doing. Another. Take Brandy or Aquavitae, and Chafe and Bath the place grieved very well with it, and dry it in with a hot Fire shovel, then take a Rag, and dip in the Brandy or Aquavitae, and strew the inside of it all over with Pepper, finely beaten and earced, and bind it to the place grieved, and swath it up with a dry Rowler, and do it thus once every day till he be∣come sound. Another. Take of sweet Butter half a pound, of Aquavitae a Gill, of Saffron hal a dram, Pepper inely beaten and earced three drams, three Heads of Garlick bruised, mix them altogether, and let them stew on the Fire, and not boil, till it come to a Salve. This being chafed in very warm to the place grieved, and a brown Paper wet in the same, and bind to it, with a dry Cloth upon that, and so used Morning and Evening, will cure it. Things good in General for St. Anthonies Fire. ☞ The Juice of Houseleek tempered with white Lead, the Juice of the green Leaves of Garden Night-shade mixed with Barley-Meal, is good for it and all hot Inflammations. Allum put to the Juice of white Beets, the Roots of Cinquefoyl boiled in Vineger, the distilled water of Colts-Foot; with Elder Flowers and Night-shade, and applied, Crabs-claws, the Juice of Wall penny-wort, with the Leaves and Flowers of Feather-few is good for it, and all hot Inflammations and Swellings, the Roots of Bug∣loss
mixed with Sallet-Oyl and Barley-Meal, Water sengreen or fresh water souldier, Ducks-meat, the leaves of the Goose-berry bush, or Hawk∣weed bruised and applied with Salt. The Juice of Kidney-wort applied also, taketh away all outward Heat and Inflammations; the Juice of Mallows or Marsh-mallows boiled in Sallet-Oyl, and applied, is very good; a Poultess made of Barley-meal and Hogs-grease, with the green Heads of Garden Poppy bruised and applied with Vineger is also very good, so is the Juice of Purslain; An Ointment made of the Juice of Garden Rue, with Oyl of Roses, Ceruse and a little Vineger, and applied, is most excellent; the Juice of the bruised leaves of Succory is good, so s an Ointment made of Woad, and the place anointed with it. But be∣cause it is a Disease very rare to be found in Horses, you shall have as strange a Cure. 'Tis this. A particular Receipt for St. Anthonies Fire. After you have cast him, slit the Skin of the fore head of the Horse un∣der the sore-top, and open the same round about with your Cornet, rounding it about an nch every way, which done take a Worm, which you shall find in a Fullers Teasel, and blow it in alive with a Quill into the place, and have a care you kill not the Worm in stitching up the Skin again, for in twenty days the Worm will die, and in that time the Horse will be throughly cured. If you would know the Nature of the Disease, you may find it hereafter, in a Table set down Alphabetically, shewing where the Diseases of a Horse do grow, and the causes of them. ☞ Things good in general for the Antichor or Heart-Sickness. To let Blood▪ if you know he wants it, and to give him a Purgation of Sack, Sallet-Oyl and Sugar Candy, or Sugar and Cinnamon given him in Sack or Diapente, or Dr. Stephens Water, Butter-burr, Avens, &c. A particular Receipt for the Anticor or Heart-Sickness. After the Swelling appears, and you have taken a good quantity of Blood on both sides of the Neck, give him the Drink of Diapente with Ber or Ale, which you may find in my First Part, putting therein one Ounce of brown Sugar Candy, and half an Ounce of London-Treacle, which will drive the Sickness and Grief from his heart; which-done, an∣oint ☞the Swelling with this Ointment. Ointment. Take Hogs-Grease, Boars Grease and Baslicon, of each three Ounces, Incorporate them well together, and anoint and rub the Swelling every day, till it become soft, then open it, and let forth the Corruption, and wash the sore with the Copperas water, which you may find in my First Part. And aint it with your green Ointment, which you may sind as a∣foresaid, and it will be soon whole.
Things good in General for an Ʋpper or Nether Ataint, or any hurt by Over-Reaching. Before you apply your Salve, lay the Place bare without hollowness, and wash it with Beer and Salt, or Vineger and Salt, and then what will Cure a Mallender or Sellander will Cure this. Particular Receipts good for an upper Attairt. Take Venice-Turpentine one Ounce, and Brandy three spoonfuls, beat them well together till they come to a Salve, and anoint the Sore very well therewith, and heat it well in with a hot Iron, and do this three or four times, and it will cure him. Another. Take of Sanguis Draconis three quarters of an Ounce, Bole-armoniack one Ounce, Sallet Oyl as much, Mastick three Ounces, Sewet as much, and as much Hogs-grease, melt and mix all these together, and lay it to the swelling, and it will take it away. Aother. Take one or two Handfuls of Saexafrage, and all the Sewet of a Loyn of Mutton, and a Pint of white Wine, chop the Herb, and Mince the Sewet very small, and boil them all very well ogether, then take a good quan∣tity of Horse-dung newly made that goes to Grass, and mix with the o∣ther Ingredients, and work it to a Salve, and apply it Plaister-wise hot to the place, renewing it every day so long as you think convenient, and this is a very excellent Cure. Another for the Nether Attaint. Take a Piece of Filletting, and bind it about the Pastern Joynt, pretty hard, which will cause the blister or swelling the better to appear; then let out the corrupt Jelly with your Incision-Knife, and crush it all out, then heal it up with your Copperas water, and anoint it with the green Ointment. ☞ Things good in General for the Stavers, Head-ach or Farcin. To let Blood to hang about his Neek, the Root of Amara dulcis, the Juice of Sow-Fennel or Hogs Fennel squirted up his Nose, or the Seed and Root of Cow-Parsnip boiled in Oyl, and his Head anointed therewith; The Seeds of Brank-Cresses blown up his Nostrils, or Ducks-Meat ap∣plied to his Forehead made into a Poultess; or his Head Bathed with the distilled water of common Elder, taketh it away if it cometh of a cold cause; Flea-wort bruised and applied after the same anner do h
the like, so doth Germander and Henbane bruised with Vineger and ap∣plied, the dust of Tobacco blown up his Head with a large Quill or Kix, causeth him to Neese, which easeth him from the pain; the Root of Pellitory of Spain dried and beaten to Powder, and used in the same man∣ner, doth the like. The Juice of Cellendine put into his Eares, or Assa foetida dissolved in Brandy, and put into his Eares, or Verjuice and Salt put into his Eares; or Groundsel and Aqua vitae stamped together and put into his Ears, &c. Particular Receipts for the Stavers. After you have taken Blood from him, take the quantity of a Hazel-Nut of sweet Butter and Salt▪ dissolve it in a Sawcer full of white-Wine Vineger, then take Lint or fine Flax dipt therein, and so stop both his Eares therewith, and stitch them up and let it remain there about twelve houres, and he will be Cured. Another. Take of bitter Almonds an Ounce and a half, of the Gall of an Ox two drams, of black Ellebore made into fine powder a half Penniworth, of Grains, Castoreum, Vineger and Varnish, of each five drams, boyl all these together till the Vineger be consumed, then strain it and put it into his Eares, and do as you did before. Another. Aqua vitae and Garlick so much as will suffice, and stamp them together▪ and put into his Ears, doing as before. Another. Take the Seeds of Cressy, of Poppy, of Smallage, of Pursly, of Dill, (the Seeds only of these Herbs) and take also Pepper and Saffron, of each two drams, make them all into fine Powder, and put to them of Barley∣water two quarts, boiling hot from the Fire, and et it infuse therein three houres, and strain it and give him one quart thereof, and his Hay sprinkled with water, and the next day give him the other quart fasting, and let him drink no cold water for four or five days after, but only white water, unless sometimes a sweet Mash, and this will cure him. You must Note that in this Disease of the Stavers you must be sure to let him Blood, before you give him any Medicine. ☞ Another. After you have sharpned a small and tough Oaken or Ashen stick, and made a Notch at one end like a Fork, (to keep it from Running so far into his Head) put it into his Nostrils, and Job it up and down to the top of his Head, which will cause the Blood to descend freely; then in the Mor∣ning fasting give him this Drink well brewed together, viz. One Ounce
of the Powder of Turmerick, with as much of the powder of Anniseeds in a quart of strong Beer or Ale, with a pint of Verjuice, and a quarter of a pint of Brandy; and stop his Eares with Aqua vitae and Herb-Grass beaten very well together. Put an equal quantity into each Ear, and stop Flox or Hurds over it to keep it down, and stitch them up with a Needle and Thread, and let it remain in for about twenty four houres, then unstitch them and pull forth the Hurds, and the next day blood him in the Neck, and give him his Blood with a handful of Salt put therein well stirred together ro keep it from clotting, and he is in a fair way to be cured. ☞ Things good in general for the Yellows. Agrimony, Water-Agrimony, the Bark of the black Elder Tree, Hops, Fennel, Smallage, Endive, Succory-Roots, Garden-Arrach, Orach, Asarabacca, Ash-tree, the Juice of Coleworts, the inner Rind of the Bar∣berry Tree, or Berry, Bay-berries, Burr-dock Roots, Wood-Bitony, Bi∣stort or nakeweed, Red Beetes, Burrage or Bugloss, Butchers-broom, Calamint or Montanie Mint, Camomel, Cardus benedictus, Celandine, the Juice of Cinquefoyl, the Juice of Cleavers, the seed of Columbines and Saffron boiled together, and given him, Dandelion, Dodder of Thyme, Eringo, Flax-weed or Toad-Flax, the Juice of the Flower-de-luce Fumitory, the Fuzz-bush, Garlick, Gentian, Feltwort or Baldmony, the seed of Germander, Groundsel, the Roots of black Hellebore, the yellow berries of Ivy, Liver-wort, Madder, Maiden-hair, Wall-Rue, the seed both of the male and female, Mercury, Wilde-marjorem, Worm-wood, Mouse-Ear, Hedge-mustardseed, Cow Parsnips, the Roots of Penny royal, the seed of Plantine, Bastard-Rubarb or the great round leaved Dock, Rupture-wort, Sarasens Consound, or Sarasens Wound-wort, Shep∣herds Purse, the Seeds and Roots of Sorrel, Spleen-wort, Tamarisk, Tur∣mentil or Setfoyl, Vervain, Ground-Pine, Myrrh, Ivory or Harts horn, Long-Pepper, Licoris, Anniseeds, Ganders or Geese dung, Misle-toe▪ white Thorn, the Roots of Parsley, Pimpernel, Chick-weed, Sheeps dung steeped in Beer; You are to let him blood in the first place. A particular Receipt for the Yellows. Take an Ouuce of Mithridate, and dissolve it in a quart of Ale or Beer, and give it him luke-warm. But if you have no Mithridate, give him two Ounces of London Treacle, and for want of that two or three spoonfuls of common Treacle. Another particular Receipt for the Yellows. Take of Turmerick, Burr-dock Roots, long Pepper, of each about half an Ounce, Anniseeds and Licoris in fine Powder and searced, of each, a
spoonful, Celandine the Leaves and Roots one handful, chopt small, and strain the Celandine, and put them into a quart of strong Beer, and boyl them a little on the Fire, and in the Cooling sweeten it with London-Treacle, and put into it a good piece of Butter, and give it him Blood∣warm, and give him white water, and he will do well. Another. Take of the best Live Honey, half a pound of Saffron and Fennegreek made into fine powder as much as will suffice, incorporate these with your Honey to a stiff Paste, and so make thereof three Pills, and dipping them in Sallet-Oyl give him them, and ride him and walk him gently an hour, and set him up warm. Another. After you have let him Blood, take a quart of Ale, and put an Ounce of Saffron, and an Ounce of Turmerick into it, being first made into fine Powder, and with the Juice of Sellandine so much as will suffice, and give it him Blood-warm. ☞ Another for the Yellows. After you have blooded him on both sides the Neck, and third Barr on the Palat of the Mouth; Give him Camomil, Elder leaves and Celan∣dine, of each a small handful chopped indifferent small, with a little of the inner Rind of the Barberry Tree boiled in three Pints of strong Beer or Ale till they come to a quart. Then strain the Herbs from the Li∣quor, and give it him luke-warm fasting in the Morning, with a piece of sweet Butter melted in it, and sweetned with two spoonfuls of Honey or Common Treacle; And Order him as you have Directions in the Phy∣sicking of Horses. ☞ Another for the Yellows. To let Blood as before. Then give him Turmerick and Anniseeds beaten to powder, of each an Ounce, with half an Ounce of the powder of the inner bark of the Barberry tree, or for want of that a Gill of the Juice of Celandine; Give him all these either in a Pint of white▪Wine Vineger, or in a quart of stale Beer, and half a pint of Brandy luke-warm, fasting in the Morning; Give him with it a spoonful of the Flower of Brimstone at the Mouth of the first Horn you give him; but none with the rest; And Order him as you do usually sick Horses. ☞ Another for it. After you have let Blood, as you must always do in this Disease, mix two penniworth of Saffron beaten well to powder, and a Thimble-full
or two of the powder of Turmrick with freh utter, and make it up into a small all, and give it him for three or four Mornings together fasting, and it will cure him. ☜ Simples that are good in Gener l for the Cure of the black aurdice or Yellows. The Decoction of the Flowers of Sorrel made in white-Wine or stale Beer, and sweetned with Honey helpeth it given him often; the powder of the Leaves and Bark of the Tamarisk Tree, is also good given him in beer, so is the Juice of the leaves of Broom, a also the Seeds given him several Mornings together in beer till you see Amendment; A Horn-full of it is enough to give it him at a time. ☜ A Particular Receipt which is very good for the Cure of it. Take the Roots of red Docks, the Roots of burr-docks, and slice a good quantity of them, and put them into a Bottle of Beer, with a little Mithridate, close stopped, and give him a Horn or two full of it, in the Morning fasting. Things good in General for the Falling-Evil▪ Planet-struck, Night-Mare or Palsey. Fifteen of the Seeds of the single Peony given him in four Wine; to hang a Flint-stone over his Head, or some old Sythe or old Iron, or to give him exercise before and after water, and to mix Hemp-seed in his Provender▪ and to enforce him to Sweat, Misetoe of the Oak given, Mu∣stard-seed, the Seed of the black Poplar, Cinquefoyl, Germander, Hysop, St. Johns wort, &c. Particular Receipts for the Night-Mare. Take a handful of Salt, half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, brown Sugar candy four Ounces, mix them all very well together, and warm them on the Fire, and give it him Blood-warm two Mornings together, and it will cure him. Another. Give him this purging Pill, take of Tarr three spoonfuls, of sweet But∣ter the like quantity, beat them well together with the powder of Li∣coris, Anniseeds and Sugar-candy till it be like Paste. Then make them into round Balls, and put into each Ball two or three Cloves of Garlick, and so give it him, observing to warm him before and after, and let him be fasting likewise two or three houres before and after. ☞ Things good in General f r Cramps, or Convulsion of the Snws. Rhubrb taken inwardly, the Seed of Bastard St. Johns wort given, the
Oyl drawn from sweet Marjorem, and the grieved place anointed with it is good, for all manner of Aches coming of a cold cause, Calamint given inwardly, Bitony, Elecampane, Master-wort or the Herb Gerard given in∣wardly, the roots of Valerian given, southern-wood, or the seeds of the La∣dies Thistle given, Juniper-berries given, Bay-berries, China-roots, Brank-Ursine taken inwardly, or applied outwardly, the leaves of the Burr∣dock bruised, and laid to the place grieved, Oyl of Chamomel, Centaury applied to it, Costus, the Juice of Chick-weed made up with Hogs-grease, and anoint the place grieved with it is very good, or to force him to sweat by Clothes, or to bury him in a Horse dunghil only with his Head out, Alheal or Centaury bruised and applied to them is very good, so is sow-Fennel bruised with fallet-Oyl and Vineger, and applied, so is Gen∣tian and Germander bruised and applied, the powder of stinking Glad∣win boiled in Ale or Beer and given is good, a Poultiss made of Hawk-weed and Barley-meal, and said to the place offended is also good. La∣vender is good for them given inwardly, the roots and seeds of Marsh∣mallows boiled in the Grounds of Beer, and applied, is also good for them, so is a decoction of Mugwort with Camomil and Agrimony, and the grieved place bathed therewith warm, Penny-royal applied with salt, honey and vineger is also good, Hermodactils and Venice-Turpentine given inwardly is also very good, the Juice of the green herb of Tobaccho made into an Ointment and applied, is also very good, &c. Particular Receipts for the Cramp. Chafe and rub the Member contracted, with Vineger and common Oyl, and then wrap it all over with wet Hay or rotten Litter, or else with wet Woollen Clothes, either of which is a present Remedy. Another. After you have sweated him well in a Horse dunghill, anoint him with this Ointment, take of Hogs-Grease one pound, of Turpentine a quarter of a pound, of Pepper half a dram, of new Wax half a pound, of sallet Oyl one pound, boyl them altogether and anoint him with it. Another. Take Pimpernel, Primrose-leaves, Chamomel, Crow-foot, Mallows, Fennel, Rosemary, of each six handfuls steeped fourty eight houres in fair water, and boil them in it till they be tender, and Bath him therewith four days together, Morning and Evening, and apply the herbs to the place with a Thumb-band of Hay wet in the same Liquor, and anoint the said Member every day about Noon, with Petroleum, Nerval, and Oyl ☞of Spike mixed together.
Another. Take two quarts of strong Ale, and of black soap two pounds, and boyl them together till they look like Tarr, with some Brandy, and anoint the place grieved therewith. ☜ Things good in General for all Colds or Coughs wet and dry, or for any Con∣sumption or Purefaction of the Lungs. Agrimony, Bay berries, Elecampane, Licoris, Anniseeds, Long Pepper, Moss of an Oaken-pale or Timber-stick boiled in Milk, Briony, a great purger which must be Corrected, the Gum of the Cherry-tree dissolved in Ale, Colts-foot▪ hawks-weed, Hore-hound, Juniper berries, Pellitory of the Wall given him with honey and brown sugar candy, penney royal boiled in Milk, Ground pine, the Juice of purslain, the Juice of Jack by the hedge, Scabias, Vervan, Fennelseeds, Fennegreek, Cardamum, Cumin, Ciliris Montany, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed, Brimstone, Ger∣mander is good for all moist Colds, hempseed, Raisins of the Sun, sallet Oyl, Garlick, Tarr given him in an Egg-shell, Sellendine, Mustard and Allum boiled in Milk or Beer, Rubarb, Cassia, Myrrh, Herb-grass, Ca∣raway seeds, Marjorem, Currants, Millolet, Lions-foot, Ladies Mantle, Opoponax, Galbanum, Storax, a hedge▪Hog dried in an Oven and beaten to powder, and mixed with his Provender, or Groundsel shred small with the powder of Anniseeds boiled in Beer, Hysop, Water and Salt brayed together and given him, is good for a new Cold, or Oyl de Bay, Anni∣seeds and Licoris, of each alike made into fine powder, and sowed in a Linnen Cloth and fastned to his Bit, and to ride him upon it, is good to break a new Cold, Ivy berries dried and beaten to powder and given in Beer, the seed of bank Cresses, Feltwort or Baldmony, the Root of Cen∣taury boiled in Beer and sweetned with Treacle, the root of Mullin or Long-wort, Ferula, Rosemary, bitter Almonds, Grains of Paradise, Lung-wort or Wood Liver-wort, or take a Hen Egg after the white is taken out, and fill it up with Butter, Tarr and salt, and put it down his Throat for three Mornings together, is very good for an old Cough, the pow∣der of Angelick taken in the distilled water of Agarick and Wood-bitony mixed with common Treacle or Honey is very good, the root of bur∣rage or bugloss made into an Electuary and given is also good, the Juice or the decoction of Cinquefoyl with Honey cureth the Cough of the Lungs, Featherfew with the Juice of sow Fennel put into an Egg, (the White being taken out) with brown Sugar candy, or a little London Treacle and given, is excellent, a syrup made of the green leaves of the fruit of the Fig-tree is good for all the diseases of the Breast and Lungs, Hysop boiled with Rue and Honey is good, so is Lungwort, Maiden∣hair,
wilde Rotchet, sugar and sallet Oyl is also very good, the Liquor of the wounded beech tree given in the decoction of Colts-foot is also very good for him, so is also Polipody with sugar candy; Or any of these Juices with Honey and sugar candy made into a paste, with the Flower of brimstone and Liquoris is very good, &c. Particular Receipts for Colds. Take the Moss that is growing upon an Oaken pale or Timber stick, one handful or better, and boil it very well in three pints of new Milk, with a green Root of Elecampane cut into thin and small slices with some Licors, and let it boyl till the Milk be half consumed, then strain it and press it throughly, and as it is a cooling put into it a good piece of sweet Butter, and of ordinary Treacle so much as will suffice, and so give it him Blood-warm. This is good also for the Head ach, Frenzy, Stavers, Pose, Cold, Cough wet or dry, shortness of Breath, rotten Lungs, Glan∣ders, Lax, Leosness, bloody Flux, or the like Diseases. You may boil them in Al or Beer, I mean the Ingredients you make up your Drink with. Let him have this Drink three Mornings together, and it will cure both his Cold and Cough wet and dry. Another to take away a Cold, Poze or Ratling in the Fead, how violent soever without giving any inward Medicine. Take a small quantity of fresh or sweet Butter, and of Brimstone made into fine powder, work them together till they be one entire body, and of a deep yellow gold colour, then take two long Goose-wing Feathers, and anoin them herewith to the very Quills on either side, which done; rowl them into more of the powder of brimstone, and so put them up into either Nostril one, and at the But end of the Quill put a strong pack∣thread, which must be fastned over his Pole, like to the Head-stall of a bridle, and ride him moderately after it about an hour, and this will provoke him to snort and snuffle out of his Nose and Head, much of con∣gealed Filth which is in his head, then tie him to the Rack for an hour after, and this will purge his head very clean, then draw forth the Fea∣thers and he will do well, keeping him warm, and giving him Mashes or white Water for four or five days together. This you may safely use to a Horse, that is ready to Hunt or Run for any great Wager, and the day is so near that you durst not give him any inward drench. Another very good, though short. Take of Time one handful, boyl it in a quar of strong Ale till it come to a Pint, then strain it, add thereunto of ordinary Treace two spoonuls, and give it him Blood warm.
Another for a new taken Cold. Take Water and Salt and brew them well together, and give it him blood-warm. Another for a Cold newly taken. Take a Hens Egg, and make a little hole on the top to take out the White and Yolk; then take Tarr and Butter, of each alike, and put it into the Egg after you have workt it very well together, and give it him three Mornings together. Another which will Cure a long taken Cold, yea, though it be accompanied with a dry Cough, and shortness of Breath or Pursiveness, and it hath done Cures that hath been held very impossible to have been effected. Take of the Conserve of Elecampane three quarters of an Ounce, and dissolve it in a Pint and an half of sweet Sack, and give it him in the Morning fasting, and ride him gently a little after, and thus do several times till you find the Infirmity do decrease. The kinds of this Conserve, and how to make it. There are two kinds thereof▪ one is called particularly a Preserve, and the other an absolute Conserve. The first is Simple, the other Com∣pound, both very Sovereign, but the Conserve is the best. They will keep a whole year close stopped; The Simple you must preserve as you do all other green Roots, and keep it close in a Gally Pot, in its own Syrup, and when you use it, beat it in a Mortar together with its Syrup and refined Sugar made first into fine Powder. Now your Compound or Conserve is thus made, first let your Roots of Elecampane be neatly Candied, and made very dry and hard, and get the youngest Roots you can, which must be kept also in a Gally-pot, or Glass, close stopped in a dry and warm place, where they may not give again, and when you use it, beat so much of it in a Mortar as you shall use, with the Syrup of Colts∣foot, and the Powder of refined Sugar, still working it till you have brought it to a perfect Conserve, and give it him in sweet Sack. The first of these two, which is the Simple, helpeth any ordinary Cold or stopping, it comforteth the Lungs, enlargeth his Wind, purgeth the Head from all filthy matter, and dissolveth many other Obstructions as well in the Body as the Head. But the Compound or Conserve work∣eth better effects in the Body of the Horse, espeially if the Malady be old and dangerous, or if there he any Taint in the Lungs, Liver or in∣ward parts: This Conserve in time by the frequent use thereof will
Cure all dry Coughs which are held to be incurable. But if you have not these Conserves take this other Receipt. Another. Take of the Syrup of Colts-foot one Ounce, of Elecampane Roots dried, Anniseeds and Licoris, of each half an Ounce, all made into fine powder, an Ounce of brown Sugar-candy, which must be divided into two parts, then take sweet Butter as much as will suffice, and so make this up into three Balls good and stiff, which done, roul them in your other moiety of your powdred Sugar-candy, and so give it him Fasting, and ride him gently for half an hour, and so set him up warm, and let him fast three houres after it, and let him drink no cold▪Water, unless it be with Exercise, and sprinkle his Hay with Water, and his Oats with Beer or Ale. A Fume for a Horse that is stopped in the Head, and that he voideth Filth and stinking Matter out of his Nose. Take of Auripigmentum and of Colts-foot made into powder, of each two drams, with Venice-Turpentine, work them into a stiff Paste, and make them into small Cakes the bredth of a six-pence, and dry them a little, and put one of these Cakes into a Chaing-dish of coals, covered with a Tunnel, and so fume him, and this not only during his Physick, but at other times after. For a new Cold give him this Cawdle. Take the Yolks of four new laid Eggs, and beat them well together, and dissolve them with a quart of good Ale, then take three Nutmegs, with a little Anniseeds and Licoris, made all into fine powder, and as much Pepper in fine powder as you can put upon a six-pence, and put these in also with a piece of sweet Butter, and two or three spoonfuls of ordinary Treacle, and of brown Sugar-candy four▪Ounces, warm them all upon the Fire till the Treacle and Butter be molten, and give it him Blood-warm four or five Mornings together, and this is an infallible Cure. Another for a Cold. Take four Ounces of Horse-Spice, half an Ounce of Diapente, one Ounce of the powder of Elecampane Roots, half an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, one penniworth of common Treacle, one penni∣worth of Honey, half a quarter of a Pint of Sallet-Oyl; Take all these together with a little Wheat-Flower to a Paste, made up in a small Ball every Morning so long as it lasts, wrapped up in sweet Butter.
Another, which Cures any Cold or dry Cough, shortness of Breath, Pursive∣ness, or broken-Winded. Take of Tarr and sweet Butter of each three spoonfuls, and work them well together, with the fine Powder of Licoras, Anniseeds and Sugar-candy, till it be brought to a hard Paste: then make it into three round Balls, and put into each Ball four or five Cloves of Garlick, and so give him them, and warm him before and after he hath received them, and be sure that he be fasting before he takes them, and let him fast three houres after them. Another for the same Purpose. Take of the white Fat or Lard of Bacon, a Piece four Fingers long, and almost two Fingers thick both ways, then with your Knife make ma∣ny holes in it, and stop it with as many Cloves of Garlick as you can conveniently get into it, then rowling it in the Powder of Licoras, Anni∣seeds, Sugar-candy and Brimstone, of equal Proportions alike, and give it him in a Morning fasting, twice a Week, till you find amendment, and Ride him after it, and sprinkle his Hay with Water. Another. ☞ Take a Red Herring, and take out the Bones, and rowl it up in Tarr, and give it him down his Throat, and it will Cure him. Another. Take of the Juice of Licoras, London-Treacle, Anniseeds, Turmerick, Fennegreek and long Pepper, of each an Ounce, beat the hard Simples into powder, then put to them two Ounces of English Honey, and as much of Sugar-candy, and incorporate all together, and make thereof Balls as big as Pullets Eggs, and give him two or three in a Morning Fasting, and give him two new laid Eggs after them, and at Noon give him a Mash, keep him warm, and do this twice or thrice. Another for a desperate dry Cough. Take a pint of burnt Sack, Sallet-Oyl and red Wine Vineger, of both a quarter of a pint, of Fennegreek, Turmerick, Long pepper, and Lico∣ras, of each a spoonful in powder, and give it him half at one Nostril▪ and half at another, and do this twice a Week, and Ride him after it, and let him fast two houres, and keep his Head and Breast warm. Another for a Horse that ath a Ratling Cold in his Head. Take a quarter of a pint of Mustard made with white-Wine Vineger,
and put to it more when it is made, another quarter of a Pint, to make it Liquid, then put to it an Egg well beaten, and two Spoonfuls of Sal∣let-Oyl, then let it be luke-warm, and work it very well together till it foams again, and give it him in three Parts, one down his Mouth, and the other two at each Nostril. Anoher for a Cold long Setled. Take three Heads of Garlick and Roast them in Embers, then mix them with three spoonfuls of Tarr, as much Powder-Sugar, and half a pound of Hogs-Grease, then with Anniseeds, Licoras, Elecampane, Fen∣negreek and Cumminseeds made into Paste, and give as much at once as a Ducks Egg. Another for a dry Cough or Roten Lungs. Take Elecampane, the Flour of Brimstone, Licoras, Fennel-seeds, Linsed, of each an Ounce, and of Clarified Honey one pound, work the Powders and those together, and to a Pint of sweet Wine put two Ounces of these, and give it him Morning and Evening, and Ride him after it, and let him fast one hour after Riding. A Cordial Powdr for any ordinary Cold, and to prepare a Horse before Travel, and to Preserve him from Mischief after Travel. Take of English Licoras, Elecampane Roots, of each an Ounce, of Su∣gar Candy an Ounce and a half, and beat them into fine Powder, and earce them. Keep it in a Box, and when you use it for a Cold, give him an Ounce in a Pint of Sack, if it be in Travel, then give it in sweet Wine or strong Ale; but if in Ale, then take a quart, and give it both before Travel, ad in your Inn, or at home immediately after Travel. Another to break a Festered Cold, or dry up Glanders, and to heal the Ʋlcer and Ciker in the Nose. Take a Pint of Verjuice, and put to it so much strong Mustard made with white-Wine Vineger as will make it strong, then take an Ounce of Roch▪Allomin Powder, and as you give this to the Horse, as you fill the Horn, put in some of the Allom, and give him part at both Nostrils, but espcially at that Nostril that runneth most, and ride him after it, and set him up warm, and give no cold water but with exercise. Thus do divers Mornings. If you would see the manner of making those Cordial Balls, which Cure any violent Cold or Glanders, or for other Diseases; Look in my First Part for Cordial Balls.
☜ Another for a Cold and Surfeit. Take two handfuls of Mallows, one of Sellandine, one of Herb of Grace or Rue, one Pint of Hemp-seed beaten in a Mortar very fine, chop the Herbs, and boyl them in two quarts of Water, to one quart, then put into it a piece of Butter, and give it him luke-warm, and order him as a Horse should be ordered after drenching. ☜ Another for a Cold or for any inward Disease. Take two spoonfuls of Bay salt, two spoonfuls of Engish Honey, two spoonfuls of Tarr, as much black Soap as a Nutmeg, as much Diapente as will lie upon Six-pence, and as much Turmerick beaten to Powder, as will work altogether until the Salt be molten, then fill two Egg-shells with it▪ and give it him, cracking the shells a little first, and ride him a little after it, and let him fast two or three houres after it, then let him eat Hay, after you have first given him a Mash. ☜ Another. Take a quart of white-Wine Vineger, four Heads o Garlick pilled clean, five new laid Eggs, set it in a dunghil twenty four houres; then take out the Eggs and wipe them clean, and strain the Vineger from the Garlick, and put to it two spoonfuls of Honey, three Ounces of Treacle of Jeane. These being thus mixed, give him of it every Morning two Horn-fulls of it, and one Egg so long as it lasts. ☜ Another. Take an Ounce of Elecampane beaten to powder, a spoonful of Treacle, a spoonful of English Honey; put all these into a quart of new Milk, blood-warm. This use twice a Week till the Cold is gone. ☜ Another. Take of the Powder of Diapente one Ounce, of the powder of Li∣quoris one Ounce, of Aloes beaten to powder half an Ounce, eight Cloves of Garlick bruised and peeled, and two spoonfuls of Sallet Oyl, put all together in a quart of Beer, and give him them in the Morning fasting, and keep him warm for a day or two after it. ☜ Another. Take a quart of New Milk, and a handful of Sellandine with the Roots, Seethe the Milk, and cut the Sellandine as small as you can, then boyl them a little while together, and put into it a good piece of sweet But∣ter, and give it him luke-warm.
☞ Another. Take an Ounce of Rubarb, half an Ounce of Cassia, half an Ounce of Mirrh, one penniworth of English Treacle, make them up into three Balls with fresh Butter, and after rowl them in Bran, and give him them fasting. Another for a Cough or Glanders. Take a little handful of Box, cut it very small, then take an Ounce of Liquoris beaten, an Ounce of Anniseeds beaten, boyl them all in a quart of Ale or Beer to a Pint and a quarter, then put a quarter of a Pint of good Sallet-Oyl, and a quarter of a Pint of Treacle, and give it him all at once, and ride him moderately a mile or better, keep him warm covered four or five days, and give him a Mash two houres ater the drink, and after five days you may ride him moderately, and if you find he requires the same Drink again, give it him. ☞ Another. Take a handful of Rue, and shred it very small, and boyl it in a quart of new Milk, till a quarter-part be boiled away, then put into it two spoonfuls of Anniseeds beaten very small, and the like quantity of Li∣coris, and two spoonfuls of Treacle, and give it him luke-warm, but put first a piece of sweet Butter into it. Let him fast two houres after it. Then give him a Mash of good sweet Malt, and after that Hay. A Receipt for a dry Husking Cough, which will make him throw out the Filth at his Nostrils. Take a whole Head of Garlick, and peel all the Cloves clean, then put them into a Linnen Cloth, and boyl them in a quart of Milk till they become tender▪ Then take out the Garlick, and squeeze out the sub∣stance with the Milk, and put it a cooling, then put to it a pound of Hony, and half a pound of fresh Butter, and give it him blood▪ warm. Another. If he Run at Grass, and hath got a Cold, and you are minded to Drench him, take him up over Night, for fear of catching Cold, and give him the Drink the next Morning, and keep him in the House that day, and if it be warm Weather turn him out the next, and take him up at Night, and the next day after turn him out both Nig and Day. ☞ Another. 1. W. Take Bay-berries, Fennegreek, Elecampane Roots, long Pepper, Li∣coris, Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, about three Ounces of them all beaten
very well, and boil'd a little in a quart of strong Beer, then sweeten it with Treacle, and put a good piece of Butter into it, and give it him luke-warm. ☜ Another. Take three or four Red Onions soft Roasted, chop and bruise them very small, and mix them with about two spoonfuls of Mustard, and four spoonfuls of Sallet▪Oyl with these Powders well beaten, viz. Ele∣campane, Long Pepper, Licoris and Fennegreek, of each a spoonful, made up into Balls with fresh Butter, and give him three of them at a time for three Mornings together, and Ride him after it. ☜ Another. Mingle as much Tarr, Honey and Powder of Liquoris, of equal parts alike, as will make two pretty big Balls, and dissolve them in a Pint and a half of strong Beer, and give him luke-warm, and exercise him after it. ☜ Balls for a Cold. Take about a quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, one Ounce of the Flowers of Rosemary or Leaves dried, made into Powder, two Ounces of red Tarr, two Ounces of Fennegreek, two Ounces of Diapente, two Ounces of Syrup of Colts-foot, two Ounces of English Honey, with a little Malt-flower, and work them up into a Paste, and make Balls of it, and give him two of them at a time Fasting, for three Mornings together, with exercise after it, and it will Cure him. ☜ Another most excellent for a dry Husking Cough, or Consumption of the Lungs. Take about three Ounces of the Fat of rusty Bacon, two Ounces of Tarr, one Ounce and a half of good Honey, and half an Ounce of th Flower of Brimstone, work all these up together into a stiff Paste, with a little Wheat-Flower, and give him a Ball or two of it for three Mor∣nings together, and rest him two or three days i there be occasion, re∣peat them again, and it will certainly cure him. ☜ Another for a Cold Old or New, or for a Cough wet or dry. Stamp or chop a handful of Herb-Grace or Rue very small, and put to it an Ounce of the Powder of Anniseeds, with a little of the Flower of Brimstone, and make it up into Balls with fresh Butter and a little Honey, and give him a large Ball of it dissolved in a Pint of warm strong Beer every third Morning, for three Mornings together, and throw down after it two or three Hornfuls of clear Beer, to take away the ill taste.
☞ Another for a Summer-Cold, or when you find that he doth not fill himself, but looks gaunt and thin. Dissolve about a quarter of a pound of red Stone-Sugar, in a Pint of Sack, over the Fire, and when it is indifferent cold, put into it two spoonfuls of the best Sallet Oyl you can get, and give it him luke-warm, and Ride him after it, and Order him as you do sick Horses, with Mashes, bursten Oats and warm Water. ☞ Another very good for a Cough of the Lungs. After you have kept him very sparingly with Meat over-night, give him this Drink in the Morning luke-warm, with exercise after it, viz. One spoonful of the Flower of Brimstone, with half so much of the pow∣der of Mechoachan, mixed with a spoonful of the Syrup of Hore-hound, dissolved in near a quart of strong Beer or Ale, luke-warm. ☞ The Vertues of it. 'Tis a great Enlarger of the Wind, and a Clearer of his Pipes, and drives away his Cough from the Lungs. ☞ Another for a Cough of the Lungs, strangling in the Guts, and to clear his Pipes, and to enlarge his Breast. If you intend your Horse either for Hunting or Running, and that you desire to free him from those Infirmities above-written; then about a Week before you design him for these Exercises, give him this ensuing Drench, viz. Two Balls made up in this manner, Take as much of sweet or salt Butter, as contains the bigness of a large▪ Turky Egg, and mix and bray together with it a quarter of an Ounce of the powder of Anniseeds, with the like quantity of the powder of Liquoris, and a little of the Flower of Brimstone; Then divide it into three equal parts, and hollow every part in the Nature of a Pye, and put into each part half a spoonful of the Syrup of Hore-hound, and close them up close to pre∣vent the Syrup from getting orth, and they are made. How you are to give them, and how to Order him after given. Warm a quart of strong Beer, and fill a Hornfull of it, and put into it one of your Balls, and throw it down his Throat with two Hornfuls of more Beer after it, to prevent sticking, and to clear his Passage for the remaining Balls; Give the rest after the same manner. Observation. As Coughs and Colds do generally come by Heats and Colds, so the
best way to send them away packing, is by the same means they came; Therefore I advise you, that after you have given him his Balls, to Ride him upon a gentle Hand-Gallop till he sweat, but bring him home cool by Riding him softly a mile or two before you come home; When he is in the Stable, Tie him up to the empty Rack, and Cloath and Litter him up warm, and Order him as you do commonly sick Horses; But in case you find that this Drink hath not wrought the wished effects you ex∣pected, then about a Week after give him as you did before the same Balls again. These Balls are very good to give your Horse a Week be∣fore you turn him to Grass, and a Week after you have brought him home; And if you give him them three or four times a year will keep him in good and perfect Health, making him very thriving and Iusty. If this Drink at any time, or any other, make him sick, Give him a Pint of warm Milk from the Cow, or warmed over the Fire, and he will be well gain. ☜ Things good in general for broken-Winded Horses. To sprinkle Water upon all the Hay he eats is good, Maiden-hair, eos, Ash, Licoras, Fennegreek, Anniseeds, Cummin, Pepper, bitter lmonds, Borage, Aristolochia, Galingale, Cardamum, Nutmegs, Saf∣on, Coloquintida, Cardus Benedictus, Fluellin, Dragons, Lung wort, ngelica, Mullet, Mullen or Horse Lung-wort, Nettleseed, the Ashes of a hedge-Hog strowed amongst his Provender, Bay-berries, Saffron, Yolks of Eggs, Water, Agrimony, Briony, Lung-wort, which grows upon rotten Oaks or Beech-Trees, or to let him drink ten days together of the Water wherein Licoras hath been sodden, mixt with Wine, or to let him drink of the Water wherein hath been boiled Cardus Benedictus, Dragons, Elecampane, Penerial. Particular Receipts for a broken-Winded Horse. Take the Guts of a hedge-Hog, and dry them and beat them to pow∣der, and give him two or three spoonfuls thereof in a pint of Wine or strong Ale, then the rest mix with Anniseeds, Licoras and sweet But∣ter, and make round Balls or Pills thereof, and give him two or three after his Drink, and let him fast two or three houres after. Water-A∣grimony is excellent good for it. Another very good. Take Wheat-Meal, the powder of Lung-wort, alias Mullet, Gentiana, Anniseeds, Cummin-seeds, o each three drams, make them into fine Powder, and make them into Paste with Honey and sweet Butter, of ach a like quantity, and put to it the Yolks of two new laid Eggs, make this Paste into Balls, and every Morning fasting give him three or four of them rowled up in the powder of Elecampane, and the powder
of Licoris, of each alike. These Pills preserve the wind of a Horse mar∣vellously, and keeps him always in breath. Another. Take the Excrements of a sucking Child, and put into it a Pint of white Wine, let it boyl till the one half be consumed, and so give it him blood-warm▪ This will cause him to forsake his blowing for fifteen days, so as when he beginneth again to blow give him the same Medicine, and so keep him with this from time to time, as you shall finde cause, and by this means you shall have his Wind good. Put not too much of the Excrement in, for it will make him very sick. Another, which is the best of all, Take the leaves of Mullet, alias Mullen, alias Horse Lung-wort; and dry them, and make them into fine Powder, and make them up in Balls with ordinary Honey; the bigness of a Pidgeons Egg, and give him three at a time fourteen or fifteen days together, or longer, as you shall see cause, and let him not drink any cold Water during the time, and let his Exercise be moderate, and his Hay sprinkled with Water, and his Oats wet with good Ale or Beer, and in short time he will be well and sound again. Another very good. ☞ Boars or Barrows dung dried and beaten to Powder, and a spoonful of it, with aboat two Thimblefuls of the powder of Brimstone put into a quart of warm Milk, and given him fasting in the Morning for four or five times, resting a day between each taking, (to recruit his spirits) will very much help if not altogether cure him. If you find that this Drink does not make him sick, you may give him a larger Proportion, not ex∣ceeding two spoonfuls. Some of the general Things for this Distemper mixed amongst his Provender, will further it very much. ☞ Things good in general for shortness of Breath, Pursiness, or Preservers of the Wind. Saffron, Wood-bitony. Butter-burr, Colts-foot, Elecampane, Fennel, Anniseeds, the uice of Sow-Fennel dissolved in Wine, and put into an Egg and given him, Hore-hound, Juniper berries, Lung-wort that groweth upon Oaks or Beeches, which is a kind of Moss, with grayish tough leaves, Horse Lung-wort, the Roots of Marsh-mallows, the Roots of Master-wort, Hedge Mstard-seed; the seeds of Cow-Parsnips, Pel∣litory of the Wall, the Juice or Seeds of Purslain, Roa Solis or Sun-dew,
Scabeus, the Milk of Sow-Thistles given in Wine or Beer, Vervain, An∣timony, Southern-wood, the Kernels of Grapes, the Blood of a sucking Pig, Venus Hair, Ireos, Ashen Skies, Fennegreek, Raisins, Pepper, Al∣monds, Burrage, Nettle-seeds, Aristolochia, Coloquintida, Powder of Gentian, Nutmgs, Cloves, Gallingal, Graines of paradice, Calamint, Hounds-tongue, Filapendula or Drop-wort, Tyme, the Root of Va∣lerian boiled with Liquoris, Raisins and Anniseeds, and given him; Caraway seeds, white-Wine and Yolks of Eggs, the Juice of VVater∣cresses, Frankincense, a Snake boiled and the Broth given him, Agarick, Cardamum, Lightwort, Angelica, the green Bark of Elder Tree, red Mints, red Fennel, primrose leaves, Brimstone, salt Nitre, Balm, Violet leaves, Hysop, the Lungs of a Fox boiled or laid in Rose water, ordry them and beat them to powder, and give him them in Beer, or strow them amongst his provender, Bay-berries, white Hawthorn leaves, the Guts of a hedge-Hog dried and beaten to powder, and boiled in Beer and given, or mixed amongst his provender with Anniseeds and Li∣quoris, or wet his Hay with water, and his Oats with Ale or Beer, Oyl of Frankincense, Fern Roots, Night-shade, Cassia, Mithridate, Diacar∣tamus, Sne, Aloes, French Beanes enlarge the Beast much, the powder of Feather few given him in Ale or Beer, is also very good, &c. Particular Receipts for shortness of Breath, or Pursiveness, or Preservers of the Wind. Take Anniseeds, Liquoris and Sugar-candy, all beaten into very fine powder, and take four spoonfuls thereof, and brew it well in a pint of white VVine, and half a pint of Sallet Oyl, and use this ever after your Horses Travel, and a day before he is travell'd. Another. Take Wheat Flower four pounds, Elecampane and Gentian, of each an ounce, Anniseeds, Fennegreek, Cummin, Brimstone and Liquoris, of each half a pound, make them all into very fine powder and sarced; then put into it of common English Honey half a pound, and so much white Wine as will make all these into a Cataplasm. Boyl them till they become so thick, that they are fit to make up into Balls, and give him three or four at a time, for six or eight Mornings together, use it often, for it will keep him in health, and make him ound of his Body, Wind and Courage. But if you do perceive a Taint in his Wind, then Take a close arthn Pot▪ and put thereunto three pints of the strong∣est Wine vineger, and four new laid Eggs unbroken, and four Heads of Garlick clean pilled and bruised, then cover the Pot very close, and bury
it in a dunghil thirteen houres, then take it up, and take forth the Eggs, and use it as you do the ame Receipt before-recited. Things good in general for the Glanders. ☞ Cummin seeds, Grains of Paradice, Fennegreek, Diahexaple, Sallet Oyl, Aquavitae, the Bark of Elder, Sugar candy, Garlick, Urine, white-Wine, Bay salt, Liquoris, Anniseeds, Hogs Grease boiled in water, and take the Fat off, Ginger, Yolks of Eggs, Saffron, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Moss boiled in Milk, Cardamonium, Spikenard of Lavender, Gallingale, Honey, Euphorbium, Pepper, Brimstone, Spikenard of Spain, Myrrh, Iris Illyrica, Smallage, Penny royal, Aristolochia, Salt water, Oyl of Oats, Tanners Oyl. Auripigimentum and Tussiaginis beaten into powder, four drams of each beaten with Turpentine, and make them into little Cakes▪ then put them upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, and a Tunnel put over it, so let him take the Perfume of it up his Nose, A∣garick, Gentian, Bay-berries, Hore-hound, Gumma Guiatum, Amber, Coral, Arkanet, Black-berries, the dust of Oaken Bark, Bramble-leaves, Knot-grass, wilde Dazie Roots, Muscadine Figs, Elecampané, Treacle, Box leaves, Coals of Ashen wood quenched in Ale, and poured down his Nose. Particular Receipts for the Glanders. The first thing that is to be done in this Disease is to let him blood, then for four or five days together give him scalded Bran, which will dry up his moist and bad humors abounding in him, and prepare him the sooner for his Cure. Take Honey as much as will suffice, and mingle it with his Oats, rubbing the Oats and the Honey together be∣twixt your Hands, so as the Honey may be very well mixed with your Oats, continue him with this manner of Feeding Morning and Evening, till you find him leave Running at the Nose. This Receipt de Grey de∣clares he hath Cured very many Horses with. Another. Take Sallet Oyl and white VVine Vineger, of each six spoonfuls, beat them well together, and put it into both his Nostrils if they both run, and continue this three Mornings together, and presently after you have given him this Medicine, you are to put it up into that Nostril that runs, a long Goos feather dipped in Oyl de bay, stirring it up and down in his No∣strils, which will cause him to sneeze and snuff so, that the viscous cor∣ruption which remaineth in his Head may void; Keep him warm all the let his Drink be sweet Mashes. Auother. Take new made Chamberly, and of the best and strongest white Wine
Vineger, of each half a Pint, then take of Mustard-seed two or three spoonfuls, and make Mustard thereof with Vineger, and let it be very well ground, that done, put your Vineger and Chamberly to the Mu∣stard, and stir them well together, then take of Tarr and Bay-salt▪ of each alike, incorporate them well together, and convey so much there∣of as three Egg-shells will hold, the Meat first taken forth; and having first prepared these things, let the Horse be taken forth of the Stable, (being kept that Night to a very spare Diet,) and ride him first till he begin to sweat, then give him the three Egg-shells fill'd with the said Tarr and Salt, and throw down presently after it a Hornfull of the Chamberly, Vineger and Mustard, and a half Horn of it at each Nostril, then ride him again as you did before, then cloath him warm and litter him well, and let him stand upon the Trench until three or four of the Clock, then give him a warm Mash, and order him as you do Horses in Physick. Give him this Medicine every other or third day three or four times, and you shall find it an infallible Cure. Before you use this Medicine, you must prepare his Body with Bran prepared, and after with a Glyster, and your Goose-feathers. Another. Take better then two handfuls of the Cankerous Moss, which grow∣eth upon an old Oaken Pale, and boyl it in two quarts of Milk to one, then strain it, and squeeze the Moss well, and give it him luke-warm to drink; then take two Goose-feathers, and take as much sweet Butter as contains a Wall-nut, and with the powder of Brimstone finely beaten and sarced, work them well together with your Knife, till the Butter be brought to a high Gold Colour; Then take two Feathers, the long∣est you can get in a Gooses wing; and first at the Quills end with a Needle fasten two long threads, then with your Salve anoint your Fea∣thers all over, which done rowl them well in the powder of Brimstone, and thrust them up into his Head, then fasten the thread on the top of the Horses Head, and ride him abroad for an hour or two, Airing him in this manner Morning and Evening; and when he hath stood a pretty while in the Stable, after you have brought him home again untie the threads, and draw forth the Feathers, and wiping them very dry, lay them up till you have next occasion to use them. This Disease cometh not suddenly, but grows out of long process of time, and therefore the Cure must be done by leisnre; therefore you must continue the Medicine as your leisure will serve either every day, or at the least thrice a week, if it be for four or five Months together, and be sure it will in the end yield your desire.
Another which will Cure any high Running Glanders, called the Mourning of the Chine. Take Elecampane Roots, and boyl them in Milk till they be soft, that you may bring them to Pap, then with a Horn give them to the Horse with the Milk luke-warm, being no more then will make the Roots li∣quid, and having anointed your Goose-feathers, use him and ride him as you did before. Another. Take of Agri-pigimentum, and of Tussilaginis, beaten into powder, of each four drams, then beating them with fine Turpentine, bring them into a Paste, then make them up into little Cakes as broad as a Groat, and dry them. Then lay two or three of them on a Chafing-dish of Coals, and cover them with a Tunnel, so that the smoke may come up onely at the end thereof, and so without auy loss ascend up into the Hor∣ses Head through his Nostrils, then Ride him till he begin to sweat, this do once every Morning, before water, till the Running be stopped, which will be in a very short space, considering the greatness of this Disease. Another. After you have purged him, two days before give him this Drink; Take of Tanners Owes new made, wherein never came Hides, one pint, of Sallet Oyl four spoonfuls, two Heads of Garlick pilled and bruised, Feathersew and Sellandine, of each one handful chopped very small, Anniseeds and Licoris, and Bay-berries, all finely pulverized, of each one spoonful, boyl all these a little, and give it him blood-warm twice a week fasting, and being thus four times drenched, will be perfectly cured, which seldom or never fails. The best Receipt for this Disease is in my First Part. Another. Take Cummin-seeds, Grains of Paradice and Fennegreek in powder▪ of each half an Ounce; of Diahexaple a quarter of an Ounce, beat this in a Mortar with a quarter of a pint of Verjuice, three spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, and two spoonfuls of Aqua vitae; then put altogether to a quart of old Ale, with a good slice of sweet Butter, and set it on the Fire till it be ready to boyl, then being luke-warm give it him part at his Mouth, and part at both Nostrils; then ride him pretty roundly for an hour, and set up warm; let him fast an hour, and if you perceive Sicknes, to grow, give him a pint of new Milk.
☜ Another for the Glander▪ Keep the Horse fasting for four or five houres, then give him this Drink here under written, viz. Ten Cloves of Garlick peeled and bruised, half a handful of Oaken Moss, and one handful of Pollipody For want of the Leaves tae the Root.of the Oak, boyl all these together upon a gentle Fire in three Pints of new Milk till half be consumed, then strain out the Milk from the Moss and other Ingredients, and put into it three quarters of an Ounce of the powder of Elecampane Roots, one Ounce of the Floure of Brim∣stone, half an Ounce of the Juice of Spanish Liquoris, and half an Ounce of the powder of Fennegreek well mixt together; Then take two hand∣fuls of the innermost Bark of green Elder▪ and boyl it in a quart of Spring water, till more then half be consumed; then strain it forth and pour it into the other Ingredients▪ and stir them well together, and give it him lukewarm, some at his Mouth, and some at his Nose; exceed not above a pint of it at a time; warm him very well after it, but bring him home cool, and Cloath and Litter him up warm, and let him fast three or four houres after it, and Order him as you do sick Horses, with Mashes of Malt, boiled Oats and white Water, &c. Observations upon it. This Disease is very difficult and hard to Cure, and therefore you must not think that once or twice giving, it will get  Conquest over this sturdy Disease, but it must be the work of a longer time, a Month or more at least, viz. Give it him two or three days together, and intermit a day or two between to recruit his spirits, and so continue it till you have recovered him. But the best and most certain Receipt for the Cure of this filthy and lothsom Disease, is by a Receipt at the latter end of the Book, which I Refer you principally unto, vide Te best Receipts for the Cure of the Glanders. Another to stay it for a time being incurable. Take the green Bark of Elder, and beat it in a Mortar, and strain it till you have a pint thereof. Then put that Juice to a pint of old Ale, and warm it on the Fire with a good Lump of sweet Butter, and an Ounce of Sugar candy, and so give it lukewarm, ride him after it, and let him fast an hour, and keep him warm, do thus divers Mornings. If you are minded to take a general Receipt to Cure all Colds, Glanders, Heart sickness, and to purge away molten Grease; Look in the First Part for Blls Cordial to Cure any, &c.
Things good in General given inwardly to a Hide-bound Horse. White-wine, Sallet Oyl, Venice Turpentine, Mithridate, Loaf sugar, Cassia prepared, milk of sweet Almonds, Verjuice given him, Muscadine, strong Ale, Grunfel, Rue, Smallage, Rosemary, Bitony, Gum Draga∣gant, Garlick, sweet Butter boiled to a pint and given him three several mornings together, the pint being divided into three parts, and keep him very warm, and feed him with mashes and white Water, or Fennel-seeds, Anniseeds, Licoris, Bay-berries, Elecampane, Fennegreek, Tur∣merick, all made into fine Powder, infused in Ale and sallet Oyl, given him four mornings together, or Hogs-Grease, Dragon-wort, Incense, syrup of Roses dissolved in Tutsan, and given him Blood-warm, with moderate Exercise till he sweat. General outward Applications. To let him Blood either on both sides the Neck, or on both the side-Veins, then to take fair Water, mallows, smallage, Rosemary, Bay-leaves boiled in Water till they be soft▪ and Bath his Body with it warm, and after he is dried anoint him with this Oyntment, Hogs-Grease, Ca∣momil, mallows, Grunsel▪ smallage chopped small and boiled in the Grease, and anoint his Body with it, which will Loosen his skin, or rub him against the Hir all over, and lay upon him a Sack well soaked in Water; and ers it is well drained a while, lay it upon him, and over that so many Cloas as will bring him to a sweat, which will be the best Cause to restore him, but let him not sweat above an houre at most, and cool him by degrees. Particular Receipts for a Hide-bound Horse. After you have let him Blood, to give him three or four mornings to∣gether a quart of new Milk, with two spoonfuls of Honey, and one Ounce of London-Treacle, and let his food be warm Grains and Salt, or sodden Barley, or sweet Mashes. Another. First, let him Blood in the Neck-Vein, then give him this Drink, Take two Handfuls of Sellandine if it be in the Summer, the leaves and stalks will serve; but if it be in the VVinter, take leaves, stalks, roots and all, chop them small, then take a Handful of VVormwood, and a Handful of Rue, chop them likewise, put them all into three quarts of Ale or Beer, and boyl them to a quart, then strain and squeeze the Herbs, and dissolve into it three Quices of Treacle, and give it him luke-warm, and for a wek together, once a day rub the Horses Body all over with Oyl
and Beer, or Butter and Beer against the hair, and seed him with warm Mashes of Malt and Water, and for his Provender let him have Barley sodden till it begin to break, provided you keep it not until it soure. Another. Take Anniseeds, Licoris, Fennel-seeds, Bay-berries, Elecampane dried, Fennegreek, Turmerick, of each alike, made into fine Powder, give him two spoonfuls of this Powder mixed in Ale or Beer one quart, with two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him four Mornings to∣gether, and the first Morning you are to give him two spoonfuls of the powder, and the other three Mornings but one, keep him warm, and order him as a sick Horse, and he will certainly be Cured. ☜ Things good for a Tyred Horse in general, either taken inwardly, or Applied outwardly. Powder of Elecampane, Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Sage, Rosemary, Mint, Ru, Camomil, Tyme, half an Ounce of either of them, or all of them givn him in a quart of Beer or Ale, or apply outwardly to his Back Armart laid under his Saddle, and his Back rubbed therewith, and if he hath any life in him, this will make him go; Or to take three or four round pebble stones, and put into his Ear, and Tie them fast in, and the noise of them will make him go; Or to make a hole in the Flap of his Ear, and thrust a long stick full of Nicks through the same, and to saw and fret him with it, and while he hath any life left him e will go, or to Te a bunch of Penny royal to his bit, and it will keep him from Tyring; An Ounce of the Powder of Bitony mixed with Honey and Vineger, given him, is very refreshing. ☜ Simples that are good in general, for to comfort the Sinews, Arteries and Joyns, fter Travel, Cold or Pain. A Poultess made of Pellitory of the Wall, with Mallows or marsh-Mallows, boiled in the Grounds of strong Beer, with the Flower of Wheat and Bran, and some Oyl of Roses put thereto, and laid upon them hot, restoreth any bruised Sinew, Tendon or Muscle to their strength again; A Decoction of Mug-wort with Camomil and Agri∣mony, and his Limbs hathed therewith while it is warm, is a very good help for them; so is the Herb Ladies bread, or the Flower made into a Bath, and used as before is very good; so is Oaken Moss boiled in the Grounds of Beer, and applied to them, &c.
Particular Receipts for a Tyred Horse. Take half an Ounce of Elecampane powdred, and give it him in a quart of Ale, and Tie his Head to the Rack, and Provender him well at Night; Or a bunch of Penny-royal Tied to the Bit or Snaffle, is very comfortable to him, and will cause him to Travel lustily. Another. Take the powder of Bay-berries, and mix it with Hogs-grease, and Bath his Limbs very well with it, doth wonderfully refresh him. Of Purgation and their Uses, vide my First Part. Scourings in general and in particular, vide my First Part. Things good in general for a hot Stomach. ☞ Bilberries, Barberries given inwardly, or to wash his Tongue with vineger, or to give him cold Water mingled with Vineger, or to give him Mik and Wine mingled together with some Mel Rosatum, the De∣coction of Endive, Grunsel, Hawkweed, Kidney-wort, Garden Sorrel, Sow-thistles, &c. ☞ Things good in general for a cold Stomach. Bay-berries, Angelica, Caraway-seeds, Garden Chervil, Clary, Mace, Cinnamon, Grains of Paradice, Saffron, Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, Ele∣campane, two drams of the dried Root of Lovage is good for it. Particulr Receipts for the Stomach. If his Stomach be cold, give him Wine and Oyl mixt together, divers Mornings together, or other Farriers give Wine Rue, Sage and Oyl boyled together, or to add to the former Compound, white Pepper and Mirrh, or to give him pilled Onions Chopt, and Rochet-seed boiled in Wine; but to conclude, for general forsaking and loathing of Meat, proceeding from hot or cold, then give him Blades of Corn in good quantity. Things good for a Blood-Spaven. To Cure it, first shave away the hair on both side; the Swelling so far as it goes, then take up the Thigh-Vein and let it Bleed well; which done, Tie the Vein above the Orifice, and let the Vein bleed from be∣low what it will; whereby the Blood which was Assembled about the Spaven place, is by this means sent away; Then with your Fleam, or Incision Knife, make two Incisions in the lower part of the Swelling, and after prick two or three holes in each side of the Hough where the pavn is, that so the Medicine may take the better effect, and when the Blood and Water hath vented away so much, as it will do, bind rond
about it Plaister-wise the Whites of Eggs and Bolearmoniack very well beaten together, either upon Hurds or Linnen Cloth, and make it fast about the Hough, to keep on the Plaister; the next day take it off, and wash and Bath the Sorrance with this Bath, Viz. Take Mallows and the tops of Nettles, and boyl them in water till they be soft, and there∣with Bath him. Then take Mallow Roots, Brancha Ursina▪ Oyl, VVax, and white-VVine, so much as will suffice, and boyl them, and bind this warm to the Sorrance round about the Hough, and sowe a Cloth about it, and so let it remain three days more, and every Morning stroak it downwards with your hand gently, to the end the bloody Humor may issue forth, the fourth day Bath and wash it clean with the former Bath. That done, take Gum Creana and Stone Pitch, of each an Ounce, and of Brimstone a quarter of an Ounce, made into very fine powder, melt these on the Fire together, and when it is almost ready to take off, put into it half an Ounce of Venice Turpentine, and make a Plaister there∣of, spreading it upon Leather, and apply it to the place warm, round about the Hough, and let it remain till it fall away of its own accord, but if it come off too soon, make another Plaister of the same Ingredi∣ents, and lay to it, which is the best Cure I could ever know for this Ma∣lady. Another or it. VVhen the swelling doth appear upon the inward part of the Hough, take up the Thigh-Vein, and let it bleed from the nether part of the Leg, till it will bleed no longer, and after give Fire to the Spaven both long-ways and cross-ways, and then apply a restringent Charge to the place. Things good to Cure a Bone Spaven. Take up the Veins that feed it, (wherher Spaven or Curb) as well be∣low as above, then give it Fire, then charge the place with Pitch made hot, and clap Flax upon it, then four days after you must dulcifie the Sorrance with the Oyl Pampilion, and fresh Butter molten together upon a gentle Fire, and when the Scar shall be fallen away, apply unto it a kind of stuff which is called Blauco or white, made of Jessoe, and so continue it until it be whole. Another. Take the Root of Elecampane well clensed, and lap it in a Paper and roast it soft, and after you have rubbed it and chafed it well, clap it on
and bind it on hard, but not so hot as to scald away the Hair, and at twice dressing it will take it away, or if you anoint the place with Oyl of Origanum Morning and Evening, it will take it away. This is good for Curb, Spaven, Ring-bone, or any Bony Excression. Another. Upon the top of the Excression; make a slit with your Knife the length of a Barley-corn or more, then with a fine Cornet, raise the Skin from the Bone, and hollow it round the Excression, and no more then dip some Lint in the Oyl of Origanum, and thrust it into the hole and cover the knob, and so let it bridle till you see it rot, and that Nature casteth out both the Medicine and Core. ☞ Another to abae the Pain of the Bone Spaven. Take two penniworth of the Oyl of Camomel, and two penniworth of the Oyl of Turpentine, and mix them well together in a Glass Viol, and anoint the place grieved with it. ☞ Another. Take a Pint of Anniseed water, and put into it one Ounce of House∣hold Pepper beaten to powder, with an Ounce of Roch Allom, and boyl them together to the Consumption of one half; then strain it and put it into a Class to keep for your use, and apply it once or twice a day, when you have occasion. Another for it, which will not only take that away, but also a Splint, Curb▪ Ring-bone, or any Bony Excression. Te up the Horses Head, for ear of biting it away. First, clip away the hair as far as the Excression goeth, and a little more, then take a piece of Allum'd Leather, made as big as the place you have Cured; then take a little Shoo makers Wax and spread round about the very edge, or verge of the same, leaving all the inward part empty and not touched with the Wax; Then take the Herb Spear-grass, or Spear-wort, which hath the vertue to raise Blisters, and brui∣sing it, lay some thereof upon the Leather in the empty place, and bind it ast thereon, suffering it so to lye, (if it be in the Summer time, when When you take off the Paister, an∣oyn the place with Train Oyl .the Herb hath his full strength,) near half a day; but if it be in the Winter, then it is not amiss (to renew the strength of the Herb) if you add to it a drop or two of the Oyl of Origanum and lt it lie half a day fully, and be sure to tie up his Head, for fear of biting it away; when you take away the Herb, rab the place well, and anoint it with Train Oyl varm, or else layon a Diminium Plaister. But because this Dis∣ase is not easily to be Cured, unless you see some skilful Farrier do it
before you; I shall shew you therefore for the prevention thereof (when you find a Swelling begin to arise) what you shall use. Take Natural Balsom, and having first shaved away the Hair, anoint the place with it for two or three days, and after you shall repress the humours with this Charge. Take three Ounces of the Oyl of Roses, Bolearmoniack one Ounce, Wheat-Flower half an Ounce, and the white of an Egg; make all these into one Body, and every day after you have anointed it with Balsom, lay on the said Charge. Things good in general for to take away a Splint, Oyl of Vitriol, unslackt Lime, Oyl of Origanum, an Elecampane Root roasted and laid to it, Oyl of Peter, Spear-Grass, alias Spear-wort, Verdegrease, Oyl-de-bay, Powder of Mercury, powder of Arsnick, row-foot, laid to it, &c. Particular Receipts to Cure a Splint. After you have washed the place and shaved away the hair, as you must do in the Cure of all Splints and Bony Excressions. Knock and rub it with your lood staff, or a Hazel-stick, then prick it with your Fleam; Then take Vervain and Salt of each a handful, pound them together to an Ointment and apply it to the place, and bind it up with a Rowler, and stitch it on fast, and let it so remain twenty four houres, and then unbind it and it is cured. Another, Take Nerve Oyl one Ounce, Cantharides the weight of six pence, and as much of the Oyl of Vipers, boyl them easily, then anoint the Splint, with this cross the hair and heat it in with a hot Iron, then Tie up the Horses Head to the Rack for twenty four houres, then squeeze out the Corruption, and do this twice or thrice. For a Splint, and to dry up Wind-Galls. First, heat the Sorrance with a hot pressing Iron, then vent it in se∣veral places with your Fleam, then take a spoonful of salt, half a spoon∣full of Nerve Oyl, a penny weight of Verdegrease, and the white of an Egg, beat all to a Salve, and dipping Flax Hurds▪ therein, apply it to the Grief. Another to take off a Splint. ☜ Take of the Oyl of Vitriol, and dip a stick or feather into the Glass, and touch the place with it, and it will eat it away. If you find it eat too much, you may stop it by bathing it with cold water; Or if you boyl some green Copperas in water, and wash the sore with it, it will
not only cleanse the Sore from any piece of the remaining Splint, but soon heal it up likewise. ☞ To take away a Splint and leave no Scar behind. Take a red Hazel stick about the bigness of your Thumb, about a quarter of a yard long, and after you have beaten and knockt the Splint very well with it, then take and cut one end of it very smooth, and stick a Needle into the pith of it, leaving so much of the point of it out as will prick through the Skin, pricking it full of holes, then take some of the Oyl of Peter, and rub all over it, and bath it in with a hot Fire∣shovel, and do thus four or five days together, and it will cure it. Another. First, wash the place with warm water, and shave away the hair, then slit a Hole in the skin more then the length of a Barley-corn, and then convey into the Hole so much Arsnick in the fourth part of a Ha∣zel-Nut, and bound on with a Bolster and Rowler of Linnen, and made fast with a Needle and Thread, and so let it remain for three whole days and Nights, in which time the Arsnick wl eat and corrode clean away the Splint, then to kill the Fire anoint the place with sweet fresh Butter eight or ten days after, being first molten, and it will be whole. Another. Take the Root of Elecampane well washed and cleansed, and lap it in a brown Paper, wet it and roast it in the hot Embers, as you do a Warden; then after you have rubbed and chaed the Excression bind it fast on, but not so hot as to scauld away the hair, this will consume it away in two or three dressings; or if you anoint the Splint with the Oyl of Origanum, Morning and Evening, it will take it away, but not presently. Observation. You must stay the falling down of new humours to the place troubled, by binding Plaisters, as Pitch, Rozin, Mastick, red Lead, Oyl, Bole-ar∣monack, and such like, then to draw forth matter, which is gathered with drawing Simples, as VVax, Turpentine, and such like; And lastly, to dry up the Relicks with drying powders, as Honey and Lime, Oyster∣shells, Soot and such like; and also you must know, that all Splints, Spavens or Knobs, must either be taken away at the beginning, or after the full of the Moon.
Another Receipt to take off a Splint, which though it seem difficult, yet de Grey declares that he hath taken off more then 100 Splins. Take two Heads of Garlick and peel them, and cut them small, and do neither stamp nor bruise them; then take the like quantity of Salt, and mix with them, and divide them into two equal parts, and put them into two fine Linnen Clouts, and bind them upon the ends of two sticks, about a foot in length, of the fashion of two short wooden foyls, but not so long, being not above twelve inches a piece; Take then your Blood-stick, and rub, knock and beat the splint therewith very well, to soften it, then prick it through the skin with your Blood-staff and Fleam, then take of the Oyl of Nuts one pint, and put it into a small Pipkin, and set it upon the Fire with a Chasing-dish of Coals, and make it boil∣ing hot, and when it is ready to boyl put in your short sticks or oyles, which hath the Garlick and Salt fastned unto them, and first with the foyl, and then with the other, (I mean by turnes) apply them hot to the Splint, and between whiles rub and stroak the Splint downwards with your Thumb, whereby to bring forth the Blood, till having with the foyls very well mollified the said Splint, you may the more easily crush forth the Blood whereof the Splint is engendred and formed▪ and thus it is cured, only you must remember to anoint the place two or three times after with sweet or fresh Butter. Things good in general for a Curb. Oyl of Vitriol, Arsnick, Verdegrease, an Elecampane Root roasted and laid to it, an Onyon roasted with unslackt Lime and laid to it, Mer∣cury, Turpentine, Nerval, green Gopperas, Tartar, &c. Particular Receipts to Cure a Curb. First, shave away the hair, then bind the Hough strait above the Joynt, then with a small stick beat, rub and Chae the Curb, like as you do in the Cure of a Splint, then pierce the skin with your Fleam in two or three places, and so with your Thumb thrust forth, and crush out the corrupt Blood, and after convey so deep as you can get, into every hole, the bigness of two Barley cornes of Arsnick, and so bind up the place, and let it remain for the space of twenty four houres, then open the place, and anoint it every day with fresh Butter till it be whole; Oyl of Vitriol used as you do to take away a Splint, will take off a Curb also. Note, that whatsoever Cureth the Splint or Spaven Cureth the Curb also.
Another Receipt. Take white-Wine Lees one Pint, a Porringer-full of Wheat Floure▪ of Cummin in fine powder half an Ounce, mix all these well together, and being made warm upon the Fire, charge the place therewith, renewing it once for three or four days together; and when the swelling is al∣most gone, draw it with your hot Iron, and charge the Burning with Pitch and Rosin molten together, which must be applied warm, to the end the Charge may stick on the better, then presently clap on Flox, and let it remain until it fall away of it self, and let it come in no wet or water for the space of fourteen days. Another. Take a Bar of Iron, heat it red hot, and hold it near to the place till it become warm, then with your Fleam prick six or seven holes through the skin, and anoint the Sorrance with Nerval; then take a spoonful of salt, and a penny weight of Verdegrease in ine powder, with the white of an Egg, incorporate them well together, and wet some Flax in this Medicine, and bind it to the place, renewing it every day once, and in a short time he will be perfectly ued. Or to alcinate Tartar, and dis∣solve it in water, and congeal it like Salt, and mingle it with Soap like an Ointment, and dress it therewith, and this will in fourty houres heal any Mules, Pains and Scratches whatsoever. Things good for the Mules, vide Scratches. Things good for the Pains, vide Scratches. Things good for Kib'd Heels, vide Scratches. Things good for Crepances and Rats-tails, vide Scratches. What Cures the Scratches Cures all these Diseases. Things good in general for the Scratches. ☞ These things boiled in Hogs Grease and Train-Oyl, viz. Tarr, white Lead, Bolarmoniack, Verdegrease, green Copperas, Allum, Brium∣stone, Briar apples all beaten to powder; the powder of Galls, Rue, Rosemary, Gun-powder, burnt Oyster-shells, urpentine, Ginger, Red Herrings chopped small, Elecampane, &c. or Lyme, Honey, Bay-salt, Urine, Vineger, the Sperm of Frogs, Pepper, Garlick, Mastard, Plan∣tain, Rib-wort, Sage▪ Tobaccho, Elder, Mans-dung, Burr-dock roots and Snails is good for them, &c. Observations how to Order him in this Disease. You are to take notice that in all the Cures of the Scratches, you must keep his Legs from wet during the Cure, and likewise you must clipaway his hair from off his heels very close, or else that will poison
his Leg. And likewise before you dress him with any of the Receipts following, you must scrape off his Scabs first, and wash off the Blood that follows them with Chamberly and Salt, or Brine. When you have dress'd him with any of the Receipts following, wash it clean off with scalding Chamberly and Salt, or scalding Brine, be∣fore you dress him again. Particular Receipts for the Scratches. Take brimstone, and make it into fine powder, and mix it with sweet Butter, and anoint him therewith once a day. Another. Take unslackt Lyme, Salt and Soot, of each alike, all made into fine powder, boiled in the strongest white-Wine Vineger you can get, till it be as thick as a Poultess, then soften it with tried Hogs-grease, and so work it to an Ointment, and anoint the places grieved till they be cured Another. Take the tender tops of Elder-buds, and the berries of the Brambles while they be red, and before they be ripe, of each a handful, boil them in two quarts of Wort, and put to it the quantity of an Egg full of Allom, and wash the Sorrance very hot twice a day, Another. Take Verdegrease and make it into fine powder▪ and work that and common Honey together, till they come to an Ointment, anoint the Sorrance with it, and it will Cure them. Another. Take tried Hogs-grease and Gun-powder, of each as much as will suffice, incorporate your Gun-powder very well with it, after it is well beaten to powder, and anoint the place grieved with it once a day. Another. Take Honey, Verdegrease, Brimstone bruised small, green Copperas and Bay-salt, of each a like quantity, boyl all these with a double quan∣tity of Hogs-grease, and put to it a big Root of Elecampane, bruised in red Wine-Vineger, apply this to the Sore very hot, and supple them by Bathing them with new Milk from the Cow. Another. Take a hundred and twelve Snails, and put them in a Linnen-bag, and put to them a handful of Bay salt, and hang them against the heat
of the Fire, and catch the Oyl that shall drop from them, and keep it close in a Glass, and chafe it into his Leg; when he is dry, and three or four Dressings will Cure him. This must be made in May. Another. Take the spawn of Frogs, and distil it, and keep the water close stop∣ped in a Glass for your use, and wash and bath the places with it every day warm, and it will cure him. Another. Take Honey and Pepper made into very fine Powder, and boyl them together, and anoint the Sorrance therewith, and they will soon heal and dry up. Another for them being held incurable. First, let him blood in the Shackle-Veins, the Spu-Veins, and the fore Toe-Veins, only let it be three days between the bleeding of the one Toe and the other, then with a Thumb-Rope of Hay, rub the Sores till they be raw and bleed▪ then take a quart of old Urine, and a quart of strong Brine, and put to them half a pound of Allom, and boyl it to a quart. With this hot wash the Sores well, then take the Sperm of Frogs (in March) and put it into an earthen pot, and in a Weeks time it will look like Oyl, then take the Oyl and the round things you see in the Sperm, and spread it on a Cloth, and bind it to the Sores, and do this divers times. ☞ Another. A Piece of Bread sod in Vineger to a Poultiss, and laid to them, will draw out the cores, then take half an Ounce of Verdegrease, as much Brimstone in quantity and bigness, not in weight, and as much Honey as will fill an Egg-shell, boyl them together till they look black, and anoint the sore places with it, and this will heal them and cre them; or Seeth three or four Ounces of Brimstone in a quart of white-Wine Vineger, till a fourth part be wasted, and with a Clout put upon the end of a stick wash the sore Legs therewith as hot as your Horse can endure it, the Hair being first cut close, and the sore places and chops of his Heels made as clean and dry as you can. ☞ Another. Take two Ounces of green Copperas, and beat it to Powder, then take half a pound of English Honey, and half a pound of black Soap, an Ounce of burnt Oyster-shells, an Ounce of beaten Brimstone, boyl them altogether to a Salve, and anoint your Horses Heels with it cold.
☜ Another. Take two quarts of strong Ale, a Pint of old Malaga sack, a Handful of dried Rosemary beaten to powder, a handful of dried red Sage, two handfuls of dried Bay▪ leaves, and half a pound of Allom, boyl them al∣together till it be half consumed, then strain it, and when you use it anoint your Horses Feet with it every day warm till they be whole; Keep, him in the Stable during the Cure. The Mirrour of all Medicines for the Scratches, which never yet failed to Cure them, though their Legs were as big as two Legs, and though they Run never so much at the Heels, provided you follow these Directi∣ons; First, to draw Blood from him, and a Week after to give him these Balls, which will Purge away the evil Humors out of his Body. ☜ The urge. If he be a strong bodied Horse, and of a good stature, you may give him an Ounce and a half of the best Aloes you can get, and pound it to a very ine powder, then put some Butter to it, and word and mix it very well together with your Knife, then divide it into three parts, and cover every part of them over again with fresh Butter, and make them as big as a good Wash-Ball, then fasting in the Morning give him them upon the point of a stick, and ride him a little after it to warm them in his boyd, which will make them work the better, then bring him into the Stable and keep him warm, and let him fast two or three houres after it; then give him his Mash of Malt, and let him eat a little Hay, and so ride him softly after that. After you have given him his Balls, put down a Hornful or two of warm Beer after them. If you find him purge too much, so that it takes him quite off his Stomach, give him two or three wilde Briar balls beaten to powder in a quart of warm Beer, and it will soon stay him; or for want of them, boyl some Cinnamon, Pepper, Nutmegs, Ginger and Bay-berries in it. But if you find that he will not purge at all, which is very unlikely; then ride him to some green Corn that is not Eared, (or for want of that some four Grass) and let him eed thereon about a quarter of an hour, then ride him gently home, and set him up warm, and you shall find him purge very kindly without any danger. The Receipt for the Scratches. ☜ After you have thus purged him, clip off the Hair as close from his Heels as you can, then scrape off all the scabs till they bleed, and wash them with Brine, or Chamberly and Salt scalding hot. Then take a quarter of a pound of Brimstone, half a quarter of a pound of green Cop∣peras
beaten to Powder, or a quarter of a pound of Goose-grease, a penniworth of Tarr, boyl all these together in a very large Pipkin, or else they will boyl over; let them boyl about a quarter of an hour, then take a Rag and Tie it to a stick, and dip it into it, and put it all over the raw Places scalding hot, and dress it every other day; making his Feet first clean by washing off the stuff with scalding Brine, or Chamberly and Salt, and the Scabs picked off, and in three or four Dressings it will Cure them, be they never so bad, provided you keep him out of the VVater during his Cure. If you find his Legs not very much swelled you need not purge him. ☞ Another very good, but not so certain, but more proper for the Killing and shealing of all manner of Scabs growing about a Horses Legs. After you have Clipped off the Hair of his Legs very close, and rubbed off the Scabs with a Thumb-Rope of Hay, and washed them with scald∣ing Chamberly and Salt, or with scalding Brine, and when he is dry an∣oint him with this Ointment here under written; VVhen you come to use it mix with it as you use it, some Oyl of Turpentine, for it will be much the better. 'Tis this, take a pound of tried Hogs Grease, with a quarter of a Pint of rain Oyl, and boyl these things in it very well after they are beaten to fine powder, viz. Dyer-Galls five, of Verdegrease, Bolearmoniack, green Copperas, Allum, Brimstone, two wilde Briar-Balls, a Red Herring chopped small, throe or four sprigs of Rosemary, and as many of Rue, mix them as equally as you can, (I mean the rest of the Ingredient,) only Brimstone excepted, which you should have most of, about half a pound weight of all of them together is enough. After your Hogs-grease is melted, and the rest of the Ingredients boiled for some time in it, then put in two or three penniworth of Tart, and boyl that with it, which will take away the ill Sent of all the rest of the In∣gredients; when you have well boyl'd it, strain it out into a Pot, and keep it for your use. Observation upon it. When you dress his Legs with it, anoint him well with it over-night, and rub it off with a Thumb-Rope of Hay the next Morning very easily, for this Ointment will sheal them off extraordinarily, then wash it with scalding Brine, and at Night anoint him again with the same Ointment, keep him dry during the Cure. ☞ Another that Cureth not only the Scratches, but also all rotten and broken Cuts, and purified Sinews. After you have Ordered him, as in Observations how to Order him
in this Disease; take half a pound of English Honey, one Ounce of black Pepper beaten, about thirty Cloves of peeled Garlick, bruise and mix them very well together in a wooden Bowl, or Stone Mortar, till they come to a Salve, and apply it to the grieved place spread upon a brown Paper, doubled two or three times double, and put over that a Linnen Cloth, sowed fast to keep it from coming off; Bind also over that a Thumb band of wet Hay, and about two or three days after take all off, and make clean the grieved place very well with warm Beef-Broth; Do this three or four times after this manner, and it will certainly Cure them, conditionally you give him a Drench or two of the Drink that is called, A Drink to Cure the most malignant Farcy that is. The Vertues of this Salve. It will not only kill this Disease, but also draw, cleanse and knit Sinews together in a very strange and wonderful manner. ☜ A most Excellent Water, not only good for this Infirmity, but also for sore Heels, Sellender or Mallender, and to cleanse and heal any Wound or Sore, by drying up the evil Humour that abounds therein. After you have boiled a quart of Conduit or Spring-water, and scum∣med off the filth that shall arise on the top, take it off the Fire, and put it up into a Bottle, with two Ounces of white Copperas▪ and three Oun∣ces of the powder of burnt Allum; When you use it, shake the Glass to make it all alike, and apply it warm to the place grieved, and wrap a Linnen Rag dipt in Water about the Mallender three or four times double. This Water will keep many years, for the Older it is, the better. Things good in general for Foundring. First, pare all his Soles so thin, that you may see the quick, then let him Blood at every Toe, and let them Bleed well; then stop the Vein with Tallow and Rozn, and having Tackt hollow Shooes on his Feet, stop them with Bran, Tarr and Tallow as boiling hot as may be, and renew it once in two days for a Week together, then exercise him much, and his Feet will come to their Use and Nimbleness, or after he is pared thin, and let Blood at his Toes, stop his Feet with Cowes-dung, Kitchins Fee, Tarr and Soot Boiled together, and poured boiling hot into them. If you Travel your Horse, you must stop him with it cold, and add unto it the
white of an Egg or two, for that will take away the heat of the former days Journey. Or to stop his Feet with Tow dipt in an Ointment made of Turpentine, Sallet-Oyl, Verdegrease, Wax and Hogs-grease; If he be newly Foundred, give him with a Horn a Pint of fair Water with a handful of Salt in it; but if you stay three or four days, or longer, then give him of Hellebore a spoonful, of Saffron a penniworth, of Assfoetida and of Soap of Venice two drams, a little of the Seed of Bay, all made into Powder, and given him in a Pint of Vineger blood-warm, and cover him with a wet Cloth, and Cloath him warm, and Tie him up to the Rack, that he neither lie down nor Vomit, and let him Sweat an Hour, and cool him by degrees. Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Foundred Horse. For a Horse Foundred in his Feet, let him Blood in the Neck, Breast and Spur Veins, and take two quarts of Blood from him, with which make this Charge as followeth, Take the Blood and put into it eight new laid Eggs, shells and all, beat them well together, and put to it half a pound of Bolearmoniack beaten to powder, strong white-Wine Vineger one Pint, Sanguis dracnis three Ounces in fine powder, make this up with Wheat-Meal good and thick, with this Charge his Back, Reins, Breast, Thighes, Fetlocks and Soles, and spread two Cloaths Plaister-wise, good and thick, and apply them to the Coffin of his Feet, and bind the sore-Legs about the Knees good and streight, with broad Filleting or Lists, then ride him two houres upon a hard way, which if it be Paved or Pitcht it is the better, his Feet being Pared reasonable near before-hand, and when you do bring him into the Stable, let his Feet he stopped with this Charge▪ Take Rye or Wheat-Bran, Ox or Cows-dung, Sheeps Suet, or Turpentine, (which must be put in last) Mince your Sheeps Suet small, melt and heat all these upon the Fire, stirring them very well, then put in your Bran to make it into a stiff Paste, then put in your Turpentine and incorporate them all very well together, and stop your Horses Feet with it, which being thus charged and stopped three or four days together, ridden and kept warm, and not suffered to drink cold water, but either Mashes or white Water, he will be sound in four or six days If it be a dry Foundered by standing too long in the Stable, then Pare him somewhat near, and let him Bleed well in the Toe Veins. Then take Eggs, and roast them blew hard, and together with the Powder of Cummin stop his Feet therewith so hot, as they may be taken out of the Embers, and put over the Soles a piece of Leather, with Splints cross, to keep the Eggs from coming out. Take then a great Onion, peel and stamp it, and let it infse twenty four houres before in the strongest white-Wine Vineger you can get, and
give it the Horse presently, after you have stopped the Horses Feet, and cover him up warm, and let him stand upon the Trench three houres, and then give him Meat and white Water. Another for Foundering a Month or more. You must take out the Soles of his Feet, and have in a readiness these Things, Viz. Take the tender tops of Hysop three handfuls, pound them together in a Mortar to stench his Bleeding, then have this Receipt in a readiness. Take Snails in the shells, and take them forth and reserve them, then take a handful of Bay-salt, and two or three handfuls of the tender tops of the angriest Nettles you can find, beat them with your Snails and Salt to a Salve, then take out the Sole, and stench the bleeding with your Hysop, and when it leaveth Bleeding, apply this Medicine to it, and bind it up with Cloaths, and let it remain twenty four houres, then open it and heal it up with your green Ointment, which you may find in my First Part, and in two days you shall see a new Sole coming. But if he be but Hough-bound, then take Turpentine and Sheeps Suet, of each half a pound, Wax a little, Sallet-Oyl half a Pint, boyl altogether, but put in the Turpentine last, and as they boyl keep them with a continual stirring, and anoint his Houghs once a day well. For n ordinary Heat in his Feet. Take Wheat-Bran and Hogs-grease, and make them into a Poultess, and apply it as well to the Coffin as the Soles, and it will be well again. Another for a Founder or Frettize wet or dry. First, pare thin, open the Heels wide, and take good store of Blood from the Toes, then Tack on a Shoo somwhat hollow, broad at the Heels, and the inside of the Web, from the first Nail to the Heel turned inward towards the Frog, yet not to touch any part thereof, or the Hough, so as he may tread on the out-Verge of the Shoo, and not on the inward. Then take Burgundy Pitch, or Frankincense, and Rowling it in a little fine Cotton-Wooll or Bombast, with a hot Iron melt it into the Foot, betwixt the Shoo and the Toe, till the Orifice where the Blood was taken be filled up; then take half a pound of Hogs-grease and melt it, and mix it with Wheat-Bran till it be as thick as a Poultess, then boyling hot stop up his Feet with it, then cover it with a piece of an old Shoo, and splint it up, and so let him stand for three or four days, then if occasion serve you may renew it, otherwise the Cure is wrought. Observations on the Cure. First, You shall not need to Remove or stir his Shooes, then
after twenty four houres rub off the Charge from his Back. It. Take away his Gartrs after twelve houres, and rub his Knees and Houghs with your Hand, and with Wisps to take away the Numbness. It. If you cannot get Wheat-Meal, take Oat-Meal. It. If he will not Bleed in the Veins before-named, then bleed him in the Neck-Vein. Lastly, if you take him in Hand to Cure within twenty four houres af∣ter he is Founded, he will be Cured in twenty four houres, but if he go longer the Cure will be longer in doing. Now if he be Foundred through streightness of his hoe, which is not a Founder but a Frttizing▪ which is a degree less then Foundering. Then let him Blood on the oes, and stop the place with bruised Sage, and tack his Shoo on again, and stop it with Hogs-grease and Bran boil∣ed together, as hot as possible you can, and do this twice in a Fortnight▪ and give him rest and it will help him. ☞ An odd kind of Receipt to Cure a Foundred Horse, Ride him so hard as to Swat, then Ride him up to the Knees in Wa∣ter, and there let him stand about half an hour▪ which will cause the hu∣mour to ascend out of his Feet into his Body, then an hour after you come home, give him a thorough Scouring, and ride him gently after it, and so bring him home, and Cloath him up warm, and this will carry it out of his Body again. Probatum, by Mr. Goodman. Give him the Purge as aforesaid. ☞ Another for the taking out of his Sole. If you find that none of the Receipts for this Disease, have had their wished Effects in Order to his Cure, then follow these Directions for the taking out of his Soles, and though it be not the common way that is practised amongst our Smiths, yet 'tis looked upon to be the best and safest; 'Tis this, First, Te about his Pastern a List or Cord so hard, as will keep up the Blood into his Leg, that it fall not down to trouble you, then pare the Foot thin, and cut the Hough round with your Incision Knife to the quick, as near to the inside of the outward shell of the Hough as you can raise the ole at the Toe, then take hold of it with a pair of Pinchers, and pluck it gently upwards towards the Heel, for fear of breaking the Vein in the Foot. When you have so done tack on the Shoo again somewhat hollow and broad, then untie the Cord, and knock round the Hough with a Blood staff, and the Blood will descend very freely, which when you think he hath bled enough, stanch it with
two or three handuls of Hysop bruised with Salt, and put over it Flox Hurds or Tow, and over them a piece of stiff Leather between the Hurds and the Shoo, to keep them in; Or you may put two or three flat sticks, cross them in the room of the Leather; About twenty four houres after or more, take away the Flox or Hurds, and bruise a handful or two of the angrist red Nettles you can get with Bay-salt, and apply them, and cover them over with the Hurds and Splinters as you did before; About a Month after or more open it again, and new dress it with Salt and Hogs-grease well bruised and mixed together, and splint it up as you did before with Tow or Flax, or some such like thing. Contrive this last Medicine during his Cure, which will be perfected in two or three times dressing more at farthest; If you find him somwhat sound, tack on a Shoo with a broad Web, and let it stand wide and easie, and in twelve or thirteen days he will be fit to Ride an easie Journey; When you Ride him at any time, when you bring him home at Night, apply all over his Foot, both inside and outside, a Poultess made of about four Ounces of Sheeps Sut cut small, and white-Wine Vineger boiled together, and keep it on with Hurds and Splints as you did before; Let this remain about fourty eight houres or more. This last Poultess used three or four times will very much strengthen his Hough, and make him stand again. Directions for the Ordering of him. 1. To let Blood, and keep him in during his Cure. 2. If he be Foundred of both his Fet, take not out both his Soles to∣gether, for then he will not be able to stand, nor Rise when he is down. 3. Some Smiths do take out the Frush and Sole, and some but only the Sole; your often Practice in this Cure will be the best Directer. 4. The common way of taking out of Soles is known by every Coun∣trey Smith. 5. The Poultess that I Ordered to be last applied to the Sole and Cof∣fin of the Foot, i very good applied to it when it hath been bruised by stub, stone, or any other Accident. ☜ A other for the Foundring in the Chest. About five or six penniworth of the Oyl of Peter, with the like quan∣tity of Ale or Ber mixed with it, and well rubbed in with your Hand, holding a hot Fire shovel at the same time before it, while you are doing it, is a very good help in order to his Cure. If you intend to have the right Oyl of Peter, do not stint your self in the pric of it, for if you do they will mix Oyl of Turpentine with it. Things good in general for the Mallender and Sellander. You are always in these Diseases first to wash and shave away the Hair, and rub the Sorrance with a Wisp till it be raw, and dry up the yellow Matter that comes out of it, before you apply any thing to it.
What Cures the Scratches will Cure this Disease. Gun-powder bruised in Hogs-grease, and anoint the Grief therewith, a soft Rowed Herring out of the Pickle, beaten with Soap and Allom, and laid to it, and renewing it for three days together, and pluck off the Scabs before you lay it on again, Hens dung and Gilly▪Flowers beaten to∣gether, or Soap and Lyme laid to it, or the Dung of a Man, or Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt-ntre, Sal▪ game mixt with Oyl de bay, or green Copperas, Allum and Tobaccho boiled in Urine, or Oyl of Turpentine, Oyl of Hemp-seed, Mustard, Verdegrease, &c. Particular Receipts for the Cure of these Diseases. Take Glovers shreds which he cutteth from his white Leather, and boyl them in white-VVine Vineger till they be soft, and bind this to it hot, and if you find that in once or twice dressing it take not away the Scurf or Scab, renew it daily till it doth, for by this means the Roots of the bristly Hairs which grow in it, which feedeth the Mallender will be taken away by this Receipt, which will cause it soon to be Cured. ☞ Another. To anoint the Sorrance with the Oyl of Turpentine, will both kill and heal it, and make it marvellous sound. And this will likewise Cure the Scratches. Another. Take an Ounce of Gun-powder, bruise it to dust and mix it well with Hogs-grease and Allom, and chae it in well, two or three dressings will Cure it▪ Another. Take Verdegrease and soft grease and grind them well together to an Ointment, put it in a Box by it self. Then take VVax, Hogs-grease and Turpentine, of each alike, and being melted together, put that Salve into another Box; and when you come to dress the Sore, after you have taken off the Scab, and made it raw, anoint it with your green Salve of Verdegrease and fresh Grease, only for two or three days. It is a sharp Salve, and will kill the Cankerous humour, then when you see the Sore look fair, you shall take two parts of the yellow Salve, and one part of the green Salve, and mix them together, anoint the Sore there∣with till it be whole, making it stronger or weaker, as you shall find oc∣casion. Another. Take of the strongest white-VVine Vineger, and boyl it, and so boyling
hot, rub the Mallender there with twice every day until it do bleed, that done, put upon it the powder of Verdegrease good and thick, and so bind it on with a Clout, and let it so remain till a Crust come thereon, and when you shall find the Crust to be dry, and withal to Chop, anoint the grieved places with tried Hogs-grease, and that will cause the Crust to fall off. ☜ Another. After you have rubbed off the Scabs, and washed it well with scalding Chamberly and Salt, anoint it with this Salve made of green Copperas, Galls, Verdegrease, Gun-powder and Allom, all made into fine powder, and made up in Hogs grease and Tarr. Things good in general to eat away proud Flesh. Ink, quick Sulphur, Orpiment, Lethergy, unslackt Lyme, Roch Allom, Galls, Soot, Verdegrease, green Copperas, white Copperas, Precipitate, the Juice of Borage, Scabius, Fumitary, a little Oyl and Vineger boiled with a soft Fire, and put to it Tarr, and it will eat away any dead Flesh, Oyl of Vitriol, black Hellebore, the Root of it beaten to powder, Ars∣nick, &c. An Excellent Ointment to eat away all dead Flesh, ad to heal the same. Take of common Honey two Ounces, Roch-Allom, Verdegrease and Vineger, of each an Ounce; Sublimate two drams: let all be made into fine powder, and boyl it a few Warmths, keeping it still stirring, and then take it from the Fire▪ and keep it in a Gally pot close stopped for your use. Apply it upon Lint or fine Hurds to the Sorrance once a day, and it Cureth speedily and soundly, but before you dress the Sore, you cleanse, wash and inject the Wound with this water. A Water to wash and cleanse a Sore or VVound, before you use the Oint∣ment above. Take red Sage, Plantain, Rib-wort, Yarrow, Bramble-leaves, Rose∣mary, Hysop, and Honey-suckle leaves, of each half a handful, boyl them in one Pint of white-Wine, and as much of Smiths or Cold Trough water, then add thereto the boyling of common Honey one spoonful, and as much Allom as a Wall-nut, and a bright black piece of a Sea▪coal, the bigness of an Egg unbroken, then let it boyl till half be consumed, then strain it hard and wash the Sore therewith, and if the Wound
be deep, inject of this Water with a Syringe into it every day when you dress him, and by this doing you shall cleanse the Wound, and take away all bad and dead flesh, and heal it up soundly. ☞ Another Water to cleanse and heal a Sre. To a Gallon of Smiths Water and a quart of Ale, add two Handfuls of Sage, a Pint of Honey, an Ounce of common Allum, and half an Ounce of white Copperas; boyl them very well together till they be all con∣sumed, and put them into a clean Vessel, and keep them for your use. Dr take Spring-water, and put to it Roch-Allum and Madder, and boyl them till they be both consumed, and put them up for your use. Or take Sage, Cinquefoyl and Fennel, of each a good handful, and boyl them in a Gallon of Spring-water till they be tender, then strain the Liquor from the Herbs, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Roch-Allum, and let it boyl again a little while, till the Allum be dissolved, then take it from the Fire, and make use of it after this manner, viz. Dip Lint in it warm, and lay it upon the Sore, and if it be hollow apply more Lint; Then make a Bolster of Linnen Cloth, and wet it well in the Water, then wring out the Water, and bind on the Bolster close. A Receipt for a Puncture or green Wound. If it be in the Foot, or any other part of the Body, if you can come well unto it, or if it be an Imposthumation unbroken, scald it first with this Medicine. Then wash it with the Water above. Medicne. Take red Tarr a penniworth, of the reddest and best, of Hogs grease half a pound, of green Copperas and Bay-salt of each a handful, both made into fine Powder, boyl all these very well, and with a Clout fastned upon a stick, apply it scaulding hot four Mornings together, for this scaulding doth so kill the Malice of the Fistula, that it can never break to annoy the Horse any further. It Careth the Imposthumes and oul Ulcers, being thus applied. ☞ Things god to take a VVen, or any other Excression arising in the Flesh, or hard Swellings. Balm used with Salt, taketh away the hard Swellings in the Throat, or Wns or Kernels therein. The Decoction of the lesser Sellendine wonderfully Cureth all hard Wens, or Tumors applied to them, The seed of Darnel, Pigeons dung, Sallet-Oyl and the Powder of Linseed boled to the form of a Plaister, consumeth them, the Seed of Turn-Sole
laid upon them▪ Archangel, or rather the Hedge-Nettle stamped with Vineger and applied as a Poultess, taketh away any hard Swelling, and also fiery hot Inflammations. To Tie a double Thread about it to eat it off, then with your Incision-Knife cut it a cross in four equal parts or quarters to the very bottom, but beware you touch not either Vein or Sinew, then with Oyl of Vitriol eat it away, or with Mercury; or else burn them off with your hot Iron, then heal the place with your green Ointment. The Leaves of Bucks-horn bruised and applied will consume them. The Milk that issueth out of the Fig-Tree Branches when they are broken and applied, is also very good; so is the Juice of Housleek or Mercury; the Juice of the Leaves and Flowers of Mullein, with the Powder of the dried Root rubbed upon them taketh them away. The Water that droppeth from the hollow places of the Popla-Tree an∣ointed with it doth the like, Garden-Rue bruised with a few Myrtle∣leaves made with Wax, and applied, taketh away all sorts of them, so doth an Ointment made of the burnt Ashes of the Willow-Tree, mixed with Vineger, and the place anointed therewith, &c. Things good to Cure an Anbury, which is a great spungy Wart full of Blood. To Tie it about with a Thread or Hair so hard as you can pull it, and in few days it will fall away of it self, then strew upon it the Powder of Verdegrease to kill it at the Root, and heal it up again with your green Ointment. But if it be so flat that you cannot bind any about it, then take it away with your Incision-Knife close to the Skin, or else burn it off with a hot Iron, and then first kill the Fire with Turpentine and Hogs▪Grease molten together, and heal it up as before prescribed, but if it grow in such a Sinewy place that it cannot be conveniently cut away with a hot Iron▪ then eat it out with the Oyl of Vitriol, and heal it up as you do other Wounds. Head Purged, Vide Perfumes in the First Part. ☜ Things good for to put in Ointments and Salves for the Cure of all manner of Wounds in General. The Juice of ordinary Centaury is good to cleanse Old Sores, and to heal p Wounds, the Juice of the leaves of Cleavers do close up the Lips of green Wounds, or the powder of the Seed of the Herb doth the same, Clowns Wound-wort, Coral-wort, Cole-wort, the powder of the Root of Sow-Fennel, or Hogs-Fennel, Fox-gloves, Golden-rod, Winter-green, True love or one Berry, Hounds tongue, St. Johns-wort, Kidney-wort, Knape-weed, Ladie, Mantle is the best Wound-Herb that is, and is good for inward and outward Wounds, Loose∣strif.
The dryed leaves of Medlers strewed upon a Wound▪ healed it quickly, Money▪wort or the Herb two pence. The Juice of Nettles is good to wash a Wound with, and if it be bound to it but three days you need no other Medicine, Pimpernel, Ground-pine, Plantine, Rag-wort, wld Sage, Sarasens Consound, Solomons Seal, Sanicle, Burnet, Saxafrage, Scabius, Self▪heal, Southern-wood, the Juice of wild Tansie, Tutsan, Vervain, Blew-bottle, Elder, Couch-grass or Dogs-grass, Daf∣fadil, Cranes-bill, Comfrey, doth so Conglutinate things together, that it is reported that it will sodder Meal together, being cut into pieces and put into the Pot, Celandine, Broom, Turpentine, Mastick, Frankincense, Balsom, the leaves of Elm, Flix-weed is good for Ulcers and VVounds, Byfoyl, Costmary, Cowslips, Cross-wort, Yarrow is good for Fistulaes and Ulcers, &c. Particular Receipts for Salves or Ointments, for VVounds Old or New. Take common Honey and Verdegrease finely pulverized, of each as much as will suffice, boyl them together till the Medicine wax red, and this will heal up any Old or green Sore in short space. Another. Take Turpentine, black Soap, Hogs-grease, green Treat and Pitch a like quantity, mix and boyl them together, and apply it warm, either Plaiser-wise or Tent-wise. Another. Take a quarter of a pound of Butter, of Tarr and black Soap of each half as much, and a little Turpentine, boyl all but the Soap together, and when you take it off the Fire, put in the Soap, with this Ointment dress any Cut and it will heal it, or Hogs-grease and Venice-Turpentine melted together. Another. Take eight drams of Venice-Turpentine, four drams of New Virgins wx, melt them in a Pewter Vessell, and stir them well together, and when they are well melted and mixed, take them from the fire, and put into them half a Pint of white-Wine, and when it is cold, pick holes in it, and let the white-Wine run out, then anoint your Hands with Oyl of Roses, and work the Wax and Turpentine well together, then put them into the Pewter vessel again, and put to them half an Ounce of the Gum of the Firr-tree, and three drams of the Juice of Bitony, then Seeth them well together till the Juice of Bitony be wasted▪ and put to it three drams of Womens Milk, or the Milk of a red Cow, and Seeth them once again until the Milk be wasted, and so keep it for your use in a Gally-pot.
Another Take Worm-wood, Marjorum, Pimpernel, Calamint, Olibanum, beat them all into powder, and boyl them in Wax, and Barrows-grease till they be as thick as an Oyntment or Salve, with this dress any Wound, and it will heal it. Others. The powder of Honey and Lyme, or Turpentine simply of it self, will dry up and Skin any Wound. If your Horse be goared upon a Stake, then pour into the Wound Butter scalding hot, and let him lie after he is cast, so long as you think the Ointment is gone down to the bottom, and do thus once a day till it be whole. If you desire to keep a Wound open, put in the Powder of green Copperas, but if to heal it up speedily, then Wheat-Flower and Honey well beaten together will do it. Another for any new Wound or Hurt. A quarter of a pound of the Powder of Bolearmoniack put into the best white▪Wine Vineger as you can get, and boiled well upon the Fire, ☜and a piece of Butter put into it when it comes off the Fire, and the Wound washed therewith warm once every day will be soon well. Or Linseed Oyl is very good put into a Wound to heal it up, and to kill a Gangreen if it be well washed and cleansed with Batter aad Vineger; Or Train-Oyl and the Powder of Verdegrease melted together, will heal and skin any Wound well and quickly. If you desire to see more variety of Ointments, Salves, Powders and Waters; Look for them in the First Part. Observations upon Dressing of Wounds. If he hath a Wound in his Head newly made, or in any other part that is full of Sinews, Bones or Gristles▪ wash it well with white-Wine warm∣ed, and keep it while you are in dressing covered warm with wet Cloaths, then search the bottom of the Wound with a Probe, and let it take as little Wind and Air as you can, and having found the bottom of it, stop the Wound close with a Clout till your Salve be ready. If the Wound be a Cut, make a handsom Rowl of soft Tow, o ong and so big as may fill the bottom of the Wound, which for the most part is not so wide as the Mouth of the Wound, then make another Rowl somewhat bigger, to fil up the rest of the Wound, even the hard Mouth, and anoint them with such Ointment as you shall think fit for the Cure, luke-warm, only observe this, that if the Wound be large, stitch the Wound a little together with Crimson Silk, it will heal the sooner and make the Scar less. But if the Hurt be like a Hole made with some Prick, then make a stiff Taint either of Tow or Lint, so long as will reach the bottom, and anoint it with your Ointments, and Bolster the same with a little Tow,
and clap a sticking Plaister over it made of Pitch, Rosin, Mastick and Turpentine, melted together; if the Mouth of the Wound be not wide enough to let out the matter, if it be in such a place as you may do it without hurting the Sinews, give it a slit from the Mouth downwards, that so the Matter may have the free passage out, and be sure to keep in the taint by one means or other, and that it be not drowned within the Wound, and to tie some thread at the upper end thereof, that it may be taken out at pleasure. Now if the hole be deep and in such a place as you cannot cut it, then make your tent full as big as the hole of a dry Spunge that was never wet, so long as it may reach the bottom, and the tent being made somwhat full with continual turning and wrying of it, you shall easily get it down, and dress the Wound twice a day, and cleanse it every time with white-Wine luke-warm, for the Spunge an∣nointed with the Oyntment, will both draw and suck up all the evil Matter, and make it very fair within, and as it beginneth to heal every day tent it lesser and lesser, until it be ready to close up, and never leave Tenting it so long as it will receive a Tent, be it never so short; for hasty healing of Wounds breedeth Fistulaes▪ which properly be old Sores; and therefore must be healed like Fistulaes. Now if the wound proceed from some Ancient Impostumation, then take to or three great Onions, and taking out the Cores, put therein a little bay-Salt and a little whole Saffron, and roast them in hot Embers then Plaister∣wise lay them hot to the Wound, renewing it once a day till it be whole. Now if the upper Skin of the Wound be putrified to take it a∣way, lay a Plaister of Cows dung to it od in Milk, and there let it re∣main for twenty four hours, and it will leave nothing vile about the Wound. ☞ An Excellent Receipt for any green▪Wound. Take Peny-royal, Camomil, Brook-lime, Rag-wort or Rag-weed, Sage, Ground-pine, Ivy, Plantaine, Yarrow, Featherew, Maiden-hair, of each a handfdl, shred and bruise them very well in a Mortar together, then set them over the Fire in a pound and a half or more of Hogs-Seam or Lard, with half a pound of Ders Suet, let them gently Simper for a∣bout an Hour; Then take it off the Fire, and strain the Herbs from the Liquor, and set it over the Fire again, and make it boil up; then take it off, and put into it a quarter of an Ounce of Verdegrease finely powdred and searced, with a quarter of an Ounce of burnt Allom, and an Ounce of common Bees Wax, and a good quantity of the Oyl of Deers Shank, stir them very well together, and put it into a Pot, and keep it for your use. If you cannot get Maiden-hair, use Chickweed and for want of Deers Suet, or Oyl of Deers Shank, put in a pound of Seam or Lard, half a pound of My utter, and half a pound of Sheeps Tallow.
☜ How to make Adders Tongue Ointment, which is a most Sovereign and Ex∣cellent Ointment for any Beast that hath been stung or bitten by any ve∣nomous Creature; Or for any Wound by Stake, Bite or any other Ac∣cident; As also for any hard Swelling in any Part of the Body, and is also very good for the Garget in a Cows Bag, chafed in very well with your Hand twice a day. Take as much of the Herb Adders Tongue as you have occasion to use▪ with a third part of Male Plantine, and bruise them very well in a Mortar together, then put to it fresh Butter new from the Churn, well beaten from the utter Milk, and mix it very well with your Herbs, but put not in so much of it as to make it lose its green Colours; After you have so done, put it into an earthen Pan, and let it lie about three or four Weeks in some cool place till it grow mouldy, then melt it down upon a gentle Fire till the Herbs grow crisp; then strain it out into some convenient thing fit for your purpose, and keep it for your use. You may dissolve into it if you please (when it comes off the Fire) some fine and clear Turpentine, which will make it much the better. You may make an Excellent green Balsom for the said Distempers, if you boy▪ the Herbs in Sallet Oyl, and dissolve into it when it comes off the Fire, some fine clear Turpentine. This Ointment is made only in the Month of April or May, the Herb being then to be found, and in its prime, for it soon perisheth with a little heat. ☜ Another f r a Sore or Swelling. Black Soap, common Turpentine, Green Treat, (which is a green Ointment bought at the Apothecaries,) Pitch and Hogs-grease, of each a small quantity boiled well together, and applied is very good. ☜ Another to dissolve any Sore or Swelling is very good without breaking. Take half a pound of black Soap, (or for want of that common Soap) as much Bolearmoniack powdred, with a little of the powder of un∣slackt Lie, and put to them a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, with a small Gll of the Oyl of Roses, and Oyl of Linseed, and anoint them with it, and it will help them. Things good to Cure a Galled or Swelled Back in General. ☜ Take the white of an Egg and beat it to an Oyl, then take Flower, Honey and olearmoniack, finely beaten, and mix them well together, and spread it upon a piece of thin Leather, and lay it over the place gal∣led, and it will not come off till it be well. Or take the Soot of the Chimney, and mix it with Cream till it become a Salve, and make a
Plaister thereof, and lay it to the Gall and Swelling, and it will Cure him. Or take some two or three spoonfuls of Aquavitae, and put to it some Sope and boyl them well together, and anoint the place well with it, as hot as it can be well applied to the Swelling, and it will take it down, or Loam boyled in Vineger to a Poultess, and apply to it very hot taketh it down. ☞ Or take a Loaf of wheaten Bread and cut a slice of it, and toast it very well, and when it is toasted, spread it all over with Honey on both sides, and prick it full of holes, and toast it till the Honey is well soaked into it, and the toast is become dry, then put it into a Mortar, and beat it to powder, and keep it for your use, when you use it, strew it upon the Galled place, and it will dry it up in a short space. To take away any Swelling, and to heal any Galled back whatsoever. ☞ Take only the Oyl of Turpentine, and lay it upon the raw Back Morning and Evening with a Feather, and it will heal it up, and so use it to a Swelled Back, it will either sink it or break it. Another for a Galled Bck, Enterering or Shackle-Gaul. Take three parts of Sheeps dung newly made, and one part of Rye, or Wheat Flower, and dry the Flower and mix it well with the Sheeps dung, kneading it to a Paste, and make it into a Cake and bake it, and apply the powder warm unto the place, and it will heal it very well, or anoint it with Turpentine and Verdegrease mixed together, finely powdred. Aother Take Water and Salt and boyl them well together, and wash the place therewith. Then take Pepper made into fine powder, and strew it upon the place and it will heal it in a very short time, or to bruise a new laid Egg between his Legs, and rub the place with it, Cureth the Gall there. Another. Take the leaves of Ars-smart, and wash them, and lay them all over the place, and though you ride him every day, yet they will heal very fast, but if he remain in the Stable, put the Water of the leaves upon it. Another which Cureth not only Galled Backs, but any other Wound whatsoever. Take Rosin and common Pitch, of each six ounces, Mastick and Incense of each one ounce, Turpentine, Galbanum, Bolearmoniack, of each three ounces, melt and incorporate all these together upon a gentle
fire, and as they begin to cool make them up in Rowls, and when you use it, spread it upon a Cloth or Leather somewhat thin, but if you use it without either Cloth or Leather, to any outward part that is not yet broken, then lay it on much thicker then you use to do Plaister-wise, and whilest it is warm clap Flox of the same Colour upon it. This is a most excellent defensative Plaister for the staying and drying up of all evil humours, and also very Sovereign for asswaging of Swellings. Another for a sore Back. Take the Juice of Cellandine and Live Honey, of each two spoonfuls, beat them with the Yolk of an Egg, and as much Allom and Wheat∣flower as will serve to bring it to a Salve, dress the Sore with this once a day and it draweth and healeth. Now though these Medicines are e∣nough, yet because Farriers hold divers Opinions, and think what they know to be the best, I shall give you a Catalogue of their Receipts in Ge∣neral. The powder of Bryer-leaves, Rye-flower, the powder of burnt Oyster∣shells, the white of an Egg, Honey, Barley, Straw burnt and Soot will ☜dry up and heal a sore Back. The powder of Honey and unslackt Lime will skin any Gall, provided the Sore be first washt with Vineger and Onions boiled in Water, and laid hot to a swoln Horses Back, will asswage the Swelling, and the Yolk of an Egg, Salt and Vineger will heal it up when it is broken, provided you wash the Sore with Ale wherein Rosemary hath been sod. The Soot or Grim of a Pot will dry and skin a galled Back. ☜ Things good for inward or outward Bruises, or Swellings in General. Wood and Water-Bitony, Honey-suckle leaves, Knot Grass, Arch∣angel, Plantine, Rib-wort, Yarrow, Bursa-pastoris, Bugle, Chervil, Mal∣lows, Solomons Seal, Sarasens Consound, Sarasens Wound-wort, Sca∣bius, Self-heal, Sanicle, Sope-wort, Thorough-wax, Rosin, Turpentine, Honey, Galbanum, St. Johns-wort, Pitch, &c. The Juice of Arsmart consumeth all cold Swellings, and dissolveth all congealed Blood, got by Bruises, Strokes or Falls; The Root of Cinque∣foyl, Cud-weed or Cotton-weed doth the like, Osmond-royal or Water-Fern is also good; Golden Rod outwardly applied is good for them: Nep or Catmint bruised, and the Juice given inwardly is also very good. The Decoction of Wood Sage is a very good Remedy for any inward Vein broken, to disperse and avoid the congealed Blood, and to con∣solidate the Veins; Sanicle is also good. The powder of Bolearmo∣mack given in warm Ale stops any inward Bleeding; the powder of Irish Slate given also in warm Ale is good for any inward Bruise what∣soever, &c.
Particular Receipts for the Cure of Bruises or Swellings. First, Ripen it with Hay boiled in Chamberly, or with rotten Litter laid upon it, then let out the Corruption, then fill the hollowness with the powder of Rosin, and lay a Plaister of Shoomakers Wax over it, and thus do once a day while it be whole, if it be slow of skinning or healing up, strew on the powder of unslackt Lime, and Bolearmoniack mixt to∣gether, and if any proud Flesh arise, take it down either with burnt Al∣lom, or Verdegrease in powder. ☞ Another. Take Ale or Beer Yest, and Verjuice, and putting a little fine Hay thereunto, boyl them well together, then bind the Hay to the swelling, and pour on the Liquor, and do thus three or four days together, and it will take away the swelling, or rotten Litter and Hay boiled in Urine will take it away. ☞ Another for any inward Bruise, by Fall or otherwise. Take near a quart of strong Beer or Ale, and put to it one Ounce of the powder of Bolearmoniack, and half an Ounce of the powder of Irish Slae, and boyl it a little and give it him fasting in the Morning, for three or four Mornings together lukewarm, and he will do well. ☞ Another for a Swelling upon the Head, occasioned by a Blow or oherwise. If the Swelling be on both sides, then Blood on both sides; but if it be but on one side, then Blood but on that side the Swelling is of, and give him this Drink, viz. One Ounce of Anniseeds, one Ounce of Turmerick, half an Ounce of Bayberries all beaten to powder, with a Gill full of the Juice of Herb-grace, red Sage and Wormwood; Put all this into a quart of strong Beer lukewarm, and give it him fasting in the Morning, and Order him as you do a Horse that hath had Physick. 'Tis good also to apply this outward application to it, viz. a little common Soap put to a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, and rub and chase it in with your Hand very well, and heat it in with a hot Fire-shovel; Leave it as thick upon the Swelling as you can. This will prevent a Farcy, which Blows and Strokes do commonly breed, and is also very good for any old or new Swelling whatsoever. ☞ Another which will take away any Crusty Knobs, or hard Swellings in any part of the Body of a Horse. According to the Cure you are to undertake, whether great or small, proportion Oyl of Turpentine, and strong Beer or Ale, and let it be of
equal parts alike, well shaked together in a Glass, and then rub and chafe it very well in with your Hand, and heat it also in with a hot Fire-shovel; and two or three days after apply a Charge of common Soap and Brandy, well chafed in, as you did the Turpentine before; You may if you please put in a little of the Oyl of Wormes, which is a great Mollifier of any Crusty, hard or Bony part. If you will see more of this kind, vide Observations upon Bruises and Strains about three Leaves further. Things good in General to Cure Swelled Legs. ☜ Nerve Oyl, black Soap and Boars Grease melted together, and anoint the place with it, or to Bathe his Legs in Butter and Beer, or in Vineger and Butter melted together, or with Sheeps-foot Oyl, or with Train Oyl, or with Piss and Salt Peter boiled together, and to rowl his Legs with Hay-Ropes wet in the same Liquor, from the Pastern to the Knee, but not bind them too hard, or to Bathe him with the water wherein had been boiled Sage, Mallows and Rose Cakes, and Butter and Sallet Oyl put into it, or to take Frankincense, Rosin, fresh Grease, of each alike, boiled and strained, and used once a day, as you see occasion; Or to Wash his Legs with the coldest Fountain-Water you can get; or to let him stand every day till the Swelling be asswaged, in running Water up to the Knees; Or else take Primrose-leaves, Violet leaves, Straw-berry Leaves, of each a handful, boyl them in new Milk till they be soft, then put into it of Nervel, of Petroleum, and of Pumpilion, of each an Ounce, anoint him with it for five or six days together; Or take Pitch, Virgins Wax, Rosin, the Juice of Hysop, Galbanum, Myrrh, secondary Bdellium, Arabicum Populeon and Storax, according to your Discretion, and boyl them in Deers Sewet, and when it is cold put into it Bolearmoniack and Costus beaten into fine powder, and incorporate them well together in∣to the other Ingredients and boyl them all over again, and when it is almost cold, work them up into Rowls, and when you use it, spread it upon a Plaister, and wrap it about the Swelling, and let it stay there till it drop off of it▪self; this is good for a Surfeit. ☜ To Asswage the Swelling of a Horses Legs, that is very much Swelled by rea∣son of the Scratches. Take a quart of Chamberly or more, as you shall think fit, and put into it a handful of Bay-Salt, a quarter of a pound of Soap, a pretty quantity of Soot, a good handful of Misle-toe chopt, boyl them all very well together, and Bath his Legs with it very warm two or three times a day, and wrap a Cloth wet in the same, and lap about it, and this will asswage them. If you will have more Receipts for swelled Legs; see the first Part for Plai∣sters and Baths for swelled Legs.
☞ Things good to Cure a Horse that is Spu-gall'd, or Shackle-Gall'd, or Lock-Gall'd. Salt and Urine mixt together, or Salt and Water, and the place bathed with it takes out Venom; warm Vineger is likewise good, or else bind unto the place, the tender tops of Nettles stamped, Oyl of Turpentine is good, or Allom and green Copperas boiled in Water, and wash the place with it, the leaves of Briony stamped and bruised with Vineger, and ap∣plied to the Place, Honey and Verdegrease boiled together till it look red, and anoint the place with it twice a day, and strow upon it some chopt Flox to keep on the Salve, is very good for Shackle-galls, and chiefly for the Scratches, &c. Things good in General to Cure the Diseases of the Eyes, as Watery Eyes, ☞Blood-shotten Eyes, Dim Eyes, Moon-Eyes, Wart in the Eye, Inflammation in the Eye, Pearl, Pin, Web or Haw, &c. The Juice of Cabbages and Coleworts boiled with Honey and drop∣ped into the Eye, cleareth the Sight and consumeth any Felm, as also the Canker that groweth therein, the Juice of Celandine put into the Eye, taketh away the Pin and Web in the Eye, and cleareth the Sight, the Juice of ordinary Centaury cleareth the Sight, the Juice of Ground-Ivy, alias Ale Hoof is good for Moon-Eyes, and to clear the Sight, the Juice of Housleek is good to allay the fiery Heat of the Eyes, and is good likewise for Rheumatick and watery Eyes, the Juice of Germander put into the Eye, taketh away the Pin and Web, and all dimness of Sight, so doth the Juice of Eye-bright, so doth the Juice of Horehound with Honey. The seed of Clary powdered and finely sarced, and mixt with Honey, taketh away dimnss of Sight, and is good for Watery Eyes likewise, so doth the Juice of Dragon, Ale-Hoof, Celander and Da∣sies stamped and strained, and white Sugar, and white Rose-water put to it, taketh away all manner of Inflammations, Spots, Webs, Itch, smart∣ing and any grief whatsoever in the eyes, nay, though the Sight be in a manner gone. The leaves of common Ivy laid asteep in water for twenty four houres helpeth sore and smarting waterish Eyes, the Juice of Endive cleareth the Sight, the distilled water of Groundsel, the Juice of Melilote cleareth the Sight, the distilled water of the Lilly of the Valley is good for Inflammations of the Eyes, or for Pin and Web, the powder of Licoris blown into the Eye, is good likewise for the same, with Rheumatick Distillations in them, the distilled water of Loose-strife is good for hurts and blows in the Eyes, and for blindness, the distilled water of Lovage taketh away the redness and dimness of them, sweet Marjorum stamped
with fine Flower, and laid to them, is good for Inflammations in them, the Juice of Mercury is good for waterish Eyes, the Juice of Pimpernel with a little Honey cooleth the Inflammations of them, and taketh away the Pin and Web, the Juice of Purslain is good to take away the redness of the Eye, the Juice of the Yellow Rattle-grass with Honey put into the Eyes, or the whole seed put into them draweth forth any Skin, Dimness or Felm from the Sight, the distilled Water of red Roses, is good for the heat and redness in the Eyes, and to stay and dry up the Rheum and Wateriness in them, the Juice of Rue, Fennel, Honey, and the Gall of a Cock put thereto is good, the Juice of Strawberry leaves ickt into the Eye is good, or take Strawberries and put them into a Glass well stopped, and set it in a Horse-dunghil for twelve or fourteen days, and then distil it, is good for Inflamed eyes, or to take away any Felm or skin that groweth over them. The distilled water of the wild Tansie, or the Juice of it taketh away the heat and Inflammations in them, Medow trefoil or Honey-suckle leaves is good for a Pin and Web, the distilled water of Vervain is good to clear the sight, and to take away the felm; the Juice of Violet-leaves is good to take away the Inflammatio of them, either applied outwardly, or put into them, Spring-wate is good to bath an inflamed eye with, water that is gather∣ed from the Willow-tree when it Flowreth, the Bark being slit and a fit∣ting Vessel to receive it, is very good for redness and dimness of Sight, and for Felms that cover the Eye, and to stay the Rheum that falls into them, the Juice of Mustard▪seed is good for dimness of Sight, the Juice of an Onion with Honey cleareth the Eye, and doth remove the Pin and Web, and amendeth the Blood-shotten Eye, the Juice of the Blessed Thistle is good for the same, the Flowers or Roots of Valerian boiled in white-Wine cleareth the Sight, Egg-shells burned between two Tiles and beaten to powder, after the inward Felm is taken away, is good for dim∣ness of Sight, Lapis Calaminaris, Plantine-Water, white-Wine squirted into his Eyes, cleareth them, so does Alloes, Camphire powder, white Vitriol, or white Copperas blown into his Eye after it is beaten to pow∣der, and searced very fine, taketh away the Pin and Web, or any Felm whatsoever, the Ashes of the Root of black Sallow Sugar-Candy, and grated Ginger and Salt made up in Butter and little Balls, and put one into his Eye once a day taketh away the Felm of it, Bine-Bole, or Bole∣armoniack with white Sugar Candy blown into the Eye, stoppeth any Rheum that falleth into the Eyes, Alabaster beaten very fine and searced and blown into the Eye, taketh away any Felm whatsoever, so doth the powder of a black Flint burnt, Sanguis Draconis taketh away a Felm, so doth the Bone of the Cuttle-Fish beaten to powder and blown into the Eye, and is likewise good for Blood-shotten Eyes, May-Butter, Rosemary, Yellow Rosin and Cellandine stamped and Fried, and kept in a Box, is a
Jewel for the Eyes, burnt Allom blown into the Eyes is good for to take off a Felm, an Egg-shell filled with Pepper, and burnt and beaten to powder, and blown into the Eyes, taketh away the Pin and Web, or any other dimness, the powder of Sandevoir, and the powder of white Salt burnt, is good likewise for the same, so is the powder of Pummistone blown into the Eye, the powder of the inner Sole of a Shoo burnt to Ashes and beaten to Powder, is good to stop the Rheumatick Eye, the powder of two Tiles rubbed together and blown into the Eye, taketh away a Felm, Wormwood with the Gall of a Bull beaten together, is good for a dim Sight; or take the Roots or Leaves of Primrose clean washed and boiled in runningwater the space of an hour, and put somewhite Copperas to it, then strain it and let it stand, and there will appear an Oyl upon the Water, and anoint his Brows, Temples and Eyes with it, and it will take off a Felm; Mans dung burnt in a Fire-shovel to a Cole, and beaten to powder and blown into his Eyes, taketh away a Felm; or take a handful of the angerest young Nettles, and stamp them well, and put them in a Linnen Rag, and dip it in Beer, then squeeze out the Juice, and put a little Salt to it, and lick that into the Eye, and that will take away the Felm; or the Lean of Beef, or a Gammon of Bacon dried and beaten to Powder and blown into the Eye, taketh it away also,  or Lapis Tulia doth the like prepared; The Gall of a Hare, and Live-Honey alike, put into the Eye, doth the same; the Haw every Smith can cut out. ☞ Eye-Lids swelled outward. If you Meet with a Horse (which is very rare to do) whose Eye-lids are so Swelled that the inside of them are turned outward, and look very red, and as it were full of Bladders, and yet the Ball of the Eye very sound and good, then you need do nothing to him but to keep him warm with a Hood made fit for his Head, of some Linnen Cloth, and to anoint them twice a day with white Sugar-Candy, Honey and white Rose-Wa∣ter, and in two or three days time they will turn into their Places again, then take Blood from him, which is partly the occasion (and cold Rheums together setling in the Head) of this Disease; do not clip nor meddle with the Bladders, or any part of the Eye, lest you do not only put out his Eyes, but endanger his Life, or at best make him but Blear-Ey'd. ☞ Particular Receipts for the Eyes. Take Rose Leaves, Smallage, Maiden-hair, Euface, Endive, Succory, Red-Fennel, Hill-wort and Cellandine, of each half a quarter of a pound, beig washed clean, lay them in white-Wine asteep a whole day, and then distil them. And the first Water will be like Gold, the second like Silver, and the third like Balm, this Water hath recovered Sight for some years.
☜ Another to take off a Felm, or Pin and Web. Take white Copperas and beat it to powder, and sift it through a very fine Sieve, with the same quantity of white Sugar-Candie beaten, and blow it into his Eye once a day, and as you see it amend, once in two or three days is enough. Another to take off a Felm Take Alabaster and beat and searce it very fine, and blow it into his Eye once or twice a day, and it will take it off. ☜ Another for the same. Take Bay-Salt, or for want of that Common-Salt, and bruise it very small and mix it well with fresh Butter, then make it up into small Balls, as big as a Hazel-nut, and open his Eye-lid and put one of them in, holding your hand over it till it be all melted, and thus doing once a day will take off any Felm, if it be taken in time. ☜ Another to take away the Rheum from his Eyes, and to clear it: Take Butter and Salt, of each alike, and mix them well together with your Knife, then take a piece as big as a small Wall-Nut, and put it into his Ear, (on that side that is offended) and let it remain there for four or five houres, and this will dry up the Rheum and clear his Eye. You must Tie or Sew his Ear close, or else he will shake it out. Another to stay the Rheum in a Horses Eye. ☜ Take fine Bole, or Bole-armoniack, and blow it into his Eyes, and it will drive back the Rheum; but if he will not suffer you to blow it into his Eye, mix it with Butter and some white Sugar-Candy beaten to pow∣der, and make it up into little Balls and put one of them into his Eye once or twice a day, as you shall see occasion. Another to take off a Felm. ☜ Take the blackest Flint you can get, and Calcine it, then beat it to powder, and Sift it through a fine Sieve, and put to it the powder of Gin∣ger, and blow it into his Eye as you see occasion. Another for sore Eyes, dim Eyes or Moon-Eyes. Take Lapis Calaminaris, half an Ounce, and heat it red hot, and quench it in a quarter of a Pint of Plantain water, or white. Wine, do this eight or nine times, then beat it to powder, and put it to the water, then add half a dram of Aloes, and a spoonful of Camphire in powder, and let them dissolve, drop this into the Eye▪
Another for the same. Take a Pint of Snow-water, and dissolve into it two or three drams of white Vitriol, and with it wash his Eye three or four times a day, and it helpeth. Another for a white Felm or Skin over the Eye. Take the Root of the black Sallow, and burn it to Ashes, then put to it the like quantity of white Sugar Candy, and grated Ginger finely searced, and blow it into his Eye Morning and Evening. Another for any Soreness in th Eye, at Pearl, Pin, Web or Bruise. Take a new laid Egg, and roast it very hard, then cleave it in sunder long-wise, and take out the Yolk, then fill the empty holes with white Vitriol finely beaten, and close the Egg again, and roast it the second time, till the Vitriol be molten; Lastly, beat the Egg, Shell and all, in a Mortar, and strain it, and with that moisture dress the Eye. If in¦stead of the Vitriol you fill the Holes with Myrrh, finely searced, and hang the Egg up that it may drop, and with that moisture dress the Eye, it is every way as good, only it is a little stronger. Another which is infallible for the Curing of a Pin, Pearl. VVib or Spot in a Horses Eye. Take an Egg and make a Hole in the top, put out half the White, then fill up the empty place with Salt and Ginger finely mixt together, then roast it very hard, so as you may beat it into fine powder, having formerly lapt it in a wet Cloth, then Morning and Evening after you have washed his Eye with the Juice of Ground Ivy, or Eye-bright water, blow this Powder therein. To Cure a VVart in a Horses Eye, which is upon the Edge or inside of the Eye-Lids. Take burnt Allom, and the same quantity of white Copperas unburnt, both being beaten very small, and ay some of this powder on the Head of the Wart once a day, and it will consume it. Another for oul Eyes, sere Eyes, or Sight almost lost. Take Thacchamahaca Mastick, Rosin and Pitch of each a like quan∣tity, and being molten with Flax of the Colour of the Horse, lay it as defensive on each side his Temples, as big as a twenty shilling Piece, then underneath his Eyes upon the Cheek-Bone (with a round Iron) burn three or four holes, and anoint them with sweet Butter, then take a
handful of Cellandine, and wash it clean in white-Wine, but let it touch no water, then bruise it and strain it, and to the quantity of Juice, put the third part of Womans Milk, and a pretty quantity of white Sugar-Candy, searc'd through a Piece of Lawn, and lick it into his Eye Morn∣ing and Evening. Thus do for the worst of sore Eyes, but if the offence be not extreme, then you may forbear both the defensitive and the burn∣ing, and use only the Medicine. ☜ Another for a Bite, or Stroke upon the Eye. Honey, powder of Ginger▪ and the Juice of Cellandine, mixed to∣gether, and licked into his Eye with a Feather twice a day, is a very good Cure for it. ☜ Another for a Felm. The powder of Verdegrease finely beaten and searc'd, and burnt▪ Al∣lom, of equal parts alike, mixed with some of the Ointment of Marsh∣mallows, and about the bigness of a Pease put into his Eye once or twice a day will Cure him. ☜ Another for Blood-shotten Eyes. Roman Vitriol steeped in white Rose water, till it be Coloured, (or for want of that fair Spring water,) and the Eye washed therewith twice or thrice a day Cureth it. ☜ Another to stop a Rheum flowing to the Eyes. Take Flox or Hurds, and dip it in the best melted Rosin you can get, and apply it to the hollow of the Eyes driveth it back. ☜ Some Observations to be observed upon Bruises and Strains. 1. In all Bruises by Falls or any other Accidents, 'tis good to Bleed first in the common Bleeding Neck-Vein, before you give him any in∣ward Medicines for it, and be very careful that what you give him be not binding things, for they will so coagulate and thicken the strained blood, that it cannot have its free passage through the Uriter Vein as it should have, which will be very prejudicial to his Health. 2. The best thing you can give him for any inward Bruise or Wrench in the Back or Kidneys, is common Turpentine made into Balls, with the best English Liquoris-powder you can get for Money, about an Ounce of it given him every Morning for about a Week together, and a Plaister or Charge applied at the same time to his Loyns or Fillets, made up with Oxicrocium and Paracelsus melted together, will perfectly Cure him in a Month at farthest, you may renew your Charge, if there be occasion. 3. All things that provoke Urine are very good for him, for the con∣gealed Blood must have its Vent through the Uriter-Veins, or else it will do him but little good.
4. If your Horse hath a Strain upon the Back-Sinews; 'tis also very convenient to let him Blood with your Fleam on the Shackle-Vein, on the Pastern-Joynt, the Hair being first clipped away, to the end you may the better see how to strike the Vein; When you have so done, apply your Piaister or Charge of Oxicrocium and Paracelsus melted together, as before directed, and laid hot upon the grieved part, and let it lie on till it come off of it self, and it will Cure him in a very short time. Things good in General for the Cure of any Halting coming by strain or strol, ither before or behind, from the Shoulder or Hip down to the Hoof. If it be in the Shoulder, to let Blood and apply things to it as you do other strains. A Poultess made of Pellitory of the Wall, and Mallows boiled in strong Beer Tilt, with Bran, Bean-flower and Sallet-Oyl put thereto, and applied warm, is good to restore any Sinew-strength in a short time, the Decoction of the Herb Scabius applied is good for any shrunk-Sinew or Vein, or Tansie boiled in Oyl is good for it, Oyl of Turpentine, Brandy, Aquavitae, Oyl of Spike, Nerve Oyl, Sallet-Oyl, Bears-Grease, Oyl of Swallows, Bolcarmoniack is good for Sinew-strains, so is Armart and Brook-Lime steeped together, good for old Strains, Glovers speks boiled in Ale, and applied hot to the place is good, Oyl of Organum, Oyl of Exceter, Oyl of Peter, Oyl of St. Johns wort, Oyl of Roses, Mirtles, Sanguis draconis, Pickle or Brine from Olives, Train-Oyl, Mallows, Oat-meal and Bran bruised together and boiled with Urine, and laid to it Poultess-wise, Dialthea and Nerve-Oyl mingled together, Pumpilion, Nerve Oyl and black Soap minglod to∣gether upon the Fire, and anointed therewith, Brandy and Soap boiled together is good, or white-Wine Vineger and fresh Butter boyled to∣gether, with as much Bran as will bring it to a Poultess, and said to it Morning and Evening is good, or Mallows and Chickweed boiled to∣gether in Ale, &c. Particular Receipts for the Cure of all Manner of Haltngs, coming by Strain or Stroke, ither before or behind, from the Shoulder or Hip down to the Hoof. Markhams Master-Medicine for a Back-Sinew Strain, or any Strain, Shrinking, or Numbness of Sinews. Take a at sucking Mastive Whelp, flay it and Bowel it, then stop the Body as full as it can hold with gray Snails, and black Snails, then roast it at a reasonable Fire▪ when it begins to warm, Bast it with six Ounces of Oyl of Spike made yellow with Saffron, and six Ounces of Oyl of Wax;
then save the Droppings, and whatsoever moisture falls from it, while it any drop will fall, keep it for your use. With this anoint the strain, and work it in very hot, holding a hot Fire-shovel before i, thus do both Morning and Evening till amendment. Another in Nature of a Charge for a Back-Sinew-Strain. Take five quarts of Ale, and a quarter of a Peck of Glovers specks, and boyl them till it come to a quart, then apply it hot to the Grief, and re∣move it not in five or six days. Another for a Strain in any Part New or Old. Take of Sheeps Sewet a pound, of Sheeps dung two handfuls, chopt Hay a handful, Wheat Bran a pint, sweet oap a quarter of a pound, boyl all these in a quart of strong Ale till it come to a Poultess, then take it from the fire and put in half a pint of white-Wine Vineger, and a quarter of a pint of Brandy, and apply it hot to the grief, and give him Moderate Exercise. Another for a Strain or Sinew-bruise. Take Cumminseeds and bruise them gross, then boyl it with the Oyl of Camomile, and put to it so much yellow Wax as will bring it to Cerots, and spread it upon a Cloth or Leather, and apply it hot to the grief. Another for old Strains, Griefs, or old Cramps. Take Brandy, Oyl de Bay, Oyl of Swallows, Bolearmoniaek, Hogs∣grease, black Soap, of each half a pound, boyl them till the Brandy be incorporate, then take of Camomil, Rue, Red Sage and Misle-toe, of each a handful, dry them and bring them to powder, and mix it with the Ointment, and bring all to a Salve. With this anoint the Grief, and hold a hot Bar of Iron before it, Chasing it well in, and do thus once a day, and in nine days the Cure hath been effected. A sudden Cure for a Kneck or Bruise on the Sinews, or Sinew-strain New or Old. Take a live Cat, wilde or tame, and cut off her Head and Tail, then cleave her down the Chine, and clap her hot Bowels and all to the Bruise; let it lie on twenty four houres, and serve another Cat or two so if there be occasion; when it is dry, anoint it with Oyl of Turpen∣tine, Brandy and Soap, and heat it well in with a hot Iron. The Cats Bones must be brken.
Another for a Strain newly done, to help it in twenty four hours. Take the Grounds of Ale or Beer, a quart, as much Parsley chopt gross as you can gripe, boyl them till the Herb be soft, then put to it a quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, and when it is molten, take it from the fire, and put it in a pint of Wine Vineger, and if it be thin, thicken it with Wheat-bran, and lay it upon Hrds, and Poultess wise as hot as ie can endure it lay it to, and remove it once in twelve houres, and give him moderate Exercise. Another which is Markhams own Balm, which he says hath never failed hm in any Strain in the Shulder, or other Parts, id or apparent, or for any VVind-gall or Swelling. Take ten Ounces of Piece-Grease, and melt it on the Fire, then take it off, and put into it four Ounces of the Oyl of Spike, one Ounce of the Oyl of Origanum, an Ounce and a half of the Oyl of Eter, and three Ounces of the Oyl of St. Johns wort, stir them well together, and put them up into a Gally pot. With this Ointment (or indeed pre∣cious Balm) being hot, anoint the grieved place, and Rub and Chafe it in very much, holding a hot Fire-shovel before it, and anoint it once in two days, but rub and chafe it in twice or thrice a day, and give him mo∣derate Exercise For want of Piece-Grease take Goose-Grease. [Look for Ointments in the Table of the Prices of Drugs, and you shall find what it is, and where it is to be bought]. Another for Sinews that are extended, over-strained, and so weakened, tha the Member is useless. Take of Cantharides, Euphorbium and Mercury, of each a like quan∣tity, and of the Oyl-de bay double as much as of all he rest; bring the hard Smples to powder, and beat all to a Salve, apply this  the Grief (being desperate) and though it make a sore, it will give strength ad streightness to the Sinews. For the Sore you may Cure it either with Popleon, fresh Butter or Deers Grease warm. Another of the same Nature, but more gele. Take Turpentine two Ounces, Verdegrease three Ounces, Hogs-grease six Ounces, boil them till the Verdegrease be dissolved, then take Rosin, Bees Wax, of each two Ounces, mix all these together, then apply it to the grieved plce hot.
Another which is a Charge for a New Strain or Grief, proceding from Heat. Take the Whites of six Eggs, and beat them with a Pint of white-Wine Vineger, the Oyl of Roses and Myrtles, of each an Ounce, Bole∣armoniack four Ounces, as much Sanguis Draconis, and with as much Bean-flower or Wheat-flower, (but Bean is the best) as will thicken it, bring it to a Salve, and spreading it on Hurds, lay it about the grieved place, and renew it not until it be dry. Signes to know where the Grief lies. You may know where the Grief lies, by pinching every several mem∣ber, and where he most complaineth, there is his most Grief. For a New Strain. Take white-Wine Vineger, Bolearmoniack, the Whites of Eggs, and Bean-flower, and having beaten them to a perfect Salve, lay it very hot to the ore place, and it will Cure it. Another for an old Strain. Take Vineger and Butter, and melt them together with Wheat-Bran, make it into a Poultess, and lay it as hot as may be to the place grieved, and it will take away the Grief. Aother for a Back Sinew-strain. Take Venice Turpentine and Brandy beaten together to a Salve, and anoint the grieved place therewith, and heat it in with a Fire-shovel, and in two or three times doing it will take it away. Another for an old Strain or Laeness. Take Boars-grease, Bolearmoniack, black Soap and Nerve-Oyl, of each a like quantity▪ boyl them well together, and apply it hot to the Grief, chasing it very well, and heating it in with a hot Fire-shovel, and thus do it once a day till the Pain go away. ☜ An ther for a Strain in the Pastern, or Foot-lock Joynt. A Poultess made of the Grounds of strong Beer, Hens-dung, Hogs-Grease and Nerve Oyl boiled together, and applied to the grieved part, two or three times bound on with a Linnen Rag will help him. ☜ Another very good for a New Sinew-strain. Take common Soap a quarter of a pound, Bolearmoniack in powder
an Ounce, the Whites of three or four new laid Eggs, a Gill of white-Wine Vineger, half a Gill of Brandy, and a quarter of a Pint of New Wort, either of Beer or Ale, with half a Gill of the Oyl of Turpentine, and incorporate and mix them very well with your Hand; Then Rub and Chae the thinness of it in upon the grieved place, holding a hot Fire-shovel before it to make it sink in the better, then daub all over the thickest of it in the nature of a Charge, and stick Flox or Hurds upon it, and bind it up with a Linnen Cloth, and it will do well; If there be occasion, you may apply a fresh Charge to it. Another for an old Strain upon the Legs. ☞ After you have Clipped away the Hair so close on the Pastern-Joynt, that you can see the Pastern-Vein, strike it with your Fleam, and let it bleed well, then take two Ounces of the Oyl of Turpentine, with the like quantity of strong Ale or Beer, and put them into a Glass, and shake them very well together, to incorporate them the better, then pour it out into an Earthen or Pewter Dish, and with your Hand anoint and chae it into the grieved part very well, holding at the same instant of time a hot Fire-shovel before it, to make it sink in the better. When you find that the Swelling is abated, lay the common Charge of Soap and Brandy upon it, and bind a Linnen Rag wet in the same about it; When your Charge begins to pill off, anoint it with the Oyl of Trot∣ters once or twice. This Way of Ordering him will perfect the Cure in a Week or Fortnight at farthest. Another for any Grief, Pain Numbness, Weakness, or Swelling in Joynt that cometh of a Cold Cause. Take Brandy and Bath the place therewith very warm, heating it in with a hot fire shovel, then wet a Linnen Cloth in the said Brandy, and cover the wet Cloth all over with Pepper finely beaten, very thick, and so Fold it about the grieved place, then Rowl it on fast with a dry Rowler, and let him Rest, and do this once a day till you see amend∣ment. ☞ An Excellent Charge which never yet failed for any Sinew-strain from the I. W.Shoulder, or the Hips down to the Foot, nay, though it be in the Coffin Joynt, which is the ardest of Strains to Cure. Take of Burgundy Pitch, and of Frankincense, of each a quarter of a pound, as much stone Pitch, or for want of that Common black Pitch, as containing the quantity of a Wall▪Nut, a quarter of a pound of Roses, and the like quantity of Bolearmoniack finely beaten to powder, melt
all these together till they be throughly dissolved, incorporate them well together, if you add two or three Penny-worth of Mallick to them, it will be the better, but if you have none of it, it will do without it. ☜ How to use it. When it is almost cold that it will not scauld the Skin, lay it on the grieved place with a Lath or any other such like thing, then lay all over the Charge some Flox, Wooll, Deers hair, or such like things, then heat the Charge again, and daub it all over the Flox somewhat better then you did the former, then cover it all over again with some Flox as you did before, and if he be a Stable Horse, keep him out of the Wa∣ter by watering him in the House▪ but if it be in the Summer, you may Charge him abroad; If the strain be in the Coffin Joynt, you must let him blood in the Toe, which every common Smith can do, then stop the bleeding of it by some Flax or Tow, dipt in the white of an Egg, beaten with Bolearmoniack; use it as before shewed, laying it all over the Hough Heels, and Foot lock-Joynt, and especially at the setting on of the Hough. ☜ How to know when it is well made. If it be well made, you may know it by this Sign, viz. If you drop it upon a Piece of white Paper and let it lie until it be cold, then take and break it asunder, and if it Crumble in the breaking, it is too hard, but if it break clear without Crumbling, it is well made, and if you find it too soft, and that it will not keep on the Horses Foot, then put in a little more Rosin and Bolcarmoniack into it, and if you find it too hard put in a little Tallow or Salet-Oyl▪ but Tallow is the best. If it be in hot Weather you must make it the harder, and especially if he run abroad; and if it be in cold Weather, you must make it the softer. If you desire to see more Charges for these Uses, look in my First Part. For Swelledor Garded▪Lgs, whether by Grease or other A cident. If your Horses Legs be Swelled, only because the Grease is fallen into them and there is no other outward Ulcer, neither will the Ba∣thing with cold Fountain water, and other ordinary helps asswage them, then take a Pottle of Wine Lees, or else take the Grounds of strong Ale or Beer, and boyl it with a pound of Hogs-grease, then with as much Wheat-Bran as will thicken it▪ make thereof a Poultess, and ha∣ving made him a Hose of Woollen Cloth, fill it with this Poultess as hot as he can suffer it, then close up the Hose and let it abide two days; the third day open the Hose at the top, but stir not the Poultess, but put in hot Moulten Grease to it whilst it will receive any, for that will renew the strength thereof, then close it as you did before, and let him stand
two or three days longer, then open the Leg and rub it down; and if you find occasion, you may apply another; if not, the Cure is wrought. Now, if besides the Swelling, he hath Ulcers, Chops and Sores, then apply the Poultess, as before shewed; And after a Week Application, take a quart of old Urine, and put to it half a handful of Salt, as much Allum, and half an Ounce of white Copperas, boyl them together, and with it wash the Sore once or twice a day, then after a little drying, anoint them with the Oyntment called Aegyptiacum, and is made of Vi∣neger eight Ounces, of Honey twelve Ounces of Verdegrease two Oun∣ces, of Allum one Ounce and a half, and boiled to the height, till it come to a red Salve, and it will both kill the Malignant Humours, and heal and dry up the Sores. Another for swelled Legs, wheather by Grease, otiness, Wind or Travel. First, Bathe them well with the Pickle or Brine which comes from Olives, being made hot; Then take a Pint of Train Oyl, as much Nerve Oyl, and as much Oyl de bay, a quarter of a pound of Allum, half a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, half a pound of Hogs-grease, put all these to a Pottle of Urine, and with a handful or two of Mallows, Oat-meal bruised, and Bran, boyl them to a Poultess, and very hot apply it to the Grief; Do this once in two days. ☞ Things good in General for a Horse that hath a Wrenh in his Back. To shave away the Hair, but then you must not lay his Charge on too hot; You may find many sorts of them in my First Part. But more par∣ticularly take this, Take of Bolearmoniack, Comrey, alias, Consolida Major, Galbanum, Sal-Armoniack, Sanguis draconis, his own Blood, Burgundy-pitch, Mastick, Olibanum, of each alike, stamp them well together with Wheat-Meal, Vineger and the white of an Egg, and lay it upon the place grieved, then clap upon the top of it all along the Chine and Back, a Sheeps Skin newly taken off from his Back, and change it every day, and in three or four days it will be well, but let the Charge lie on till it fall away of it self. Or to Bath his Back with Brandy well warmed, and the powder of Bolearmoniack mixt together is very good. But if your Horse be Naturally weak in the Back, or swayed in the Back, these two Diseases are not absolutely Cured; but Coleworts boiled in Sallet-Oyl, and put Bean-Meal into it, and Charge the Back with it, will strengthen it. Or you may give him these things inwardly which is good for a Back ☞swanckt in the Fillets or Loyn; Or for a Wrench in the Back-bone,
viz. Take one Ounce of Solomons Seal, one Ounce of Comfrey, one of Clary, a quarter of a pound of Pollipody of the Oak, Wood-bitony If your Roots be green, slice them, if dry beat them to powder.two handfuls; Boyl them in a Gallon of strong Beer or more, till half the quantity be consumed, then take it off the Fire, and put into it a quarter of a pound of Butter, and a quarter of a pound of Honey, and give him a quart of it luke-warm in a Drenching-Horn fasting, at the end of every third day, for about three or four times, and Order him as in Observations how to Order sick Horses; Iing-Glass boiled in Milk with a little Bole armoniack is a great Strengthner of the Back, given him for several Mornings together; But the more easie and familiar way to Cure these Distempers, and is as good a thing as I think you can possibly give him, is to make him some Balls of common Turpentine, and the powder of English Liquoris, and give him about two Ounces of them, for about a Fortnight together, and apply at the same time to the Reins of his Back this excellent Plaister, viz. Oxicrocium and Paracelsus, of each a like quantity (but rather more of the Oxicrocium) melted to∣gether, and spread upon Sheeps Leather, and apply it to grieved part, and let it lie on till it fall off of it self; You may renew his Charge if you think it convenient, after the other hath been about a Fortnight on. This is also a very excellent Plaister for a Back Sinew-strain in the Foot-lock Joynt, and indeed for all manner of Strains what∣soever. To Cure the Lampas. Take a roasted Onion very hot, and put it upon a Clout, or upon Hurds, and with it rub the Lampas very much, and do this two or three times a day till it be whole, but the best Cure is to burn it away, which every common Smith can do. Things good to Cure the Camery or Frounc. To let him Blood in the two greatest Veins under his Tongue, and to wash the Sore with Vineger and Salt, or to burn the Pimples on the Head, and to wash them with Ale and Salt till they Bleed. To Cure the Barbes. Clip them away with a Pair of Scissers, and let them Bleed, then prick them in the Palate of the Mouth with your Fleam, and wash the place with Wine Vineger, Bolearmoniack and Salt, and see that no Hay dust stick upon the Place Clipped, and he will be well again.
Several Receipts for the Canker in the Mouth, Nose, or in any other Part of the Body. For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose, take white-Wine half a pint, Roch-Allom, the quantity of a Wall-nut, Bay-salt half a spoon∣ful, English-Honey one spoonful, Red-Sage, Rue, Rib-wort, Bramble∣leaves, of each alike much, boyl these in the white-Wine so much as will suffice, till a quarter be consumed, and inject this water into the sorrance, or if it be in the Mouth▪ wash the place with a Clout fastned to a stick, and dress him therewith twice a day, or oftener as you shall see it, till it be whole. Another for the Nose or Mouth, or any other place. Take the Juice of Plantine, as much Vineger, and the same weight of the powder of Allum, and with it anoint the sore twice or thrice a day, and it will kill it and Cure it. Another. Take of Ginger and Allum, of each alike, made into fine powder, mixing them well together till they be very thick like a Salve, and after you have washed it very well with Allum-water or Vineger, anoint it with this Salve, and in twice or thrice dressing it will be killed. ☞ Things good in General for the Canker. The Herb Fluellen stamped, and the Juice given inwardly, or applied outwardly, healeth the most spreading and eating Cankers and Ul∣cers, and fretting Sores, Sage, Plantine, Rosemary, Honey, Allum, Ver∣degrease, green and white Copperas, Brimstone, Tansie, Bay-salt, Bramble-leaves, Elder, Ginger, the Roots of Asphodil, quick Silver, Arsnick, Agrimony made up with Hogs-grease Cureth old Cankers and inveterate Ulcers, Allum, Honey and Verdegrease mixed together is good; the Decoction of white Beets in Water is good for Running Sores, Ulcers and Cankers in the Head, Legs, or other Parts of the Body, the Decoction of the leaves of the Burr-dock, &c. ☞ Another Excellent Cure for the Cure of the Canker in the Head, Face or Eys, &c. Take three Ounces of Burgundy Pitch, and half a pint of Sallet Oyl, and put them into a large Earthen new Pipkin, and set them over a soft Fire, and let them Simper gently, keeping them stirring while they are on the Fire, to incorporate them the better. Your Pipkin must be
the larger, by reason that you are to put in Verdegrease▪ which is of that fiey Nature, that it will make it quickly rise and boyl over, if you have not a special care thereof; After you have boiled it near a quarter of an hour, put to it one Ounce of the Oyl of Turpentine, and as much of the Powder of Verdegrease as will lie upon a six-pence, finely pow∣dered and searc'd through a Lawn Sieve, boyl them also a little while together, then take it off the Fire, and put it into a Gally-pot, and keep it till you have occasion to use it. Directions to know whether it be well or ill made. If it be vell boiled it will be neither too thick nor too thin, but in the condition of an Ointment, and of a very good green Colour; But if it be too much boiled, your Verdegrease will turn it of a red Colour, which will be so prejudicial to your Salve, that it will lose the healing quality thereof. Directions how to use it. If you use it for a Canker in his Nose, you are to Tie a Linnen Rag upon the end of a stick, and dip it in Wine Vineger and Salt, or Ver∣juice and Salt mixed together, and put it p into his Nostrils, and rub and scrub off the scabs and filth that you find therein; When you have thus washed and cleansed it, take the longest Goose-feather you can get, and if it be not long enough to reach to the top of his Nostrils, Tie it to the end of a small stick, and dip it into the Salve, and use it as before once a day, and he will do well. If you find it on his Head, Face or Eyes, you must do the like, viz. to rub and scrub off the scabs till they Bleed, and lay on some of your Salve with a Feather, and strew some Wheat-Bran upon it to make it keep on the better. You are to dress it once a day till you find it heal, and then once in two or three days is e∣nough. Observaion. The quickest and speediest Way for to effect all outward Cures, is to let him stand in the House during his Cure. ☜ Things good to Kill Wormes in General. Alheal, Alkanet, Water Agrimony, the leaves of Bistort, or Snake-weed, the powder of the Root of Butter-Bur, the Seed of Sea Coewort, bruised and given in Beer, the powder of ordinary small Centaury, the powder of the Root call'd Devils Bit, Elecampane, the powder of Fern-Roots, the Juice of Flix-weed, Gentian, Feltwort or Baldmony, Ger∣mander, Hops beaten to Powder and given him, the powder of Hore∣hound, Knotgrass, Groundsel, Savin, Brimstone, Allom, Salt, Mother-wort,
the Bark of the Root of the Mulberry-Tree, Nettleseeds, the powder of the leaves of the Peach▪tree, the powder of Plantine, Horse-Radish; Wild-Rotchet, Rupture-wort, Southern-wood, Vervain, the Bark of the Wallnut-tree, or the powder of the green shells, Worm∣wood dried and beaten and given, Tansie seed▪ the white Beete sodden with Garlick, Mercury Calcin'd, Alloes, blak Soap, Taners Ouze, his own▪ Hair chopped small and given him in his Provender, Rue, Soot, the warm Guts o a new slain Hen or Chicken rowled up in Salt and Brimstone, and given him, Elder-berries sodden in▪ Milk, Chalk, Fennegreek, Bay-berries, Turmerick, Worm-seed, Garlick, Hens dung, Saffron, Mint, Sage, Rozin, Juniper berries, the green Branches of Sallow or Willow given him, Reeds, so much of Sublimaum as will lie upon two pence, workt up in Butter and given him, Stone-crop, Quick-silver crude or mortified, with the Juice of Lemons, &c. Particular Receipts for the ots or Wormes. Take a quart of new Milk, and as much Honey as will extraordinarily sweet, then give it him in the Morning luke-warm, having fasted all the night before, and let him ast after it two houres; then take a Pint of Beer, and dissolve into it a good spoonful or more of black Sope, and being well mixed together give it him, then ride and chase him a little, and let, him fast another hour, and the Wormes will avoid. ☞ Another more Easie. Take Savin chopped and stamped small, a good handful warmed in a quart of Beer, and given him luke-warm, or a quart of Brine given him is very good. Another. Take as much Precipitate, alias, red Mercury Calcin'd as will lie upon a Silver two-pence, and work it into a piece of sweet Butter, the bigness of a small Wall-Nut in the manner of a Pill, then lape it all over again with Butter, and make it as big as a small Egg, and give it him Fasting in a Morning, taking forth his Tongue, and putting it upon the end of a stick, put it down his Throat, and Ride him a little after it, and give him no Water that Night, and let him fast two houres, and then let him feed as at other times. With this Medicine you may kill all manner of Bots, Trunchions and Wormes of what kind soever, but you must be very care∣ful you exceed not the quantity prescribed, for it is a very strong poison. Another. Take the ender tops of Broom and of Savin, of each half a handul,
chop them very small, and work them up into Pills with fresh or sweet Butter, and having kept him over Night fasting, give him three of these Pills the next Morning early, and let him fast two houres after it, and give Him no Water that Night; Or take Rosin and Brimstone beaten not very fine, and strowed amongst his Provender, and given him fast∣ing, long before he drinks is good. To a Mare with Foal, be Cautious what you Give her. You shall need therefore but only to Rake her, and to let her Blood in the Roo or Palate of her Mouth, and make her eat her own Blood, for that will not only Kill, but help all inward Maladies. Another. Take a quart of Milk warm from the Cow, and put half a pint of Honey to it, and give it him the first day; The next day take Rue and Rosemary, of each half a handful, stamp them well together, then let it inuse together with the powder of Brimstone and Soot, (so much as will suffice) four Houres in a quart of Beer or Ale-wort, then strain it, and give it him Blood-warm, then Ride him gently an hour or two, and set him up warm, and give him Hay an Hour before you give him Drink, and let it be white Water, and give him no Hay before you give him his said Drink, and let his Drink be either a Mash or white Water. Another. Take two or three Heads of Garlick well peeled and bruised, with the quantity of a small Nutmeg of black Soap, and put them into a quart of strong Beer, and warm it a little over the Fire, and give it him luke-warm in the Morning fasting, with about an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone at the Mouth of the first Horn; And Order him as you do Horses that you give Drenches to. Another. ☜ Three or four penniworth of the powder of Carolin, (which you may buy at the Apothecaries) given him in a quart of sweet Wort in the Morning fasting, is a very good Cure for them. ☜ Another. Take of Turmerick and Anniseeds a good spoonful, of each beaten to powder, put them in a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, and a pint and a hal of strong Beer, and gie it him fasting in the Morning luke-warm, with some Flower of Brimstone put at the Mouth of each Horn,
not exceeding an Ounce of it in all, and let him Fast three or four houres after it. You may Repeat this Drink two or three times, as you see oc∣casion. ☞ Another for the Bots in a Horse. Take the Guts of a Chicken newly Killed and wrap them up warm in Honey, and put it down his Throat over Night; the next Morning give him a Pint of New Milk, with about three Ounces of the Flower of Brimstone, and exercise him after it. ☞ Things good i General to stench Bleeding, either inward or outward, or of any Sinew, Cut or Wound, or of Beding at the Nose. The leaves of Snakeweed or Bistort strowed upon the Wound after it is beaten to Powder, the Juice of Cleavers applied to a bleeding Wound will stop it; the green leaves of Cud-wed or Cotton-weed bruised and laid to the Wound, the decoction of the Herb called Golden Rod out∣wardly applied the smoother Horse-tail is good, either inwardly taken or outwardly applied, Ladies Mantle, the dried leaves of Medlars strowed upon the Wound being beaten to powder, stoppeth the Bleeding of it; the Juice of Mint given in Vineger stayeth Bleeding inwardly, Money∣wort or the Herb two pence stayeth Bleeding inwardly, so doth Moon∣wort, or the Oaken Moss of a Pale or Spear; Mouse-ear stayeth the Flux of Blood inward or outward; the Powder of the leaves of the Peach Tree strowed upon the Wound, Plantain, Queen of the Medows, Med∣lars dried before they be ripe and beaten to powder, and strewed upon the Wound, the Juice of Sorrel, stone-crop, a piece of a Fuze-ball or a Mullipuss laid to any Bleeding Wound stoppeth it presently; An Oint∣ment made of white Lilly-Roots with Hogs-Greas is very good for them. The Broth wherein Coleworts hath been sodden, is good for cut Sinews and Joynts. The Root of Garden-Lilly stamped with Honey, gleweth and soddereth them together, the Herb Tutsan or Park-Leaves, the Leaves or Bark of the Willow-Tree is good for the Bleeding of Wounds, or at the Nose, or Fluxes of Blood, the powder of the blew Bottle taken inwardly, the Juice of Clowns Wound-wort taken inwardly with Com∣frey, or applied outwardly, the Down of a Hares or Cony Skins, or Woolen Cloth burnt to Ashes and strewed upon the Wound, Primrose leaves or Wild Tansie bruised, and old Felt burnt and beaten to Powder. Bolearmoniack beaten to powder, and given inwardly or applied out∣wardly, stancheth Bleeding. To stop Bleeding at the Nole, Tie him hard upon his fore-Legs, about twelve inches above his Knees, and just beneath his Elbow, and keep the Nape of his Neck as cold as may be, with wet Hay or Clothes, and it will stanch him presently. The leaves of
Rosemary made into Oyls, Ointments or Bathings, help all cold and be∣numbed Joynts, Sinews or Members, &c. ☜ The best Receipt to stop Bleeding at the Nostrils. The Juice of the Roots or Leaves of Nettles squirted up his Nostrils stayeth the bleeding at the Nose. But the best thing of all to stop bleeding at the Nose, is to take a Hank of Coventry-blew thread, and hang it cross a stick, and set one end of it on fire, and strow a little white-Wine Vineger on it, to keep it from burning too fast, and let him receive the smoak up his Nostrils, and it will stop it in a very short time, when Nothing else will do. New Horse Dung tempered with Chalk and strong Vineger laid to a Bleeding Wound will stop it, burnt Silk is good likewise for it, so is the Juice of Coriander, or bruised Sage, or Hogs dung, or a Clod of Earth, or bruised Hysop, or the soft crops of Haw-thorn bruised, or to boyl two ounces of the Horses blood, and beat it to powder, and strow upon the Wound; and to stop Bleeding at the Nose, the Juice of Coriander squirted up it stayeth it, or the Juice of Periwincle, the Coam of a Smiths Forge laid to the Wound stayeth bleeding, or Shepherds Pouch distilled and an ounce given fasting, stay∣eth any inward bleeding, whether natural or unnatural, or Bursa-Pasto∣ris bruised and applied to the place. Particular Receipts to stop Bleeding. Take the powder of the Stone Emachile, and blow it up into his Nose, and lay it to the Vein or Wound that Bleeds, and it stancheth them. Another. Take the Root of Rubarb and bruise it in a Mortar, and stop it into the Nostrils that bleeds, and it stayeth it. Anoher for the Bleeding at the Nose. Take Bitony and stamp it in a Mortar with bay-Salt, or other white Salt with Wine-Vineger, and put it into his Nostril that bleeds, and it stayeth it. Loosening Things in General, Vide the first Part. ☜ Binding Things in General which is good to stop a Loosness, Lask or Flux of Blood. Sloes, or the inner Rind of the black Bush, wilde Bryar-ball, or the inner Rind of it, Dock-Roots, or the seeds of Docks boiled in Beer▪ the inner Skin that covereth the Chest-Nut, Cud-weed or Cotten-weed, the
Root of the Water-flag, or Flower-de-luce, the seed of Flea-wort fryed and given, the seed of Flix-weed given in Water where Steel hath been quenched, the powder of stinking Gladwin is good for the Flux, Win∣ter green, the dried shells of Hazel-Nuts, or the red Skin that is over the Kernel, the berries of Holly-holm, or Halver-bush beaten to powder and given, Knape-weed, Knot-grass, Ladies Mantle, the seeds or Roots of Water-Lilly, Loose-strife or Willow Herb, Honey-wort, or the Herb Two-pence, Moon-wort, the Oaken-Moss of a Pale or Spear, Mulberries, the Roots of Mullen, the Leaves and Bark of the Oak and Acorn Cups, the leaves of the Pear-Tree, or sour Pears, Periwincle, Queen of the Me∣dows, red Roses, Sanicle, the powder of Services when they are mellow, Shepherds Purse, wilde Tansie, the Bark of the Wall-Nut Tree, or the Kernels of the Wall-Nuts when they are old, Yarrow, Wormwood, the Juice of Rue mixed with clarified Honey with red Wine, or Bean flower and Bole-armoniack boiled in Milk▪ or red Wine and Bay-Salt bruised together, Cinnamon and Nutmegs boiled in red Wine, Tanners Bark, Dragon-water, a pint of it sweetned with Treacle, Myrrh, Mastick, Sto∣rax, the Rind of Pomegranate, Allum, for a Foal give him a Pint of Ver-Juice to drink. The inward and outward Barks of the Willow-Tree burnt to Ashes is a great binder and dryer up of Sores, &c. Particular Receipts to stay a Lask or Loosness. Take Bean-flower and Bolearmoniack, of each three Ounces, mix them with red Wine, or stale Beer, and give it him blood-warm. ☞ Another. Take half a Pint of Plantine water, and half a pint of red Wine, (or for want of that, Claret,) and put into it an Ounce of Cassia powder finely beaten, with as much of the powder of Pomgranate Rinds, and boyl them well together, then take the Yolks of two Eggs, and some Loaf Sugar, and make a Caudle of it, and give it him luke warm, and it will help him. ☞ Another. The powder of a Stags Pizel dried and grated, and given him in Claret or stale Beer, is a very Sovereign Remedy for it, so is the powder of the Jaw-bone of a Pike, Teeth and all, given after the same manner. ☞ Another very Excellent. Take three pints of stale Beer, and put to it the powder of Cummin-seeds three spoonfuls, and boyl them together till half be consumed, then take Knot grass, Shepherds Purse and Plantine, and stamp them se∣verally and put four or five spoonfuls of the Juice of each of them, and put to the Beer, and boyl them again a little, and give him it half over-night,
and half the next Morning; But if it fall out in the Winter that you cannot get the Herbs, then take the Water of the distilled Herbs, and use it as before. ☜ Another. Take as much Bole-armoniack as contains the bigness of a Wall-Nut, beat it into fine powder, and put it into a pint of Claret, (or for want of that, Verjuice) and give it him when you find occasion. Or take a pint of Claret, Verjuice or Beer, and put into them an Ounce of the powder of Cinnamon, with some of the powder of the wild Briar-balls, and two or three olks of new laid Eggs warmed over the Fire. This Given twice or thrice at most will perfectly Cure him. ☜ Another very good. Take a quart of Claret, and put to it four Yolks of new laid Eggs, half an Ounce of long pepper, with as much of the Grains of Paradise, boyl them together and give it him luke-warm. Or take an Ounce of the inward Bark of an Oak, and half an Ounce of the powder of long pep∣per boiled in a quart of new Milk, and give it half over-night, and the other half of it the next Morning fasting is very good. ☜ Another. Take two or three wild Briar-balls, if they be not very large, and beat them to powder, and boyl them in a quart of Beer with a little of the powder of Bolearmoniack, and give it him Blood warm, and it is a certain Cure. Another for a violent Scouring. Take the Intrails of a Pullet, or great Chickin, all but the Gizard, and mix with them of Spikenard one Ounce, and make him swallow it, and this will infallibly stay his Scouring, yea, though it be a bloody Flux. Another which will stay a Lask, be it never so violent. Take a penny worth of Allum powdered, Bolearmoniack powdered an Ounce, put them in a quart of Milk, keeping them stirring till the Milk become all of a Curd, and give it him luke-warm. Another. Take a quart of Red Wine, and put into it an Ounce and a half of Bolearmoniack in fine powder, and two Ounces and a half of the Con∣serve of Sloes, mix them together and boyl them pretty well, then take it off and put into it a spoonful of the powder of Cinnamon, brewed al∣together, and give it him, and let him fast two houres after it, and le
him eat no washed Meat. Hay is wholesom, so is Bread and Oats, if they be well mixt with Beans or Wheat, but not otherwise. Another. Take a handful of the Herb Shepherds Purse, and boyl in a quart of strong Ale, and when it is luke-warm take the leaves of Woodrose stampt and put therein, and give it him. ☞ Things good in General for a Bloody Flux. Cummin-seeds, Knot-grass, Plantine, the leaves or seeds of Agrimony, the inner Rind of the Barberry-tree, or Beries, or red Beets, Bistort or Snakeweed, and Turmentil is very excellent, Brank usine, Bears-breech, Bucks-horn, Plantine▪ Burnet, the Roots of Cinquefoyl or Five Leav'd Grass, the Juice of Clowns Wound-wort, red Darnel, the powder of the yellow Water-Flag or Flower de luce, the Flower of vy, Kidney-wort, Sage, Wormwood, Shepherds pouch, Red Robin, the seeds of Sorrel or Roots, wilde Tansie, ole-armoniack, Myrrh, Southernwood, Parsley, Rue, Spittlewort, Cassia, Cinnamon, Chalk, Vineger, Bursa Pastoris, Tanners Bark, Red Wine, Sloes, Arsmart, Self-heal, Pauls bittony, Mil∣foyl, the blood of a Hare made into Powder, the Powder of Mens bons, the powder of white Dogs Turd, the Pizzle of a Hart, or of Harts or Goats Hornes burned, the Jaw bone of a Pike beaten to powder, red Saunders, &c. Particular Receipts for the Bloody Flux. Take an Ounce of Saffron, two Ounces of Myrrh, three Ounces of Southernwood, of Parsley an Ounce, of Rue three Ounces, of Spittle-wort and Hysop, of each two Ounces, of Cassia which is like Cinnamon, one Ounce, beat all these into fine powder, and with Chalk and strong Vineger work them to a paste, of which paste make little Cakes, and dry them in the shadow, and dissolve some of them in a pint and a half of Barley Milk, or for want of that, that Juic which is called Crimor or Pisane, and give it him to drink, and it doth not only Cure the bloody Flux, but being given with a quart of warm Water, healeth all grief and pai either in the Belly or Bladder, which cometh for want of staling. Another. Take Red Wine three pints, half a handful of the Herb called Bursa Pastoris, or Shepherds purse, and as much Tanners bark taken out of the Fat and dried, boyl them in the Wine till somwhat more then a Pint be consumed, then strain it hard and give it him luke-warm to drink, if you add to it a little Cinnamon it will be the better, or to dissolve into a pint of Red Wine, four Ounces of the Conserve of Sloes, and give it
him to drink, either of the Medicines are sufficient. Another most Excellent Receipt, which is infallible for the Cure of the Bloody Flux, or any other Scouring whatsoever. ☜ Take three pints of new Milk, and dissolve in it over a gentle Fire four or five Ounces of Issing-Glass, which, when it is thoroughly dissolv∣ed, it will so thicken the Milk that it will look like unto Cream. After you have so done, pour or strain it forth through a very course Sieve, to take out the dross and dregs of the Issing glass that will remain behind undissolved, and give it him luke-warm in the Morning fasting, and at twice or thrice giving it will Cure him at farthest. 'Tis also a very great Strengthner of Nature. When the Issing-glass is dissolved, and the dregs strained and poured from the Milk, there will not be above a quart of it, which is quantity enough to give him at a time. To make your Issing-glass dissolve the freer and better, bruise it first in a Mortar, and then take it in pieces, which if it be right and good, it will Flake off like unto a Wafer, and be Transparent. Issing-glass is not much unlike in form and shape unto a white Pud∣ding; The Price of it you may find in the Table of the Prices of Drugs. 'Tis very good also to be given to a weak Horse, to strengthen and make him lusty. ☜ Things good in General for the Falling of the Fundament▪ To anoint it with Oyl of Roses or warm Red-Wine, if it be not infla∣med, and put it up again; but if it be, bath it with a Spunge dipt in the Decoction of Mallowes, Chamomel, and Dill, mingled together, to as∣swage the Swelling, and put it up again with your warm hand, and bath the Tuel about with Red-Wine, wherein hath been sodden Acatium, Galls, Acornecups and the paring of Quinces, then throw upon it the powder of Bolearmoniack, Frankincense, &c. Particular Receipts for the Falling of the Fundament. Take Garden Cresses, and having dried them to powder, with your Hand put up the Fundament, and then strow the powder thereon, after it lay a little Honey thereon, and then strow more of the powder, mix with it the powder of Cummin, and it helpeth. Another. Take white Salt made into very fine powder, strow a little upon the Gut, then take a piece of Lard, and first having boiled Mallow-leaves
till they be soft, and beat the leaves well with the Lard, and when it is well beaten make it up like to a Suppository, and apply it to the place every day once till it be whole. ☞ Another. Take a small Fagot made of the green Boughs of the Willow-tree, and burn them to Ashes in some clean place▪ When you have done wash his Fundament with warm Water, and strow some of the finest of them upon it, and put it up into its place again with your warm Hand, and Tie down hs Tuel between his hinder Legs to his Surcingle, pretty streight, and it will Knit very strong again. Or white Pepper strowed upon it, after it hath been beaten and sarced to a very fine powder, and used as you did the other, is very good also. ☞ Things good in General for the Biting of a mad Dog. To let blood first, Angelica, Balm, Wood-bittony, Cardus Benedictus, the Juice of Elder, all taken inwardly▪ An Ointment made of the Juice of the Figtree leaves and Hogs grease is good to anoint the sore, Gen∣tian, Felt-wort or Baldmony, Hounds togue, Mint bruised and laid to the ore is good, Pimpernel given inwardly, or applied outwardly, Plantine, the Bark of the Wall-Nut tree taken with Onions, Salt and Honey is good, the tops of Rue, Box leaves, Primrose▪roots, of each alike, powdred together, and boiled in new Milk with London-Treacle is good, Hob goblin, Dan-wort. Sallet-Oyl, the powder of Diapente given inwardly, or lay a live Pidgeon cleaved in the midst hot to the Wound, and it will draw out the venom, and heal the sore with Turpentine and Hogs-grease melted together, the leaves of Aristolochia bruised will take away the poison, Yarrow, Calamint and Southernwood made into a Salve. The Ash Keys, the Roots of the sweet Bryar dried and beaten to powder, and given inwardly, and applied outwardly, is good, &c. Particular Receipts for the Biting of a mad Dog. Take Hob-goblin, Periwincle and Box-leaves, of each half a handful, first mince them small, and stamp them very small in a Stone Mortar, and with Milk or Beer administer it both at the Change and Full of the Moon. The best of Cures for the Biting of a mad Dog. Take the Herb which groweth in dry and barren Hills, called, The Sar of the Earth; you must give it three days together; the first time you must gather three of these Herbs with all the whole Roots, and wash and wipe them clean, then pound them well, losing no part of them, and give it him in Beer, an  be careful that he hath all the Herbs and Roots,
you may make them up in sweet Butter, which will do as well; The second day give him five of these Herbs and Roots, and the third day seven, and he will be assuredly Cured, for it Cureth all manner of Cattel of all sorts whatsoever; It Cured a whole Kennel of Hounds of a Gentle∣mans, one Beagle excepted, which they did not suspect to be bitten It Cured a Gentlemans Son, who was so far gone with it that his Head be∣gan to be Addle, and to talk idlely, yet it Cured him perfectly, and though he was then but a Child, yet he lived to be a proper man. Look for another afterwards. Another. Take Goats dung, and of Flesh that hath layn long in the Salt, with the Herb Danewort, of each half a pound, and fourty Wall Nuts stampt altogether, and lay part thereof to the Sore, and it will suck out the venom, and heal up the Wound; but upon the first Dressing give him Wine and Treacle together to drink. Another. Give him two or three spoonfuls of the powder of Diapente, in a quart of good Ale or Beer, and to cauterize and burn the Sore, and to heal it up with a healing Salve. ☜ Another. Presently after the Biting let him Blood, then take Sage and Rue, of each a large handful, one Ounce of common Treacle, three or four Heads of Garlick peeled and bruised, of scraped Tinn or Tinnfoyl the bigness of a Nutmeg; Put all these into a Gallon of strong Ale, and put them up into an Earthen Pot close stopped with Paste, then boyl it in a Kettle of Water till half of it be consumed. Give him five or six spoon∣fuls of it before the Full of the Moon, and three days after; but if ne∣cessity requires, give it presently. ☜ Another not so difficult to make. First, let Blood, (as you must always do in this Distemper) then take Henbane and burn it to Ashes, and mingle it with Hogs-grease, and ap∣ply it to the place bitten▪ and give him some of the Juice of the green Herb inwardly to drink in a quarter of a Pint of Angelica water, and he will do well. Things good in General to expel all manner of Poison, either by Serpent, Spider, or any venomous Best. Bay-berries, Burrage, the powder of the blw Bottle, the powder of
the Root of the Butter-burr, water Caltrops, Dragons, the seed of Fen∣nel, Garlick, English or foreign Gentian, Felt-wort or Baldmony, Clove-Gilliflowers, Angelica, Germander, Hawk-weed, the leaves or the berries of the Herb called True-love, or one Berry, Hops, Horehound, Juniper-berries, Lavender-Cotton, the white Lilly, Lovage, wild Marjo∣rem, Mustard-seed, Ground pine or Champepitis, the Seeds of Garden Rue, Sorrel, Southern-wood, Stone-crop, the Juice of Turmentil or Set-foyle, Heart-trefoyl, Vipers Bugloss, the Root of Valerian, Holy∣thistle, Birth-wort, the Root of Spider▪wort, the seed of Turneps, the Juice of Bastard-wild poppy, Moon-wort, Calamus, white Hellebore, or Neesing-root, Bittony, Elecampane, Mallowes, Cinque-foyl, Master-wort or Herb Gerard, the seed of Hercules, All heal, Parsley-seed, Ameos, or Bishops weed, Wormwood, Pomitron, the seed of Oringes, Pepper, the Ashes of Reeds given him to drink, Mug-wort, or great Tansie, and Wine and Camomel stampt together. ☞ Particular Receipts to expel Poison. Take a pint of Sallet Oyl, and mix with it some Dragon and Angelica water, and give it him luke-warm. ☞ Another. Take Calamus, ittony, Angelica, Dragons, and Elecampane and Bay-berries, about two ounces of all of them together very finely beaten, and boyl them in a quart of Ale, and give it him, is very Excellent. ☞ Another. Take Rue, Mug-wort, Germander and Worm-wood, chopt small and boyled in a quart of Beer and give it him. If You desire to know the best Cure for this Distemper, Look for the Ointment of Dialthaea or Marsh-Mallows, in the Table of the Prices if Dugs, and you may find the Receipt f it. ☞ Things good in General for the Plague or Pestilence oo not your Horse in this Dis∣se, for if you do it wll cer∣tainly Kll him. Red-Lead, Bezor, the seed of the Thorny-Apple, Gun-powder, Bistort or Snake weed, one Blade, Burrage, the powder of the blew bottle, the Roots of the Butter-Burr beaten to powder, the Juice of Cellendine, Cuckoe-pint dryed and beaten to powder, the Leaves or Root of Devils bit boyled in Wine, Elecampane, Garlick, True-love or one Berry, the Berries of Ivy, Juniper berries, pimpernel, the seeds of Garden Rue, Saffron, Sage, the Roots of the Star thistle, Stone-crop, Angelica, the Roots of Valerian, Diapente mixed with Sack and sweet∣ned with Treacle, Urine mixt with Hens dung, Gentian, Aristolochia,
Myrrh, Scrapings of Ivory, Bay-berries, Pepper, Germander, Turmen∣til, The Scull of a dead man, dried and beaten to powder, and given in Sack i most ex∣cellent.the Seeds or Leaves of Southernwood stamped and given in white-Wine, or Ale with Bolearmoniack or Balm, Bittony or Naphe, the Juice of Marigolds, Scabius, Dragons▪water, Mug-wort, Featherfew, Yar∣row, Tansie, Briar-leaves or Elder-leaves, the Root of the white Lilly given three Mornings together boiled in Beer, causeth the poison of the Pestilence to break forth into Blisters in the outward part of the Skin, the Root of Winter-Green is good, Calathian Violet, Vipers-grass, Rue, Ameos or Bishops-weed. To preserve a Horse from the Infection of the Plague is to anoint his Nose with Vineger, wherein hath been steep∣ed Affasetida during the Infection. ☜ Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Plague or Pestilence. Take Devil-bit, Gun-powder, Bistort or Snakeweed, Angelica, Bay∣berries, the Root Meum, Elecampane, all beaten to powder, and give it him two Mornings together, and Order him as you do other sick Hor∣ses. About three Ounces of all of them is enough. Another. Give him two spoonfuls of Diapente with a pint of white-Wine, or a quart of strong Beer sweetned with Treacle, and give it him. If you desire more Receipts, you may Compound them as your discretion will think it, out of my General Things for the Plague. ☜ Things good in General for Pissing and Staling of Blood. Agrimony, Wood-bittony, Bucks-horn, Plantine, wilde Bryar Palls, the whole Chest-Nut dried and beaten to powder, the powder of the Root of the Earth Chest-Nut, the Root of Cinquefoyl or Five-Leav'd Grass, Clowns Wound-wort, Comfrey, the powder of an Herb called Crabs-claws, the Herb or Seed of Flix-weed given wherein Steel hath been quenched, Fluellen or Lluellen, Golden Rod, the smoother Tail of the rougher Horse tail, the Juice of Housleek, Spear-Mint, Money wort, Mouse-Ear dried, green Mulberries, red Robin, Shepherds Purse, Bole∣armoniack, [Hob-goblin is a Stone much like an Oyster-shell, which you may find upon course stony Lands. It is good also beaten to powder to take off a Felm from the Eyes.].Hob-Goblin, Blood-wort, Plantine, the Juice of Purslain; the powder of Gum▪ Tragacanth and Arabeck, the red Rattle grass boil∣ed in red Wine, red Roses, the seeds of Rushes, the Juice of the powder of Sanicle. The Seeds of Sorrel or Roots, wilde Tansie, wild Tyme or Mother of Tyme, Turmentil or Set-foyl, the Kernels of old Wall-Nuts, the powder of the Rinde o dried Pomgranates, Pollipodim of the Wall, Knot-grass,
Comfery, Storax, Pine-apple, Kernels, Daffodil and Wheat-flow∣er, or Licoris and Anniseeds rowled in Honey and given him. Barley boyled in the Juice of Gumsolly, the Barley to eat and the Liquor to drink, the yellow Willow herb, Bugle, herb Two pence, water-Sengreen, Marsh mallowes, the Root or Queen of the Medow, Knipper-wort, the ☞tender tops of the Bramble-bush or Flowers, the berries of the Hawthorn tree, Acatia, Moss of an Oaken pale or stick boyled in Beer, Coral is a most excellent thing to stop all issues of blood, a live Frog given him, or Aristolochia longa boiled in Ale or Beer is very good. Particular Receipts for the Care of a Horse that Pisses or stales Blood. Take Knot-grass, Shepherds purse, Blood-wort of the Hedge, Pollipo∣dium of the Wall, Comfery, Garden Blood-wort of each a handful, shred them small, and put them into a quart of Beer and boil them, then put to them a little Salt, Leaven and Soot, mix altogether and give it him. Another for the same. Take three or four red Sprats, or one red Herring, with a hard Row, chop them very small, and let them lie asteep aout half an hour, in a quart of strong Beer, and give it him lukewarm, fasting in the Morning, or at any time of the day when you have occasion, with about a spoon∣full of the powder of Bolearmoniack amongst it, and it will Cure him at twice giving at farthest. ☞ Another which never yet failed, whether it be a Strair, or some other inward Distemper, and will stop any violent Scouring, being boiled in Beer, and given. Take two or three wilde Briar Apples, if they be small, and beat them to very fine powder, taking out the sticks that are in them, and boyl them in a quart of Beer, and give it him fasting, so long as you find him stale Blood. If you put to it the powder of Hob-goblin, it will be the better, and it will certainly Cure him. Take heed you blood him not, for if you do you endanger his Life. It will Cure him at twice or thrice giving at furthest. These Balls are to be Given when they be Ripe, which is about the latter end of November. Another. Take a good handful of Arsmart, and chop it very small, and boyl it well in a quart of good Beer, and when it is cool enough give it him so long as you find him to stale Blood, with the powder of Bolearmoniack, and you shall find it work a Cure in two or three times giving at far∣thest.
Things good in General for the Cure of the Poll-Evil. To sink it at the first Rising, anoint it very well with red Lead and Sal∣let Oyl, and chae it in very well twice a day with your hand, and keep him warm, and it will sink it, and if you find it will not sink, ripen it with Wine Vineger, and the Loam of a Wall, straws and all, boiled to∣gether, and let out the Corruption with a hot Iron, and Tent it with Flax dipt in Hogs-grease, and after four days tent it with a dry Spunge dipt in Turpentine, Saffron and the Yolks of Eggs. But if it be turned to a Fistula, then take of unslackt Lyme and Arsnick, the Juice of Garlick and Onions, Wall-wort nd Holly, and boil them till they become an Ointment, then wash the Sore with the Water wherein green Copperas and Allom hath been boled, and fill the whole full of the Ointment, by dipping a tent therein twice a day, or to take of Orpiment, unslackt Lyme, Verdegrease, the Juice of Pellitory, Cellendine, black Ink, Ho∣ney, and strong Vineger boiled together thick, and made into Rowls, and put it into the Sore, and if the Fistula be killed the Matter will be white and thick, then dry it up with the powder of Savin, Honey and Lym baked together, or anoint it with Tarr, fresh Hogs-grease and Sallet-Oyl melted together, or tent it with red Lead and black Soap mingled together, and to sink it before it breaks, lay a Charge to it of Shoomakers Wax spread upon Allom'd Leather, or what other Charge you think most convenient. You may find Varety of them in my First Part, if you look for Charges. Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Poll▪Evil. After you have shaved away the Hair from the Swelling, then lay on a Plaister of black hoomakers Wax▪ with some Mastick melted in it, and spread it upon Allomed Leather and let it lie till it hath ripened or broke the Impostume, then take a Pint of Wine-Vineger, and when it is boiling hot, mix with it as much Loam with the Straws in it, and apply it as hot as the Horse will suffer it, and renew it once a day till it be whole. Another. Take an Ounce of Quick Silver, and kill it in fasting spittle, and mix it with the quantity of a Hens Egg, with Hogs-grease and Brimstone fine∣ly beaten to powder, incorporate these very well together, and anoint the Swelling very well with it, then take red Tarr one penniworth, of Hogs-grease half a pound, and of green Copperas and Bay-salt, of each a handful, both made into fine powder, boyl them very well, and boyling hot apply it to the place with a Clout Ted on the end of a stick, being lately anointed with the Quick-silver, Hogs-grease and Brimstone, and
by so scaulding it three or four Mornings together, you may after that but only warm the Tarr, and apply it, and it will be Cured, for this Scaulding doth so Kill the Malice of the Fistula, that it will never break forth any more, and this will Cure any other Fistulaes or foul Ulcers whatsoever. ☞ Another. After you have so slit the Sore that the Corruption may Run forth, and you have eaten or cut away the proud and dead Flesh, and washt it and made it very sweet and clean with Allomed water, pour into it some Oyl of Turpentine, and thus dressing it every day, you shall soon find it grow well, for this Oyl will no only search it at the bottom, but it will also cleanse and heal it. It will likewise heal any raw Back pinch'd by the Saddle, or any Swelling it will likewise sink. Another. Take Euphorbium and Mastick▪ mix them well together, and Seeth them well with French Sope, and make a Tent and put it into it, and it will consume the evil moisture. Things good for the Pains, vide Scratches, for what Cures the Scraches Cures these. ☞ Things good in General to Kill the Canker in any Part of the Body. Green Copperas, white Copperas, Bay-salt, unslackt Lyme, Sope and quick Silver well mixt together, Turpentine Hogs-grease, Arsnick, Verdegrease, Allom, Garlick, Rue, Savin▪ Tar, Ginger, Pepper, Or∣piment, Oyl of Vitriol, Elecampane, Fluellen, Tansie, Cuckoe-point, Snap-dragon, Burr-dock Roots, &c. Particular Receipts to Cure the Canker of the Body. Take Savin, Bay-salt and Rue stampt with Barrows-grease, and an∣oint the Sore therewith, and when the ill Humors are killed, (which you shall know by the whiteness) then heal it with Tar, Oyl and Honey mixt together. Another. Take Vineger, Ginger and Allom, and mix them well together, and anoint it therewith, and it will kill the Poison and heal the Ulcer. Another for a Canker, foul Ʋlcer, Lprosie, and to make Hair grow. Take a quart of Tar, and put to it half a pound of Boars grease, an Ounce of green Copperas, a quarter of a pound of Salt Peter, two Ounces
of Wax, a quart of Honey, a quarter of a pound of Rozin, two Ounces of Verdegrease, a quart of Lynseed Oyl, Seeth them till half b con∣sumed; then strain it and keep it ciose in a Pot, then when you have oc∣casion to use it, take of it warm, and apply it to the Sore, it doth both heal, draw and make Hair to grow. ☜ Things good in general to Cure a Fistula or Canker, or any other Running Sore whatsoever. Wild Champions, Doves Foot or Cranes Bill, the powder of the Root of Sow Fennel put upon them, the Juice or Water of Flix-weed or Toad Flax put into them, the Juice of Coleworts, the Juice of Flea-wort mixed with Hogs-grease clenseth them, the Juice of the Flower-de luce, Flu∣ellen or Lluellen, Golden Rod, the Juice or the distilled Water of Win∣ter green, the Root of the black Hellebore baten to powder and strow∣ed upon them, consumeth the dead Flesh instantly, the leaves of True-Love or one Berry, Knape-weed, Knot-Grass, Ladies Mantle, Money-wort or the Herb Two-pence, the Juice of the Leaves or Roots of Nettles is good to wash all rotten and stinking Sores, Fistulaes and Gan∣grenes, and such as are fretting, eating or corroding scabs or manginess, in any part of the Body, the Root of Cow Parsneps scraped upon the hard skin of a Fistula will take it away, the Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernel Ground-pine or Champepitis, the Juice of Plantine, Queen of the Medows, the Juice of Rag-wort or Rag-weed, the red Rattle-grass, Winter Rochet or Winter-Cresses, the Juice of wild Sage, the Juice of Srazens Wound-wort. It is good for Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, be it never so foul and stinking, and so is Sanicle, the pow∣der of Savin is good to cleanse them, but it keeps them from healing, the Juice of Scabius, the Juice of Garden Succory, Self-heal is good to cleanse Sores, and is good for Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, so is the Juice of Smallage put to Honey of Roses, the Juice of Sorrel or Wood sorrel is good for Ulcers and Cankers, the Juice of the Tamarisk Tree, Vervain, the Juice of the Leaves of the Wall-Nut Tree, or the Water of them distilled in Ale is good to cleanse and Cure oul Run∣ning Sores, Wheat-Flower mixed with the Yolk of an Egg, Honey and Turpentine doth draw and heal any Bile, Plague Sore, or any running oul Ulcer, Roch Allom and Bay-salt burned to powder and beaten to∣gether, and mixed with Cummin and Honey, keep it for your use, and apply it either Tent-wise or Plaister-wise, which will heal any old Sore, the Oyl of Turpentine is good likewise for the same purpose, the Juice of Beets, Calafoma or Calofonia, the Ashes of Garlick strowed upon them, the powder of Cellendine or Verdegrease, Vineger and Honey mingled together upon the Fire; but if you intend to make it stronger,
put to it some Mercury, Sublimate and Arsnick beaten to powder, but the other may be applied to the Mouth, and he receive no danger, or white-Wine Vineger, Mercury, Precipitate, Camphire, green Treacle, Sage, Yarrow and Ribwort, with Honey and Hogs-grease boiled to∣gether, This water will Cure any Fistula whatsoever if it come to the bot∣tom, and heal is up with your green Oint∣ment. A Cankr Cured. till half be consumed, and strain it and wash the Wound with the Liquor, or take four quarts of Cole-trough water, boyl it and skin it, then boyl it over again after you have strained it, with white Copperas, Allom and Verdegrease, of each a pound, beaten to powder, and when it is clear, put it into a Glass for your use. The powder which remaineth at the bottom, keep by it self, for it will heal up any Old Sore, or take Roman Vitriol, Roch Allom and Rose-water boiled till they become as hard as a stone, and strow this powder upon it is excellent good; but to break a Fistula, take Brook▪lyme, Mallows, Arsmart, of each alike, boil∣ed in Chamber-Lye till they be soft, and apply it to the Swelling, and renew it not in two or three days But to Cure a Canker take red Grape leaves, Bramble-leaves, Honey-suckle leaves, Allom, Columbine eaves, Sage leaves, boiled in Water, and wash the sore till it bleed, or Verdegrease, Butter and Salt melted scaldng hot, and pour it into the Fistula, and use it till all the Flesh look red, then tent it with Verde∣grease, Allom, Wheat-flower, and the Yolks of Eggs beaten and ming∣led together, and skin it with Barm and Soot mixt together, or Loam-Wall and Wine Vinegr put hot upon the sore, is good to ripen and heal it, or Butter, Rozin and Frankincense, made boiling hot and poured into the Wound, and for a Fistula in the Head, dip a Lock of Wooll in the Juice of the Houseek, and put it into his Eare, and put Hurds upon it and Tie it cloe, and this will break it, or alt mixed with Butter or Water, and salt put into his Ear will do the like. Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Fistula. After you have searched it to the bottom with a Probe of Lead, or some other thing which will bend wheresoever the Concavity of the Sorrance leadeth it, and when you have found the bottom let it be open∣ed downwards, if it may be possibly done to the end the Corruption may the better issue out, then tent it two or three days with tried Hogs-grease to cause the hole to be the wider, then inject this Water following. Take of Sublimate, and of Precipitate of each as much as will lie upon a three-pnce, of Allom and of white Copperas, of each three Ounces, burn all these in an Earthen Pot, but first rub the bottom with a little Oyl to keep it from burning, this done burn them together, then take two quarts of fair clear Water, boyl it first by it self, and scum it in the boyling, then take it from the Fire, and put in as much of this powder as will lie upon a shilling at twice, and thus it is made; bt if you would have it stronger, then take fair water and Smiths water, of each alike, and of
white▪Wine vineger a third part, & with the Ashes of Ashen-wood make Lye of them with the Water and Vineger, and so make your Water with this Powder and Lye in the former Ingredients, according as before is taught you, inject this water with a Syringe into the Sorrance, and in a short time it will both kill the Fistula and heal it up, and is an approved and infallible Cure. Another. Take a Pint of the best Honey, an Ounce of Verdegrease beaten to powder, and boyl them together three quarters of an hour, then strain it into a Gally-Pot, and keep it for your use. This is a very precious Oint∣ment to tent a Fistula or Poll-evil, for it searcheth it to the bottom, and eateth away all dead and evil Flesh, which causeth it to heal the better. ☜ A Water for a Fistula. Take a Pint of the best white-Wine you can get, or for want of that white-Wine Vineger or Verjuice, and put a good handful of Sage-leaves bruised into it. After you have boiled it pretty well, strain out the Sage from the Wine, and dissolve into it about an Ounce and a half of Roman Vitriol, half an Ounce of burnt Allom, and half an Ounce of the fine powder of Verdegrease; When it is cool, put it in a Glass, and keep it close stopped for your use. When you dress the Sore, let it be very warm, and Syringe it very well to the bottom once or twice a day, and in five or six Weeks it will be Cured. ☜ Another Receipt for a Fistula, Take of Roch Allom and bay Salt burnt, of each half an Ounce, the leaves of Rag-weed and Elder-tops, what you think fitting, according to the Concavity of the Sore, bruise and mix them very well together, with a handful or two of Grey Snails, shells and all, and stop the Hole full of it to the bottom, having first washed and cleansed it very well with a Syringe, with the water abovesaid, do this once or twice a day, and it will do well. ☜ Thing good for Feavers in General, which you are to use according to your Discretion. Some hold it death to let Blood, but this you may use as Dis∣cretion ser∣vth. To let Blood, the distilled water of the Branches, Leaves, Flowers, or Fruit of the Bramble is very good, the Leaves or Roots of Burrage or Bugloss is very good for Pestilential Feavers, to defend the Heart, and to Mitigate heat in them, the seeds or leaves of the blew-Bottle is like∣wise good for the same, so is the Root of the Butter-bur, the Juice of Cinqueoyl is good for all inflammations & Feavers, the distilled water of
Dandelion; the inner Juice of the Pomcitron or Lemmons are good, Cochenele is good in Pestilential Fevers, a Manchet steeped in Muscadine and given him, or in Sallet Oyl, Mashes of Malt and warm Water, three or four Yolks of Eggs, given him in eight spoonfuls of Aquavitae, and stir him till his shaking Fit be over is good, so is Muscadine and Sugar∣candy brewed together, Wormwood, Pepper, Grains, powder of dried Rue boiled in Ale, and sweetned with Treacle and Sugar-candy is good, so is Ston-crop bruised and infused in Ale and given him, Germander, Gumgragant and dried Roses put into a quart of Ale, with Sallet Oyl and Honey given him luke-warm is good, Alloes, Garlick, Licoras and Anniseeds mixed in white-Wine and given him, Rue, Long Pepper, Bay-berries, Smallage boiled in Beer, Saffron and Treacle mingled to∣gether, If you de∣sire to know the several sorts of Feavers, look in the First Part for Fea∣vers, and there you shall find them.or a handful of Thyme boiled in Beer till it be tender, then train it and put to it Sugar Candy, Anniseeds and Treacle, and give it him blood-warm; but for a Hectick Feaver boyl Sage, Yarrow, Rib∣wort, Plantine, Bramble-leaves, Honey-suckle-leaves, of each a hand∣ful, with common Honey a spoonful in two quarts of running Water till half be consumed, then put to it a good Piece of Allom, and two spoon∣fuls of Vineger, and when it is dissolved drain the Water from the Herbs, and keep it for your use, and wash his Mouth therewith often, for his Tongue will be raw; Then give him this Drink, take of Alloes an Ounce, powdred Garlick half an Ounce, of Anniseeds and Licoras an Ounce made into powder, bruise your Garlick and put to it three Oun∣ces of brown Sugar Candy, and add to it a Pint of white-Wine, and give it him Blood-warm, and Ride him afterwards; Give him this Drink every other day for three Mornings together. Particular Receipts for them. ☞ Take Oyl of Vitriol, Oyl of Sulphur and the Spirit of Salt, and put to it a quart of strong Beer, ninety or one hundred drops of either of them, and give it him every Morning till you find his Feaver abate; These three Oyls or Spirits are much of a Nature, for they all comfort and strengthen the Stomach very much, and abate all Inflammations, quenching Draught, and abating the Heat of Feavers, and create a good Stomach; They purifie the whole Mass of Blood, and resist all Poison, Plague and Putrefaction, and are so excellent Medicines, that they are to be accounted truly Cordial and Comfortable to the whole Body; pow∣erful, yet safe in Operation; If you give them alone, they are present death. They are good also applied outwardly, to takeaway hard Knobs or Warts, and to kill Ulcers or Fistulaes in the Flesh. The Dose given him is from Fifty to one hundred Drops. When you take them mix them not together, but use them singly by themselves. Have a care you touch not your Linnen or Woollen with them, for if you do, they will
soon eat them full of holes. The salt Spirit I advise you rather to make use of, of the three. ☜ Another Receipt good for a Feaver. Take of Diapente one Ounce, Bay-berries and long Pepper, of each half an Ounce, of the flat shell of an Oyster burnt and beaten to powder half an Ounce, of Diascordium half an Ounce, put all these into a quart of strong Beer, and give it him uke-warm when you find him want it, and Order him with white-Wine and Honey to preserve his Stomach, and a Cordial of brown Houshold-bread boiled in Beer, and sweetned also with Honey, as you have Directions more fully how to make, and use them in Directions for sick Horses, after the Table of Simples; This Drink will cause him to sweat and sleep, which will bring him to his Sen∣ses, which is the proper effect of the Diascordium; but if you find that this does not make him sleep, then give him as much powder of Poppy∣seeds as will lie upon a six pence in two Hornfuls of small Beer, at each Nostril one, or for want of that a spoonful of white Poppy water, which cause him to sleep soundly. ☜ Things good in General to be Given inwardly for the Cure of the Farcy. Hounds tongue, Knot-grass, Horse-Mint and Spare-Mint, Rag-wort, feed of Bastard Rhubarb, Savin, Scabius, Stone-crop, Tamarisk, Oyl of Vitriol, ten or fifteen drops of it in his Drink is good for it, stinking Gladwin, Dodder, Callamint, Water-Hemp or Water-Agrimony, Hearts-ease, Hops, black Hellebore or Beares foot, Fumitory, the dried Bark of the black Aller-tree, the Root of Asarabica is not only good for it, but likewise for all Cankers or Old putrid Ul∣cers and Fistulaes upon the Body, the inner Rind of the Barberry-Tree, the inner Rind of the Elder-Tree, or Berries, Burrage, Bri∣ony a great Purger, which must be Corrected, Gentian, Feltwort or Baldmony, the Juice of Housleek or Stone-crop, Liver-wort, the seed of Male and Female, Mercury, Chick-weed, Turmerick, Bay-berries, Fennegreek, Nut-galls, the inner Rind of the Wall-Nut Tree, the Juice of Cinquefoyl put into his Eares, or the Juice of Rue and Aqua-vitae, or Assafetida and Brandy put into them, the Juice of Ground-Ivy given inwardly, the Juice of Cel∣landine, the Juice of Sow-thistle, Southernwood, &c.
☞ Things good in general to be applied Outwardly to Kill the Knots of the Farcy. After you have Blooded him well, take Oyl of Bay and Euforbium mixed together, and anoint the Knots with it, or to Bath the place with the Stale of a Cow or Ox, and with the Herb called Lyons Foot, boiled together, or Tallow and Horse-dung melted together, or to burn the Knots with a hot Iron, or to wash the Sore with Salt, Vineger, Al∣lom, Verdegrease, green Copperas and Gun-powder boiled together in Chamber-Lye, or take a penny-worth of Tar, two Handfuls of Pigeons dung, white Mercury two penniworth, and make it into Salve, and an∣oint him with it. Soot, Bay-salt and black Sope is likewise good, so is Rue, Brimstone, Arsmart, Hemlock, Nettles, Housleek, Brandy, Oyl of Turpentine, Aqua-vitae, Pepper, Ginger, Misle-toe, the powder of un∣slackt Lime, used at your pleasure, &c. Observation upon this Disease. If his Breath smell strong and stink, his Lights are rotten, and there is no Cure for him. Particular Receipts both Inwardly given and Outwardly applied for the Cure of the Farcin. Take nine Leaves of the Pot-Herb called Beetes, of the smallest but soundest Leaves, and nine grains of Bay-salt, beat these very well toge∣ther to a salve, and put this Medicine into his Eares by equal portions in the Morning before Sun-rise, and stitch them up, and let him stand with Meat before him, and let his Drink be white water. Unstitch them not in twenty four houres, then take forth the wooll and stuff and he is Cured. Another. If the Farcin be in the fore-parts of the Horse, take two ounces of Arsnick, and put it into a piece of new Cloth, and bind it up with a piece of new pack-thread, and fasten it unto his Mayn▪ and if it be in his hinder-parts, as well as his fore-parts, then hang it upon his Tail, and the more you ride and exercise him the better, and though the common way is to keep him with a spare diet, I like not of it, for you cannot keep him too well, for the lower you keep him, the more doth the disease get the upper hand of him. Another to anoint the Farcy Knots with. Take black Hellebore, and add to the Herb some of its Juice, then
put to it old Boars or Barrows Grease, and boyl it till the Juice be quite boyled away in it, whereby to bring it to an Ointment, with which an∣oint the Knots or Buttons of the Farcin with, but shave or clip away the hair before you do anoint it. ☜ Another for it when it first appears, before it begins to be raw. Take of Chamberly, Soot and Bay-salt, and boyl them very well toge∣ther, then at night wash the Places infected with a rag, upon the end of a stick very hot, but not so hot as to scauld away the hair; then in the morning anoint it with Tarr and black Sope, boyled together pretty hot. This done four or five times together will Cure it. Another which De-Grey says he hath Cured 100 Horses with. Take of Rue the leaves and tender tops only, without any the least stalk, a good handful, first chop them small, then stamp them in a Mor∣tar to an Ointment, then put to it one spoonful of the purest tried Hogs-grease you can get, and work them together to a Salve, then stop into either Ear the whole quantity by equal proportions, and put a little wooll upon the Medicine to cause him to keep it in the better, and so stitch up his eares, and let it be in about twenty 24 houres, and then unstitch them, and take forth the Wooll and he is Cured. ☜ . W. Another, which if he hath it given him twice it will Cure him. Take the inner Rind of Elder, the inner Rind of the Wall-nut-tree, the inner Rind of the Barberry-tree, of all of them an equal quantity, and not exceeding above a handful of all of them together; Boyl them in a quart of strong Beer a little while, then take out the Barks, and add to it the powder of Turmerick, Fennegreek, and two Nut-galls beaten to powder, with the powder of Grains of Paradice, about an ounce of all of them, boyl them in the same Beer about as long as you did be∣fore, then sweeten it with Treacle, and give it him luke-warm in the Morning fasting, and let him fast two or three houres after it, and or∣der him as you do a sick horse,; if you put into it a little handful of stone-crop it will be the bettet; You must wash the buds of the Farcy night and morning with this water. Take half a pound of green Cop∣peras, and boyl it a little while in a quart of Chamberly; before you boil it you must put in a good quantity of Salt or Brine. ☜ Another. After you have kept him slenderly fed all Night, give him the next Morning fasting, half a pint of the Juice of Housleek, and half a Pint of Sallet Oyl mingled together, and let him Fast till Night, and then give him Hay and no Water till the next Morning, and
that warm too. This Drink used twice will almost Cure any Farcy. ☞ Another for the Farcy▪ Take a handful of each of these Herbs here under-written, chopped very small, and boiled in three Pints of strong Ale or Beer to about a Pint and an half, and after you have strained the Liquor very well from the Herbs, give it him luke-warm fasting in the Morning, but before you give it him, stir into it an Ounce of crude Antimony, finely pow∣dred and searc'd; About three or four days after give him the like Drink again, and repeat it the third time if there be occasion, and it will certainly Cure him. The Herbs are these, Chickweed, Wood∣bittony, Groundsel and Mullen. ☞ The Buds must be anointed also with this outward Application. Take the bigness of a Hazel-Nut▪ of yellow Arsnick beaten to powder, and put to it about a spoonful of black Sope, (or for want of that, common Sope) and lay a little of it upon the Head of every one of them, which will so corrode and eat into them, that they will become so loose, that they will drop out by the Roots, then heal up the wounded places by anointing them with your green Ointment, which you may find in the first Part, or with Sallet-Oyl or Hogs grease; take care you let him not come to gnaw it with his Teeth for fear of poisoning him, or that you lay it not upon any sound place, for it will make a Wound wheresoever it comes. You may anoint them with the Oyl of Vitriol, if yo please, which hath the same Operation with the other. ☞ Another outward Application for this Disease, which will not only Cure the Buds of it, but any foul Scab, Leprosie or Mange. After you have let Blood, which is always convenient in this Dis∣ease; Take three Pints of old Urine, and a Pint of Vineger or Ver∣juice, and put to it half a Pound of the Stalks of the strongest To∣baccho you can get, but let them be first bruised and laid asteep in the Urine all Night before you boil them; After you have o done, set it over the Fire, and put to it an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, and boil them altogether till it come to a quart, then strain forth the Liquor from the stalks, and anoint the infected places with it till they be well. Another inward and outward Application for the Farcy. ☞ After you have Blooded those Buds with your Incision-Knife, which are fresh and green wash them once or twice a day with your Fistula-wa∣ter, which will Kill them, conditionally you give him this inward Drink with it, viz. Take two quarts of Running Water and put to it, two
Handfuls of Herb-grace, chopt indifferent small, with two or three spoonfuls of bruised Hemp-seed, and set it over the Fire, and let it boyl away till it come to three Pints, then give it him three times in nine days, and Order him as you do sick Horses, and he will do well. ☜ Another to Cure it by ptting something into his Eares. After you have bruised about nine or ten Cloves of Garlick, (being first peel'd) wiuh a Handful of Rue, and about half a quarter of a Pint of Brandy strain the Juice through a Cloth into some convenient thing, and put to it so much of black or white Wooll as it will well drink up, and fill each Ear full of it, putting a piece of dty Wooll upon it to keep it in the better. Then sowe them up as you have Directions before, and do not unstitch them in twenty four houres; If you open his Head in the usual place under his fore-top, and put into it about the length of an Inch of the inner Rind of Elder, and let it remain there about the same time, the Cure will be the sooner Expedited. ☜ Another Medicine to put into his Eares to Cure it when it is in his Head. After you have let Blood bruise so much of Housleek and Hemlock as will contain two spoonfuls of the Juice of each of them, and add to them two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, and fill each Ear full of it, leaving so much room as you may put Flox or Wooll upon it to keep it in the bet∣ter. When you have so done stitch up his Eares as in the former Re∣ceipt, and at twenty four houres end take out the stuff. If you like best the former way of soaking up the Juice with the Wooll better then this, you may use that. ☜ A Drink to Cure the most malignant Farcy that is. Before you Give him this Drink here under-written, let him be kept very sparing of Meat all night, and the next Morning Blooded on both sides the Neck very well. 'Tis this, Take the inner Rind of the Bar∣berry Tree, Herb-grace, Sage, Wormwood, Fennel, Lungwort, of each half a Handful chopped small, Anniseeds, Turbich, Turmerick, and of Aristolochia rotunda, about two Ounces of all of them beaten to pow∣der; boyl the Herbs pretty well in two quarts of small Beer to one quart, then strain it forth and put in your Powders to it, and when it is cold enough to take, give it him. ☜ How to Order him before and after you have Given it him▪ 1. Before you give it him, let him fast four houres, and after it as much, when you have given it him, Air him well by Riding him after it. 2. Let him drink but once a day, and let it be white Water, which is a handful or two of Wheat-Bran stirred in amongst his water, made first luke-warm.
3. Let him be kept in the House with very dry Meat during his Cure. 4. Exercise is very good in this Distemper, and the more you use him to it the better you will find him, 5. 'Tis good also in order to his Cure, once or twice a day to Flounce him backward and forward in some clear River or Pond, up to the Mid∣sides, which will cleanse his Body, and take away the Filth and Venom of the Disease. 6. This often washing him in cold water will wash off the poisoned Medicines, if he hath been poisoned with any, and also abate very much the Malignancy of the Disease. 7. Let him rest three or four days after his first Drink, and then give him another, and Order him in every thing as you did before. 8. If you find him after this second Drink that he is not perfectly Cu∣red, you may give him the third, and this will certainly Cure him. 9. When you give him his first Drink, if you please you may Blood him with the end of your Cornet in the Furrow on the top of his Mouth. The Vertues of this Malignant Drink for the Farcy are these. It will cause him to vomit up much Filth, and run at the Nose very nau∣seous and stinking stuff, and yellowish Water; It is a great Sweetner and Purifyer of the Blood, as also a great Drier up of all evil and ma∣lignant Humours that are seated and rooted in the Body; If the Heads of the Buds appear red and loose, lay upon them a little burnt Allom, mixed with a little Butter or Hogs-grease, and you shall quickly find them to fall off. ☞ A Receipt for the Cre of the Water-Farcy. This is the usual and common Way for the Cure of it, viz. To take a long and small Iron Rod, and bend it backward at one end about the length of a Fleam, then heat it red hot in the Fire, and strike the swelled places under his Belly, and chaps full of Holes, and let and squeeze out the grey and Oyly water, that you find pent up in the Skin, and wash the places, (to keep them from wrankling, and to take out the Fire) with Chamberly and Salt, and some powder of Bolearmoniack mixt amongst it as hot as he can wel endure it for three or four times, and he is Cured. Things good in general to Cure the Running or rotten Frush. To take off the Shoo and pare away all the corrupt places, and make them raw, then put it on again being widened; then take Soot and Salt, bruise them well together in a Dish, and mix therewith the Whites of three Eggs, and dip Tow therein, and stop all the Foot with it, renewing
it seven days together, or to wash it with Urine three or four times a day; or take a quart of urine, and boyl in it a quarter of a pound of Allom, with some green Copperas, and strain it out, and keep it for your use; and after you have washed the Sore with it, strow on it the pow∣der of green Nettles Fryed and Pepper, and it will dry it up. When you dip Tow in any thing, you must splint it in that it may not fall off, and during the Cure to let him come into no wet, and at the seven days end leave stopping him, and ride him abroad, and bring him in very clean into the Stable, for dirty setting up breeds this infirmity, &c. Things good in general for the Over-flowing of the Gall, which is a yellowness of the Skin, and a Costiveness of the Body. Saffron boiled in Milk is good, or Ale, Saffron and Anniseeds mixt together, or Cellandine Roots chopt, bruised and boiled in Beer, or for want of Cellandine, Rue, and give it him luke-warm, &c. ☜ Things good for Gangrenes inward or outward. The Leaves, Fruit or Roots of Briony; but it is a great Purger which must be Corrected▪ the Leaves of Bugle bruised and applied, or the Juice of it to wash the place; the Meal of Darnel is good to stay them, Cankers, or any other eating and fretting Sores, Water-Cresses, Mal∣lows, Elder-leaves, Brook-lime, mouldy Hay and Bran boiled in the dregs of strong Beer, and laid to very hot, is good to stay its spreading, if any thing will do it; Nettles bruised and laid to them is good, so is the decoction of the Leaves or Bark of the Tamarisk-Tree, and the place Bathed therewith. VVhat the Spleen i. It is a long, flat, narrow and spungy substance, of a pale fleshy colour, joyning with the Liver and Gall; it is the Receptacle of Melancholy, and the dregs of the Blood, and it is as subject to Infirmity as any inward part whatsoever, as to Inflammations, Obstructions, Knobs and Swel∣lings; it is through the spunginess apt to suck in all manner of Filth, and to dilate and spread the same all over the Body, the appearance thereof is on the left side under the short Ribs, where you shall perceive some small Swelling, which Swelling gives great Grief to the Midriff, and ta∣keth away more of his Digestion then his Appetite, and being suffered to continue, it maketh faint the Heart, and grows in the end to a hard Knob and stony substance. Now if I mistake not, this Spleen is no other then the Milt, and I have known four or five Horses die of it out of one Stable, and it hath been lookt upon no other then the Plague, which if they had had things proper for the Distemper they might have lived.
Things good in General for the Spleen, either inwardly taken or outwardly applied. A Decoction of the Herb Archangel in wine applied to the place grieved hot, Barley-Meal-boyled with Melilot and Chamomel flowers, with some Lynseed, Fennegreek, and Rue applied warm, the Juice of Chamomel given inwardly, or to make him Sweat, and then give him a quart of white-wine, wherein hath been boyled the Leaves of Tamarisk, and a good quantity of Cummin seeds beaten to powder, and give it warm, or to pour into his left Nostril every day after he hath Sweat the Juice of Myrobalans mixt with Wine and Water to the quantity of a pint, or take Cummin-seed and Honey, of each six ounces, of Lacerpiti∣um as much as a Bean, of Vineger a pint, and put all these into three quarts of water, and let it stand so all night, and give him a quart there∣of next Morning fasting, or Garlick, Nitrum, Hore-hound and Worm∣wood sodden in sharp wine, and given, and to bathe his left side with warm water and to rub it hard. A Particular Receipt for the Spleen. ☞ Take a Handful of Agrimony chopped very small, and work it up with sweet Butter into two or three Balls, with half an Ounce of the powder of Turmerick, and as much of Cummin-seeds powdred, and give him them fasting in the Morning for several Mornings together, and it will Cure him; 'Tis good also to give him some of the Herb boiled in his Drink, or Oxicrocium applied Plaister-wise to the grieved part is very good. Things good in General to Cure the Colt-Evil. The Juice of Rue mixed with Honey, and boiled in Hogs-grease, Bay∣leaves, with the powder of Fennegreek added thereto, and anoint the shath with it. The powder of the Herb Avit, and the leaves of Bit∣tony stamped with white-Wine to a moist Salve, and anoint the Sore therewith; to wash the Sheath clean with luke-warm Vineger, and to draw out the Yard and wash that also, and to Ride him twice every day into some deep Running Water, tossing him to and fro to allay the heat of the Members till the Swelling be vanished; and if you swim him now and then it will not be amiss; but the best way to Cure a Horse is to Give him a Mare, and to swim him after it; To bathe his Cods with the Juice of Housleek, or with the water wherein Knee-holm hath been sod; if it stops the Urine, then give him new Ale and a little black Sope in it to drink, or to wash his Cods with Butter and Vineger made warm, or with the Juice of Hmlock, or else take Bean-flower, Vineger and
Bolearmoniack, and mix them together; Lay it Plaister-wise to his Sheath and Cods, or to make him a Plaister of Wine-Lees, Housleek and Bran mixt together, and laid to his Sheath and Cods, &c. Things good to Cure the Mattering of the Yard. Take Roch Allom one Ounce, and white-Wine one Pint, boyl them till the Allom be dissolved, then Blood-warm inject this Portion with a Syringe, putting it up into his Yard so far as it may be four or five times a day, till it be well. This is so perfect, that you need not any other. Things good in General for Shedding of Seed, which is no other then the Run∣ning of the Reins in Men. Amaranthus that bears a white Flower, the Juice of Bistort added to the Juice of Plantine outwardly applied, Comfrey, to Ride him into some cold water up to the Belly, then cover him warm and give him Red Wine and Hogs-dung, or Red-Wine and Acatium, Venice-Turpentine, &c. ☜ Two Receipts (which may serve in stead of many more) for the Shedding of the Seed, or Running of the Reins, which is an infallible, safe and sure Way of stopping it; And is also good for all manner of Bruises by Falls, or any other Accident, &c. If you give it for Bruises or Falls, leave out the Bole∣armoniack. Take a pound of common Turpentine, (if you will not go to the Charge of the Venice) and put to it so much of the fine powders of Bole∣armoniack and English Liquoris, with a little Wheat-Flower, as will make it up into a stiff Paste; When you have occasion to use it, Rowl it out between your Hands, and break so much of it off as contains the bigness of a small Wash-ball, and give him three of them Morning and Evening upon the end of a stick, or in a Horn full of strong Beer, till you find the Flux of Seed stayed, which will be in a Week or Fortnights time at farthest. 'Tis convenient to purge and cleanse his Reins very well first before you give him his Balls, which will not only Expedite, but perfect the Cure so much the sooner and better. Another for the same. ☜ Take brown Sugar Candy, Tanners Bark finely powdred and Sifted, with the powder of the dried leaves of Clary, and incorporate them very well with some common Turpentine, and make them up into Balls with a little Wheat-flower, and give him two or three of them at a time, Mor∣ning and Evening, about the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, till the Flux of the Seed stayeth, which will be in a very short time.
Things good in General for the Cure of the Falling of the Yard. To Wash his Yard with Sea-water, or Water and Salt, and if that will not prevail, prick all the outmost skin of his Yard with a sharp Needle very slightly, and wash all the Pricks with strong Vineger, and this will not only make him draw up his Yard again, but also if at any time his Fundament chance to Fall, this Cure will put it up again, or to put Ho∣ney and Salt into his Yard made liquid, or else a quick Fly or a Grain of Frankincense, or a Clove of Garlick clean pilled and bruised, and Bath his Back with Oyl, Wine and Nitre made warm and mingled together; But the best Cure is first to wash all his Yard with white-Wine warmed, and anoint it with Oyl of Roses and Honey mixed together, and so put it up into his Sheath, and with a lttle Bolster of Canvass keep it from fal∣ling down, and dress him thus in twenty four houres until he be reco∣vered, and let his Back be kept very warm as is possible, both with Cloth and a Charge of Plaister made of Bolearmoniack, Eggs, Wheat-Flower, Sanguis Draconis, Turpentine and Vineger, or else lay next his Back a wet Sack or wet Hay, and a dry Cloth over it, and that will keep his Back exceeding warm. VVhat is good for the Cure of the Particular Diseases in Mares, Barrenness, Consumption, Rage of Love, Casting Foals, hardness to Foal, and how to make a Mare cast her Foal. If you have your Mare barren, boy good store of the Herb Agnus in the Water that she drinketh, or to stamp a good Handful of Leeks, with four or five spoonfuls of Wine, then put twelve Flies called Cantharides, and strain them altogether with a sufficient quantity of Water to serve the Mare two days together, by pouring the same into her Nature with a Glister▪Pipe made for that purpose, and at the end of three days offer the Horse to her, and if he covers her, wash her Nature twice together with cold water; Or to take of Nitrum, Sparrows dung and Tur∣pentine, of each a like quantity, wrought together and made like a Sup∣pository, and put that into her Nature, and it will cause her to desire the Horse, and also to conceive. If you will have her fruitful, boyl good store of Mother-wort in the Water which she drinketh; If she lose her Belly, which sheweth a Consumption of the Womb, give her a quart of Brine to drink, Mug-wort being boiled therein. If your Mare, through good keeping, forsake her food, give hr for two or three days together, a Ball of Butter and Agnus Castus chopt together▪ If you will have her cast her Foal, take a handful of Bittony, and boyl it in a quart of Ale, and it will deliver her presently. If she cannot Foal, take the Herb Horse-Mint, either dry it or stamp it, and take the powder
or the Juice, and mix it with strong Ale, and Give it her, and it will help her. And if your Mare is subject to cast her Foals, as many are, keep her at Grass very warm, and once in a Week give her a good warm Mash of Drink, this secretly Knitteth beyond expectation. ☜ Things good in General for the Cure of a Consumption. Wood-bitony, Hore-hound, Juniper-berries, Leeks mixed with Sallet Oyl and Sack, with some Frankincense, Agarick, Bay-berries, Brank-Ursine, China, Dandelion; but the best is to scour him well, and put him to Grass; Or take a Sheeps Head with the Wooll on, wash it clean, and boyl it in a Gallon of fair water, until the flesh come from the Bones, then strain it, and put into the Broth half a pound of Reined Loaf Sugar, of Cynnamon, Conserve of Roses, Conserve of Barberries, Conserve of Cherries, of each three Ounces, and give him a quart every Morning fasting; use this till four or more Sheeps-Heads be spent, and let his Drink be either sweet Mashes or white Water. Take no Blood from him in this Disease, but rather labour to Cherish the Blood h hath, nei∣ther be too busie in Administring unto him Purges, but Cordials, as Dia∣pente, Diatessaron, Duke Powder, Cordial Powder, and such like Restora∣tives, and to give him good Meat and good Mashes, and to change his Meat sometimes to make him eat his Meat the better. Things good in General for the Lungs. ☜ Physick-Nuts is good for Rotten Lungs, Lung-wort, or Wood Liver-wort beaten to powder and Given in Beer, is good for Inflammations and Ulcers of the Lungs, the powder of stinking Gladdon, given him in Beer, with a little Mastick, is good for them. The Decoction of Hysop made with Figs, Water, Honey and Rue helpeth the Inflammations of the Lungs, the old Cough or shortness of Breath, Featherfew, Penny-royal given with Honey cleareth the Breast from all gross and thick Humors, and cleanseth the Lungs; Calamint is good for the Wheesing of them; Common Hore∣hound cleanseth them, and is good for the Ulceration of them, so doth Bit∣tony; Scabius scoureth the Chest and Lungs, Mullen or Lungwort is good, Comfrey, Cowslips of Jerusalem, Cinquefoyl is good for the Liver and Lungs, Chervel boiled is good for the Consumption of the Lungs, Cum∣min-seeds, Brank-Ursine, Rue, Licoris, Bay-berries, Cassia, Water-Agri∣mony, Alehoof, the Leaves of the Fig-Tree, Lung-wort which grows up∣on Oaks or Beeches, which is a kind of Moss with broad grayish tough Leaves, Maiden-hair, wilde Marjorem, Hedge Mustard-seed, Rosa Solis or Sun-dew; the Juice of Sanicle, Vervain, Wood-bind or Honey-suckles, Cresses, Almonds, Bugloss, Garlick boiled in Milk, Tartar, which is the thickest of white-Wine Lees, dried and made into powder, Elecam∣pane, Sugar-Candy, Diapente, or take a Pint of sweet Sack, Honey,
Myrrh, Saffron, Cassia and Cinnamon, of each alike, made into fine Powder, and mix two spoonfuls of it with your Sack, and give it him warm fifteen days together, and feed him with Mashes and white Water. But if his Lungs be rotten, then take the Juice of Purslain half a Pint, and mix with it Oyl of Roses, and put to it Tragantium steeped in Cows Milk, and give it him seven Mornings together, and this will Ripen the Impostume, which you may know by his stinking Breath, then give him this Powder; Take of Cassia made into fine powder, seven Raisis of the Sun stoned, boiled in a Pint of Muskadine, and give it him Blood∣warm; or the Water of Angelica give him with some of the Root. Particular Receipts for the Lungs. Take of Horse Lungwort, alias Mullet, it groweth in every place with broad hoary soft leaves, which do feel like Velvet. shred it, stamp it and strain it; Then take of Fennegreek a good spoonful, and of Madder as much, made into ine powder, and give this to him in a quart of good Ale or Beer, and give it him every other day, for twelve or fourteen days, and sprinkle his Hay with Water, and let his Oats be washed in good Ale, and let his Drink be white Water, and somtimes sweet Mashes. Another, Take a Snake, and cut off the Head and Tail, and Flea it, and after cut the same into Pieces the length of your Finger, and roast it as you would an Eel upon a Spit, and let it Baste it self, and keep the Oyl of it in a Glass for your use; when you use it anoint the Breast, and his four short Ribs which be against the Lungs; but first clip away the Hair, for that will take too much of the Oyl up, and thus do often for some time, and it will recover his Lungs again, and make him perfectly ond. Things good in General for the Consumption of the Liver. There is no absolute Cure for it, but to preserve it give him half a Pint of Sack, with the same quantity of the Blood of a young Pig luke∣warm to drink, or to give him three days together no other food then warm Wort and baked Oats, and let him be kept Fasting the Night before he receives his Medicine, or to put into his Wort which he drinketh, two or three spoonfuls of the powder of Agrimony, red Rose-leavs, Saccarum, Rosaceum, Diarcadon, Abbat is, Disantelon, Licoas, and of the Liver of a Wolf, or to give him Sulphur and Myrrh beaten into fine powder, mixed with a new laid Egg, and given him in half a Pint of Malmsey, and se∣parate him from other Horses, for this Disease is infectious.
Things good in General to Preserve the Liver, and to open the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Amara dulcis, Alheal, Agrimony openeth and cleanseth the Liver, wa∣ter-Agrimony openeth the Obstructions of the Liver, and mollifieth hardness of the Spleen, Alexander or wild Parsley, Angelica, Asarabica, the decoction of Avens, the Bark or the Root of the Bay-Tree, openeth the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and other inward Diseases, the Juice of the white Beet openeth them, Wood-bittony, Butchers broom or Knee-holly, the leaves of Calamint, Centaury, Columbines, Dandelion, Liver-wort, the leaves or Bark of the Maple-Tree, Pimpernel, Ground∣pine or Chamepitys, Agaricum, Almonds, Fumitory, Chamomel, Worm∣wood, Licoras, Anniseeds, Smallage, Parsley, Spikenard, Gentian, Suc∣cory, Endive and Lupine, all these are very comfortable for the Liver, and are to be Seethed in Water that he drinketh, Alloes dissolved, Ireos stamped, avoury Lungwort, or Oyl and Wine mixt together; but the best of all is a Wolfes Liver dried and beaten to powder, and given him in Beer, or strowed amongst his Provender, or Parsley and Harts-horn, or Fennel and Parsley-roots scraped or boiled in Water, and given him with Licoras and Sorrel, or ollipodium of the Oak beaten to powder and strowed amongst his Provender, or take Hysop, Cowslip-leaves, Sil∣ver-wort or Lung-wort, alias Mullen, Harts-horn, of each a handful; then take Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda, Fennegreek, Enula compana dried and long Pepper, of each alike, and when they are all powdred and searced, take a spoonful of all of them; chop the Herbs and mingle them with this powder, and put a spoonful of live Honey to it, and boyl all of them in strong Ale till half of them be consumed, and give it him Blood-warm; Groundsel preserveth it greatly. Of the Infirmities in General of the Hoofs, as false Quarters, loose Hoofs, casting of the Hoofs, Hoof-bound, Hoof-running, Hoof-brittle, Hoof-hurt, Hoof-soft, Hoof-hard, and generally to Preserve Hoofs. False Quarters. To take off the Shooe, and to take away so much of the Hoof on that side the Sorrance is, that when the Shooe is set on again, the Chink may be wholly uncovered, then open the Chink to the Quick with your Drawing-Iron, and fill up your Rift with a Rowl of Hurds dipt in this Ointment; Take Turpentine, Wax and Sheeps Sewet, of each alike melted together, and dip your Hurds therein, and stop the Rift there∣with, renewing it once a day till it be whole; and thus the Rift being closed on the top with this Ointment, draweth the place betwixt
the Hoof and the Hair with a hot Iron overthwart that place, which will make it grow and shoot downwards, and Ride him with no other Shoo till his Foot be hardned and become ound. What is good to Cure a loose Hoof. If the Hoof be loose, let it be of what cause soever, you are first to open it in the sole of the Foot, so as the Humour may have free passage downwards, and put a restrictive Charge about it, as you have some in my First Part, then to heal it up with Turpentine and Hogs-Grease melted together; Or take three spoonfuls of Tarr, and a quarter of a pound of Rosin, and half a Handful of Tansie, and half a Handful of Rue, and half a Handful of red Mints, and half Handful of Southern∣wood brayed altogether in a Mortar, and add to it half a pound of But∣ter, and a Penniworth of Virgins Wax, and melt them on the Fire till it come to be a thick Salve, then spread it upon a Cloth, and lay it to it seven days together till it be whole; Or to anoint it with Burgundy-pitch, and it will fasten it; Or take Bittony, Rosemary, Rue, Bolear∣moniack and Frankincense boiled together and laid over it; o to take Tar, Brimstone in fine powder, Wheat-Bran, and the Urine of a Man-Child, boyled all to a Poultess, and apply it hot to the Hoof, and it will fasten it, or to stop it with the Brains of a Pig, or to stop it with Flax dipt in the Whites of Eggs, or wash it with Vineger, and ill it with Tar∣tar and Salt, and then anoint it with Olibanum, Mastick and Pitch of Greece, of each alike, and a little Sanguis Draconis, new Wax and Sheeps Suet, and melt it together, and anoint it with it, and if the new Hoof come, cut away the old. Of Casting the Hoof. Take Aqua fortis the strongest you can get, and first with a Rape or Drawing-Iron File or draw away the old Hoof somewhat near, then touch the Hoof so prepared with your Aqua fortis three or four several dressings and no more, then anoint the Foot with the Unguent for Hor∣ses Feet, viz. take Hogs-Grease three pounds, Patch Grease two pounds, Venice-Turpentine one pound, new Wax half a pound, Sallet Oyl one pound, melt and mix all these upon the Fire, and anoint the Coffin of the Hoof up to the top, and this will bring a new Hoof. Another. Take Turpentine half a pound, Tar half a Pint, new Wax half a pound, Sallet Oyl one Pint, melt all these except the Turpentine to∣gether, till they be well mixed; and a little before you take it from the Fire put in your Turpentine, and stir it till it be cold, but before hand make him a Buskin of Leather, with a thick Sole made fit for his Hoof,
but wide enough, that it may be Tied about his Pastern, and dress his Hoof with this Medicine, laying Tow or Hurds upon it, and so put on the said Buskin, and fasten it to the Pastern Joynt, or a little above, but so as the Buskin do not trouble the Foot, renewing the Medicine every day till it be whole, and is good likewise for a Hoof-bound Horse; and as the Hoof beginneth to come, and if you find it grow harder and thicker in one place then another; or crumbleth, or groweth out of fashion, take your Rape and File it into good fashion again; and when you finde it so well that you may turn him out, put him into some moist Pasture or Me∣dow, which will cause the Hoof to become tough. Of the Hoof-bound. First, pluck off the Shooes, and shoo him up again with Half-Moon and Lunet-shooes; then ease with your drawing Iron or Rape, the quar∣ters of the Hoofs on both sides of the Feet, from the Cronet down to the end or bottom of the Hoofs, so deep till you perceive as it were a dew to come forth, and if you make two Rases it will be the better, and enlarge the Hoofs the more, that done, anoint the Hoofs next to the hair about the Cronet with this Ointment. Take of Turpentine one pound, of Wax and of Sheep or Deers Sewet, of each half a pound, of Tarr and of Sallet Oyl, of each half a Pint; melt all but the Turpentine together, and when you are ready to take it up put in your Turpentine, and stir it well together till it be cold, anoint his Hoofs once a day till you find amendment, and ride him once a day upon soft ground for the space of a Month; then take off his Half-Moon Shooes, and pare his Soles, Frushes and Heels, so thin, till you may see a dew come forth, and the Blood ready to start, then tack on his Shooes, and stop his Feet as well within as without with this Charge. Take of Cow or Ox-dung, and of Wheat-Bran, of each so much as will suffice, of tried Hogs-Grease, and of the Kidney of a Loyn of Mut∣ton, of each one pound, of Turpentine and Tar of each half a pound, melt all these together, (the Turpentine excepted) which must be put in when it is almost ready to take from the Fire, keeping it shirring to mix the Ingredients. Let this Charge be laid on hot, and renew it nine days together, to the end the Sole may arise, but if this will not do take out the Sole clean, and after you have stanched the Bleeding with the tender tops of Hysop stamped in a Mortar, apply then the Oyl of Snails to it and red Nettles; the Oyl is thus made, take fourty, fifty or more Snails, and put them into a Bag with Bay salt, and when they are hung some time nigh the Fire, there will drop an Oyl from them, and use that with red Nettles once a day for three days, and heal up the Feet with your green
Ointment, which you may find in my First Part, which will bring a New Hoof again, which then Shoo him with Lavels again, and turn him forth to Grass. If you fear that your Horse is subject to be Hoof-bound, anoint his Coffin all over with Neats-foot Oyl, especially at the setting on of the Hoof, or with Turpentine, and to stop his Feet underneath with Cows dung. Or take the Fat of Bacon half a pound, of white Sope three Oun∣ces, Balm a handful, and five or six Sprigs of the tender tops of Rue, chop and stamp all these together very well, then fry them and lay them to reasonable hot, and let him come in no wet till he be well, and being thus dressed every day once, his Hoof will in a short time be sound and easie to him again. Things good in general to Preserve Hoofs, and to make them grow. To pare him well when you Shooe him, which ought to be when the Moon is three days in the increase, Turpentine, Hogs-Grease and Bees Wax melted together, and anoint the Coffin with it, or Myrrh, Allom, the Juice of Garlick, Rue, Asses dung or Cows dung, Pitch, Rozin, Sallet Oyl, Dogs-Grease, Olibanum, Dialthea, Sheeps Sewet boiled together, and anoint his Hoofs with it, or Chalk and white Lead mingled together▪ or Bark dust and Honey mingled together, or Yarrow, Allom and Worm∣wood boiled in Oyl, or to boyl Beans till they burst, temper them with Honey, and anoint his Feet with them, or to wash them with warm. Vi∣neger, and anoint them with Hore-hound, Wormwood and Grease melt∣ed together, standing upon his own wet Litter, is good to keep them moist, and make them to grow. Particular Receipts to make a Horses Hoof grow, and to Toughen it. Take the Juice of Garlick seven Ounces, of old Hogs-Grease two pounds, and a Handful of Asses or Cows dung, boyl and mix them well together, and stop his Feet with it, and anoint the Cronets of his Hoofs, the Medicine being pretty hot. Another for brittle Hoofs. Take Turpentine, Sheeps Sewet, unwrought Wax and Hogs-Grease, of each half a Pound, Sallet Oyl half a Pint and of Dogs Grease a pound, boyl them altogether, and keep them in a Gally-Pot for your use, and when you use it, anoint his Hoofs very well two or three times a day with it, especially at the setting on of the Hair, and to stop them with Cows∣dung and Dogs grease melted together.
Another most Excellent. Take one pound of Dogs and Hogs-grease, and Clarifie it with Rose∣mary, then mix it with half so much Cows dung, and boyl it up and an∣oint his Feet with it either hot or cold, is very good. A most Excellent Receipt for brittle Hoof'd Horses, to make their Hoofs grow so in a Fortnights time, that they will carry a Shoo that would ☜not carry it before. Take a Gallon of fresh Hogs-grease, half a Bushel of Damask Roses clean pickt, and when you have melted your Hogs-grease, and that it is boyling hot, put in your Damask Roses into it, and stir them well about till they be all wet, then take them off the Fire and put them into an Earthen Pot close covered, and put it into the Oven after you have drawn your Bread, and there set it stand till it be cold, then take it out and put it into a new Horse-dunghill that is very hot, and there let it be for three Weeks, then take it out and melt it again and strain the Roses from the Liquor, and keep it in an Earthen Pot close covered for your use. How to use it. When you dress your Horse, take a spoonful of Tar, and three Balls of Horse-dung warmed in a Pint of that Oyl, then take off his Shooes▪ and bind up his Feet with a pair of Buskins of Leather with a thick Sole, and pour in the Liquor and let him stand a Week so, but apply fresh shift to him every day poured into the Buskins, but take away none of the old Medicine, then tack on his Shooes again, and stop his Feet, and anoint∣ing them with the former Medicine, after his Bags are off you may water him twice a day as at other times, and when his Feet be clean pickt and dry, you may use the Medicine as you did before. In my First part you may have a better Direction to make the Buskin▪ Things good to soften a Hoof that is too hard. Take an Ounce of Soap, two Ounces of unslackt Lyme, with as much strong Lye as will make it soft, and stop his Feet daily with it till they come to a convenient softness. Or hot glowing Embers put upon the Hoof will soften it. Things good to harden Hoofs if they be too soft. To burn an old Shooe Sole and seethe it in Vineger, and Bath his Feet with it twice a day will harden them, or take of the powder of Galls, Bran and Salt of each a handful, boyled in a Pottle of strong Vineger,
and therewith Bath the Hoofs and it will harden them, the powder of Honey and Lyme, the powder of burnt Oyster-shells, the powder of a burnt Felt or Boot mixed together with Cream is good. Things good for the Malt-long. Things good for the Malt-long of the Hoofs, which will run in Wa∣terish humours about the Cronet, which are certain Knobs there. If it be in the Summer take black Snails and Burr-dock-roots, and beat them well together, and lay them unto the sore, and renew them once in twenty four houres; but if it be in the Winter, take the scrapings of a Pan or Cauldron, and put to it a handful of the inner Rind of the Elder Tree, and having beaten them well together in a Mortar, lay them to the Sore, and renew it once a day, and it will heal it, or take Garlick, Pepper and Honey, of each alike stamped together, and laid to it. For any Hurt upon the Hoof, or for all manner of Hurts in General. To stop the Hoof with Honey and Vineger mingled together for the space of three or four days at least, and then lay on the leaves of Ta∣marisk bruised with them till it be whole, or to stop the Hoof with Sheeps-Grease and Horse-dung mixt together, and renew it once a day till it be well, or take Pitch and Rozin of each two Ounces, Brimstone in fine Powder an Ounce, melt them together on the Fire, and add to them an Ounce of Turpentine, and as it cooleth make it up into Rowls, and when you use it put it into the Wound pretty hot, and all about the Sorrance, and clap Hurds upon it, and over that a piece of Leather, and so splint it on, and in twice or thrice dressing he will be Cured, two Ounces of Turpentine melted down with some Wax healeth any Wound or Gall, House-Snails seethed in Butter will draw out any Thorn or Nail being often renewed, or take Sope and Salt of each alike, and work them into an Ointment, and after you have washed the Wound with Beer and Salt, or Urine and Salt, and dried it again with a Linnen Rag, bind on the Medicine, and let it remain on for twenty four hours, which will take out the venom; then take Train Oyl one spoonful or two, and as much white Lead into fine Powder, and work them to a thick Salve, and apply it to the Sorrance Plaister-wise till it be whole, which will not be long, for nothing doth dry up sooner, or is more kindly or natural for the breeding of a new Hoof then this. Things good in General to draw out either Stub, Thorn or Iron, either out of the Foot or any other Part of the Body. Black sope laid to the sore all night will make it appear, the roots of
Reeds stamped and mixt with Honey, and laid to it, draweth out any Stub or Nail, so will also black Snails stamped and wrought with Butter, ☜the root of stinking Gladwin roasted and laid to it, the root of the Sword-Flag stamped with the powder of Frankincense and Wine is good, Daffadil stamped with Meal of Darnel and Honey, Clary stamped and laid asteep in warm water, and the slimy substance taken and applied Plaister-wise doth the like. Dittony bruised and applied, Primrose∣leaves, Galbanum, Agrimony stamped with Hogs-grease; if a Cloth be wetted in the distilled water of Haw-thorn, and applied, will draw forth any Thorn and Splint, the seeds and leaves of Mullen boiled in Wine, the Juice of Scabius and Southernwood bruised and laid to it, Sope and Chalk mixed together, and when it is out pour into it scalding hot Tur∣pentine, and when that is cold pour in the powder of Sulphur, or black Snails and Sope bruised together and apply it to the Grief; and bolster up his Foot or the Sore with Hurds, and keep it from all wet and filthi∣ness. VVhat is good for the Cords in general. To Bathe his Legs with the Grounds of Ale, and to Rope them up with Hay wet in the same for a Fortnight or more together, or take Mu∣stard, Aquavitae and Sallet Oyl, and boil them together, and make a Plaister of it, and apply it to the place grieved. But the best and sure Cure of all is to make a Slit upon the very top of his Nose, and with your Cornet take up his two great Sinews which you shall there find, and cut them in sunder, and so heal it up again with some healing Salve, and this will do him no harm but good, for it will give him the use of his Legs so perfectly, as that he will seldom or never after trip any more, and this can any ordinary Smith do. To Cure the String-halt. Take up the middle Vein upon the Thigh, and underneath the same, then under the said Vein there lies a string, which string must be cut a∣way, and then anoint him with Butter and Salt, and he will both do well and go well. You may find it more at large afterwards. ☜ Great Driers in General of old Sores, and of all manner of moist Humours whatsoever. Allom burnt, unslackt Lyme, the Ashes of an old Shooe burnt, Oyster-shells burnt will dry up any sore, be they never so moist, the Juice of Elder, the powder of the Leaves of Brambles, or the inner Rind, the powder of the Root of the Butter-bur, the powder of Fern Roots, the powder of sow-Fennel, the distilled water of Throat∣wort, the whole Plant, Root and all, wll dry up the hollow moisture
of corroding Ulcers, the Ashes of Southernwood, the Ashes of Nut∣shells burnt, Chamberly, green Copperas, Brimstone, Mastick, Frank∣incense, Cloves, Myrrh beaten to powder, and laid upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, then take some Lint, and receive the Smoak of it into it, and lay it upon the Sore, but wash it first with Chamberly, Soot and Cream tem∣pered together, Aquavitae and Sope boiled together, Rye flower, the White of an Egg beaten to an Oyl with Honey, Bole-Armoniack and Meal mxt amongst it, and make a Plaister of it, is good to heal up any New Gall'd Back, Barley-straw burnt and Soot, the powder of Honey and unslackt Lyme will heal any Gall, being first washed with Vineger, the Soot or Grim of a brass Pot, the powder of the Bone of a Crab-Fish, the Powder of Galls, the Grease of Snakes roasted with Heads and Tails off is a great Drier, the Bark of a Willow-Tree burnt to Ashes, is a great Drier and Binder, dry Figs beaten to powder with Allom, Mustard and Vineger, or Oyland soft Grease beaten to a Salve, with Vi∣triol, ☞Galls and Allom; the powder of Pomegranates, Salt and Vineger doth dry very much, or take a Toast of Wheaten-bread, spread all over with Honey, and Toasted dry, and beaten in a Mortar to powder, and strowed upon any Gall, and it will dry it up soon, or take Egg-shells burned black and beaten to powder, with old Shooes burned to a Coal and Charcoal, quick Lime and green Copperas burned in an Earthen Pot until it be red hot, then take of each of these alike, and knead them well together till they come to a Paste, and bake it well, and beat it into fine Powder, and strow it upon the sore, and before you dress it, wash it with strong Vineger or Chamberly, and it will be well; or bathe the sore with hot melted Butter, and strow upon it the powder of Rozin for a day or two, then take of thick Cream and Soot, and work it to a Paste, and apply it to the place Plaister-wise. A Plaister to dry up superfluous moisture, and to bind Parts loosened. Take Bitumen one pound, of the purest part of Frankincense three Ounces, of Bdelium Arabicum one Ounce, of Deers Sewet one pound, of Populeum one Ounce, of Galbanum one Ounce, of the drops of Storax one Ounce, of common Wax one pound, of Rozin Cabial half a pound, of Viscus Italicus one Ounce and a half, of Apoxima one Ounce, of the Juice of Hysop one Ounce, of the drops of Armoniack one Ounce, of Pitch half a Pound, let them be well molten together and incorporated, and make a Plaister thereof. Another Plaister to dry up any Swelling, VVind-gall, Splint or Bladder, in or about the Joynts. Take of Virgin-Wax half a pound, of Rozin one pound and a quarter,
of Galbanum one Ounce and a half, of Bitumen half a pound, of Myrrh secundary one pound, of Armoniack three Ounces, of Costus three Ounces, boyl all these together in an Earthen Pot, saving the Armoniack and Co∣stus, which being first Ground like fine Flower, must be added unto the other things, after that they have been boiled and cooled, and then boiled together again and well stirred, so as they may be incorporated together, and made all one substance, and then applying as occasion shall be admi∣nistred. Things good to dissolve Humours. To bath the Sorrance well with hot melted Butter, and to strew upon it the powder of Rozin for a day or two, then take Cream and Soot, and work them to a thick Paste, and apply it to the Sorrance, and it will dry▪ up the humour and skin, and heal the sore. VVormwood, Sage, Rose∣mary, and the Bark of an Elm, or of a Pine, and Linseed boiled in Oyl, and make a Bath thereof, and lay it to the grieved place, and it will dissolve any humour▪ that are bound and gathered together. A pound of Figs stamped with Salt till they come to a Salve, dissolveth all manner of Humors, by opening the Pores, and giving a large Passage▪ Look for more Receipts in my first Part, of this Nature. Things good to stop Humours. The Flower of VVheat mixed with the Juice of Henbane stayeth the Flux of Humors▪ The Flowers of the VVillow-Tree boiled in white-Wine and given inwardly, drieth up evil humors; Wormwood, Sage, Bole∣armoniack, Camphopia, a kind of Gum, Cardimonium is good. Things good to drive back Humours. Vineger, Salt and bold-Armoniack beaten together, and spread about the Sore driveth it back, or White-Lead and Sallet Oyl beaten together, or Red Lead and Sallet Oyl, or else Ʋgueum Album Camphoratum, and such like, but to take away the evil Humours of the Legs, take of common Honey, Turpentine, Mastick, Frankincense, Bolearmoniack made into powder, Sanguis Draconis, New laid Eggs, white-Wine Vineger, the Flower of Rice mixed altogether, and make a Plaister of it, and Lap it round about the Legs from the Feet to the upper Houghs, do this four or five times Hmours made thin. Garlick maketh thin, thick and gross Humours, and cutteth such as are tough and clammy, French Mercury a Decoction made of it and Cummin∣seeds.
Humours Purged. A Conserve made of Musk, Roses are a great Purger of waterish Hu∣mours, Sene purgeth cholerick and phlegmatick Humours, also gross and Melancholick. ☞ Simples that are good to cleanse the Body from all manner of evil Humours. Agrimony, Anniseeds, the inner Rind of the Barberry-tree boiled in Ale and given him for three or four Mornings together cleareth the Body from Itching, Mange, Tettars, Ring-wormes, Yellows and Boyls. The Flowers of Broom or Fuz clenseth it of Choler; The Decoction of the root of Butchers Broom or Knee-holly made in Wine and Treacle pc thereto, clenseth the Breast from Phlegm, and the Chest from much clammy Humors gathered therein; wild Marjorem clenseth it from Cho∣ler; the seed of Cow Parsnips clenseth it from tough phlegmatick mat∣ter therein; the powder of English Rubarb steeped all night in Ale and given him fasting, clenseth the Stomach, Liver and Blood, by purging a∣way those evil Humours that offend the Body; the distilled Water of Dragons given him, is a great Clenser of the internal Parts, Mallows or Macsh-mallows does the like; Mercury clenseth the Breast and Lungs from Phlegm; the distilled Water of the Star-thistle or Root beaten to powder is very good; Common Wormwood clenseth the Body from Choler; Ground-Pine is good for all Diseases of the Brain, procured from cold and phlegmatick Humours, &c. Simples that are good to dry up all manner of evil Humours in Sores or Wounds ☞ The powder of the root of the Butter-bur doth wonderfully help them, wilde Bryar-balls dried and beaten to powder, and strewed upon them, doth the like; the root of Sow Fennel beaten to powder and used as be∣fore doth the like; so doth Fig wort, Mother-wort and Lung-wort; Nettles bruised and applied to them is very good; Pollipody, Rupture-wort bruised and applied to the place grieved drieth up all manner of filthy Ulcers and Humours; Green Copperas boiled in water, and the place bathed therewith drieth them up; About two Ounces of burnt Allom, put into a quart of Spring-water after it comes off the Fire, and the place grieved Bathed therewith warm Morning and Evening, and a wet Cloth dipped in the water, and bound about it three or four times double wet, is excellent good to dry them up; the powder of the root of Turmentil is good; The Flower of Wheat mixed with the Juice of Hen∣bane laid to them, stayeth the Flux of them to the Joynts; the Leaves, Bark or Seed of the Willow-Tree doth the like; the Flowers also hath the same Faculty in drying up of evil humours; Wood-Sage digesteth Hu∣mours, &c.
Things good in General for the Shedding of the Hair from the Main or Tail. To anoint the Main and Crest with black Sope, and then to make a strong Lie of Ash Ashes, or else of Urine and Ashes, and wash it all over with it, but if there should grow on the Horses Tail a Canker, which will consume away oth the flesh and bone, then lay some Oyl of Vitriol upon it and it w ll kill it; if you find it eat too much, 'tis but wetting it with cold water, and it will stop it; Or take of green Copperas, Allom and white Copperas boiled in Running water till half be consumed, and wash it with it till it be whole; but if the Hair fall away, then take Southern∣wood and burn it to Ashes, and mix it with common Oyl, and anoint it with it, and it will presently bring Hair again; If it be in the Main, let him Blood; but if it be both in the Main and Tail, then take Quick-silver and tried Hogs-grease, the Quick-silver being first mortified with fasting Spittle, incorporate them very well together till the Hogs-grease be of a perfect Ash-colour, and anoint the Sorrance with it every day once, heating it in with a hot Fire-shovel, and three or four days thus dressing him he will be well. Things good in General to take away Hair in any part of the Body. ☜ The Gum that grows on the Body of Ivy rubbed therewith, for it is of so hot a quality that it doth obscurely burn; the Juice of Fumitory of that which groweth amongst Barley with Gum Arabick, &c. Particular Receipts to take off Hair in any Part of the Body. Dissolve in Water eight Ounces of Lyme, and then boyl it till a quar∣ter be consumed, then add to it an Ounce of Orpiment, and lay a Plaister of it to any part of the Horse, and it will in few Houres bring away the Hair. Another. Take Rust and Orpiment boiled in Running Water, and wash the place with it very hot, and it will soon bring the Hair away. To make Hair black. ☜ The Leaves of the Bramble boiled in Lye, and anoint any place with it maketh it black, or the Leaves and Berries of the Wayfring Tree boyl∣ed in Lye, or the Juice of common Elder, or the Decoction of Sage wash∣ed therewith. To make Hair Yellow. ☜ To wash the Hair with the Lye of the Ashes of the Barberry-Tree.
Things good in General to make Hair grow very soon, very thick, and very long. The Roots of the Elme boyled very well in water, and wash the place therewith, the Juice of Thistles put on the place, the Juice of Red Beets, the Juice of Onions; Tar, Hogs grease, Dogs-grease, the Ashes of green Willow, Nut-shells, Soap, Bears-grease, Aquavitae▪ Oyl of Tur∣pentine, an Oyl made of the white Lilly-roots with Hogs-grease is very good, the Ashes of Southern-wood mingled with old Sallet-Oyl, &c. Particular Receipts to bring Hair, and to cause it to grow long. Take the dung of a Goat newly made, ordinary Honey, Allom, and the blood of a Hog, the Allom being first made into fine powder, boyl them together and anoint the place with it every day, and it will make the Hair come again apace. Another. To wash the place with the water wherein the Roots of Althaea hath been boyled, and after dry it gently with your hand increaseth Hair much. Others. To wash the place with the Urine of a young Boy, then take Lye made of unslackt Lyme, Ceruse and Lytergy, and with it wash the Hair off, and it will make it come soon, long and thick, or to wash the place with Oyl mingled with the Ashes of Nut-shells burnt, or else Snails shells burnt, or Nettleseeds bruised with Honey, Water and Salt, or the Root of the white Lilly beaten and sod in Oyl, and anoint the place there∣with, or the Juice of Radishes or Tar, Sallet-Oyl and Honey boyled to∣gether, or the Soot of a Caldron mixed with Honey and Oyl▪ &c. Another. Take a quarter of a pound of Soap, and as much Piece-Grease, and a quarter of a pint of Aquavitae, boyl these together, and apply it to the bald places, and in a Fortnight it will bring Hair again. Another which is the best of all. Take green Wall-nut shells and burn them to powder, and mix it with Honey, Sallet-Oyl and Wine, and anoint the place therewith, and it will encrease Hair wonderfully and very soon. Things good in General for to Ripen all Imposthumes, Inflammations hot or cold, or for any Swelling in any part of the Body and Legs, and to take away hard Knobs or Kernels, &c. Wheaten-Bran boiled in Vineger, Leaven made of Wheat, Daffodill
stamped with Bores-grease and Leaven of Rye-bread, is good to ripen hard Impostumes, Brank-cresses, Sow-thistles, Hawk-weed, the Juice of Thorn-Apples boyled in Hogs-grease to an Oyntment, the leaves of Arsmart bruised and laid to any Impostumes in the Joynts, for the space of an hour or two taketh away the pain; the Juice of Housleek is good against the burning Inflammations, the Juice of Wall-penney-wort is likewise good for any hot Inflammtions or Tumors, all the sorts of Pimpernel is good to Cure Inflammations and Swellings, the Leaves of Flowers of Fether-few is good for all hot Inflammations and Swellings, the Leaves of Mullen boyled in Water and laid to the Eyes Cureth and easeth the pains of them, Walter-Caltrops used in the Nature of a Poul∣tess is good, Water Sengreen, or fresh-water-souldier, Duckmeat, is good for all hot Inflammations and Swellings, the fruit of the Pompion boyled in Milk is good for the Inflammations of the inward parts, the green leaves of Elder pounded with Deers Suet allayeth all hot Inflammations, Straw-berrie-leaves, Bay-leaves, Apples are good for all Inflammations and hot Swellings, Figs stamped and made into the form of a Plaister with white Meal and the powder of Fennegreek and Lynseed, and the Roots of Marsh Mallows applied warm doth soften and ripen Im∣postumes, and all hot and angry Swellings and Tumors, and if you add thereto the Roots of Lillies, it ripeneth and breaketh venomous Im∣posthumes. Observation. To all cold Swellings or Imposthumes you may apply hot Simples to them, and to all hot Swellings and Inflammations you must put cold; If the Swelling doth Imposthumate, you may know it by the heat, and when you have made it fit to be opened, open it with a red hot Iron. Particular Receipts to Ripen Imposthumes or Swellings. Take Mallow-roots, and white Lilly-roots, of each alike, bruise them and put to them Hogs-grease and Linseed-Meal, and boyl them till they be soft, and Plaister-wise apply it to the Grief, and it will Ripen it, break it and heal it presently. Or Oyl of Populeon is very good, anointed twice a day with it. Another: Take Southern-wood and dry it to powder, and with Barley-Meal and the Yolk of an Egg make it into a Salve, and lay it to the Impostume, and it will ripen it, break it and heal it. Another. Take of Sanguis Draconis, Gum Arabick, New Wax, Mastick, Pitch
of Greece, Incense and Turpentine, of each a like quantity, and melt them together, then strain them and make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the Imposthume without removing, and it will both ripen, break and heal it. Another. Take Wheat-bran two Handfuls, and so much Wine, Ale or Beer, as one quart, and to thicken it put to it of Hogs-grease half a pound, boyl them together till the Liquor be quite consumed, and apply it hot to the place, renewing it every day once till it break of it self, or be so soft to be opened, then let forth the Corruption with a hot Iron, and Taint it with Flax dipt in this Salve, take of Turpentine and of Hogs-grease, of each alike; and of Rozin and Wax a much greater quantity, melt them together and dip the Taint in it, and put it into the Wound, renewing it every day once till it be whole. This is to Ripen Inflammations, Pu∣stules and Kernels, which do grow under the Chaul of a Horse; but if it be an Inflammation in any other part of the Body, then take four quarts of the Grounds of a Beer-Barrel, of Smallage, Penny-royal, Win∣ter-Savoury, Comfrey, Rue, and of the Leaves and Berries of Misletoe, of each two Handfuls, chop them small and put them to the Grounds, and put to it a pound of Sheeps Sewet or Deers Sewet tried, and three or four Handfuls of Rye or Wheat-bran, so much as will serve to boyl it to a Poultess, and when it is boiled apply it to the place, it will break it or at least soften it that it may be opened, if it be hard when you put your Poultess thereunto, it will send it back. Things good in General for Imposthumated Ears. If it be not broke, Water and Salt put into the Ear, or Butter and Salt will break it, or to apply to this swelling Linseed beaten, and put to it Honey and Hogs-grease melted together, and when it breaks Taint it with Flax dipt in Salve made of Turpentine. Metrosatum and Sallet Oyl; but if he hath pain in his Ear, dip some black Wooll in the Oyl of Cha∣momil, and put into it; but if it be broken, dip it in the Oyl of Roses, Honey and Venice Turpentine, the Juice of Ivy growing on a Pale or Wall, put into the Eares stayeth the running of them, though it be of long continuance, and helpeth old Ulcers and Impostumes bred there, but if you think it too sharp, you may mix it with the Oyl of Roses. Particular Receipts for Imposthumated Eares. Take of Pepper beaten and searced, and tried Hogs-grease one spoon∣ful, the Juice of Rue one handful, white-Wine Vineger two spoonfuls, and if the Swelling, Imposthumation or Inflammation be in the Eares, Face, Head or Throat of the Horse, if you take either black Wooll, fine
Lint, Flax or Hurds, and dip it into this Medicine, and so stop both his Eares therewith, and then stitch them up that it get not forth, renewing it once in two days, till the Swelling be clean gone, he will be certainly Cured. But if the Grief be in any other part of the Body, then with this Ointment you shall anoint the grieved or swoln place once or twice a day, till it depart; but if the Swelling be near about the Cods or Privy Parts, then bath the place well with cold Water, and after it is made dry again, with a Cloth anoint it with the said Ointment every day once or twice, and it is a present Cure; It Cureth also the Ulcer and Canker in the Nose, and is a sure Cure for the Vives. Things good in General for the Strangles. To anoint and chafe the Swelling well with Bacon-grease or Hogs-grease, and that will ripen and break it. Or so soon as you finde the Swelling begin to arise between his Chaps, take a wax Candle and burn it therewith, till the Skin arise from the Flesh, then lay unto it wet Hay or wet Litter, and that will ripen it and make it break; then lay a Plaister unto it only of Shoomakers Wax, and that will both draw and heal it. Now if it break inward you may know it by voiding the cor∣ruption at his Nose; then twice or thrice every day Perfume his Head by burning under his Nostrils Frankincense or Mastick, or else by put∣ting a hot Coal into wet Hay, and let him receive the smoke thereof up his Nostrils, or else to blow the powder of Euphorbium with a Quill into his Nose; and so Note, that whatsoever Cureth the Vives Cureth the Strangles; or with a small round hot Iron thrust a Hole through the Skin, on both sides the Weesand, and then after it beginneth to matter, to mix Butter, Tanners water and Salt together, and every day anoint the sore therewith till it be whole, to anoint the Swelling with Oyl of Turpentine is good. Blooding him in the Mouth is very good for this Distemper. A Particular Receipt for the Strangles. Take Basilicon, old Bores Grease and Dialthaea, of each four Ounces, of Oyl de Bay one Ounce, incorporate all these very well together, then an∣oint the place well after you have clipped away the Hair, and bind it up with a piece of Sheeps skin with the Wooll next to the Inflammation, that the warmth thereof may the better help to ripen the Pustules, which being ripened, let forth the Corruption with a small hot Iron, and taint it for three or four days together with Basilicon only, and afterwards heal it up with your black Aegyptiacum, taught you in my First Part, and let him eat good sweet Hay and Bran in stead of Oats, and let his Drink be white Water.
☞ An Excellent Receipt for the Strangl, Squinzey, Strangling or Cold, that hath Run for above half a year or more at his Nose. Give him this Drink in the Morning fasting, in a pint and a half of strong Beer, (not boiled, but heated) luke-warm, and blood him in the third urrow of his Mouth after it, viz. the powder of Turmerick and Anniseeds, of each an Ounce, half a quarter of a Pint of Brandy, with five or six spoonfuls of white-Wine, white-Wine Vineger, or for want of that, Verjuice; Then Air him after it. When you have brought him home, Cloath and Litter him up warm, and Tie him to the empty Rack for three or four houres or more; But if you see him sweat very much, which this Drink does usually cause him to do, and that you find him de∣sirous to lie down, you may untie him and give him that liberty; let him have no Mash, but only warm water, and a handful or two of Wheat-Bran put into it, and the next Morning give him the like, and presently after it (to bring him to a Stomach) give him about two Ounces of Honey in half a Pint of white-Wine, or white-Wine Vi∣neger, or for want of either, Verjuice, and Air him after it. The third day you may give him the common Cordial for Horses, viz. three Pints of stale strong Beer, boyled with a good big Toast of Houshold-Wheaten Bread, crummed into it, and when you are ready to give it him, put into it before it be quite cold, Honey and fresh Butter a quarter of a pound of each, and give it him luke warm fasting, and exercise him after it, and set him up warm three or four houres, after give him as you did before, warm Water and Bran in it. Thus Order him till you finde Amendment. The Vertus of the Cordials of white-Wine and Honey, and of the Tost of Houshold-bread boyled in strong Beer, and sweetned with Honey, &c. These do not only help to bring him to a Stomach, and kill the Can∣ker in his Mouth and Throat, (which this Disease does commonly bring aong with it) but also clears his Guts, and cleneth and heals his Lights, if there be any Imperfection in them. Observations upon this Disease. 1. If you find that he Runs at the Nose any oul, filthy & yellowish Mat∣ter, and it afterwards turn white, you need not much Question the Cure. 2. If he hath any Knots or Kernels under his Jaws, your common Charge of Soap and Brandy, heated and rubbed in well, will either break or sink them. 3. If you find the Hair in the middle of the swelling begin to scale
off, and that it be soft all over, you may let out the corruption with your Incision Knife, and let it heal up of it self. 4. Though your Dri does cause him to be very sick, and make him swell much in his Body, fear him not for he will do well. 5. Two or three Miles Riding every day will do him much good in or∣der to his Cure. A Receipt for a Sprain Shoulder; And if you desire to see more Variety of Receipts, look for Sinew-strains. Take Oyl de Bay, Dialthaea, fresh Butter, Oyl of Turpentine, of each two Ounces, boyl and mix them well together, and when they be well incorporated anoint the grieved place therewith, so hot as he can well suffer it without Scaulding, and anoint him thus twice or thrice a day, and give him moderate Exercise by walking him a Foot pace gently up and down, and this is a certain and approved Remedy. Another for a Sprain in the Shoulder. ☜ Take one Ounce of the Oyl of Spike, half an Ounce of the Oyl of Lin∣eed, half an Ounce of the Oyl of St. Johns wort, with half an Ounce of the Oyl of Pompilion, and put them all together into a Glass Viol, and shake them very well together to mingle them, then put them forth into some earthen Vessel, to prevent penetrating and loss of the Medicine; And when you have occasion to use it, chafe and rub it all over the grieved place with your hand, one holding at the same time at a little distance a hot Fire-shovel, or Brick-bat before it, to make the Oyls sink in the better. This is very good for a slight Strain; Then Blood him in the Shoulder, and Tie his fore-Feet together. ☜ Another for a very great and violent Shoulder-strain, which is the best Rceipt I know for the Cure of it. If by any Accident he get a Strain in his Shoulder, take this common and usual way which our Smiths do now generally use, viz. To take up his sound Leg before, and double it backwards in the Joynt, and Tie it so doubled with some List or Garter, so fast that it Untie not; then force him to go upon his three Legs, till he sweat at the Roots of his Eares, Flanks and between his Legs; then let down his Leg again (by untying it) which will cause the Blood to descend so into the Plate-Vein, that it will be more visible to be seen then when it was Tied up; but in case it does not appear so plain as you would have it, dabb a little warm Water upon it with your Hand, and stroke it downwards towards the place you are to let Blood, and this will make it appear more visible
to be seen then it was before. Then Tie up his Leg again, and let him Blood in the common bleeding place, viz. between his Chest and lame Leg, about two quarts or more, according to the greatness or smalness of his Strain. Let the blood that you save for this purpose (to anoint him with) be about a quart, add let it be the last blood, for that is the best, and therefore most proper and fit for your use; put a handful of Salt into the Bowl you receive it into, and keep it stirring all the while it is running to keep it from clotting. When he hath bled so much as you think Fitting, pin up the Mouth of the Vein with a Pin or Needle to prevent Bleeding, winding some Hairs of the Mane or Tail about the Pin, to keep the Pin fast and steddy, and a day or two after take it out; but before you pin him up, anoint him all over the Shoulder and bottom of his Breast, between his Legs and down to his Knee, with Oyl of Tur∣pentine and strong Beer or Ale, of equal parts alike, shaked and ming∣led very well together first, in a Glass Vial, clapping and dabbing it well in with your hand; And after you have anointed him as much as you think good, smear all the said places anointed before with the Blood and Salt, chafing and dabbing this also very well in with your hand, as you did the other; Then bring him home softly into the Stable, and give him some Meat, and Tie his Fore-legs together with his Surcingle, or any o∣ther String that is broad and easie; The next day you may untie his Legs, and walk him abroad in your Hand at the Halters end, which if you find that he goes pretty well, you may Mount his Back, and Ride him a Mile or more gently; Then set him up again, and Tie up his Legs as you did before; The third day after his Dressing, make him a thin flat Wedge of Wood about the bredth of a Six-pence, and drive it be∣tween the Shooe and oe so fast that it stir not, not forgetting still to Tie his Legs together; Thus Order him for three or four days together, which is the usual time limited to make him sound again, conditionally it be but a new Strain; When you take him out of the Stable, or Ride him at any time, you must untie his Legs▪ and take forth the Wedge. This Receipt is good also for a Shoulder that is pulled out of its place, a∣bout the bredth of a Mans Hand or more, or a Wrench Shoulder, or a splayed Shoulder, &c. Things good in General to Cure the Sit-fast, or hard Knobs growing under the Saddle. Take a long Nail with the Point turned inwards, and catch hold of the edge of the dead Skin or Horn which will rise from the sound Skin, and with a sharp Knife cut away all the dead and hard skin from the sound Flesh, and heal it up by pouring hot Butter into it Morning and Evening, and when the Flesh is made even, dry and skin it either with the powder of Honey and Lyme, or with Soot and Cream mixt together; or to
wash the Wound either with Urine or white-Wine, and dry it up with the powder of Oyster-shells burnt, or of Bole-Armoniack; or take the green Leaves of Cabbage and stamp them with Hogs-grease, and work them to an Ointment, and lay it to his Back, then put on the Saddle and Mount his Back, to the end that the Ointment may the better enter, or sink into his Back, and in few days it will Cure him, &c. Things good in General for a Navel-Gall. To anoint it with the Oyl of Turpentine, will not only cleanse it but heal it also; but if you find any dead or proud Flesh arise in it, either cut or eat it away before you use any Medicine, with either burnt Allom or the powder of Verdegrease; or after you have washed and clensed the Sore with your Copperas water, or with warm Vineger, strow this powder on it; Take of Honey a Quartern, and as much unslackt Lyme as will thicken the Honey, and make it into a Paste, and bake it so hard as that you can beat it to powder, and strow it on the Sorrance, &c. Particular Receipts for the Navel-Gall. Take Oyl de Bay, Oyl of Costus, Fox Grease, Oyl of Savin, of each an Ounce; then take one hundred of great Garden Wormes, and scour them with Salt and white-Wine, and put all the Ingredients together in∣to an earthen Pot very well stopped, and boyl it well, then add thereto of Sallet Oyl one Ounce and a half, and boyl it over again till it come to a perfect Ointment, then strain it into a Gally-pot, and keep it for your use, only warm it, ad so dress the Sorrance therewith with Lint or Hurds, and it will soon be whole. Another. After you have washed the Sore with old Urine and Salt, then anoint it with an Ointment made of Bitony, powder of Brimstone, Hellebore, Pitch and old Hogs-grease stamped together and melted, or with your green Ointment in the First Part. Another for the Navel-Gall. ☜ If the place be only swelled, and the skin not broken, then dabb the grieved Part all over with your Hand, or with a Rag wet in Brandy, and it will take it down; Or the Oyl of Turpentine used after the same mannr will do the like: but if it be raw and sore, then these Medicines are very proper for it, viz. Take a quarter of a Pint of Whale Oyl, by some called Train Oyl, and boyl in it as much of the powder of Verdegrease finely powdred and earced as will lie upon a small shilling, and the griev∣ed part anointed with it will Cure it very speedily. Or the same quantity of Verdegrease, Train-Oyl, and two or three spoonfuls of the Ointment of Marshmallows boyled a little together, is a certain Cure for it.
How you are to Order them. If the Skin hang loose about them you are to cut it off. But if it be an Old Navel-Gall, which feels hard, then cut out the bruise with your In∣cision Knife, and ear the wound up again with a hot Iron, and heal it up with your green Ointment in the First Part. These Medicines are not only good for a Navel Gall, but for any man∣ner of Sores and raw Backs whatsoever, and also for a Sit-fast. Ʋnguen∣tum Bubrum desicativum is also good for them, so is Palm-Oyl. What is good for the Cure of the Paley. To let him Blood on his Neck-Vein and Temple-Veins, on the con∣trary side to that way he wryeth his Neck, then anoint his Back all over with Oyl of Petrolium, and with a wet Hay Rope swaddle his Neck all over even from his Breast to his Eares; Then for three Mornings to∣gether give him a Pint of old Muscadine, with a spoonful of these pow∣ders in it, viz. Opoponax, Storax, Gentian, Manna, Succory, Myrrh and long Pepper beaten all into fine powder, but put not in so much of the Myrrh and long Pepper as of any of the rest. Things good in general to Cure the Lethargy or sleeping Evil. To keep him waking with great Noise, and let him Blood in the Neck and Palate of the Mouth, and to give him water wherein hath been boil∣ed Chamomel, Mother-wort, Wheat, Bran, Salt and Vineger to per∣fume his Head, and to anoint the Palate of his Mouth with Honey and Mustard mixt together, or to put Parsley-seed or Fennel-seed into his Water to provoke him to Urine▪ Another for the same. After you have Blooded, as you must always do in this Disease, then take some of the green Boughs of the Ash-Tree, and set them on Fire in some clean place, and quench the Coals made thereof in some Ale, and when you have strained it out, give him a Hornful of it at each Nostril, the Cold being first taken off. 'Tis good also to open his Forehead un∣derneath his Fore-top, and put into it a Slice or two of an old Onion, and let them lie there till they Rot. Things good in General for the Phrenzie and Madness in a Horse. To let him Blood in all the lower parts of his Body, to draw the Blood front his Head; As namely, in his Shackle, Veins, the Spur-Veins, the Plat-Veins and the Thigh. Veins, and let him Blood very much, then give him this Drink, Take the Root of wilde Cucumber, and where that
cannot be gotten, take a Handful of Rue or Mints, and a Handful of black Hellebore, and boyl them in Beer, and give it him luke warm; or to give him the Root of Virga Pastoris stamped in water, or to give him Mans Dung in Wine three Mornings together, or to make him swallow down Hens Dung. Things good in General for the Quitter-bone. To open it, and put some Oyl of Vitriol into it, and that will so eat about the Bone, so that you may thrust it out; this is a very safe, and as good a Medicine as any you have. If you find it eat too much, you may stop the eating of it with cold water, or with your Copperas water in my First Part, which will not only keep it sweet and clean, but also keep proud Flesh from growing in it, or you may heal it up with a Salve made of Turpentine and Hogs-grease, and always before you dress it to wash it with the said water, or Auripigmentum made into fine powder, and steeped in white-Wine twenty eight houres, and apply it to it, and it will eat so about it that you may pull it away with your Fingers, and do like∣wise after the bone or gristle is taken out, heal it up with your Copperas water and your green Ointment, and let him not come into the water during the time of Cure. Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Quitter-bone. ☜ Tent it a day or two with Hogs-grease and Verdegrease ground toge∣ther, then take scalding hot Grease poured into the Hole, and lay a Plaister of Pitch and Tarr mixt over it for twenty four houres, and if the Bone rise not, do the same again and it will rise, then take it out with your Nippers, and heal it up with some of your Salve, which you best like on, which you may find in my First Part. Another. Take of common Honey and Verdegrease in fine powder, as much of each as will suffice, boyl it till it be red▪ and tent the Wound till it be whole, keeping evermore the Wound open, lest it heal up above before it be well healed up at bottom. Another. Take of Arsnick the quantity of a small Bean made into ine powder, and put it to the botttom of the Sorrance, and stop the Mouth of it with hurds, and bind a clout over it very fast that he bite it not off, for it will poison him, and after it hath remained on for twenty four houres, open it and it will look black therein, it is a sign that it hath done his work, then to allay the fire and to restore the flesh, is to taint it with Turpen∣tine and Hogs▪grease melted together, and to cover the taint with a
Plaister made of Rozin, Pitch, Wax and Turpentine melted together, and thus dress him daily till you have got out the Core or sharp Gristle, for till that be out the Sorrance will not heal, or to heal it up with your green Ointment. ☞ Things good in General for the Cure of a Ring-bone. To wash the place with Vineger after you have shaved away the Hair, then use green Vitriol, Euphorbium, Cantharides, Verdegrease, Oyl de Bay, Venice Turpentine, Oyl of Turpentine, the powder of Tartar and Salt Arsnick, unslackt Lime, the powder of Vitriol, Pepper, Ginger. Particular Receipts for the Cure of a Ring-bone. Scarifie the place about the Ring-bone with a Lancet, then take a great Onion and pick out the Core, then put into it Verdegrease and un∣slackt Lyme, then cover the Hole and roast the Onion soft, then bruise it in a Mortar, and so very hot lay it to it four days together, and it will Cure it. Another. Take unslackt Lyme and burn it well, which you may know by its lightness, make into fine powder, and lay it upon the place Swelled all along of a good thickness, and bind a Linnen Cloth upon it very fast, and so put him into the water, and let him stand there a pretty while, then take him forth and unbind his Foot, and he is infallibly Cured, for the burning of the Lyme doth kill the Ring-bone even unto the Root there∣of; de Grey declares that he hath Cured with this Receipt about one hundred Horses; but when you are to dress your Horse you are to bring him close to the water, and so soon as you have dressed him you are to put him presently therein. Another. After you have Washed, Shaved and Scarified the place, then take grey Sope and Arsnick pulverized, of each the quantity of a Wall Nut, which being very well mixed, spread it upon the Sorrance, so far as the Ring∣bone goeth, and having thus spread it, apply upon it a few Hurds, and bind a clean Linnen Cloth upon it, and remove it not in twenty four houres, then take it away and stir not the Scab, but only anoint it with fresh Butter till it fall away of it self, and so heal it up with some heal∣ing Salve, whereof you have plenty in the First Part. And this Medi∣cine will Cure either Bone-spavin, Splint or Curb; let him come in no water during his Cure. ☞ The common way that our Smiths do▪ generally use for the Cure of this Infirmity, is to take up the Vein on the inside of the Leg where the Sorrance is, and then to ear the Ring-bone with a hot Iron, made about the thickness of the back of a Knife, three times downright, and as many
times cross it till it look somewhat of a yellowish colour, then prick three or four holes in it on an equal distance one from another, in the seared Lines quite through the Skin, with a Nail or other Instrument of Iron, which you think most proper and fit for the Work: When you have so done, rub a Handful of common Salt very well in upon it, which will fetch forth the Blood and Water, that was occasioned by the scaring and pricking of it; Then apply this Charge to it, viz. half an Ounce of Mastick and Frankincense, Burgundy Pitch and common black Pitch, of each as much as contains the bigness of a Wall-Nut; Boyl all these very well together in an Earthen Pipkin till they be thoroughly melted and incorporated, and apply it very hot upon the grieved place, with a Lath or any other flat stick, and clap Flox or Hurds upon it, pressing it down hard with your Hand to make it stick on the better. Observations how to Order him. Let it stick on till it come off of it self, and if Occasion requires ap∣ply another fresh Charge to it. If you turn him to Grass, let him remain the first Night in the Stable, which will make it stick on so much the better. The Cure will be the sooner perfected if you keep him upon dry ground, for if he goes much in the wet it will quickly come off▪ ☜ Things good to Cure the Red Water. Take of the Root of the Herb, called, Emanuel, alias, bonus Henricus, or good King Henry, or all Good, boyl the Roots in Water and give it him, or Mustard-seed beaten small, a good handful given him in white-Wine Vineger two or three times together one after another, keeping his Belly rubbed with a good long stick by two men, one taking one end of it, and another the other end. ☜ A particular Receipt very good for it. Give him these things here under-written, well mixed and brewed to∣gether in a Quart of strong Beer or Ale for three Mornings together, viz. Three spoonfuls of the powder of the Lean of salt Beef dried, two spoonfuls of the powder of Bolearmoniack, with about four or five Shal∣lots peeled and bruised in a Mortar, with the rest of the Powders, dissolve all these in the Beer as aforesaid, and give it him. 'Tis not amiss to give him after his Drink a Pint of Butter-milk, or for want of that a Pint of Cheese-Runnet. This is a very good and certain Cure for it. Things good in General to provoke Ʋrine, or to cause a Horse to Stale. ☜ Wilde Bryar▪ balls beaten to powder is very good, Alheal, Water-Agrimony,
Birds-Foot, Parsley-roots or seed, Mustard-seed, Alexander and Horse-parsley, or Wild parsley which is sold in Apothecaries shops, for Macedonian▪parsley, Burdock-seed is a great provoker of Urine, Asara∣bacca th Kernels within the Husk of Ashen Keys, Brook Lyme, Pimpernel, Water-cresses, Butchers-Broom, the Root of the Butter-Bur, the Juice of the leave▪ of the Bur-docks, Champions, Wild-Carrots, the Berries and Fruit of the Winter-Cherries, the Juice of Garden-chervil, the Juice of Cuckoe-point boiled in Ale or Beer, the Seed of Cucumbers, Dandelion, Dodder of Thyme, Dogs-grass, Elder, Elecampane, Eringo or Sa-holly, the Root of Fern, Fennel-seeds, Filipendula, Drop-wort, Flax-weed or Toad-Flax, the Flower-de lue, Gentian, Felt-wort or Baldmony, the Seeds of Germander, the seeds of stinking Gladwin, Golden-Rod, Gromel, Groundsel, Hartichoke weed, Hawk-weed, Herb Robert, Hops, the smoother not the rougher Horse-tail, St. Johns wort, the Berries or Leaves of Ivy, Garlick, Radish roots, Horse▪Radish∣roots, the seeds of Rochet, Kidney-wort, Knot-grass, Juniper Berries, the Flowers of Lavender steeped in white Wine, Ladies smocks or Cuckoe-Flowers, Lovage, Maiden-Hair, Wall-Rue, the Roots of Master-wort, Mother-wort, Mug-wort, Nettle-seeds, dried Acorns beaten to powder and given, Parsley, Piert, or Parsley-break stone, the powder of the Bark of Rest-Harrow, Burnet, Smallage, the Roots of Spignel, the Seeds of the Star-thistle, Lady Thistle, great Turnsole boiled in Water with Cummin, the Water that is gathered from the Willow-Tree when it Flowreth, the Bark being slit to let it out, Honey suckle leaves, Worm∣wood, Saffron, the Roots of Valerian with Fennel-seeds, Haws bruised and laid asteep in Beer or Ale, Egg▪shells dried and beaten to powder and given in Ale or Beer, the Juice of Coleworts, Southernwood, Mal∣lows stamped and given him in Ale, Cherry-stone Kernels, Madder. But for a Horse that can neither stale nor dung, take the Root of Male brake or Fern, the Male is to be known, for if you cut it you will find the perfect Figure of an Eagle upon it, put a piece thereof upon his Tongue, and it will cause him both to stale and dung, a Flint-stone beaten to powder will make him Stale given him in Beer; Ivy-berries dried and beaten to powder and given in white-Wine is very good. Particular Receipts to cause a Horse to Stale or Piss. Take a quart of strong Ale and put it into a Pottle-Pot▪ then take as many keen Radish-Roots washed, slit and bruised as will fill up the Pot, then stop it up close and let it stand twenty four houres, then strain the Ale and Roots very hard and give it him Fasting, and Ride him a little up and down, and set him up warm, and you shall se him Stale, do this two or three Mornings together.
Another. ☜ Take a good Piece of fine Castle-Soap, about the bigness of a good big Wall-Nut, and dissolve it in a quart of warm Beer with some bruised Parsley seed, give it him in the Morning Fasting, and Ride him mode∣rately after it, and set him up warm, and it will cause him to stale. Another. ☜ Take three or four spoonfuls of bruised Bur-dock seeds, and boyl it in a quart of Beer, and give it him to drink luke-warm, putting a good piece of Butter to it whilst it cools. Another for the same. ☜ Take half an Ounce of Fennel-seed, half an Ounce of Parsley-seed, half an Ounce of Bur-dock-seed, half an Ounce of Nettle-seed, and half an Ounce of Ivy-berries when they be thorough ripe; Put all these into a Pint of white-Wine, and a quarter of a Pint of Ale, and let them steep some time therein, and give it him Fasting in the Morning for two or three Mornings together, and exercise him after it. This is a most ex∣cellent Receipt, not only for this Distemper but also the Wind-Cholick, Stone and Gravel, for it wonderfully clenseth the Kidneys from Sand and Filth. Another very good. ☜ Take Burnet, Dill, Smallage and Anniseeds, of each a like quantity, well dried and beaten to powder, and put a small spoonful of each of them to a Pint of white-Wine, or for want of that a quart of Ale, and give it him as you did the other. Another. ☜ Take about a spoonful of these Powders here under-written, and put them into a Pint of white-Wine, and as much Ale, and give him them Fasting in the Morning with exercise after it, viz. Gromel-seed, Broom-seed, Parsley seed, and the powder of the Root of Horse-Radish well dried. Another Infallible Cure for the stoppage of Ʋrine. ☜ Kill as many Bees as you think you have occasion to use, and dry them very well, and beat them to Powder, and give him about an Ounce of them at a time in a Pint of white-Wine, or for want of that a Pint of Ale, and at twice or thrice giving them at furthest, they will so open the Passages of the Uriter Veins, that they will make him Piss and stale very freely. This Receipt is also good for the Strangullion.
Things good for the Pain or Ʋlcers in the Kidneys. Plantine, Licoris, the Decoction of the tender tops of Broom, Broom∣rape boyled in Wine is good for the Kidneys and Bladder, and provoketh Urine, and breaketh the Stone, to Bath his Back with Sallet-Oyl and Nitrum warmed together, and to cover him warm, then to drink the wa∣ter wherein hath been boiled Dill, Fennel, Anniseeds, Smallage, Parsley-seed, Mustard-seed, Spikenard, Myrrh, Cassia▪ or Sallet Oyl and Deers Sewet melted together, and the Root of the Daffodil boiled in Wine. Things good in General for the Strangury or Strangullion. To bath his Loyns with warm water, then take Bread and Bay-berries and temper them with sweet Butter, and give him two or three Balls thereof three days together, or take a quart of New Milk and a quartern of Sugar, and after they are well brewed together, give it him to drink Fasting in the Morning, and to keep him from all sharp Meats, as Mow∣burnt-Hay, Bran and the like, or to boyl in the Water that he drinketh good store of the Herb Mayth or Hogs Fennel, and it will Cure him. A particular Receipt for it. ☞ Take some of the powder of a Flint-stone Calcined, with an Ounce of the Powder of Parsley-seed, and as much of the powder of Ivy-berries, and boyl them a little in a Pint of Claret, and given him, is a very good Cure. ☞ Things good for the Stone in General, or for the Stone in the Kidneys. Alehoof, Alkanet, Birds▪foot, the seeds of the Bur-dock, Parsley-seeds, the Kernels of the Husks of the Ash-tree, the Bark of the Bay▪tree root, Broom, Bucks horn, Plantine, Carrot-seeds, the Berries or Fruit of the Winter Cherry, expelleth the Stone out of the Reins and Bladder, the Juice of Garden-chervil, Chich Pease or Cicers, the Root of Co∣lumbines, Coral▪wort, Dogs-grass, Doves-foot or Cranes-bill, Elecam∣pane, Eringo or Sea-holly, Fennel, the powder of the Root of Filapen∣dula or Drop-wort, the Flower de luce, the Fuz bush, Garden Rod, Herb Robart, the smoother not the rougher Horse-tail, St. Johns wort, the Berries of Ivy, Maiden-hair, the Juniper berries, Kidney-wort, Knot-grass, Wall-Rue, the Roots of Master-wort, Medlar stones made into powder and given in Wine or Beer, wherein some Parsley-seed hath been infused all night, and a little boyled, the powder of Spear-Mint, Ground Moss boiled, Mouse-ear, Mug-wort, Nettle seeds, Parsley piert or Parsley break-stone, the Kernels of the Peach Tree, Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernel, the Gum of the Plum-Tree, the powder of the Bark of the Root of Rest-Harrow given in white-Wine, Winter Rochet or
Winter-cresses▪ wilde Briar-balls beaten to powder and given in white-Wine, the seeds of the great round leav'd Dock, Cummin, white Sax∣afrage, Burnet Saxafrage, the Seeds or Roots of Sorrel, the Milk of the Sow-thistle given in Wine, Spleen-wort, the Seed of the Star-thistle, Garden Tansie, the great Turn-sole boiled in water with Cummin, Vervain, the Tears of the Vine given, but the salt of the Leaves is better, Vipers bugloss, Dodder, Sallet Oyl, the Lard of a Goat, Co∣riander seed, Castle Sope, the Juice of the red Colewort, the Roots of Alexander, Wormwood, Southernwood, Galingale, Mallows, black Soap, Hysop. Particular Receipts good for the Stone in the Reins, Kidneys or Bladder. Take Saxafrage, Nettle-roots, Parsley-roots, Sperage-roots, and Dodder, of each a Handful, bruise them and boyl them gently with white-Wine until a third part be consumed, then put to it of Salt a Hand∣ful, of Sallet Oyl, and of the Lard of a Goat, of each three Ounces, of Hony half a pound; when all this is boiled, strain it and ring it very hard, and give him of this one Pint every Morning fasting, blood-warm, and if it become too thick by boiling, dissolve into it some white-Wine; and after the first boiling it must be but only warmed, and let him have it so long as it will last; Or a handful of Maiden-hair steeped all Night in a quart of strong Ale, and strained, and given him is excellent. Another. Take of Ale or Beer a quart, and put it into a Pot, and put to it so many of the reddest Radish roots clean washed and sliced into small Pieces as will fill up the Pot, then stop it up so close that the Air get not in, and let it remain twenty four houres, then strain the Roots from the Ale or Beer very hard, and give it him in a Morning fasting, and ride him gently upon it, and after that set him up warm covered and lit∣tered, and in a little while you shall see him piss freely, let him have it several Mornings together, and during the Cure let his Drink be white Water. Another. Make a strong Decoction (that is to say) boil the first quantity of wa∣ter to an half Pint three times over, of keen Onions clean pilled and Parsley, then take a quart thereof, and put to it a good spoonful of London-Treacle, and as much of the powder of Egg-shells, and give it him. And thus do divers Mornings if the Infirmity be great, otherwise when you see him offended.
☞ Things good in General for the Cholick or Stone, or for the Gripings or Fret∣ting of the Guts by VVind. Centaury, Costmary is good for the Gripings of the Belly, Camomel Flowers is good for the Cholick and Stone, and is good given in a Glister for that purpose; the Roots of the Sea holly boiled in white-Wine, Rue boiled with Dill and Fennel-seeds in Wine is good, Cinnamon, sixteen or eighteen of the Berries of Holly purgeth the Body of thick and phleg∣matick Humors, Hawthorn-berries, Cardamum, Cloves, Pepper, Juniper Berries given him, or to put a Jagged Onion into his Fundament, or to give him a Pipe of Tobaccho at his Fundament, Hore-hound, Southern∣wood, or the powder of a Stags Pizel dried and given in Beer, or the Heart of a Lark swallowed down whole, Hysop, Cowslips, Liver-wort, Lungwort, the Urine of a Child given him to drink, Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda, Enula Campana, or a Glister made of Sope and salt Water, or to give him two drams of Myrrh in Wine, Nettle-roots, Sperage-roots, Dodder bruised and boiled in white-Wine, with some Salt amongst it, is good to give him Fasting, the powder of the wilde Briar Apple-balls. ☞ For the dry Gripes. Or you may give him by way of a Drink, or by Glister, this following Drench, viz. Two good Handfuls of Mallow leaves boiled in three Pints of New Milk till it comes to a quart; Strain out the Milk from the Mallows, and give it him either way sweetned with Loaf-sugar luke-warm. This is a most Excellent Receipt for the dry Gripes, for this will make his Body loose, which by this means will free him from those tor∣menting pains he is troubled with. Particular Receipts for the Cholick or Stone. Take of white-Wine a quart, Fennegreek four Ounces, Bay-berries and Pepper, of each four Ounces, Grains and Ginger of each an Ounce, Water-cresses two Handfuls, Sage one Handful, Sengreen one pound, Mints a Handful, stamp the Herbs and pound the Spices, and put them to the Wine and boyl it, then strain it and put two spoonfuls of Honey to it, and give it him luke-warm. Another. Take Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, of each one Ounce, all made into fine powder, and well mixed, then put it into a quart of Sack, and let it boyl a while, then take it off, and put to it one spoonful of Honey, and give it him luke-warm, then Cloath him up and Litter him, and let him Fast three or four houres after it, then give him Hay, and one hour after that a sweet Mash or white Water.
Another for the Cholick and Stone. Take of white-Wine one Pint, of Burdock Seeds eight Ounces made into fine powder, of Parsley-seed two Ounces, two Ounces in powder of Hysop, unset Leeks and Water-cresses, of each half a handful, of black Sope half-an Ounce, stamp them well and strain them with the Wine, then put to it your Bur and Parsley-seed, and so give it him blood-warm; this will break the Stone, and bring it from him with much ease, and cure his Cholick. ☜ Another for Griping and Fretting in a Horses Belly. First, blood him in the Mouth with your Cornet Horn, and give him a Pint or a Quart of Pork or Beef Brine cold, when you see occasion; After you have so done, strip up your Shirt as high as your Elbow, anoint your Hand and Arm with Sallet Oyl, Butter or Hogs-Grease▪ and put it into his Fundament, and draw forth as much of his hard and baked Dung as you can well get; Then take a good big angry red Onon and peel it, and Jag it cross-ways with your Knife, and Rowl it very well in Salt and Floure of Brimstone, and cover it all over with fresh Butter, and put it up into his Body as far as you can well thrust it, and Tie down his Tuel or Tail close between his Legs, to his Surcingle or Girts, and walk or Ride him about a quarter of an hour or more; then Untie his Tail, and you shall find he will purge freely; The excellency of this Receipt is, That it will cleanse his Maw and Guts, and Kill the Wormes within him; The next Morning you may give him a comfortable Drink warm, made of an Ounce of Horse Spice, boyled a little in a quart of strong Beer sweetned with either Hony or common Treacle. Or you may give him a Cordial of three Pints of strong Beer, with a Toast of Houshold Wheat bread crummed in it, and boyled together with a little Mace, and when you have taken it off the Fire, dissolve into it two or three spoonfuls of Honey, with a good big Lump of sweet Butter, and he will do well. ☜ Things good in General for the Dropsey. To let Blood first, to take away the thin Wheyish Blood, the Kernels within the Hu ks of the Ashen Keys, Broom, Chamomel, wild Carrets, Centaury, the Berries of Elder either green or dry, Dwarf Elder, Hawk∣weed, Wormwood, Juniper berries, Kidney wort, wilde Marjorem, the Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, the Seed of Plantain, Bayberries, Succory, the Bark of the Tamarisk Tree, Lady thistle, Vervain, Peony Seeds, Coleworts, Smallage, Elm boughs, Sallow Leaves, or whatsoever else that will make him Urine, Chiche steeped in water a day and a night, Parsley stamped and mixt with white-Wine, or Burdock seeds taken the same way, Rue, red Sage, Winter Savoury, Time, Horse Radish, Roots,
Rubarb, Saldanella, Salt of Scurvey-Grass, Garden Scurvey-Grass, Rose∣mary tops, Asarabica, Wood bitony, China-roots, the Juice of the white Lilly-Roots tempered with Barley-Meal and baked, and given him for to eat is very good. A Particular Receipt for the Cure of the Dropsey. Take a Gallon of Ale, and set it upon the Fire, and scum off the Froth as it riseth, then put into it of Wormwood and of Rue, the tender tops and leaves without stalks, very well picked, of each a Handful, and boyl it to a quart, then strain it, and dissolve into it three Ounces of London Treacle, and put into it of long Pepper and Grains made into sine Pow∣der of each an Ounce, then brew them well together; an give it him blood-warm, and bath and anoint his Legs that be swelled with Train-Oyl twice a day, till it go away, and give him Mashes or white Water, and feed him with such Meat as he will best eat, and if the Weather be seasonable turn him to Grass, and he will do well. Things good in General for Gravelling. To take off his Shooe, and with your drawing Iron draw the place till you come into the quick, prick forth all the Gravel, and crush forth the matter and blood clean, then wash it clean with your Copperas water taught you in my First Part, then pour upon it Sheeps Tallow and Bay-Salt molten together scalding hot, and stop up the Hole with Hurds and set on the Shoo again, and at two or three times dressing it will be whole; but till he be thoroughly well do not travel him, neither let his Foot come into any wet, or after the Gravel is gotten out, stop his Foot with Hogs-Grease and Turpentine molten together, pouring it into the Wound scalding hot, or to stop it with Hogs-Grease, Verjuice, Bees Wax, the Juice of Housleek beaten in a Mortar together, and melt it, and dip Flax therein, and use it as you did the other; or to wash it with Beer and Salt, or Chamberly and Salt; and to put into it scalding hot Pitch, Virgins Wax, Deers Sewet, Bores Grease and the Juice of Housleek, and stop it up with Hurds, and tack on the Shoo again, or to lay into it Flax dipped in the white of an Egg, or to heal it with the powder of Galls and Tartar mixt together. Things good in General for Molten Grease. First, to take blood from the Neck-Vein to a good proportion, to let out all the inflamed Blood, and to give him Bran prepared or dried Bran, and if he empties himself, to give him a restringent Glister, which you may find in my First Part. But things in general to be given inwardly are these, Sallet Oyl, Sack, Honey, Cordial powder of Anniseed, Hemp∣seed, Cummin-seed, Fennegreek-seed, Powder of Elecampane Roots, Brim∣stone,
Licoras, Colts-foot. In Maladies of this Nature you must for∣bear to administer such Drugs as be hot, for that is the way rather to kill then recover your Horse, for lenitive and gentle things are the only means to bring it away. Particular Receipts for Molten Grease. Take of Titian three Pints, three Ounces of Loaf-sugar finely pow∣dered, of Cordial powder an Ounce, of Live Honey four Ounces, and give it him to drink Blood-warm. Another for Grease fallen into his Legs. ☜ When you have warmed him well by Riding him two or three Miles; then take about half a Pint or more of Sack, and three or four penny∣worth of Sallet-Oyl, and give it him to drink, then ride him as far again, and he will purge out his molten Grease; This done two or three times will Cure him for that Winter. Another for Molten Grease. You shall find an∣other most excellent for this Purpose af∣terwards. After you have let him Blood, take half a Pint of white-Wine, half a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, of Rubarb and of Aloes two drams, of Sene half an Ounce, of Agarick three drams, Bay-berries half an Ounce, Saffron two drams, Duck or Duke powder, and of Cordial powder of each two drams, make what is to be powdred into powder, and mix them well to∣gether, adding thereunto four Ounces of Live Honey, give it your Horse after it is well warmed upon the Fire blood-warm, but be sure you let him fast about three Houres before you give it him, and three houres af∣ter you give it him, and let his Drink be either a sweet Mash or white Water for five or six days after, and let him have in stead of Oats Bread made for him, or Bran prepared; but if you give him Oates, put in a∣mongst them Fennegreek bruised; but if you desire to approve of an∣other Receipt; Look in my First Part for Balls for Colds, Glanders or Molten Grease. Another very good for it. ☜ To abate the stirring and working of his Body, and to bring and re∣store him to his perfect Health again; Take this course for his Re∣covery, Take an Ounce of Diascordium and dissolve it in a Pint of Sack, or for want of that in a quart of Beer or Ale, and give it him cold in the Morning fasting, and Order him as you do sick Horses, with Mashes of Malt, bursten Oates, warm Cloaths, warm Water, &c. But if you find that he falls from his Stomach, and dungs hard, to Remedy these two Evils I direct you to the Directions how to Order sick Horses, about the beginning of the First Part after the End of the Table of Simples, where you may find Vineger and Honey to bring him to a Stomach, and a Cordial of Bread boyled in Beer with Butter and Honey put therein, to Loosen his Body, and to bring him to Heart again,
Which when you find him lusty and strong, you may give him as much of the powder of Mechoachan as will lie upon a shilling at thrice, in a quart of warm Beer or Ale; Or you may give him a Purge of Aloes. Another also very good. ☞ Take an Ounce of the best Aloes Succotrina you can get for Money, half an Ounce of the Cream of Tartar beaten to powder, with as much of each of these powders as are here under-written, as will lie upon a Groat, viz. Licoris, Flower of Brimstone and Ginger; Mix them alto∣gether, and work them up in a little fresh Butter at first, then divide them into three equal parts, and cover over every part all over with fresh Butter, to keep the bitter taste of the Aloes from offending him. Let your Balls be made about the bigness of a small Wash-Ball, thick in the middle and sharp at both ends; stick them upon a stick not too sharp at the end, and give him them in the Morning Fasting, with a small Horn∣full of warm Beer after every one of them, to make them pass down the better; Let him have moderate Exercise after them, and Order him as you do sick Horses, and he will do well. General Simples good for a Surseit. ☞ Angelica, the distilled water of Broom Flowers, the Leaves of Balm, with Nitre given in Ale, or the Juice of Ivy-leaves so given, Liver-wort, Common Wormwood, the distilled water of wilde Poppey, &c. A particular Receipt for a Surseit. Take three Quarts of strong Beer, one Handful of Wormwood, one Handful of Cellendine, one of Herb-grace, alias Rue, chop them gross, and boyl them in it till they come to a Quart; Then strain and squeeze the Liquor from the Herbs, and put into it two spoonfuls of Honey, and two Ounces or more of Treacle of Jeane, with a Lump of sweet Butter, and give it him Fasting in the Morning with Exercise after it, and when you bring him Home, Cloath and Litter him up warm, and two or three houres after give him a Mash and white Water. Another for a Horse whose Coat stands staring, and dos not thrive; Or that hath swelled Cos or Legs by reason of Moulten Grease, setled and dried in his Body, which commonly brings along with it Gaunt∣ness and Costiveness, with several other Distempers, &c. ☞ The only Way to Remedy and help these Distempers, is first to give him a Purge of Aloes made up according to Art as you may find the man∣ner how in Directions for the Purging of Horses after the Table of Simples, and Order him as you do sick Horses with Mashes, bursten
Oats, scalded Bran, warm Clothing and warm Water &c. About three or four days after he hath done Purging and drank cold Water, to bring him to a Stomach, give him Honey and white-Wine, and to comfort him and Loosen his Body, and to make him Stale freely, give him the Cor∣dial of Houshold Wheat Bread boyled in Beer, &c. You may find the manner how to make this also in the Directions how to Order sick Hor∣ses after the Table of Simples; As to the Ordering of his swelled Cods or Legs, you may apply to them (after his Physick hath done working) the common Charge of Soap and Brandy scalding hot, and three or four days after Ride him into some River or clear Pond, up to the mid side, and Flounce him backwards and forwards, which will be a means to abate and take away the Swelling; You need not lay on your Charge above once. These Directions are in case of a dry Surfeit. But if he be trou∣bled with a Cold, which you may soon know by his Coughing and Run∣ning at Nose, then give him this Drink, viz. of the Powder of Anniseeds and Turmerick, of each on Ounce, put into a Pint and a half of strong Beer, half a quarter of Brandy, and about five or six Spoonfuls of white-Wine Vineger, (or for want of either, Verjuice). Boyl all these a little, and give it hm luke-warm Fasting in the Morning. If you find his Stomach lost give him his Cordial. But if you find that your Horse is fat and strong, and hath his Grease setled within him, then give him the Purge of Aloes first, but if you find him both fat and ill together, then give him this white-Wine and Honey, and Cordial, to bring him to a Stomach, and after them give him his Purge. Observation. These Heats and Colds which are occasioned by hard Labour or vi∣olent Riding, does commonly bring along with them hard Pustules and Kernels under his Chaul, which you may either sink or break with your common Charge of Soap and Brandy, boiled together and applied hot▪ If you find that they break wash them with Verjuice and Butter, or Vi∣neger and Butter melted together, and they will do well. Things good in General to Mollifie Hardness. ☞ Linseed, Fennegreek, Rosin, Pitch of Greece, Flower of Roses boyled together with Turpentine, Honey and Sallet Oyl, till it come to an Ointment, Malvarsco, Oleum, Rosatum, Brank-ursine, Mallows, Cole∣worts, Lard, Oyl of Cypress with Meal, Pellitory, Wormwood or Grease, Mustard-seed and Cummin boiled together, or the Juice of the Roots or Leaves of Elder, Armoniack, Aloes, Opoponax Nettles, Mercorella, the Roots of Cucumbers, Hogs-Grease and Tar, Turpentine and old Grease beaten together, Oyl of Turpentine is very excellent to take down a Swelling, Patch-Grease and Turpentine melted together, and
stop his Feet therewith, and anoint his Coffins therewith, or Salt and Water mixt together, and Bath the Swelling therewith, and dip a Linnen Cloth in the same, and lay that upon it, and it will dissolve it. What is good for bruised Kidneys. The powder of the Herb called Crabs-Claws, Plantine, Licoris, Broom, &c. Things good in General for a sore Mouth and Throat. Wood-bine leaves, Bolearmoniack, Plantine water, to wash it with a Water made of them▪ or to wash it with Bay salt and Verjuice warmed together. If the Palate be sore, then let him Blood there, then take Honey, young Onions and toasted Cheese boiled together, and anoint the Pallate with it, or to wash it with the Juice of Alehoof, the Juice of Golden Rod, Mallows or Marsh-Mallows, or Mint, or Mulberries, or Nettles, or Pellitory of the Wall, or Privet, or Queen of the Medows, or Rag-wort, or Sage and Allum, or Self-heal, or Succory, or the Juice of the English Vine, the Decoction of Rag-weed, Plantine boiled in white-Wine, Mustard-seed applied outwardly dissolveth the Swelling of the Throat. ☞ What is good for the Quinsey. To let Blood under the Tongue, and if his Throat is so swelled that you can get nothing hardly to go down it, lay a Poultess under his Chaul, and that will open the Passage, then take a Bulls Pizzle or a Whale-bone, and Tie a Linnen Rag about it, and dip it into Milk, wherein Allum and the powder of a Dogs-turd hath been dissolved, and thrust it up and down his Throat, and put a Hornful of it down after it; if he be so bad that he can eat nothing but what you give him with a Horn, which must be comfortable and Cordial things; be sure let the Hornful of Milk wherein Allum and Dogs-turd hath been dissolved, be the last thing you give him, or else it will do him no good, and to Tie him up to the Rack half an Hour after it; you are to use it two or three times a day or oftner as you shall see occasion, or four Ounces of the Juice of Cinquefoyl given down at a time for certain days together cureth it, or the Juice of Cud∣iweed or Cotton-weed taken in Wine and Milk is a good Remedy against t, so is Hysop boyled with Figs. Another Receipt good for it. ☞ After you have Blooded him under the Tongue, take as many Leaves of common Mallows as you think fit for your use; Boyl them very well in his own Piss and apply it as hot (Poultiss-wise) to his Throat as he on well endure it, and you shall soon find the wonderful effects of it, for it
will open the Passage of his Throat, and take down the Swelling occa∣sioned by the Inflammation of it; Do this two or three times if you see occasion, and apply your inward Medicine also to it, as the Receipt above will direct you. Things good in General to Kill Lice or Vermin. The Decoction of the Herb or seed of Henbane, and wash him with it, to wash his Body all over with Cows Piss for three or four days to∣gether, it is an approved and certain Cure, and is as good as any I can give you. However I shall give you some more Receipts, which is to anoint him with Quick-silver and Hogs-grease mixed together, or take Staves∣acre and green Copperas boiled in Running water, and wash him all over therewith, and at twice dressing it will Cure him, or Tobacco shred small and boyled in small Beer with some powdred Allum, and when the Allum is dissolved, to wash him therewith. ☞ Another very good to destroy them. Take Hogs Lard, and anoint your Horse all over his Back-bone, and under his Mane, and about his Flanks, or any where elsewhere you find your Lice do come, and it will destroy them; the reason is, that this food being so very delicious, and so well lik't of by them, makes them seed so much upon it that it causeth them to burst. Or to take Train Oyl, which is Whale Oyl▪ and anoint his Breast and Flanks with it, and then dip a broad List of Woollen into it, and sow it about his Neck, and this will destroy them. Things good in General to keep the Flies off a Horses Head. To anoint his Head with Oyl and Bay-berries mingled together, or to rub his Head all over with the water wherein Rue hath been steeped in after it is well bruised, or to anoint his Head or round about his Eyes with Lynseed Oyl, and it will keep them away, or with the water where∣in Devils dung hath been dissolved is the best of all, or with the water of Pellitory of Spaein, or the leaves of Ivy bruised with a little Water, and his Head washed therewith. Things good in General for the Cure of the Leprosie or Mange. To take Blood first from the Neck-Vein, good store, and scrape away the Scurf with an old Curry-eomb, Oyster-shell or such like, then these things you are to use as your discretion serves, Staves-acre, Chickweed, Elecampane, Mercury Sublimate, the leaves of Bramble boyled in Lye, Cow-Piss, the powder of the dried root of Briony, the powder
RESAL∣GAR is a composition of Sulphur, Orpiment and un∣slackt lyme, and is a most strong rrosiv. of the red Dock, or the powder of Arsnick, Resalgar or white Mereury mixed with Hogs grease till it be killed, Urine, Tobaccho and Brim∣stone boiled together is very good, or Salt, Verdegrease, Allum, Ver∣juice and Train Oyl boiled together and anoint him therewith, or Broom, Wormwood, Mustard-seed, Elecampane, Chimney-soot and black Soap boyled together, or the Juice of Hemlock, unslackt Lyme, Pepper and Ginger boiled in Beef-broth, and anointed therewith is very good▪ Particular Receipts for the Mange. ☞ Take a quart of fair Running Water, and put into it half a pound of green Copperas, and an Ounce of Allum, and an Ounce of Tobaccho chopped small, then boyl them together till they come to somwhat more then a Pint, and anoint him all over with it very warm after you have rubbed off the Scabs, and Tie him to the Rack three or four houres, twice dressing him cures him. Or the Ashes of the Bark of the Ash Tree made into a Lie, and the Body washed therewith, Calamint taken in∣wardly, the Decoction of the Leaves of the Fig tree, wilde Flower, &c. Another. First, let Blood, then take a quart of old Urine or Vineger, and break it into a quarter of a pound of Tobaccho, and set it on the Embers to stew all Night, and wash the infected places, whether it be in the Mane or otherwise. Another for any Mange or Ʋniversal Leprosie in a soul Surfeited Horse. After you have let him Blood, and scraped off the Scabs or Scurf, take of Verjuice and Vineger a Pint, Cow-Piss a Pint, Train Oyl a Pint▪ old Urine a Pint, and put to them a Handful of wilde Tansie, and a Handful of Bay-salt, a quarter of a pound of Brimstone, as much Allum, two Oun∣ces of Verdegrease, and four Ounces of Bolearmoniack, boyl all well to∣gether, with this very hot wash▪ him well, and if you put to it a quantity of a Pint of Blood you take away, it is not amiss, do this twice or thrice. Another. Take Mother of Salt Peter, the best and strongest, and wash the Sores therewith so hot as he is able to suffer it, and in three or four times dres∣sing it will cure him, this will not only kill the Mange, but all Scratches, Pains and Rats-tails, &c. Another. Take of Sopers Lees, and after you have scraped away the Scurf, wash
him with it, and in once or twice dressing he will be well, it cures the Mange not only in Horses, but also Dogs, provided they get not to it with their Mouth. ☜ An inward Drink with an outward Application, which I think is the best Re∣medy that can be Invented for this Disease. Take Anniseeds and Turmerick, of each an Ounce, finely beaten, of the blackest Rozin powdered one Ounce, put them into a quart of strong Blood him first, and about two or three days after give him this Drink.Beer, heated luke-warm, and give it him in the Morning lasting, with a little of the Flower of Brimstone at the Mouth of every Horn you give him, not exceeding above an Ounce in all, and let him fast four or five houres after it, and Order him afterwards as you do a sick Horse. About two or three days after his Drink, when he hath a little recruited and re∣covered his strength again, apply this outward application (but first curry off all the Scabs with an old Curry-comb till the blood and water appear) viz. Take Oyl of Turpentine and Beer, of equal parts alike, with some Flower of Brimstone, well shaked and Jumbled together in a Glass Vial, to incorporate them the better, and anoint him all over with it, Tying him first with a strong Bridle to the Rack to prevent him from biting at it, for it is a very terrifying, biting and sharp Medicine, and will torment him for about half an hour or more and then the smarting will be over. If you find your Horse full of good and in heart, you may venture to give him two or three of these Drinks and Oint∣ings, if you see the Cure will not be performed without them; but if he be a very poor lean Horse, then one is enough till he hath recovered more heart and strength. Things good in general for the Cure of the Scab, Tetter, or Ring-worm. The water that is ound in the hollow places of a decayed Beech-tree, and annoint him with it, the Juice of the leaves and roots of stinking Gladwin, one part of Plantine water, and two parts of the Brine of Beef boyled together and clarified, and anoint him with it, Plum-tree leaves boyled in Vineger, killeth Tettars, the Juice of the Root of Monks Ru∣barb, which is a kind of Dock, some call it Garden-Patience, is very good, the Oyl of Wheat pressed between two thick Plates of Copper, the Juice of Mercury mingled with Vineger, Water-cresses, the Roots of Docks boiled in Vineger and bathed therewith, Cardimonium mixt with Vineger. To make a strong Lye of old Urine, Ash Keys and green Copperas, and bathe the Knots therewith, and it will kill and heal them; or to cut the Head and Tail of a Snake, and cut it into small Pieces and roast it,
and anoint the Sore with the Grease of it, and it will heal it in a shor time, and have a care you touch no place but the Sorrance, for it will venom. Particular Receipts to Cure the Tettar or Ring-worm. Take two drams of Precipitate, and put it into a small Vial-Glass with fair water, much more then will cover the powder, keep it close stopped, and with this Water twice a day wash it, and it will infallibly Cure it; and after you have dressed the Sorrance, shake the Glass, and let it stand till the next dressing; But if it be in any fleshy part, you may kill it by Bathing the Sorrance with the Juice of Southern-wood, Maudlin and Rue, of each alike stamped together and strained, and Bathe the place with it twice a day till it be whole. Another. Take the roots of Elecampane, and the roots of red Docks, of each alike, slice them thin, and put them into three quarts of Urine, with two Handfuls of Bay-salt, let it boil till one quart be consumed, then take it off, and with a Clout fastned to a stick wash the Sorrance very hot, four or five Mornings together, and it will Kill it. ☞ A very good Receipt to Cure any manner of Scab, Itch or Scurf, in any part of a Horses Body. Mix Sallet Oyl, his own Water, white Wine Vineger, Salt, Butter and Brimstone together, and anoin the grieved part with it twice a day, and it will Cure them. Let your Quantities of all these things be more or less, according to the Cure you undertake. Things good in General for the Crown Scab, which is a stinking and filthy Scab, breeding round about the corners of the Hoof. Spread upon a Plaister this Ointment, take salt Bacon, Grease, Soot, Wax and Pitch molten together, and lay to it; and if the Flesh grows proud, eat it away with Verdegrease beaten to powder, or with burnt Allum, or scrapings of Harts-horn or Ox-horn made into powder, or take Sope and Hogs-Grease, and half a pound of Bolearmoniack, and a quarter of a pound of Turpentine mixed well together, and make a Plaister and bind it on fast, renewing it every day till it leave Running, and then wash it with strong Vineger made warm, and let him come into no water during the Cure; or to Bathe him with old Urine sod with salt, and that will dry up the Humours and heal it, or to wash it with green Copperas, Allum and Honey boiled together in fair water, and
wash the Sore with it three or four times a day, and this will both kill and heal it without any other Medicine. Things good in General for a surbated Horse. Take two new laid Eggs, and after you have well picked his fore-Feet, break them raw into his Soles, then stop them up with Ox or Cow dung, and he will be well by the next Morning; or Sugar-Candy melted with a hot Iron between the Shoo and the Foot, and when it is hardned take Nettles and Bay-salt, stamped and laid upon it, or after his Foot is pa∣red, to cool it stop his Feet with Bran and Hogs-Grease boiled together very hot, and to cover the Coffin round with the same, or to stop them every Night with Cows dung and Vineger mingled together. ☜ Things good in General for Sinews that are Cut, Prickt, Bruised or Shrunk, or for any other Griefs in them. Alheal is good for the Grief of them, Wood-bitony, Comfrey sodder∣eth cut Sinews together, the dried powder of red Wheat boiled in Vi∣neger is good, wilde Tansie, Oyl of Chamomel, Mugwort cureth the Contraction and drawing together of the Sinews; or Tarr, Bean-flower and Oyl of Roses mixed together, and laid to the place hot, and if it do not presently good, then take Wormes and Sallet-Oyl Fried together, or else the Ointment of Wormes, which you may have at the Apothecaries, and apply either of them, for they Knit the Sinews again if they be not quite cut asunder; but if there be a Convulsion, you must with your Scissers cut the Sinew asunder, then take Rozin and Turpentine, Pitch and Sanguis Draconis melted together, and clapped somewhat hot to the Sore, then take Flax and clap upon that, for that will cleanse and defend, and is a very excellent Medicine for any swollen Joynt whatso∣ever. But if the Sinews be not much swelled, but only stiff, then take of black Soap a pound, and seethe it in a quart of strong Ale, till it wax thick like Tarr, and anoint the Sinews and Joynts with it, and it will supple them and stretch them forth be they never so much shrunk; Or take a quart of Neats-soot Oyl, a quart of Ox galls, a quart of Aqua∣vitae or Brandy, a quart of Rose-water, or a Handful of Rosemary stamp∣ed, boyl all these together till half be consumed, and strain it, and use it as you see occasion. A Receipt for a Cut Sinew. Take the Leaves of Nep or Woodbine, and bruise them well in a Mortar with May Butter, and apply it to them, is very good to Knit them together.
☞ A Particular Receipt for the Shrinking of the Sinews. Take a Handful of Chickweed, of red Roses dried the like quantity, put them into a Pint of Ale, and a Pint of Canary, and let them boyl to∣gether till a fourth part be consumed; then put to them a Pint of Trot∣ters Oyl, and let that boyl also a good while, keeping them stirring, which being strained anoint the grieved part therewith, chasing it in very well with your Hand, holding a hot Fire-shovel or Brick bat before it at the same time, to make it sink in the better; When you bind it up, put to it some of the Herbs, and at three or four times Dressing it will be well. The Decoction of the Root of Scabius and Garden Tansie boiled in Sallet Oyl; Or the Decoction of the Leaves of Mullen, with Sage, Marjorem and Camomel Flowers, and the grieved part bathed therewith, is excellent good for them, &c. Things good in General to Cure the Tongue of a Horse that is hurt. To boyl in Water Wood-bine leaves, Primrose leaves, black Berry∣leaves, Knot-grass with some Honey, and put to it a little Allum, and two or three times a day wash it with a Clowt Tied upon a stick, being luke∣warm, or take Mel Rosatum and anoint therewith, and be sure whenso∣ever you dress his Tongue or Mouth, Tie him up to the Rack an hour after it, that so the Medicine may take the better effect; or take red Ho∣ney, the marrow of powdered Pork, quick Lime and Pepper made into fine powder, of each alike, boiled together till they come to an Oint∣ment, and anoint with it twice a day. Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Tongue of a Horse that is hurt. Take of Arman half an Ounce, and put it into the Fire till it become red hot, then take it out and beat it to very fine powder; then take a Sawcer full of live Honey, and of white-Wine one Pint, mix and steep these with the Powder together, and so let it boyl over the Fire, keeping it stirring, then take it off and let it cool, and so wash his Tongue Morn∣ing and Evening with it till it be whole. Another. Take the Juice of Selandine, and wash the Hurt therewith nine days together, and it will Cure it though it be half Cut asunder, for the Juice of the Selandine will conglutinate and sodder the Tongue together, being cut or wounded. See more of this in the First Part. P. 151. Things good for Venomed Things. Garden Bazil or sweet Bazil laid to it is good for any thing Venomed by a Spider, Wasp, Bee or Hornet, Water-bistort or Snakeweed is like∣wise
good; and if he hath drunk Horse-Leeches, Hens-dung and the like, give him three spoonfuls of the Herb Sow-thistle dried in a quart of Ale. ☞ Another for a Venom. Take a Handful of Rue, and stamp with it the Fat of rusty Bacon, till it come to a perfect Salve, and therewith dress the Sore till it be whole. ☜ Another to be used either inwardly or outwardly. If he hath eaten any Venomed thing, Give him the Juice of Sage, Morn∣ing and Evening in Wine or Ale; but if he be outwardly venomed, bruise the Sage, and apply it to the grieved part twice a day, and it will take out the Venom. See a more large Ac∣count of things of this Na∣ture in the First. Part p. 152. Things good in General for Ʋlcers. Tarr, Hogs-Grease, green or white Copperas, Salt-Peter, Bees Wax, Honey, Rozin, Verdegrease, Linseed Oyl, all boiled together, and make a Salve of it, and dress it with it. Euphorbium, Mastick, French Soap is good, or to wash the Sore with white Wine and green Copperas dissolved to∣gether, and to heal it up with Swines Grease, the Leaves of Lillies beaten in a Mortar, and make a Salve of it, and lay it upon the Sore, and cover it with a Plaister, or Loam and Horse dung mixed with Pepper and the white of an Egg; or to strow upon the Sore of the powder of Galls, or to scald it once a day with Sallet-Oyl or Sack, Frankincense, Cloves▪ green Copperas and Brimstone, and double as much Myrrh as any of them, and put it upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, and receive the smoke of it upon Hurds, and keep it close in a Box, and when you use it, wash the Sore with Urine or Vineger twice a day. Things good in General for a Ʋlcer or Canker in the Nose. Green Copperas and white Copperas, with some Allum boiled in Run∣ning water, and squirted into his Nostrils luke-warm, three or four times one after another, is good; but if the Canker be hot and very burning with great pain; then take the Juice of Purslain, Night-shade, Lettice, and mix them together, and wash the Sore with a fine Cloth dipt therein, or else squirted up his Nostils, and it will allay the heat of it; Or to take Sage, Rue, Hysop, of each a Handful, and seethe them in U∣rine and Water, and strain it out, and put into it a little white Copperas, Honey and Aquavitae, and wash or squirt it into the place; But if the Canker be killed heal it with this Water, take of Rib-wort, Bitony and Dasies, of each a Handful, and Seethe them well in Wine and Water, and wash the Sore therewith; Or take Chrystal made into fine Powder, and strow upon it Pauls Bitony bruised is very good.
Things good in General to Cure the Vives. To Cut a Hole where the Kernels are, and pick them out with a Wire and ll the Hole with Salt, and at three days end it will run; then wash it with the Juice of Sage, and heal it up with an Ointment made of Hony, Butter and Tarr, or with your green Ointment in my First Part; or to wash the Sore wherein hath been boiled green Copperas and Allum, and to Taint it with Flax dipt in the white of an Egg, beaten to an Oyl, or to heal it up with Hogs Grease, Turpentine and Wax molten to∣gether; or take a Spunge dipped in white-Wine Vineger, and bind to the Sore, and renew it twice a day, till the Kernels do Rot, then open the nethermost part of the softness, and let the corruption out, and fill the Hole with Salt finely brayed, and the next day wash away the Filth with warm water, and the next day after wash the Sore with Honey and Fitch-flower mingled together till it be whole. Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Vives. Take Tar, tried Hogs-Grease, Bay-Salt and Frankincense powdered, of each as much as will suffice, melt them together, and with a Clowt fastned to a stick, scald the place four or five Mornings together, until the inflamed places do become soft and ripe, then slit the Skin with your Incision-Knife, and let forth the Corruption, and heal up the Sore with tried Hogs-grease and Verdegrease made up into fine Powder, melt them upon the Fire, and let it not boyl more then a Waum or two, then put in some ordinary Turpentine, and so stir all together till it be cold, and anoint the Sorrance with it till it be whole. Another which is the best Cure for it. Take a penniworth of Pepper beaten to fine Powder, Swines Grease a spoonful, the Juice of a Handful of Rue, Vineger two spoonfuls, mix them very well together, and convey it equally into both the Eares of the Horse, and so Tie or stitch them up, then shake his Eares that the Medicine may sink downwards, which done, let him Blood in the Neck-Vein, ☞and Temple-Veins, and this is an infallible Cure. Another very good for the same. The Vives are Cured several manner of ways, as you find by the Re∣ceipts above, but the most usual and common way that our Smiths ge∣nerally use for the Cure of this Infirmity, is for to let Blood on both sides the Neck-Veins, then to sear the Swelling with a small hot Iron, from the Root of the Ear, down to the bottom of it, till the Skin look yellow; the manner and form of the Searing-Iroh must be somewhat like the shape and fashion of a great Arrows Head, as you see by the Figure in the
Margin, with three or four small Lines or Stroaks on each side, drawn from the Body of it. After you have seared it, to take out the Heat of the Fire; and to make it sound again, anoint it with fresh Butter or Hogs-Grease, and he will do well. What is good to Cure the Arraistes or Rats-tails, which is a kind of Scratches. To Ride him till he be warm, which will make the Veins to swell, and the better to appear, then let him Blood on the Fet-lock Veins, on both sides, making him to bleed well, and the next day after to wash the Sores with warm water, and then clip away all the Hair from about the Sores, and anoint the grieved place with this Ointment, viz. Take green Copperas and Verdegrease, of each two Ounces, and of Common Honey, four Ounces, beat your Copperas and Verdegrease very small, and so work them with your Honey to an Ointment, and anoint the Sores daily with it till it be whole. ☜ Things good in General for the Cure of the Wind-Cholick. See the Ex∣pellers of Wind in the First Part. p. 150. Alheal, True-love or one Berry, the Berries of Holly, Holm or Hul∣ver-Bush, Juniper-Berries, the Flowers of Lavender steeped in Wine, wilde Parsnips, Jack by the Hedge, Winter and Summer Savory, but the Summer is the best, Burnet, Saxafrage, the leaves of the Willow-tree bruised, and the Juice given with some Pepper in Beer, Cardamum, Fenne∣greek, Hawes beaten to powder, Rue, Cloves, Cinnamon, an Onion peeled and Jagged, and put it into his Fundament, or to give him a Pipe of Tobaccho at his Fundament lighted, and the Wind of his Body will draw it out. If you intend to see more of this Nature, look for Cho∣lick. Angelica, Wood-bittony, Mullen, Mustard-seed, Centaury. A Plaister to lay upon the Wound to keep in the Taint or Salve. Take Pitch, Rozin, Mastick, Turpentine, Hogs grease, of each so much as will suffice, melt them together and keep it for your use, when you use it, spread it upon Leather and cover the wound therewith, this Salve doth infinitely comfort a Wound both green or old, be the same Fistula or otherwise. Things good in General to Cure the Wind-Galls. To open them the length of a Bean and thrust out the Jelly, then take the White of an Egg and Oyl-de bay, and mix them together, and apply it with Hurds, Plaister-wise, and in three or four days thus dressing, it will be Cured, and after you have opened it, and the Jelly squeezed out, to lay Pitch and Rozin melted together upon it, and to clap some Hurds upon that.
This is a very good Cure. To lay to it Oyl de-bay, Turpentine, Verdegrease, the white of an Egg and Red Lead boiled together till they become a Salve, or the Roots of Cummin beaten with Salt and laid to it, or to anoint them with the Juice of Onions, or Leeks, or Ground-Ivy and Wormwood sodden in white-Wine, and laid to them; or after the Jelly is let out, to Lap a wet woollen Cloth about it, and with a Tailors hot Pressing Iron rub upon the Cloth till all the moisture is dried up, then daub all over it Pitch, Mastick and Rozin boiled together, and lay Hurds upon it. In all these kind of Cures you must first shave away the Hair, and open the Sorrance, and squeeze forth the Jelly before you lay any Charge to it, and to keep him out of the Water during the Cure. Particular Receipts for the Cure of the Wind-Gall. Take Tachamahaca, Mastick, Perozin, of each the quantity of a Ha∣zel-Nut, and of Stone Pitch to the quantity of a Wall-Nut, with a little Brimstone powdered, melt all these together, and when it is molten put in as much Turpentine as a Wall-Nut will contain, and spread it upon a Plaister, and lay it to the place warm, and daub it all over with the same Salve, and Flox upon that, and let it remain on till it fall away of it self. Another. Take of Oyl of Vineger, and dip your Thumb therein, and rub the Sorrance with it every day till the Hair do fall off, which will cause the Wind-galls to break out and bleed, then heal and cure them as you have been already taught. ☞ Another for the Cure of the Wind-Galls. Take about half a Pint of white-Wine Vineger, one Ounce of Roman Vitriol, one Ounce of Mastick, one dram of white Copperas, and one ounce and a dram of Euphorbium, boyl all these together till a fourth part be consumed, then strain it out, and put it into a Glass close stopped, and keep it for your use. The manner of using it is to rub about a spoonful of it upon each side where they are for three or four days together, and not clip away the Hair. A Purgation for a Horse Sick of Grease or Costiveness. Take a Pint of old white-Wine, and set it on the Fire, and dissolve in∣to it a Lump of Castle Soap as big as a Hens Egg, and stir them well to∣gether, then take it off, and put into it two good spoonfuls of Hemp∣seed beaten, an Ounce of Sugar-candy beaten to powder, and brew all
together; then having warmed the Horse, to stir up nis Grease and o∣ther foul humors, give it to him to drink, and walk him up and down a little after it, to make the potion work, then set him up warm, and after a little stirring him in his Stall, if he grow sickish, give him liberty to lie down, then after two houres fasting give him a sweet Mash, and feed as at other times: Or if you find him sick, give him a pint of warm milk down his throat, and he will be quickly well. For Costiveness, Rake out his hard dung, then boyl an Ounce of each of these things in a quart of Beer, viz. Anniseed; Fennegreek, Linseed, and the powder of Piony, and give him a Pint of it luke-warm. ☜ To Cure a Horse that is swelled after Blood-letting. Take Lynseed Oyl, Hogs-grease and red Lead mixt together, and melt them together over the Fire, keeping them stirring till it becomes cold, or else the red Lead will sink all to the bottom; then rub it once a day well in with your Finger till the swelling be down, and this will dis∣solve the hardest Knot that is; If it be in the Winter you must heat it in with a hot Fire-shovel; but if it be in the Summer, the Sun will do the same thing. ☜ Another for a Horse that hath taken Cold after Blood-letting; Or that hath been Prickt by some rusty Feam, so that it wrankles. Take Soap and Brandy, and dissolve them together cold, and wash the place with it is good for them; so is the Ointment or Oyl of Po∣puleon, They are both very cooling things.the place grieved being anointed with it. Or Pitch both white and black of equal parts alike melted together, and applied hot upon the end of a Lath, and Flox or Hurds stuck upon it while they come off of themselves, is also a very good Cure. Things good to Cure a Bone-Spaven. Though this is a very hard thing to Cure, yet I shall give you such Re∣ceipts as I find in an Eminent Author. First, take up the Vein which feeds it, and let him Bleed well, and do no more to him that day; the next day shave away the Hair from off it, and rub it hard with a Rowling Pin, (having first anointed the place with Petroeleum, and chafed it well with your Hand) or some other round and smooth stick Morning and Evening, for four days together, and at the fourth days end slit down the Skin with your Incision-Knife, the full length of the Spaven, but be very careful you touch not the great Artery or Vein, both which do lie very near, for if you do but hurt that you Maim the Horse past all recovery, having thus done lay to the place the Herb called Flamula, bruise it and bind it on so fast that it fall not
off in two days more: Then for three days after take Cantharides and Euphorbium, and incorporate them well together, (being before beaten to powder) with black Soap and Bay-Salt, and lay this to the place, and thus dress it every Morning, and this will lay the Bone and Crust bare. After take Fearn roots, Hounds-tongue and Boars Grease, incorporate all these together, and lay to the place till you perceive the Crust to be loose, and to be wasted; and now and then try to Loosen it with your Cornet, or other Instrument, and if you can conveniently take it off, do so, which done heal up the Wound with your green Ointment pre∣scribed in my First Part. But if you find a Swelling begin to arise in the Spaven place whereby you suspect it, then for the prevention there∣of, after you have first shaved away the hair, anoint the place with na∣tural Balsam, for two or three days together, then repress the humour with this Charge take three Ounces of the Oyl of Roses, Bole-armoniack one Ounce, Wheat Flower half an Ounce, and the White of an Egg; Make all these into one Body, and every day after you have anointed it with Balsam, lay on the said Charge. ☞ Things good in General for all manner of Burnings or Scaldings, either by Shot, Gun-Powder or Wilde-Fire. The leaves or roots of the yellow Lilly, Daffodil stamped with Honey, the Juice of an Onion, the Juice of the red Lilly, Lettuce, the Juice of Thorn-Apples boiled in Hogs-Grease to the form of an Ointment, cures all manner of Burnings or Scaldings whatsoever in a very short time, Water Plantine, the Juice of Housleek, St. Johns wort bruised, the Herb Tutsan or Park leaves, an Ointment made of the Juice of Cowslips, and Oyl of Linseed Cureth all manner of Scaldings or Burnings whatso∣ever, Ivy that groweth upon Walls or Trees, Brank-Ursine, the Juice of Elder-leaves, the Decoction or the distilled Water of Archangel, the Flowers and Herb of Ladies Bed straw made into an Oyl, by setting it in the Sun, is good, the leaves of the Bur-dock bruised with the White of an Egg, is a most excellent thing for all manner of Burnings by Fire, the Juice of Colts-foot, the Decoction of Dasies, Wall-wort and Agrimony cureth inward Burnings, being given inwardly, the Decoction of the leaves of Brank-Ursine. Particular Receipts to Allay Burning with Shot, Gun-Powder or wilde Fire. Take Varnish and put it into fair Water, and beat them very well to∣gether, then pour away the Water from the Varnish, and anoint the place burned with a Feather dipt into it, and in a few days dressing it will kill the Fire, which done heal the Sore with your carnifying and healing Salves.
Another. Take Hogs-Grease and set it on the Fire, and take off the Filth that shall arise, and when it is well boyled, take it off the Fire and put it into an Earthen Pan to cool for four or five Nights together in the open Air, then wash it in fair Running Water so often till it become White, then melt it down again, and keep it for your use, and anoint the place grie∣ved, and it will Cure him. Another. Take fresh Butter and the Whites of Eggs, as much of each as will suf∣fice, beat them well together till you bring them to a formal Ointment, and anoint the places burned therewith, and it will speedily take away the Fire, and Cure them soundly. Another. Take a stone of quick Lime, which must be well burned, which you may know by its lightness, dissolve it in fair Water, and when the Water is setled▪ strain the clearest through a fine Cloth, then put into the water either the Oyl of Hemp-seed or Sallet Oyl, of like quantity with the wa∣ter, and so beat them well together, you shall have an excellent Unguent very precious for all sorts of Burnings. And the Nature of these three Unguents be to leave no scars. Wherefore we apply them for most so∣vereign Remedies, as well for Man as Beast. To Help a Horse that is Costive in his Body. Take a Decoction of Mallowes one quart, Sallet Oyl half a Pint, or fresh Butter half a pound, Benedicta laxativa one Ounce, give him this Blood-warm Glister-wise, then clap his Tail to his Tuel, and hold it close, and make him keep it for half an houre at the least, and when it hath workt, give him a sweet Mash, and so keep him to Mashes and white Water for two or three days. What is good to make a Horse draw up his Yard. To Bathe his Yard and Sheath with white-Wine made warm, then an∣oint it with Oyl of Roses and Live Honey mingled together, and so put up the Yard into the Sheath, and with a short Bolster of Canvass keep it from falling down, and dress him once every day till he be well, and let his Back and Fillets be kept warm, and anoint him with Acopum, but if you have it not, apply this Charge unto his Back and Fillets. Take Bole-armoniack, the Whites of Eggs, Wheat-Meal, Sanguis draconis, Venice Turpentine, and strong white-Wine Vineger, of each
as much as you think fit, mix them well together, and charge his Back with it, as also his Sheath and his Stones. Another. Take the Ashes of Ashen wood, the whitest, finest and best burned, and searce them, one pound of Red Clay dried, and made into fine powder, half a pound, Bolearmoniack half an Ounce powdred, boyl all these in as much Verjuice of the Crab, as will make it liquid like Pap and with it anoint his Yard, Sheath and Stones, Morning and Evening, and he shall be presently Cured. ☞ A Receipt to Scour and Cleanse a Horses Yard, that is Foul and Furred by Pissing within his Sheath. Draw forth his Yard, and Rub and Pick off the Filth with your Hand, and cleanse it well with Butter and white-Wine Vineger melted to∣gether, and squirt some of it up into his Yard with a Syringe, and he will do well. A Receipt to Prevent Diseases in a Horse the whole Year. The first day of April open a Vein in the Neck, and if it be good take the less; if bad, take the more; then from that day until the first of May give him this which I shall prescribe, and let him have it Morn∣ing and Evening during the whole Month of April, from the first to the last, which is before his turning out to Grass, or Soyling, which shall be about the middle of May, and let him have the same all the whole Month of October, (like as you must do in April) after you have taken him from Grass about Bartholomew Tide, that which I prescribe is this. To Prevent Diseases. Take a Bushel of Old Rye, sweet and clean, well purged, or made clean from all Filth, and put it in a clean Iron Pot, dry, and without Water, put it over the Fire▪ and put in your Rye and keep it continually stirring to the bottom, until it be so parched that it becometh black, hard and dry, then take it from the Fire and put it into some clean Ves∣sel, and when it is cold keep it close stopped for your use. When you use it, take two or three Handfuls of it, and beat it into fine Powder, and mingle it amongst his Provender, at every Watering, Morning and E∣vening, or at other times when you give him Oates; do this these two entire Months of April and October, for all Men hold that in these two Months the Blood turneth and altereth, as we alter his Diet, from hard and dry Meat to Grass, and so likewise from Grass to dry Meats, for this Rye thus parched and ordered, doth refine the Blood, cool the Liver, and
purgeth the Spleen, so as the whole Structure of the Body is thereby bet∣ter ured and freed from all such bad and unnatural Humours, which would otherwise make the Body inclinable to sundry Maladies and Dis∣eases, which this Rye preventeth. Things good to keep a Horse from Casting forth his Drink. As it proceeds from Cold in the Stomach, or other Causes, as Cold in the Head where the Rheum bindeth, about the Roots and Kernels of the Tongue, hath as it were strangled and made strait the Passages to the Stomach; therefore to prevent this mischief you must give him Cordial and warm Drinks, as Malmsey, Cinnamon, Anniseeds and Cloves, well brewed and mixed together, and to anoint his Breast and under his Shoulders, with either the Oyl of Cypress, Oyl of Spike, or the Oyl of Pepper, and to purge him with Fumes or Pills, for such Fumigation joyn∣ing with these hot Oyls will soon dissolve the Humors. ☜ A Particular Receipt for the Cure of it. This Infirmity comes also by Glut of Provender, or by eating of raw or green Food, as new Pease or Beans, &c. You may also take this course for the Recovery of him, viz. To give him comfortable Things, as Diapente boiled in Beer or Ale, and the like; Or to keep him Fasting, and let him have no Meat, but what he is willing to take out of your Hand, viz. Bread, Hay, Oats, &c. Let his Drink be new Milk till his Stomach returns to him again. 'Tis also very good to bring him to his Stomach again, to put a Piece of sour brown Bread steeped in Vineger, into a Bag, and hang it at his Nose for him to smell of it. Things good in General for the hungry Evil. To comfort his Stomach by giving him great Slices of white Bread, Toasted and steeped in Sack, or to let him drink Wheat-Flower and Wine mingled together; or to make him Bread of Pine Nuts, and Wine mingled together, but there is nothing better then moderate Feeding of the Horse many times in the day, with wholesom Bean-bread well baked, or Oats well dried and sifted. Particular Receipts for a Horse that hath swallowed down Hens-dung, or ay other venomous thing. Take a Pint of Sallet-Oyl, and two Spoonfuls of Sugar-candy beaten to powder, and as much of the powder of Diapente, and brewing them well together give it him to drink, and for want of Diapente, so much of the shaving of Ivory, or of an old Stags-Horn especially, the Tips there∣of burnt, or three spoonfuls of the powder of Sow-thistle given him in a Pint of Ale or Beer.
Another. Take of the Urine of a Man, as it cometh warm from him, one Pint, of Bay-Salt a handful, stir them well together, and give it him, and after walk him up and down for half an hour. If you desire to see more Receipts, you must look for things that are good to expel Poison. Things good for Pain in the Teeth, Loose Teeth, Wolfes Teeth and Jaw Teeth. For loose Teeth the Cure is to prick all his Gums over with a Lancet, making them bleed well, then rub them all over with Sage and Salt, or with the leaves of Elecampane, and it will fasten them. The Pains of his Teeth comes by means of Distillation of Humors, which is Cured by rubbing all the outside of his Gums with fine Chalk and strong Vineger mixt together▪ or after they are so washed to strow upon them the powder of Pomegranate Pills, or to cover the Temples of the Head with a Plaister of Rozin and Mastick molten together. Now for the Cure of the Wolfes Teeth or Jaw Teeth, Tie up his Head to some Post or Raster, and after you have opened his Mouth with a Cord, so wide as you can see any part thereof, take an Instrument of Iron made like unto a Carpenters Gouge, and with your left Hand set the Edge of the Tool to the foot of the Wolfes-Teeth on the out-side of the law, turn∣ing the hollow side of the Tool downwards, knock it out as steadily as you can with your Mallet, and put some Salt finely brayed into the holes. Now if the upper Jaw Teeth doth hang over the nether Jaw-Teeth, and so cut the inside of the Mouth, then take your Gouge and Mallet▪ and pare the Teeth shorter by little and little, turning the hollow side of your Tool downwards towards the Teeth, by which means you shall not cut the inside of his Cheeks, then with your File file them all smooth, without any ruggedness, and then wash his Mouth with Vineger and Salt. Things good in General for the Crick in the Neck. The Cure is to thrust a sharp hot Iron through the flesh of the Neck in five several places, three inches distant from one another, and to have a care you touch not any Sinew, and Rowel all of them with Horse-hair, Flax or Hemp, for the space of fifteen days, and anoint the Rowels with Hogs-Grease, and the Neck will soon be restored, or to Bathe the Hor∣ses Neck with the Oyl of Peter, or the Oyl of Spike very hot, and then Rowle it up in wet Hay, or rotten Litter, and keeping him very warm, without using any burning, wounding, or other violence, he will do well, the leaves or roots of Down or Cotton-thistle given inwardly, or the leaves or roots of the Fullers thistle, Eringo or Sea-holly, or Vineger and Patch-grease melted together, and chafed in very hot against the Hair, and afterwards Bathed in with Soap and Vineger mixt together, is very good.
A certain Way to Raise up the Crest that is fallen. Is first to Raise it up with your Hand, and to place it where it ought to stand, then having one standing on the same side the Crest falleth from, let him with one Hand hold up the Crest, and with the other thrust out the bottom of it, so as it may stand upright, then on that side to which it falleth, with a hot Iron (somewhat broad on the Edge) drawing his Neck first at the bottom of the Crest, then in the midst of it, and lastly at the setting on of the Hair, and to draw it through the Skin, and no deeper then on the other side (from whence the Crest falleth) gather up the Skin with your Hand, and with two Plaisters of Shoo Makers Wax, laid one against the other at the edge of the Wound, and with smooth Splints to stay the Skin, that it may shrink neither upward nor down∣ward, then with a Pair of sharp Scissers clip away all the spare Skin which you had gathered with your Hand, then with a Needle and some red Silk, stitch the Skin together in divers places, and to keep the Skin from breaking, stitch the Edges of the Plaister also, then anoint the Sore with Turpentine, Honey and Wax melted together, and the Places which you drew with a hot Iron, with Piece-Grease made warm, and thus do twice a day till it be whole; and have great care that your Splints shrink not. But the best Cure for this Infirmity, is to let him Blood, and to keep him very well, for strength and fatness will ever raise the Crest. Things good for a Horse that is Wrung, or hurt in the Withers. If you find that by taking off the Saddle his Withers are swoln, clap on the Saddle again, and lay upon the place some wet Litter, then take up a thin Turf of Grass and Earth together, and put into the Fire, and let it there remain till it become red hot, then take it out and moisten the Grassy side very well with white-Wine Vineger, then take off the wet Litter, and lay the Turf very hot with the Grassy-side next to the place, and so put on the Saddle again, and let it so remain all Night, and this presently helpeth any Swelling in the Withers, or any other part of the Back, as also any Swellings by Spur-Galls. But if the Skin be broken or ulcerated, then take sweet Butter, Bay salt and the powder of Frank∣incense, of each as much as will suffice, boyl all these together, and with a Clout fastned upon a stick, dip it into it scalding hot, and scald it two or three times but if it be full of corruption, then make in∣cision on both sides beneath, that the Matterative stuff may the more easily void away downwards, and heal it up with your powder of Lyme and Honey, or to anoint it well with the Oyl of Turpentine, and it will either asswage or break the Swelling, and if it be broke squeeze forth the corruption, and drop some of the said Oyl into it Morning and
Evening, and it will both cleanse and heal it; but if the Skin be only Galled off, take Cream and Soot well mixt together, and lay upon the Sore, and it will heal it presently, if the Wound be not very deep. Things good in General for Swelled Cods. If it come of Rankness of Seed, or of Blood, then let him have a Mare, and let him Cover her two or three days together, and half an Hour after Ride him into the Water above the Cods or Stones against the stream, and he will do well. But if it come of other Causes, take the Lees of Claret-Wine, or for want of that, the Dregs of strong Beer and Cum∣min-seed made into fine powder, and a little Wheat and Bean-Flower, boyl them altogether to an Ointment, and anoint his Cods warm there∣with, then draw forth his Yard, and wash that and his Sheath also with white-Wine Vineger, and three or four Houres after Ride him into the Water above the Cods, and let him stand in the Water some short time, and to Ride him against the stream, do this every day till the Swelling be asswaged, or take the Roots of wilde Cucumbers and white Salt, boyl them in fair Water to an Ointment, and anoint his Cods with it warm, and then apply this Ointment. Take Goats-Grease, or Deers Sewet, the White of an Egg and Sallet Oyl, boyl them gently, and anoint his Cods therewith, but this must be after he hath been ridden into the Water, and dry again. A Charge for Swelled Cods. Or take Bolearmoniack beaten into fine Powder, Vineger and the Whites of Eggs well beaten together, and anoint him therewith daily, till it be abated; and if it Impost humate, where you find it to be soft, open it with a hot Iron, or with your Incision Knife, if it break not of it self; and heal it up with your green Ointment, taught you as aforesaid. ☞ Another for any Bite or Bruise on his Cods, which cause them to Swell very much. They are both very cooling things. To remedy this Accident, Wash and Bathe them very well with warm Whey Morning and Evening for three or four days together, and an∣oint them after it with the Oyl or Ointment of Populeon till you finde the Swelling abated, keeping his Cods warm with a Linnen Bag, made in the nature of a Purse, and drawn easily over them. If you find that the Swelling is abated, you may then apply the Common Charge of Soap and Brandy to it very hot, which will Knit the Strings of his Cods to∣gether again; But if you find that they are so torn that you question his Cure then the best way in my opinion is to Geld him.
☜ A most Excellent Bath, which is not only good for Swelled or bruised Cods, but for all manner of Bruises in any Part of the Body, from Head to Foot. Take two quarts of the strongest Ale you can get; Then set it over the Fire in a large Skillet or Pipkin, and put to it two good Handfuls of the Rind of the black Berry Bush, and let it Simper away till it come to a quart, then strain it forth and keep it for your use. How you are to use it. Bathe the grieved part Night and Morning with it very hot, and heat∣ed very well in by the Fire, then dip a Linnen Cloth in the same, and bind it up hot; When you have done, peel off the Bark towards the Root, (when you gather it) for that is the best. This is a very great Strengthner of any weak Member, by either Bruise, Strain or Pain. Things good in General for Bursting or Ruptures in Horses. ☜ Though I hold it incurable, yet I shall give you those things that worketh much good, though no absolute Cure. These things are great Knitters, and are to be taken inwardly, Valerian, Rupture-wort, Cross-wort, Cranes-bill, the powder of the Roots of Chammack, the Leaves and Nuts of the Cypres, Elm leaves or the Bark thereof, Corn-Flag; any of these things given inwardly, with the outward means used, maketh the Cure the more effectual; The outward means is this, Bring the Horse in∣to a place where there is a Beam overthwart, and strow it thick with straw, then put on four strong Pasterns, with four Rings on his Feet, and fasten one end of a long Rope to one of those Rings, with the loose End of the Rope, and so draw all his fore-Feet together, and he will fall; then cast the Rope over the Beam, and hoist him up so, that he may lie flat on his Back with his Legs upwards without strugling, then Bathe his Stones well with warm Water and Butter molten together, and the Stones being somewhat warm and well mollified, raise them up from the Body with both your Hands, being closed by the Fingers close to∣gether, and holding the Stones in your Hands in such manner, work down the Gut into the Body of the Horse, by stroaking it downwards continually with your two Thumbs, until you perceive that that side of the Stone to be so small as the other, and so having returned the Gut to the right place, take a List of two Fingers broad, thoroughly anointed with fresh Butter, and Tie his Stones both together with the same, so nigh the Body as may be, yet not over-hard, but so as you may put your Finger between, that done, take the Horse quietly down, and lead him gently into the Stable, and keep him warm, and let him not be stirred
for the space of three Weeks, but forget not the next day after you have placed his Gut in his true place to unloosen the List, and to take it away, and as well at that time as every day once or twice after, to cast a dish or two of cold Water up upon his Cods, and that will make him to shrink up his Stones, and thereby to restrain the Gut from falling down, and at the three Weeks end, to make the Cure so much the surer, take away the Stone on that side he is bursten, so he shall hardly be bursten on that side again, and during the Cure let him not eat much nor drink much, and let his Drink be always warm. ☞ A particular Receipt for the Rupture. Take common Pitch, Sanguis draconis, Powder of Bolearmoniack, Mastick and Frankincense, of each an Ounce, and make a Plaister there∣of, and lay it upon his Loyns, and upon the Rupture, and let it remain there till it fall off of it self, and it will Cure him; Conditionally you give him some strengthning things inwardly, which you may find variety of, if you look for General Things good for Ruptures. Particular Receipts for the Botch in the Groin of a Horse, which is a hard Swelling there, which will cause his Legs to swell, especially from the Cambrels or Hoofs upwards. The Cure is to Ripen it with this Plaister, Take of Wheat-Floure, of Turpentine and of Honey, of each a like quantity, stirring it together to make a stiff Plaister, and with a Cloth lay it on the Sore, renewing it once every day till it break or wax soft, and then Lance it, so as the mat∣ter may run downwards, then Taint it with Turpentine and Hogs∣grease molten together, renewing it every day once, until it be perfectly whole. Another for the Botch in the Groin, or any Imposhumation. As soon as you can perceive the Swelling to appear, lay upon it a Plai∣ster of Shoomakers Wax spread upon Allum-Leather, and let it lie until the sore grow soft, then open it with a Lancet, or let it break of it self, when the Filth is come out, wash the Sore very well with strong Allum water, then Taint it with the Ointment called Aegyptiacum till it be whole. A Receipt to Cure the Mellet, which is a dry Scab, that groweth upon the Heel of the fore-Feet. Take of ordinary Honey half a Pint, black Soap a quarter of a pound, mix them together, then put thereto four or five spoonfuls of Vineger
and as much Allum finely beaten and imburned as a Hens Egg, and of Rye Flower two spoonfuls, mix them very well together, and having clipped away the Hair, apply it to it Plaister-wise, so far as the Sorrance goeth, and let it so remain for five days, then take it away, and wash all the Leg, Foot and Sorrance, with powdred Beef-broth, and after Rope up his Legs with Thumb bands of soft Hay wet, in the same Liquor, and he will be sound; you are to remember that whensoever you are to dress the Sorrance, you take off the dry Scab, or whatever crusty thing shall be upon the place, and to wash it very clean. A Receipt for the Hough-bonney. To Ripen it either with rotten Litter or Hay boiled in old Urine, or else with a Plaister of Wine Lees, and Wheat-Flour boiled together, to ripen the Swelling, and bring it to Putrefaction, or else to drive the Swelling away; but if it come to a Head to Lance it in the lowest part of the softness, with a thin hot Iron to let out the matter; then to Taint it with Turpentine, Deers Sewet and Wax, of each alike molten together, laying a Plaister of the same Salve over it, to hold in the Taint until it be perfectly well. Things good in General for the Cure of the Fig in a Horses Foot. Cut away the Hoof so as there may be a convenient space betwixt the Sole and the Hoof, to the end the Fig may the more easily be Cured; then put to the Sorrance a piece of a Spunge, which you are to bind close up∣on it, which will eat it off to the very Root, and heal it up with your green Ointment, in my First Part, Or to cut it away close with your Incision▪Knife, or else to burn it off with a hot Iron, (which is the better way) then for two days after lay tried Hogs-grease to it, to take away the Fire, take then the Tops of the most angriest Nettles you can find, pound them very small, and so lay them upon a Linnen Cloth, just the bigness of the Fig; then take the powder of Verdegrease, and strew it upon the chopped Nettles, (which must be done before you lay it to the Sorrance,) and so bind it upon the Sorrance, renewing it every day once till the Hoof have recovered the Sore. To Cure Blisters. Fret them in the Sun till they bleed, then take the Roots of Ivy, and stamping them in a Mortar, mix them with as much Tar, Brimstone and Allum, till they come to a Salve, and dress it therewith, and it will heal it.
Things good in General for Knots in the Joynts, Hardness, Cramp or any Inflammations. The powder of Diapente beaten with Linseed Oyl, or Sallet Oyl, to an Ointment, and applied once a day to the Grief, is good for the Cramp or Inflammation, or Wine, Oyl and Tar mingled together as it is boiled, is good, or Mustard, Hogs grease and Bay-salt mixed together with Vineger, and applied, is good, or take a Plaister of Figs, and the roots of Fern and Rochet mingled with Hogs-grease and Wine-Vineger, or take dry Pitch, Pitch of Greece, of each one part, of Galbanum and Lime, of each four parts, of Bitumen two parts, of Wax three parts, melt them altogether, and anoint the place therewith very hot, and it will take away the Grief. ☞ A particular Receipt to Cure a Knot that is moving in the Place where it grows If you find in any part of your Horses Body a Knot or Kernel that feels soft, and slips up and down in the Skin when you handle it; Take your Incision-Knife, and slit the Skin right over against it, so wide, that you may pinch the Knot out to cut it off; When you have so done, to stanch the Bleeding of it, Sear the inside of it with a hot Iron, and stop the Wound, either with the powder of Bolearmoniack or Hares Wooll. The next day unstop it, and wash the Wound clean with a Linnen Rag Tied upon a stick, dipped in Verjuice or white-Wine Vineger; Then dry up the moisture that you shall find therein with a Linnen Rag also, and heal it up with your green Ointment in the First Part, or what other healing Salve you think best fit for the purpose. Observation. In all Wounds that you have in Cure, be sure you cleanse and wash them very well before you apply any healing Medicine to them. ☞ Another to take away the Knots under the Chaul, occasioned by Heats and Colds. Brandy and Soap dissolved together over the Fire, and Chafed in very well hot, with your Han I heated in afterwards, by holding a hot Fire∣shovel before it, will either sink or break them. Or Butter or Hogs-grease used after the same manner is very good. Observations upon Dressing of them. Before you anoint them Sear away the Hair with a Candle, and in a
Fortnights time or little more they will remove, conditionally you give him some inward Medicine for a Cold. How to Cure Wounds made with the Shot of Gun-powder. Search first if the Bullet be in the Wound, if it be, take it out with an Instrument made for that purpose, but if you cannot get it out, you must have patience, for Nature it self will wear it out of its own accord, with∣out any Impediment, for Lead is of that Nature that it will not Canker; then to kill the Fire, drop in some Varnish into it with a Feather to the bot∣tom, and stop up the Mouth of the Wound with some soft Flax dipt like∣wise in the same; then charge all the swollen place with this Charge. Take of Bolearmoniack a quartern, of Linseed beaten into powder half a pound, of Bean-flower as much, and three or four Eggs, shells and all, and of Turpentine a quartern, and of Vineger a quart, mingle them well together upon the Fire, and being somewhat warm, charge all the sore place with part thereof, and clap a Cloth upon it to keep the Wound warm, continuing so doing every day for four or five days together, then at the fifth days end leave anointing it, and taint it to the bottom with a Taint dipt in Hogs-grease and Turpentine melted together, re∣newing once or twice every day till the Fire is killed, which you shall perceive by the Mattering of the Wound, and by falling of the Swel∣ling, for so long as the Fire hath the upper Hand, no thick Matter will Issue forth, but only a thin yellowish water, neither will the Swelling asswage, and then of Turpentine washed in nine several Waters half a pound, and put thereto three Yolks of Eggs, and a little Saffron, and Taint it with this Ointment, renewing it every day once till the Wound be whole; but if the Shot be got quite through the Wound, then take a few Weavers Linnen Thrums made very knotty, and dipping them first in Varnish, draw them through the Wound, running them up and down in the Wound at least twice or thrice a day, and charging the Wound on either side upon the swollen places with the Charge afore∣said, until you perceive that the Fire is killed, then clap on a comfort∣able Plaister upon one of the Holes, and Taint the other with a saint in the Salve, made of washt Turpentine, Eggs and Saffron, as is before∣said. Some Farriers use to kill the Fire with the Oyl of Cream, and to heal up the Wound with Turpentine, Wax and Hogs grease melted to∣gether, or to kill it with Snow-water, and charge the swelled place with Cream and Barm beaten together, and to heal up the Wound by dipping a Taint in the Yolk of an Egg, Honey, Saffron, well beaten together. Of Bones being broken and out of Joynt to Cure. If the Bone do fall in its true Plceg in, it will give on a sudden a great  If your Horse hath any broken Bone, then take a double strong Can vass, which ought to be as broad as the Horses Fore-shoulders to his
Flanks, then you shall have another double Canvas, which shall come from between his fore-Booths up to the top of the Wither, whereas meet∣ing with the rest of the Canvass, and having very strong Loops and Ropes fastned to them, sling him up upon some Beam, no higher then that his Feet may touch the Ground, and if it be a fore-Leg that is broken, raise him up then higher before then behind, and if a hinder, then a little higher behind then before, so that he may rest most upon the Members most sound, when he is thus slung, put the Bone into the right place, and wrap it close up with unwashed Wooll, newly pulled from the Sheeps Back, bound fast to the Leg with a smooth Linnen Rowler, soaked be∣fore in Oyl and Vineger mingled together, and look that your Rowler lie as smooth and as plain as may be; and upon that again lay more Wooll dipt in Oyl and Vineger, and then Splint it with three broad, smooth and strong Splints, binding them fast at both ends with a Thong, and be sure to keep out his Leg streight for the space of fourty days, and Loosen not the Bones above thrice in twenty days, unless it shrink, and so re∣quire to be new drest and bound again, and fail not to pour on every See my First Part for Conglutina∣ting things, good in Ge∣neral, or Strength∣ners of Parts out of Joynt. p, 16.day through the Splints Sallet Oyl and Vineger mingled together, and if at the fourty days end you find that the broken Places be soddered to∣gether with some hard Knob or Gristle, then loose the bands, and ease the Canvass, so as the Horse may tread more firmly upon his fore-Foot, which if he doth, loose him altogether, and let him go up and down fair and gently, using from henceforth to anoint the place with soft Crease, or to take of Liquid Pitch one pound, of Wax two Ounces, of the purest and finest part of Frankincense one Ounce, of Amoniacum four Ounces, of dry Rozin and of Galbanum, of each one Ounce, of Vineger two pints; Boyl first the Vineger and Pitch together, then put in the Amo∣niacum dissolved first in Vineger, and after that the aforesaid Drugs, and being united in one, strain it, and make into a Plaister, and use it accord∣ing to your occasion, or to take a quart of old Sallet Oyl, and put to it of Hogs-grease and of Spicma, Nitre, of each one pound, boiled together till they begin to bubble above; then take it from the Fire, and when you use it, let it be chafed in very hot, and then the former Plaister solded about it, which is very comfortable for a broken Bone. A Bath very good for broken Bones. ☞ To a Gallon of standing Lye put to it these things here under-written, viz. Knot Grass two Handfuls. Plantine two Handfuls. Comfrey a Handful. Wormwood a Handful.
Boyl these very well in the Lye, and while it is warm Bathe the afflict∣ed Member therewith, and give him also at the same time inwardly the Buds of Elder (gathered in March) boiled in running Water for several Mornings together, in half a Hornful of Sallet Oyl and Vineger, and it will much avail to the Knitting of the Bones. A Receipt to Cure a Stifled Horse. After you have Tied down his Head to the Manger, then take a Cord and fasten it to the Pastern of the stisled Leg, and draw his Leg forwards, and so the Bone will come right, by helping it with your hand, which be∣ing in, your care then must be to keep it in with your hand, and then Tie the other end of the Cord to the Rack, so as he may not put back his Leg, to dislocate the Bone for an hour or two after, till it be setled and dres∣sed; wherefore let his Keeper stand by him all the while, lest he should lie down, or be unruly. Take Pitch, which you must have molten in a Pot in a readiness, and with a Glout upon a stick, anoint his Stifling three or four inches broad at the least, and ten Inches long, and presently be∣fore the Pitch can cool, have a strong Piece of new Canvass cut fit for that purpose, which being made very warm by a Fire, clap it upon the place so neatly that the Bone cannot go forth again. This Plaister must not lie towards the Flank and Foot long-ways, but cross-ways upon the Joynt, as it were about the Thigh, otherwise it cannot hold in the Bone. Having thus done, anoint the Plaister on the out-side all over with the said Molten Pitch, and whilst it is warm, clap Flox of the Horses Colour all over the out-side of the Canvass, and let the Plaister remain on till it fall away of it self, and after that you may apply such good Unguents as you may think most expedient for the Malady; but if the Bone be not out, then put in a French Rowel, a little beneath the stifling place, and let it remain in fifteen days, turning it once every day, and at fifteen days end take it forth, and heal up the Orifice with your green Ointment in my first Part. ☜ Another which is very good. The only way for the Cure of this Imperfection, is the common way that Farriers generally use, viz. To swim him in some deep River or Pond, till he sweat about the Ears, which will put the Bone into its right place again; When you think that he hath swum enough, take him out of the Water, and throw an old Blanket over him to prevent catching of Cold, and lead him Home gently; When you have him in the Stable, put a Wedge of Wood about the bredth of a Six-pence between his Toe and his Shoo on the contrary Foot behind, and when you find him thoroughly dry, anoint him upon the grieved part with Piece-grease, or Oyl of
Turpentine and strong Beer, of equal parts alike, well shaked and mixt together in a Glass Vial; Chafe it in very well with your Hand, one hold∣ing at the same time before it a hot Barr of Iron, or Fire-shovel, to make it sink in the better; Or for want of them, you may apply unto it Brandy and Common Soap and strong Beer mixt together, and used as you did the Turpentine. These are very sharp Medicines, (especially the Tur∣pentine) which will cause the place to swell and heave up, but fear them them not, for they will work a speedy Cure. To Cure the String-Halt. Take up the Vein in the Thigh, and then anoint all the Leg and the Thigh from the Body down to the very Foot, a long time together, hold∣ing a red hot Fire-shovel to the place, and let him be anointed with this Patch or Piece-grease is the Tallow that is gotten from Shoo∣makers shredsOintment. Take of the Oyl Petroilum, of the Oyl of Wormes, of the Oyl of Ner∣val, of Patch or Pece-grease, of the Oyl of Spike, of each one Ounce, of London-Treacle two Ounces, and of Hogs-grease one pound, melt all these upon the Fire; then take it off, and keep it stirring till it be throughly cold, and with this anoint the Visited Member every day once, and then Wisp him with a soft Thumb-band of Hay from the Pastern to the top of the Hoof, and thus do for ten days together, rubbing and chafing in the Ointment very well a long time together, holding a hot Fire-shovel near it, the better to cause it to sink into the Sinews, Nerves and Joynts. But after you have done anointing him, keep him warm and well Littered, and let the Thumb-bands be daily made lesser and lesser, and shorter and short∣er, till you perceive him to Handle both Legs alike, and your Horse to be Recovered; but you must not Ride him that he may sweat much in a Month after; and so soon as warm Weather cometh, turn him to Grass in some dry Pasture, where is Water, and take him up again about Bartho∣lomew-Tide, or before the Cold cometh; and whilest he coth remain in the Stable keep him warm, and so he will be free of his String-halt, and be a sound Horse again; To Anoint him also with Acopum is very good; With this Receipt De Grey says, he hath Cured sundry Horses of this Ma∣lady. How to make your Unguentum-Theriacum, which is good for any Ach in the Joynts, Griefs in the Hip, Stifling Place, Legs, Shoulders, Pastern, or any other part of the Legs, a Back Sinew-sprain only excepted. Take Norvel, of Oyl of Pamphylion, and of black Sope, of each two Ounces, and of Tried Hogs-grease half a pound, melt them all upon a gentle Fire, and being molten put into it of ordinary Treacle two penny worth, then take it from the Fire, and keep it stirring till it be cold, then
will it be of a dun colour; Keep it in a Gally-pot for your use, and when you use it, anoint the place grieved with the same, rubbing and chafing it in very well, and heating it well in with a hot Fire-shovel. Hot Simples in General. ☜ Agarick, Aloes, Allum, Anniseeds, Aristolochia, Assafetida, Asonteo, Asarabacca, Arsmart, Archangel, Angelica, Alexanders, Alehoof, Balm, Garden-Bazil, Bayberries, wilde running Bitony smelling like Marjo∣rem, Burrage is hot and cold, so is Brank-ursin, Briony, Broom, Butter∣bur, Burdock, Brimstone, Celandine, Chervil, Garden clary, Clowns wound-wort, Calamus, Coloquintida, Garden cummin, Chamock, Cin∣namon, Cloves, China, Darnel, Elecampane, Fennel, Gentian, Garlick, Germander, stinking Gladwin, Golden Rod, Gromel, English Galingale, Ginger, Glass-wort is so hot that it hath a costive burning quality, Galls, Grains of Paradice, Galbanum, Hemp-seed, Garden Hysop, Honey, St. Johns-wort, Juniper-berries, Ivy, Jack by the Hedge, Iris, Knee-holm, Lavender, Lavender-cotton, Ladies smocks, Garden Lilly, Lovage, Leeks, Mallows and Marsh-Mallows, wilde Marjorem, sweet Marjorem, Marigolds, Master-wort, Melilote, French and Dogs Mercury, Spear-mint, Misle-toe, Mother-wort, Mouse-ear, Mug-wort, Mustard-seed, Neesing-roots, Nutmeg, One blade, Pepper, Rag-wort, Rest-harrow the wilde Rochet, Rosemary, Garden Rue, Saffron, Sage, Sanicle, Sarasens Confound, Savin, common Saxafrage, Burnet Saxafrage, Scabius, English Scurvey-Grass, Self-heal, Smallage, Sope-wort, Southern∣wood, Sea star-wort, Staves-acre, Garden Tansie, Time, Tutsan, Tur∣merick, Valerian, Veruain, Wold, Weld or Diars-weed, Fennegreek, Scutchanele, London Treacle. Cooling Simples in General. ☜ Clove Gilly-flowers, Groundsel is an universal Medicine coming of Heat whatsoever, Hawk-weed, Housleek, Knot-grass, Kidney-wort, Let∣tuce, Water-Lilly, Licoris, common Liver-wort, Medlars, Money-wort, Tree-Moss, Ground-Moss, the unripe fruit of Mul-berries, Mace, com∣mon Night-shade may be used either inwardly or outwardly, and is no way dangerous as the others are, Navel-wort, Orpin used outwardly, Water-Plantine, Land-Plantine, Pomegranate, Queen of the Medows, Shepherds Purse, common Sorrel, Wood-Sorrel, Sow-thistles, Straw∣berry-leaves, Succory, Stone-crop, Star-wort, Spinach, wilde Tansie, all the parts of the black Thorn or Sloe-bush, Medow trefoyl, Honey∣suckles, both the Vervains, Vine-leaves, Violets, Vipers-bugloss, Vi∣neger, the Leaves, Flowers, Seed, and Bark of the Willow-Tree, Yar∣row, Antimonium, Alkanet, Garden Arach, Barberry-bush, Barley, Bil∣berries, Blew-bottle, Bucks horn, Plantine, Bole-armoniack, Comfrey,
Cranes-bill, Dandelion, all the kinds of Docks are generally cold, Ducks Meat applied outwardly is a great Cooler of hot Inflammations, Fu∣mitory. Things good in General for a Prick or Stub in the Sole of a Horses Foot. To pull off his Shoo, and pare his Foot so deep that you may discover The Nail or Sub must be first drawn out and the Corruption let forth and made very clean, before you dress it.the Hole, making the Mouth of it about the bredth of a Two-pence, then wash it well with Chamberly and Salt, or green Copperas and Allum boiled together in Water, then Tack on his Shoo again, and stop the Hole with Turpentine, Hogs-grease and Verdegrease melted together, and lay Flax or Towe upon it, and put over that Cows dung, and cover it with Leather, and splint it with two cross splints, and renew it once in two or three days, and keep him out of wet during the Cure. Or Taint it with Tallow and Turpentine melted together, and anoint his Coffin all over with Bolearmoniack and Vineger mingled together, and take red Nettles stamped with Vineger, and black or common Sope, and stop the Wound therewith, or to wash the Wound with Vineger and Salt; or if it be in the Summer, take the tender Buds or Leaves of Elder stamped; if in the Winter, the inner Rind of it, and melt some hot Tallow with it into the Wound. Or take Turpentine, brown Sugar-candy powdred, and white Ginger powdred, and melt them all in an Iron Spoon, and pour it hot into the Wound, and put Hurds or Flax upon it, or Roch-Allum burned and made into powder, and fill the Hole therewith, and lay Hurds thereupon, or Oyl of Turpentine poured into it is excellent good, for it will not only search it to the bottom, but take out the Venom and heal it up. Or after you have clensed it with Salt and Vineger, take Salt made into fine Powder, and four times so much Turpentine, and boyl them well together, and pour it into the Wound scalding hot, and put in∣to it the powder of Brimstone dissolved in white-Wine, and lay Hurds upon it. Or take Oyl de bay four Ounces, of Orpin, of Cantharides and Euforbium, of each two Ounces made all into fine powder, and set them on the Fire, keeping them stirring till they become an Ointment, and with it dress him as before is taught. But if the Foot be bruised, fear a Live Spider upon it with a hot Iron. A Particular Receipt for a Stub in the Foot, or for any Over-reach of the Toe of the Hinder-foot upon the Heel of the sore-Foot, or for any Accidental Cut with a Stone. After you have well searched and made clean the Wound with Water and Salt, or Verjuice, Beer and Butter; Take these things here under∣written, well beaten and bruised together till they come to a Salve, and spread them upon a Linnen Rag, or brown Paper, with a Rag bound and
Tied fast over it to prevent the coming of it off; Let it lie on twenty four houres before you take it off; Continue so dressing and washing it every twenty four houres till you find amendment; but if you find it amend very fast, you need not dress it in two or three days. The things you are to apply to it are these. viz. Common Soap about the bigness of a good big Wash-Ball, a large Onion peeled and a spoonful of long Pepper beaten to Powder, and mashed and bruised together with the rest. Of Clifts and Cracks in the Heels cross and overthwart, which are a kind of Scratches, and are Cured with the same Medicines as they are. Falling Evil Cured, which is no other then the Falling Sickness in Man. Take a pretty quantity of Blood from the Neck, and four or five days after let him Blood in the Temple Veins, and on his Eye-Veins, then an∣oint his Body all over with a comfortable Friction, then Bath his Head and Eares with Oyl de bay, Liquid Pitch and Tar mixt together, and of the same, put some of it into his Eares, then make him a Cap or Biggin of Canvass, Quilted with Wooll, to keep his Head warm, then give him a Purgation or Scouring; but if the disease continue still, then pierce the Skin of his Forehead with a hot Iron in divers places, and after anoint it with sweet Butter, for thereby you shall draw out the gross Humours which do oppress the Brain, and keep him warm in the Stable, during the time of his Physicking. General Things to be Given inwardly for it. ☜ The Seed of the Bolbonack, or the Satten Flower, the Leaves and Flow∣ers of Flea-wort, stinking Ground-pine taken with Oxymel or Honeyed Water is good, given Evening and Morning for some time together, Bi∣tony, the Flower of Violets, the Roots of Peony, Master-wort of Gerrard, Anniseeds, the Leaves and Bark of the Mastick Tree, the Gum of it hath the same Vertue given in Ale, the distilled Water of red Cherries. A Particular Receipt. A spoonful of the powder of dried Missle-toe that grows upon the Apple tree, (which is shaped much like Ivy-leaves) given him in half a Pint of Canary, and kept warm, is very good. A Hip-shot Horse. There is so uncertain a Cure to be made of it, that I durst say nothing of the Cure. The Cure for the Hurle-Bone out of Joynt. Take Oyl of Turpentine and strong Beer, of equal parts alike, and
shake them very well in a Glass-Vial, and anoint the grieved part there∣with, as also the Brawn and inside of his Thigh down to his Gambrels, and heat it in very well by holding a hot Fire-shovel before it, while you are doing it; This will make him sound in a few days, conditionally you continue using of it, working the Bone gently in with your Hand, to bring it to its right place again. This is a very sharp and biting Medi∣cine, which will make his Skin puff and heave up, but you need not fear it, for there is no danger in it; When you have anointed him Tie him up to the Rack-staves for about half an hour, to prevent his biting of it with his Teeth, which may prejudice him; while he stands in the Stable, put a Wedge of Wood about the bredth▪ of a Six pence between his Toe and his Shooe; but when you Ride him you are to take it out; but when you come home to put it in again. Or after you have anointed him once with Oyl of Turpentine and Beer, and put in his Bone into its right place again, you may clap a Charge upon it made of Oxycrocium and Pa∣racelsus, (which you may buy at the Apothecaries) which will strengthen it so very much, that it will keep it from slipping out of its place again. But the most best, speedy and certain Cure is, (though it doth a little dis∣figure your Horse) is to Pin him, which every Smith either does, or ought to know. Quick-Scab to Cure. To let him blood, then clip away the Hair where the Sorrance is, and take off the scurf and scabs with an old Curry-Comb, or other such like thing, then with fair cold water wash it well, and lay a Linnen Cloth well wet in it to the place, and do nothing to it in ten days after; and if you find it doth not heal, dress it as before; and so a third time and a fourth till it be throughly healed; Or to take Mallowes and Marsh-Mallowes, of each alike, and boil them in fair water as much as will suffice, till they be soft; and with the Herb and Decoction bathe and wash the Sorrance two or three days together warm: Then take of common Honey a Pint, Copperas, Allum, of Glass and Verdegrease, all made into fine powder, of each four Ounces, Turpentine and Quick-silver mortify'd, of each two Ounces; boyl all these together with the Honey unto an Unguent, and with it dress him every day till it be whole. Rot in a Horse Cured. Let him first bleed under the Tail, then take of Mares Milk two quarts, or the Milk of a red Cow then take a Lump of Arement, then take a young Horse about the Age of fonr years, and of colour black if it may be, if not of some other colour, run and chafe him about till he sweat much; then with a Spoon or some other Instrument Rake off the Sweat from off his Head, Neck, Breast, Back, Sides, Ribs, Buttocks, Legs, and
in each part or member where you can get off any, and so put your Are∣ment and your Sweat into the Milk, mixing them well together, and by equal Portions give it him three Mornings together, till he hath taken it all; and let him drink no drink after it in six or seven houres; and im∣mediately after his Drink, lead him forth into some Pasture where other Horses be, to sneeze, stale or dung, to empty himself, which is very whole∣som for him so to do, before he either eats or drink, then set him up warm and well Littered; and if the Season do serve, give him of the green Blades of Rye; if not, give him Barley steeped in Milk three days, but renewed every day once; Then after every of these Drinks, if you feel him cold in the Pastern Joynts, or that he trippeth or stumbleth as you lead him in your hand, do no more to him, for he is past Cure; Otherwise, for nine days together after, Morning and Evening, give him white Water only, unless now and then a sweet Mash; and somtimes give him Milk with his white Water; if he be not above nine years old, this will prolong his life, whereby he may do the more service. Mr. Grey declares, that this Receipt a Knight taught him, who recovered sundry Horses with it. Swaying in the Back. Take of the Fat of the fruit of the Pine-tree two Ounces, of Olibanum three Ounces, of Rozin four Ounces, of Pitch four Ounces, of Bole-Ar∣moniack an Ounce, and of Sanguis Draconis half an Ounce, incorporate all these well together, and lay it Plaister-wise all over the Reins of his Back, and let it remain till it fall off of it self ☜ Another most Excellent Receipt for Swaying a Weakness in the Back. These Infirmities are seldom or never perfectly Cured. But the best Help for them that I know of is, to give him inwardly some strengthning things, as common Turpentine made up into Balls, with the powder of Bolearmoniack, and powder of the dried leaves of Clary, and to apply outwardly at the same time all over the Reins of his Back these strength∣ning Charges, viz▪ Oxycrocium and Paracelsus melted together. Or Cole∣worts boiled in Sallet Oyl, made thick like a Poultess, with the powder of Bolearmoniack and Bean-floure. If you desire to see more Variety of Charges, (though these are very good) look into the First Part, and there you may find plenty, where you may pick and chuse what you best fancy. Foundering in the Body to Cure. To Cure this Distemper, is first to Rake his Fundament, and to give him a Glister, which you have variety of in my First Part; Then take Sack or Ale a quart, Cinnamon half an Ounce, Licoris and Anniseeds, of each two spoonfuls beaten into fine powder, with five or six spoonfuls of Honey, put them all into the Ale together, and warm them till the Honey
is molten, and give it him luke-warm to drink, and Ride him gently af∣ter it for the space of an hour, and let him fast two houres more, and keep him warm Clothed and Littered, and let his Hay be sprinkled with Wa∣ter, and his Oats very clean Sifted from dust, and give it him by little and little, and let his drink be warm Mashes of Malt and Water, and when he hath recovered strength let him blood in the Neck-Vein, and once a day perfume his Head with Frankincense. There is no Drink nor Diet that is comfortable, but is good for this Disease. ☞ The Way of Gathering, Drying and Preserving of Simples and their Juices, viz. Roots, Barks, Leaves, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, &c. CHAP. I. Of Roots. 1. Chuse those that are sound, and not rotten nor worm-eaten, and let them be such as have their proper taste, smell and colour. 2. Those that are dry, hard and sound, are the best and fittest for your use. 3. If they prove soft, dry them in the Sun, or else string them and hang them up by the Fire, but the dry and hard ones you may lay any where. 4. The small Roots will keep a year or two very well, but the larger sort of them will keep four or five, but they are best in their prime the first year. 5. The best time to gather them is in the Summer, before they Run out to seed, for then they grow hard and sticky, and lose their Vertues. 6. Those Roots that you may have all the year, as Plantine, Fennel or Parsley, &c. trouble not your self to dry them. CHAP. II. Of Barks. 1. Barks of such Trees as are frequently with you, as the Oak, Elm or Ash, &c. Gather them but when you have present use for them; As for the Out-landish you may have ready dried at the Druggist. 2. The Barks of Roots, as Fennel, Parsley, &c. is only that which re∣mains when the Pith is out, which is called a Bark, though very impro∣perly. CHAP. III. Of Leaves, of Herbs or Trees. 1. Of Leaves, gather such as are fresh and green, and full of Juice,
and in the picking of them be careful to throw away the dead and de∣cayed Leaves, which are not fit for any Physical use. 2. That Place they most delight to grow in are best for use, as Bitony delights to grow in the Shadow, and therefore 'tis better then that that grows in the Sun, because it is its proper place. 3. Those Herbs that Run up to Seed, and in Flowers their leaves are not so good then as before they were spindled (some few only excepted) and therefore I advise you, If through Ignorance you know them not, or through Negligence forget them, rather chuse to take the Tops then the Leaves. 4. The Sun is better to dry them in, then the Shadow. 5. The best Way to keep them after they be dried, is near the Fire, in a Bag made of brown or white Paper. 6. 'Tis not certainly known how long Herbs will keep, but 'tis con∣cluded by most they will keep a year very well. 7. You may know when they are decayed by the loss of smell, colour or both. 8. Those that grows upon dry Grounds, does usually keep longer then those that grow upon moist, and those that are very full of Juice, will not continue their Virtue so long as those that are drier, because more subject to Putrifaction and Corruption. 9. Those that you do thoroughly dry will keep better then those that are ill dried. CHAP. IV. Of Flowers. 1. The Flower, which is the Glory and Beauty of the Plant, is of ex∣cellent use in Physick, if it be gathered when it is in its prime. 2. When you intend to gather them let them be thoroughly dry, and the Sun shining; for if you gather them when they be wet they will not keep. 3. When you have gathered them dry, them thoroughly upon a Table, or in the Window where the Sun comes, before you put them up in Pa∣pers, to hang near the Pire. 4. If you find their Smell and Colour continue, you may be assured their Vertues are not lost. CHAP. V. Of Seeds. 1. The Seed contains the vital faculty and spirit of the whole Plant, and therefore hath in it equal Vertues with it. 2. Gather them not till they be full ripe, and from the places where they delight most to grow in, and let them be thoroughly dried in the Sun before you lay them up.
3. These having the spirit of the whole Plant in them, are not so sub∣ject to corrupt as the others are, and therefore you need not keep them so near the Fire as you do the Herbs. 4. They will continue good and sound four or five years; but they are best in their prime the first and second. CHAP. VI. Of Juices. 1. The Juices that you are to press out of Herbs, Plants, Tops and Flowers must be done when they are young and tender. 2. If you intend to preserve them some time, you must gather them when they be thoroughly dry. 3. When you use them they must be bruised in a Stone-Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and put afterwards into a Canvass bag, and the Juice pressed out in a Press, and when you have so done set it over the Fire in an Earthen Pipkin or Skillet, and clarifie it by taking off the scum that shall arise; You may know when it is well clarified, for then the scum will not appear on the top. 4. This being Clarified according to your mind, you may preserve it for your use, (in the Winter when you can get no Herbs) these two ways. First, by putting it into a Glass when it is cold, and pouring so much Sallet Oyl over it as will cover it, let the Oyl lie about the thickness of two Fin∣gers above the Juice; This Oyl being of a light Body will always get up∣permost, and keep out the Air from entring, and so preserve it the better from putrefaction. When you have occasion to use it, pour it out into a Porringer or any other convenient Vessel, so much as you think you shall use, and take off the Oyl that comes out with it, with a little Cotton or with a Spoon, and put the remainder back again in the Glass, (if you leave any) and it will quickly sink under the Oyl again, &c. The second way of preserving it is after you have Clarified it, to boyl it over again, (being first cold) to the thickness of Honey, and this way it is used for the Dis∣eases of the Mouth. ☞ The Way of Making and Keeping all Neces∣sary Compounds, Viz. Electuaries, Pills, Wa∣ters, Ointments, Plaisters, Charges, Poul∣tisses, Oyls, Syrups by Infusion and by De∣coction, or by Juice. CHAP. I. Of Electuaries. 1. If you desire to preserve your Horses Health abroad as well as at
Home, then make up some Electuary with some Herbs, Rooes and Flow∣ers, suitable to the Diseases you think he may be most Afflicted with, whe∣ther they be Coughs, Colds, or any other Illness, and put it into a Gally∣pot. 2. If you intend any Physick for present use, let the Herbs, Roots, Seeds and Flowers be always in a readiness, ready dried in your House, that so you may not want them when you come to use them. 3. They will keep best whole, for being beaten and made into pow∣der, they will be soon penetrated by the Air, which will cause them to lose much of their Strength and Virtue. 4. If you find them not dry enough to beat, make them fit for the Pestle by drying them by the Fire. 5. When you use them, beat them as small as you can, and then Sift them through an indifferent fine Sieve. 6. To one Ounce of this Powder you may add three Ounces of clarified Honey, and make up what quantity of Electuary you please, according to the occasion and use you have for it. 7. Your Honey must be clarified by the Fire, by scumming off the scum from it that shall arise. 8. Mix the Powders and this Honey very well together in a Mortar, before you put them up for your use. 9. The usual Dose of Cordial Electuary is from one Ounce to two Ounces, dissolved in a pint or a quart of strong warm Ale or Beer, and given him in the Morning or Evening fasting, and to fast two or three houres after it. CHAP. II. Of Pills or Balls. 1. The Invention of these Pills or Balls at first were for the Purging of the Head, as I have told you in some of my Physical Observations. And as such Infirmities as lie nearest the Passages were best removed by De∣coctions, because they pass to the grieved part soonest, so in the Infirmi∣ties of the Head or other parts of the Body more remote from the Stomach and Bowels, are best removed by Pills or Balls, which are longest in Dige∣stion, and therefore the better able to call the offending Humor to them. 2. The Way of Making them is very familiar, for with the help of a Pestle and Mortar, and a little of your care, you may make any Powder into Balls, you have Directions at large for the making of them after the best Receipt for the Glanders. 3. The Manner of Giving them are two-fold, viz. either upon the end of a Stick, with his Tongue first drawn forth on one side of his Mouth, or in a Horn-full of strong Beer. CHAP. III. Of Distilled Waters. 1. Waters are distilled out of Roots, Herbs, Flowers and Fruits, and
are best when they are distilled in their greatest strength and vigour. 2. Distilled Waters are the weakest of all Artificial Medicines, and made more weak by distilling them in a Pewter Still, being good for very little unless mixed with other Medicines. But the strongest Way of Stilling them is in Sand. 3. When they are distilled put them up into a Glass, and bind on the Top of it a Paper prick't full of Holes, that so the fiery▪ Vapours may Exhale, for else they will cause them to Mother, which will corrupt the Waters. Then cover them close, and keep them for your use. 4. Stopping them with Cork is the common Way though not the best, because that Way will make them grow Musty, and not much better is Paper, if it be suffered to touch the Water; But the best and most ap∣proved Way to keep them is to Top them with a Bladder, being first wet in Water, and bound over the Glass. 5. Those Waters that are distilled in a Pewter Still will not keep a∣bove a year good, when those that are distilled in Sand will keep twice as long. CHAP. IV. Of Oyntments. There be many Ways of making Oyntments, but the most familiar and easie is the common Way, viz. To bruise those Roots, Herbs or Flowers you intend to make it of, and to two Handfuls of the bruised Herbs, add a pound of tried Hogs Seame, Mash and beat them very well together in a Mortar, then put them into an Earthen Pot (covering it with paper to keep it from filth) and set it in the Sun, or in some other warm place for four or five days that it may melt, then take it forth and boyl it gently over the Fire for some little time, then strain it out while it is hot, pressing the Herbs very hard to get what Grease you can out of them, then add to it as many more fresh Herbs bruised and set in the Sun, and Ordered in every thing as before; but if you think them not yet strong enough, you may repeat the Herbs over again the third or fourth time, for the fuller of Juice the Ointment is, the stronger will it be; The last time you boyl it, boyl the Herbs and all with it, and when they be crisp and the Juice consumed, (which you may know by the leaving of its bubling while it is on the Fire) 'tis enough, then strain it out very hard in a Press, and to every pound of Ointment add two Ounces of the best common Turpentine you can get, and as much Bees Wax, which will take away the offensiveness of the Grease, which is very prejudicial to Wounds as well as Oyl. CHAP. V. Of Plaisters. 1. The Emplaisters of the Greeks consisted of very many Ingredients,
viz. Gums, Rosin, Wax, Herbs, Seeds, Roots, Juices, Liquoris, Minerals, Metals, Stones and Excrements of Creatures, &c. which said Metals they reduced to powder, and mixed them with their satty substances, which the rest of the Plaister consisted of while it was hot, keeping it continu∣ally stirring up and down to prevent the sinking of them, that they may the better stiffen and incorporate together; which after it was some∣what cold and hard, they made them up into Rolls, and when they need∣ed it they melted them again by the Fire. 2. The Arabians made up their Medicines with Meal, Oyl and Fat, which needed not so much boyling as the other did. But seeing these are so difficult to make, and when made, so rarely used in Farring, I shall advise you to let them alone, and buy them rather of the Druggist, when you have occasion to use them, then put your self to the needless trouble of making of them. CHAP. VI. Of Charges. 1. The Use of these are for Strains, Sprains, or any other Weakness in the Legs, Shoulders or Back, and are made of several things, viz. Pitch, Rosin, Mastick, Oxycrocium, Paracelsus, add Hernium, Galbanum, Clip away the Hair before you apply it.Frankincense, Turpentine, Meal, Bolearmoniack, &c. The manner of using them is to melt what things you have occasion for in an Earthen Pipkin, and lay it on with a Lath all over the grieved part, then clap up∣on it some Flax, Hurds, Tow, Wooll, Deers Hair or such like thing, then heat the Charge again, and daub it all over the Flax, Tow or Wooll the second time, scalding hot; then daub it over again the third time as you did before, pressing it all the time close with your Hands to the grieved part to make it bind on the faster, and let it remain there till it fall off of it self. 2. If his Charge be on his Legs, be careful that he come not into the Water, for that will soon fetch it off. But to prevent this, chuse rather to keep him in the Stable, and Water him there till he be somewhat a∣mended. CHAP. VII. Of Poultisses. 1. Poultisses are vulgarly called Cataplasmes, which is as much as to say a thick Poultess made of Meal and Herbs, which is a very excellent Me∣dicine to ripen and break Sores, ease Pains, cool hot Inflammations, dis∣solve hardness, ease the Spleen, disperse Swellings, and digest Humors. 2. When you are to make them, you are to take those Roots and Herbs as are most proper and suitable to the Disease and Member afflicted, chop∣ping them first small, then put them into clear running Water, and boyl them to a Gelly, then add to them a little Meal of Lupins, (or for want of that Barley-Meal,) with a little Sallet Oyl, or rough sweet Suet, which I account better; Then spread it upon a Linnen Cloth, and apply it to the grieved part, bound fast with a Tape or Pack thread that it fall not off.
CHAP, VIII. Of Oyls. 1. Sallet Oyl is made from the Expression of Olives, which is so tem∣perate, that it exceeds in no one quality. 2. Of Oyls, some are Simple, and some are Compound. 3. Simple Oyls are such as are made by Expression of Fruits or Seeds, as Linseed Oyl, Rape-seed Oyl, and Oyl of sweet or bitter Almonds. 4. Compound Oyls are made of the Oyl of Olives, and other Simples, as Leaves, Flowers, Roots, &c. 5. The Manner of making up those Herbs or Flowers you intend to make your Oyl of, must be first bruised, and then put into an Earthen pot, and to two or three handfuls of them so bruised put a pint of Sallet Oyl, and then cover up your Pot close with a paper (to keep it from Filth) then set it in the Sun for about a Fortnight; then warm it on the Fire, and press out the Oyl from the Herbs very hard, and add so many more Herbs to the Oyl, and use them in every thing as before; The oftner you repeat your Herbs, the stronger will your Oyl be. When you think it is strong enough for your use, boyl the last Herbs (you put in it) and Oyl together, till the Juice be consumed, (which you may know by the leaving of its bubling) and the Herbs grown Crisper. Strain it while it is hot, and put into some convenient Earthen or Glass-Vessel, and set it up till you have occasion to use it. CHAP. IX. Of Syrups by Infusion, by Decoction and by Juices. 1. A Syrup is a Medicine of a Liquid Form, Composed of Infusion, De∣coction and Juice. 2. Those Syrups that are usually made by Infusion, are made of such Flowers as lose their Colour and Strength in Boyling; As Violets, Ro∣ses, Peach Flowers. They are thus made, viz. To every pound of Flow∣ers well pickt, add three Pints of Spring Water made boyling hot on the Fire; Put them in an Earthen Vessel, and put the Water to them, then cover it close, and let it stand by the Fire to infuse about twelve or thir∣teen houres, then strain it out (in such Syrups as Purge, as Peach-Flow∣ers, Damask Roses, &c. the usual and best way is to repeat to their In∣fusion fresh Flowers divers times, which after you have strained it out in∣to some convenient Vessel, add to every pint of it two pounds of Loaf Sugar, then melt it over a gentle Fire again, taking off the Scum that shall arise, and your Syrup is made. 2. Those Syrups that are made by Decoction are made of Compounds, yet any Simple Herb may be made also into a Syrup; Take the Root, Herb or Flower you intend to make into a Syrup, and bruise it a little in a Mortar; Then take it forth, and put to every Handful of Roots, Herbs or Flowers, a pint of Running Water, and boyl it till half the Water be
consumed; After you have so done, strain it through a Woollen Cloth, letting it Run out at leisure without pressing; And to every pint of this Decoction add one pound of Sugar; then boyl it again over the Fire till it come to a Syrup, which you may know when it is well done, if you take a little of it now and then in a Spoon, and let it cool. Be sure you take off the Filth that doth arise while it is a boyling; And when you think it is enough, strain it hot through a Woollen Cloth, and press it out and keep it for your use. 3. Syrups that are made by Juices, usually are made of such Herbs as are most full of Juice, and are best made this Way, viz. Take the Herbs and beat them in a Mortar with a Wooden Pestle, then press forth the Juice, and Clarifie it as you were taught before in Juices, then set it over the Fire again, and let it boyl till a quarter of it be consumed, and to a Pint of it add a pound of Sugar, and boyl it up to a Syrup, keeping it scumming all the while; When you think it is well boiled, strain it through a Woollen Cloth, as you did the other, and keep it for your use. 4. If you make Syrups of Roots that are hard, as Grass-Roots, Parsley, Fennel, &c. Bruise them very well first, then lay them asteep in that Water you intend to boyl them in, which will cause the Vertue of them to come forth so much the better. 5. Your Syrups that are well made will keep somewhat above a year, but such as are made by Infusion will not keep so long. 6. The best Way to keep them when made, is in Glass or Stone-pots, and to bind a Paper about the Mouth of them. CHAP. X. Of Decoctions. 1. Decoctions are made either of Fruits, Barks, Roots, Leaves, Flowers or Seeds, and is made after the same manner as is shewed you in your Syrups. 2. Those Decoctions that are made of Wine are more durable then those made of Water. 3. If you make a Decoction for to cleanse the Passages of Urine, and to open Obstructions, chuse rather to make it of white-Wine, because it is of a more penetrating and subtil Nature then Water. 4. Decoctions are of the best use for the Cure of such Diseases as lie Lurking in the Passages of the Body, Stomach, Bowels, Kidneys, Passages of Urine and the Bladder, &c. which are more powerful in Operation, in passing quicker to the aforesaid Diseases then any other sort of Medi∣cines. 5. All the difference that are between Decoctions and Syrups made by Decoction, is only this, Syrups are made to keep, Decoctions only for present spending. 9. You may sweeten them with Sugar or Syrup, or such things as you imagine most fit for the Disease you give it.
7. If you make a Decoction of Roots, Herbs, Flowers and Seeds to∣gether, boyl the Roots a good while first▪ because they retain their Vir∣tues longer; so then the next in Order according to the same Rule, are, first, Barks; secondly, Herbs; thirdly, seeds; fourthly, Flowers; And fifthly, Spices; which are put in last, because their Vertues do soonest come sorth. 8. All Decoctions are to be kept in a Glass close sopped, and the cooler you set them the longer they will keep, their usual time of lasting is not above a Week at most. 9. The usual Dose you are to give him at a time is a quart or more, ac∣cording to the Age, Strength and Constitution of your Horse, Season of the year, strength of the Medicine, and quality of the Disease. Roots th t are hot in the First Degree. ☞ Liquoris, Dogs-grass, Marsh-mallows, Burrage, China, Valerian, Ba∣zil, Parsley, Bugloss, Pilewort, Lillies, Peony male and female, wilde Parsnips, Burrdocks, Spatling Poppey, Kneeholly, &c. Herbs hot in the second Degree. Lovage, Water-flag, Fennel, Butter-bur, Hogs Fennel, Swallows-wort, Carline-thistle, Devils-bit, Spignel, Mercury, Sarsaparilla, &c. Hot in the third Degree. Ginger, Angelica, Asarabica, white Dittany, Doronicum, Elecam∣pane, Hellebore white and black, stinking Gladdon, Filapendula▪ Aron, Sow-bread, Birth-wort, Galangal, Cellandine, Snake-root,  and black, Master-wort, Rest-harrow, &c. Hot in the fourth Degree. Leeks, Onions, Garlick, Pellitory of the Wall, &c. Roots that are very Temperate. Cinquefoyl, Turmentil, Mallows, Bears-breech, Mechoachan, Jallop, Eringo, Asparagus, our Ladies thistle, &c. Roots Cold in the first Degree: Plantine, Comfrey the greater, Sorrel, Madder, Beets white and red, Rose-root, &c. Cold in the second Degree. Hounds-tongue, Alkanet, Succory, Endive, Dazies, &c. ☜ Cold in the Third. Mandrakes, Bistort, &c. Cold in the Fourth. Henbane. Roots dry in the first Degree. Calamus, Aromaticus, Bears-breech, Madder, Burr-docks, Pile-wort, Red Beets, Eringo, Self-heal, Knee-holly, Endive, &c. Dry in the second. Hounds-tongue, Zedoary, Plantine, Mercury, Reeds, Devils-bit, parsley, Butter-bur, Fennel, Spignel, Lovage, Alkanet, Marsh-mallows, Valerian, Sprattling poppey, Bazil, Water-flag, our Ladies thistle, Cyprus long and round, orrel, Smallage, Aspodel male, swallow-wort, &c.
Dry in the third. Cellendine, Angelica, Hogs Fennel, Turmentil, Ginger, Birth-wort long and round, Aron, Sow-bread, Carline thistle, Bistort, Briony white and black, Sarsaparilla, Asarabica, Virginian snake-root, China, Doronicum, Dittany, Galangal of both kinds, Hellebore white and black, Elecam∣pane, Rest harrow, Peony Male and Female, Filapendula, Orris English and Florence, stinking Gladdon, &c. Dry in the Fourth. Costus, Pellitory of Spain, Garlick, Onions and Leeks, &c. Roots Moist are, Dasies, Burrage, Valerian and spatling poppey, Bugloss, white Beets, Liquoris, Dogs-grass, parsnips, Skirrets, &c. ☜ Of hot Medicaments Appropriate to the Parts of the Body. 1. Heating the Head. Doronicum, Fennel, peony, Spikenard, Winters his Cinnamon, Bitony, Costmary, Cardus benedictus, Cowslips, Eye-bright, Featherfew, Goats-Rue, Herb Mastich, Lavender, Laurel, Lovage, Maudlin, Mellilot, Time, penny Royal, Rosemary, Celandine, Scurvey-Grass, Sneese-wort, fena, peony Male and Female, Chamomel, sage, Nutmegs, Jallop. 2. Heating the Throat. Devils-bit, pilewort, Archangel white and red, Alewort. 3. Heating the Breast and Lungs. Birthwort long and round, Calamus, Aromaticus, Cinquefoyl, Elecam∣pane, Liquoris, Orice squills, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Bitony, Bayes, Bawm, Calaminth, Camomil, Distaff, Thistle, Fennel, Germander, Hy∣sop, Hore-hound, Indian-leaf, Maiden-hair, Nettle, Oak of Jerusalem, Organy, periwincle, Rue, scabius, Time, Figs, Raisins, Orris English and Florentine. 4. Heating the Heart. Angelica, Butter-bur, Basil, Cinnamon, Citrons, Carline-thistle, Tur∣mentil, Valerian of both sorts, pimpernel, Bay-berries, Bawm, Broom, Cardus Benedictus, Rue, Goats Rue, Rosemary, southernwood, sene, saffron, spicknard, Juniper-berries, Mace, Nutmegs, Wall-nuts, Mu∣stard-seed, Doronicum, Bugloss. 5. Heating the Stomach. Avens, Fennel, Galangale, Ginger, Radish, Spicknard, Enula, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Citrons, Lemmons, Sassafras, Bayes, Bawm, Broom. Hysop, Indian Leaf, Mints, Time, Parsley, Sage, Smallage, Worm∣wood, Rosemary, Cloves, Almonds, Ben, Nutmegs, Pine-Nuts, Annis, Caraway, Cardamums, Cummin, Elecampane, Fern. 6. Heating the Liver. Carlin thistle, China, Dogs-grease, Fennel, Gentian, Parsley, Rhubarb,
Smallage, Turmerick, Sparagus, Agrimonia, Ale-cost, Ash, Bayes, A∣sarabacca, Centaury the less, Chamepitys, Germander, Fox Gloves, Hops, Horehound, Hysop, Ladies-thistle, Thyme, Maudlin, Pimpernel, Ce∣landine, Samphire, Sage, Elder, Scordium, Water-cresses, Chamomel, Bi∣tony, Annis, Caraway, Cummin, Cinquefoyl, Parsley, Rubarb, Knee∣holly, Rhapontick. 7. Heating the Spleen. Ash, Round Birth-wort, Thistle-Fern of both sorts, Fennel, Gentian, Parsley, Sparagus, Bayes, Agrimony, Centaury the less, Chamepitys, Dodder, Germander, Hops, Hore hound, Harts-tongue, Maiden-hair, Thyme, Smallage, Samphire, Sage, Scordium, Sena, Tamarisk, Water∣cresses, Wormwood, Bitony, Wall-flower, Annis, Caraway, Fennel. 8. Heating the Bowels. Ginger, Valerian great and small, Zedoary, Alehoof, Alexanders, Cha∣momil, Ginger. 9. Heating the Reins and Bladder. Bazil, Burdock, Carline-thistle, China, Cyprus long and round, Drop∣wort, Knee-holly, Marsh-mallows, Parsley, Smallage, Sparagus, Spick∣nard, white Saxafrage, Valerian, Sassafras, Agrimonia, Bitony, Brook∣lime, Bayes, Broom, Chervil, Costmary, Camomil, Clary, Germander, Hops, Melilot, Thyme, Nettleseed, Organy, Pimpernel, Penny-royal, Rochet, Samphire, Scordium, Toad-flax, Vervain, Gromwell, Resthar∣row, Licoris, Pellitory of the Wall, Elder, Turpentine, spatling Pop∣pey, Filapendula, Dogs-grass. 10. Heating of the Womb. Peony, Valerian, Angelica, Pimpernel, Briony, Aristolochia rotunda, Mugwort, Rue, Mercury, Featherfew, Savin, Bitony, Elder, Spicknard, red Fetches, Rosemary, Indian Nut, Juniper berries, Oringes, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cassia Lignea, Saffron, Cardamums, Ash, Pepper, Castoreum, Birthwort long and round, Galanga greater and lesser, Hogs Fennel. 11. Heating the Joynts. Branca ursina, Costus, Ginger, Hermodactils, Jallop, Mechoacan, A∣grimony, Arsmart, Camomil, Costmary, Carden cresses▪ Cowslips, Me∣lilot, Rosemary, Rue, Sciatica cresses, Water cresses, Sage, Bayes. Of Cold Medicaments Appropriate to the Parts of the Body. 1. Cooling the Head. Lettice, Purslain, Mandrake, Plantine, Night-shade, Henbane, Water Lillies, Roses, Poppy, Violets, Gourd, Cucumber, Melons, Opium, House leek, Wood-sorrel, Strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, Fumitory, Willow leaves. 2. Cooling the Throat▪ Bramble leaves, Orpine, Privit, Strawberry leaves, Poppey, Oringes, Lemons.
3. Cooling the Breast and Lungs. Endive, Lambs Tongue, Plantine, Polipody, Purslain, Water-Lillies, Bramble-leaves, Coleworts, Violet leaves, Mallows, Bugloss, Cichory; Poppeys, Quinces, Strawberry leaves, Barley; Mulberry leaves, Prunes, Sanders, Fennegreek, Gum tragant, Arabick. 4. Cooling the Heart. Dandelion, Sorrel, Wood-sorrol, Water Lillies, Violet-leaves, Cu∣cumbers, Gourds, Barberries, red Corans, Citrons, Pomegranates, San∣ders, Camphire, Vipers Bugloss, Lettice, Burnet, Strawberry leaves, Wa∣ter-Lillies. 5. Cooling the Stomach. Cichory, Sorrel, Asparagus, Water-Lillies, Rudive, Purslain, Myrtle, Roses, Violets, Cucumbers, Barley, Quinces, Citrons, Oringes, Pome∣granates. 6. Cooling the Liver. Asparagus, Gramen, Water-Lillies, Sorrel, Strawberries, Gichory, Sow-thiltle, Endive, Purslain, Lettice, Roses, Bugloss, Burrage, Poppey, Barley, Lemons. 7. Cooling the Spleen. Willow, Hemlock, Fumitory, Oyl of Vitriol, spirit of Salt, Oyl of sulphur, which three last you must not exceed above 90 or 100 drops, put into a quart of Ale or Beer. ☜ 8. Cooling the Reins and Bladder. Grass, Strawberries, Water-Lillies, Purslain, Willow, Lettice, Cassia, Fistula, Violets, Roses, Poppey, Citrons, Lemons, Barley. 9. Cooling the Womb. Bistort, Comfrey, Bursa pastoris, plantine, stinking Arach, Balaustins, Water-Lillies, Willow, Henbane, poppy, pomegranats, Medlars, Myrtles, Red Coral. 10. Cooling the Bowels. Cassia, Fistula, sow-thistle, Bucks-horn, Orpine, Plantine, Fumitory, Mallows, Altha. 11. Cooling the Joynts. Henbane, Housleek, Lettice, Night-shade, Willow, poppy, Opium. ☜ The Properties of Purging Medicaments. 1. Purging Cheler 1. Mild; As Cassia Fistularis, Tamarins, Manna, Ca∣labrina, Aloes succotrina, Rheubarb, Damask-Roses▪ Violets. 2. Strong, as, Asarum, scamonie. 2. Purging Phlegm. 1. Mild, as Myrobalans, Chemulan and Emblican, Carthamus-feeds, Mechoachan. 2. Strong, as Agarick, Jaiiup, Turpe∣thum, Coliquintida, Hermodactyls, Euforbium, sagapenum, Briony, spurge, sow▪bread, Elaterium, squills, Turbech, Ground-pine. 3. Purging Watry Humors, 1. Mild, as soldanella, German Orrice. 2. Strong, as Elaterium, Cambogia, Hedge Hysop Ensula.
4. Purging by Vomit. 1. Mild, warm Water, sat Broth, Oyl with wa∣ter, Butter, Roots of Garden-Cucumber, Orach, Mellon, Asarum. 2. Strong, as white Hellebore, Tobacco, Sulphur of Antimony, Merch∣rius vitae, Crocus Metallorum, Turpethum, Minerale, Gutta gamba. 5. Purging by Ʋrine. 1. Mild, as Roots of parsley, Smallage, Eringo, Ruscus, Asparagus, Pimpernel, leaves of Pellitory, Asarum, Chervil, Scordium, saxafrage, Seeds of Gromwel, Winter-cherries. 2. Strong as Sal tartari, Succini, Absynthii, Oleum tarti, Baccarum, luniper, Vitri∣oli, Sulphuris, Cerae, Wood and Bark of Guajaccum, Sassaphras. 6. Purging by the Throat, Mercurius dulcis, Sublimatus & Praecipitatus, Turpethum Minerale, Unguentaque Mercuriata, 7. Purging by Sweat, 1. Mild, as Angelica, Pimperhil, Turmentil, Gentjan, Carduus, Scabius, Zedoary. 2. Strong, as Lignum Guajaccum, Sassaphras, Bezoar-stone, Aurum Diaphoreticum, Antimonium Diapho∣reticum, Bezoar-joviale & Minerale, Sal tartari, Sulphur Auratum. 8. Purging by the Nose. Roots of Orris, Bind-weed, Leaves of Beet, Marjorem, Sage, Bitony, Ivy, Ginger, Roots of Pellitory of Spain, white Hellebore, Leaves of Sneesewort, Tobaccho, Pepper, Mustard, Eu∣forbium. ☞ The Properties of Altering Medicaments. Softening Things, the Roots of Lillies, Altheae, Wild Cucumber, Briony, Leaves of Mallows, Pellitory, Violets, Elder, Dwar-Elder, Flowers of Chamomil, Seeds of Fennegreek, Lime, Fat, Figs, Fresh Butter, Hogs-grease, Bears grease, Old Oyl. Loosening things. Lillies, Lynseed, Fennegreek, Fat, Butter, Althaea, see more in my first part. Abolshing Things. Herb Mercury, Chamomil, Melilot, Elder, Fennegreek and Lynseed, Old Oyl, Butter, Orris, Tyme, Penny-royal Hysope, Mug-wort, Seed of Annis, Fennel. Opening Roots, Smallage, Fennel, Asparagus, Parsley, Holm, Ci∣chory, Eringo, Gentian, Fern, Madder, Tamarisk, Ash leaves, Fumi∣tory, Wormwood, Agrimony, Maiden-hair, Liver-wort, Chamepi∣tys, Dodder, Hore hound, Calamint, Penny-royal Scurvey-Grass, Brook-lyme, Water-cresses, Hops, Seeds of Annis, Ameos, Lupins, Al∣monds, Cinnamon, Vineger, Endive, Garlick, Onions, Pellitory, Tur∣merick, &c. Binding things; Roots of Turmentil, plantine, Comfrey, white Lillies, peony, Bistort, Rhubarb roasted, leaves of Amomum, Agnus Castus, Cy∣press, Cinquefoyl, Bawm, Flea-wort, Horse-tail, Ivy, Knot-grass, Solomons Seal, Bay, Myrtles, Oak, Purslain, Shepherds purse, Medlars, Rice, Lentiles, Galls, Mirtle-berries, Barberries, Acorns, Mastick, Dragons blood. Al∣lum, Coral, bole-Armoniack Iron, Sumach, Pomegranate Rind. See more of this Nature before spoken of.
Drawing things; Birth-wort Roots, Roots of An mony, Bindweed, Taragon, Gentian, pellitory, Crow-oot, Daffadil, Aron, Garlick, Ony∣ons, leaves of Sciatia cresses, Calamint, Ditany, pimpernil, Ivy, Seeds of Nettles, Euphorbium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, sagaponum, pitch, Rozin, Cantharides, pigeons and Hens dung, sope; see more in this part before spoken of. Striking back Things; Roots of plantine, leaves of Housleek, purslain, Duckweed, Endive, Lettice, Night shade, sumach, Hen-bane, red Roses. Dissolving things. Roots of Asphodil, Birthwort, Briony, leaves of Arach, Beets Chamomil, Chickweed, Dill, Maiden hait, Althaea, Mints, pellitory, Bawm, Cleavers, Mallows, scordium. Cleansing things Roots of Aron, Asphodil, Birth-wort, Celandine, Orrice, Gentian, Solomons seal, Tamarisk, leaves of smallage, Tansey, Wood, Hysop, Water-cresses, Horse-hound, Agrimony, Tansey, pim∣pernel, pellitory, Arach, Beets, Aloes, sugar, Honey, Fenne greek-seeds, Turpentine, Vitriol, Whey. Pain-removing things; Roots of Eringo, Orris, Rest harrow, Water∣flag, Marsh-mallows, leaves of Arach, Beets, Chamomil, Chick-weed, Dill, Maiden-hair, Fennel, Marjorem, Time, parsley, Rosemary, Rue, saffron, Fennegreek-seed, Hogs and Hens-grease. Things good to clear the wind. Costus, Galingal, Garlick, Fennel, par∣sley, smallage, spicknard, Zedoary, Camomil, Dill, Juniper, Marjorem, Organy, savory, Wormwood, chenanth, Bay, Nutmeg, pepper, Ginger, Annis, Caraway, Cummin. Humour-dssolving things, Roots of Turmentil, Zedoary, Virginian snake weed. Ginger, leaves of Cardus benedictus, scordium, Butter-bur, Rosemary, sage, Rue, Flowers of Saffron, Bezoar-stone, Cochenele, Treacle. Things good to drive away poison, Angelica, Birthwort, Bistort, ug∣loss Costus, Cyprus, Carline, Doronicum, Enula, Garlick, Gentian, smal∣lage, Turmentil, Vipers bugloss, Zedoary, Bitony Cardus, Calaminth. Agrimony, Avens, Juniper, Organy, penny-royal, Rue, scordium, Worm∣wood, Centaury, Bay-berries, pepper, Citrons, Anniseeds, Animi, Carda∣mums, Caraway, Fennel, Bezoar, saffron, Cochenele, Dragons, plantine. See more in this part. Astonisting things. Mandrake-roots, leaves of Mandrake, Hemlock, Henbane, poppey, Opium, spirit of Darnel and Darnel meal. ☜ To stop the Running of the Glanders for present sale. Take some Frank in cense and strow it upon a Chafing dish of Coals, and let him receive the smoke through a Tunnel, into the Nostril that runneth, and it will stop it for some time.
☞ The best Receipt for the Cure of the Glanders that is, which if your Horse be Youthful, and his Strength and Lungs not too much wasted, you need not fear the Cure; For if any thing in the World will Cure this Disease, this Receipt will. Take a small Faggot made of the green Boughs of the Ash-tree, and set it on Fire in some Chimney-corner, clean swept for your use, then ha∣ving a Gallon of the best Ale you can get in a readiness, quench so many of the Coals that is made thereof therein as will make it pretty thick, then strain it through a Linnen Cloth into some convenient Vessel, fit for your use, then double it over again to make it the stronger, by quench∣ing fresh Coals therein; then strain the Liquor from the Coals as you did before, and when it is cold put it into a Bottle close stopped for your use▪ for if you do not put it in cold, it will quickly soure, which will spoil it. If you make it strong enough you shall find that the Coals will drink up a quart or more of your Ale, when you use it, shake the Bottle to make it all alike, then pour out of it so much as you think fit for your use, and warm it luke-warm, and put a small drenching Horn full of it into each Nostril of your Horse, if he runs at both, if not▪ but one will serve; do this Morning and Evening during his Cure, and ride him gently after it for about an hour, Then let him feed a while upon Hay, and after that you may give him some drink; Three or four quarts of this Liquor will perfect the Cure at the farthest; if you find, that the Kernels under the Chaul do waste, which this Liquor will take away in four or five days at the furthest, you need not much question the Cure▪ you are to keep him in the House during his Cure. After you have given him this drink for about a week together you may rest him, by forbearing to give him any more for a day or two, then give it him again▪ and so use it till you have Cured him. 'Tis convenient if the Horse be very strong and lusty, before you give him this Drink, to cleanse his Body with this Scouring, which is both safe and sure. Take an ounce of the best Barbadoes Alloes you can get for mony, and beat it very fine, then mix it very well with fresh Butter, and after you have so done divide it into three parts, and cover every part all over with Butter, as big as a good Wash-Ball; then give them the Horse in a Morning fasting upon the point of a stick, and stir him a little after it, then bring him into the Stable, and keep him warm, and let him fast two or three Houres, then give him a Mash of Malt, and after that some Hay. ☞ The best of all Receipts for the Ordering and Making up of Pills or Balls of Alloes, for the Scouring or Purging of a Horse that is sick, either of Cold, Surfeit, Molten Grease, Worme, or any other inward Illness, &c. Take an Ounce of the best Barbadoes Aloes, or of Aloes Hepatica with
half an Ounce of the Fylings of Steel Needles, and put them both to∣gether Or with the Help of the Fire and your warm Hands, you may work up by it self into Balls the bitlest sort of loes that is.in a Mortar, and beat and rub them round about with your Pestle, till the Aloes be finely powdred, then drop into it sixteen or twenty drops of Bandy. (or for want thereof, Water) and rub them round with your Pestle▪ and they will incorporate and become one Body, which you may work and make up with your Hand like unto Paste, into what form or shape you please; Divide them into two or three Balls, and give him them Fasting in the Morning one after another in a Hornful of cold strong or small Beer, and exercise him after it, then bring him Home, and set him up warm Clothed and Littered, and no question but he will purge very well. Some Observations upon i. If you chance to put too much Brandy into it, it will be so thin that you cannot work it up into a Paste. If this Misfortune happen to you, put a little of the powder of English Liquoris to it, and that will so qua∣lifie the thinness of it, that you may work it up into a Body very well; Or you may make up your Aloes after the same manner only with the powder of Liquoris, or with any other Powder, which you think most proper for your use. ☜ How to know the Goodness of the Fylings of Steel Needles. If it look bright and be clean from dirt 'tis good; but if you find it of a rusty colour 'tis naught; You may buy it at the Needle-makers in Crooked Lane, near the Monument, for 6 d. the pound. ☜ Another Receipt very good for the said Distempers. Take an Ounce of Barbadoes Aloes, or Aloes Hepatica, with a dram of each of these Roots here under-written, finely beaten and searc'd viz. Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda and Elecampane, put them into a Mortar together, and make them up as in your former Receipt. Or you may make up your Aloes with the powder of Crude Antimony. Another Excellent Purge or Scouring, which is good to free a Horse from the same Distempers as the others did, and is the best way I know of for ☜ Or you may dissolve your Aloes in cold Brandy, being first beaten into fine powder, and put therein.the dissolving of Aloes. Take an Ounce of the best Barbadoes Aloes, or Aloes Hepatica, and beat it in a Mortar to a fine powder, then put it into a Bladder, and wet the powder very well with Brandy wine, then Tie it up hard that it re∣ceive no Vent, and put it into a Skillet of Water, and set it over the Fire, and you shall find that in a little more then a quarter of an Houres boyling▪ your Aloes will be quite dissolved. Then take it off the Fire, (ha∣ving first in a readiness a quart of strong Beer indifferent hot) and untie
or clip your Bladder with a Pair of Scissers, and let out your Aloes into the Beer, and put also into it an Ounce of fresh Butter, with the Yolks and Whites of two New laid Eggs; Brew and beat all these very well together, till you think they are cool enough to give him, and Order him as in the former Receipt. If your Horse be strong and lusty, and that you think this is not a sufficient Dose strong enough for him, you may either add more Aloes, or else you may put into it as much of the pow∣der of the Root of Jallop and Liquoris, as will lie upon a Six-pence, which will strengthen his Purge very much and make it work very freely, kind∣ly and safely. Some more Physical Observations in the Giving of Purges or Scourings. 1. When you give your Horse a Purge or Scouring, either for Surfeit, Cold, or any other Illness, let him fast about three houres before he takes it, and about three or four houres after it. 2. Let the first thing he eats after he hath fasted his limited time, be a Mash of Malt or boiled Oats, and let him not have it till his Physick hath wrought twice or thrice with him, which will set it working so much the more freely. 3. If you give him Hay first, before you give him his Mash, 'twill so bind his Physick upon his Stomach, that it will spoil the Operation and working quality thereof, to the no little prejudice of his Health. 4. The best time in my opinion is to give it him about four or five in the Afternoon, for then 'tis possible you may see the Working of it the next Morning, which if you give it him in the Morning (which is the usual time of giving a Horse Physick) it may work in the Night, and so pre∣vent you of seeing the Operation thereof. 5. According to the strength of your Horses Body, and the quantity or quality of the Physick you give him will be the Operation of it, for in some Horses it will work in twelve houres, in others not in twenty four, and again in others not in fourty eight. 6. Let him have no Water, till after his Physick hath done working, and then let it be a little Aired before you give it him, with a Handful or two of Wheat-bran put amongst it. 7. If you fear your Horse is troubled with Bots or Wormes, and that you find him to begin to dung loose after his Purging, then put a To∣baccho-pipe at the same time ready lighted into his Fundament (breaking off some part of it before you put it in, lest it prove too long) and the Wind from within his Body will draw it out, as orderly as if it were taken at your Mouth, so that the Smoke being thus received into his Body will so suffocate and choak them, that it will make them to let go their hold, which being loose will be the more easily thrown out by the Purge in his Excrements.
A Particular Receipt for Splaiting of the Shoulder, which is a Torn Shoulder. Put a Pair of streight Pastornes on his Feet, keeping him in the Stable without disquieting of him; then take of Dialthaea one pound, of Sallet Oyl one Pint, of Oyl de bay half a pound, of fresh Butter half a pound; Melt all these together in an Earthen Pot, and anoint the grieved place therewith, and also round about the inside of the Shoulder, and within two or three days after, both that place and all the Shoulder will swell, and either prick it with a Launcet or Fleam in all the swelling places, or else with a sharp hot Iron, and then anoint it still with the Ointment be∣fore said; but if you see that it will not go away, but swell still, and ga∣ther to a Head, then Launce it where the Swelling doth gather most, and is softest under your Finger, and then Taint it with your Green Oint∣ment, which you may find in the First Part. ☜ Things good in General to Cure a Shoulder Pight, which is a Shoulder out of Joynt. To make him swim in a deep Water up and down a dozen Turnes, for that will make the Joynt to go into its right place again; then make two Pins of Ashen-wood the bigness of your Finger, being sharp at the Points and five inches long, then slit the Skin an Inch above the Point, and an Inch beneath the Point of the Shoulder, and thrust in one of these Pins from above downwards, so as both the ends may equally stick with the Skin; and if the Pin of Wood will not easily pass through, you may make it way first with an Iron Pin, then make other two holes cross to the first holes, so as the other pin may cross the first pin right in the midst with a right Cross; and the first pin should be somewhat flat in the midst, to the intent, that the other being round may press the better without stop, and close juster together; then take a piece of a little Line, somewhat bigger then a Whip-cord, and at one end make a Loop, which being but over one of the Pins ends, so that it may lie betwixt the Pins ends and the skin, and fasten the last end with your pack-thread unto the rest of the Cord, so as it may not slip; And to do well, both the Pins and the Cord should be first anointed with a little Hogs-grease, then bring him into the Stable▪ and let him rest the space of nine or ten days, and let him lie down as little as may be, and put a Pastorn shoo on the sore leg, and at nine or ten days end you may anoint the place with a little Dialthea or Hogs-grease, and so turn him out to Grass, and let him run there till the pins be rotted off. If you work him in a Cart after, a Months time, it will settle his shoulder the better, and make him the more fit to ride.
The Cure for the Canker in the Mouth. Take Allum half a pound, Honey a quarter of a pint, Columbine leaves and Sage leaves, of each a handful, boyl them together in three Pints of running Water, until a Pint be consumed, and wash the sore places therewith, (with a Rag Tied upon a stick) till they bleed, Morn∣ing and Night till they be Cured. The Cring of the Gigges, Bladders or Flappes. Pull out his Tongue, and slit them with an Incision-Knife, and thrust out the Kernels or Corruption, and wash the place with Vineger and Salt, or Allum-water, and they will do well again. But to prevent their coming at all is to wash it often with Wine, Beer and Ale, and so shall no Blister breed thereon, nor any other Disease. To make Ʋseful unto you those several Weights and Measures, which are set down by some Authors, in some Physical and obscure Cha∣racters, (and therein contained many Ex∣cellent Receipts); Take them as followeth, VIZ. ss The Character of the half-pound lb A pound lb ss A pound and a half ℥ An Ounce ℥ j ss One Ounce and a half ʒ A Dram ʒ ss A Dram and a half ℈ A Scruple ℈ ss A Scruple and a half gr. A Grain, which is the least of all Weights, M. A handful. P. A Pugil. p. A. part. A. Of each alike, Note that Twenty Graines Make A Scruple. Three Scruples Make A Dram Eight Drams Make An Ounce. Twelve Ounces Make A pound. FINIS.
A TABLE Alphabetically set down, shewing, where the Diseases of a Horse do Grow, either inward or out∣ward, in any Part of his Body, and how you may Know them, and what were the Causes that Bred them. The Pages Direct You to their Cues, which are found only in the Second Part. A. ACcloyed or Cloyed, is no other then Prickt with a Nail in the Shooing, vide Prickt page 396 Arristes vide Rat-tails 377 St. Anthonies Fire is a vehement burning disease in the Flesh, and is of the Na∣ture of Noli me tangere or Wilde▪Fire, and is named of some, The Singles of an horse, which is very hard and difficult to Cure 233 and 234 Anticor or Heart-sickness, is caused many times by too much seeding without ex∣ercise, and sometimes by hard and im∣moderate Riding, and careless looking after him afterwards, which makes the Blood of this useful Creature (a Horse) so corrupted and inflamed, that unless it find some way to vent it self forth, it soon puts a Period and End to his Life. This Disease hath its Seat and Residence near the Heart, and is known by a Swel∣ling in the middle of his Breast against the Heart, from whence it derives its Name 234 Attaint upper, is a Swelling of the Master, or Back-Snew of the Fore-legs, near the Pastorn-Joynt, and cometh ordi∣narily by an Over-reach 235 Attaint Nether is the same with the other, coming sometimes by a Wrench, and sometimes by a strain; All the diffe∣rence of them is, whereas the other is upon the Foot-lock Joynts, this is under it, and is usually upon the Heel or Frush, and is not always visible to the Eye; but it may be felt by the heat and burn∣ing of it, and by its softness, which will arise by a Swelling like a Bladder or Blister, wherein will be corrupt and vi∣tious matter like to Jelly, which will make him complain very much ib. Anbury is a kind of Wen or spungy Wart, growing upon any part of a horses Body 279 Apoplexie, vide Palsey Ach or Numbness in the Joynts cometh by Cold, taken by hard and violent exer∣cise or labour 232 Avives, Vives or Five; see Vives B. Bloody Flux, vide Flux bloody 310 Back-swayed, vide Swaying in the back▪ Barbes are a common Disease, and few horses are without them, they are known by two Paps under his Tongue, which seldom prove hurtful to him, till
they be inflamed with corrupt blood, pro∣ceeding from vitious humours, which wil make them raw, and grow beyond their usual length, and cause them to become very painful to him, which will hinder his feeding. You must clip them away with the Scissers. 301 Blood-spaven, is a soft Swelling which groweth through the Hough, and is commonly full of blood, and is biggest upon the inside, and being fed by the Master-Vein, makes it greater then the swelling on the outside; It runneth down the inside of the Hough down the Leg to the Pastorn; This Disease is oc∣casioned from the corruption of the Blood, taken by hard Riding when the Horse is young and tender, which by overmuch heating, makes it so thin and flexible, that the humour falling down∣wards resideth in the Hough, which makes the Joynts stiff, and causeth him to go with great pain and difficulty. This Disease not growing hard makes it more easie to Cure then the Bone-spaven 260 Bone-spaven is a great Crust as hard as a bone, if it be let run too long, it sticketh, or rather groweth on the inside of the Hough, under the Joynt, near to the great Vein, which maketh him to Halt very much, it cometh at first like a ten∣der Gristle, which by degrees cometh to this hardness; It is bred several Ways, ei∣ther by immoderate Riding or hard la∣bour, which dissolves the Blood into thin humours, and falleth down, and ma∣keth its residence in the Hough, which causeth the place to swell, and so becom∣eth a hard Bone, which occasions this name of Bone-spaven, it cometh also he∣reditary from the Sire or Dam, which are troubled with the same dsease. 261 Blood-running Itch cometh by the Inflam∣mation of the Blood, being over-heat by hard Riding, or other sore labour; It getteth between the skin and the flesh, and maketh a Horse to rub, scrub and bite himself, which if let alone too long, will come to a grievous Mange, and is very infectious to any Horse that shall be nigh him; What cureth the Mange cureth this disease. 369 Bots and Wormes in general are of three sorts, viz. Bots, Trunchions and Maw-wormes: Bots are usually found in the great Gut near the Fundament, Trun∣chions are found in the Maw, and if they continue there too long, they will eat their Passage through, which will cer∣tainly bring death, if not killed. The third sort are called plain Wormes, which remain in a Horses Body, which are of an evil effect also. Bots are a small worm with great heads and small tails, breed∣ing in the great Gut adjoyning to the Fundament, which may be taken away by your hands, by picking them away from the Gut where they stick. Trun∣chions are short and thick, and have black and hard heads, and must be re∣moved by Medicine. Maw-wormes are of a reddish colour, somewhat long and slender, much like unto Earth-wormes, about the length of a Mans Finger, which also must be taken away by Medi∣cine. They proceed all from one cause, which is raw, gross and phlegmatick matter engendred from foul feeding, which causeth all these three sorts of e∣vil creatures to breed. The Signes to know when he is troubled with them is, He will stamp with his feet, kick at his Belly, turn his Head towards his tail, for∣sake his meat; He will groan, tumble, wallow, and also frisk his tail to and fro 303
Bunches, Knots, Warts and Wens, come somtime by eating of foul meat, by brui∣ses, by hard riding and sore labor, wher∣by the blood becomes so putrified and foul, that it turns into evil humors, which occasions these kind of sorrances. 278 Blood-shotten Eyes, or all diseases of the Eyes come of two causes, viz. either inward or outward; The inward Causes proceed from evil Humors that resort and flow to the Eyes, or by some stroke or blow that is given him thereon. 290 to 291 Bleeding at Nose cometh commonly among young horses, proceeding from great store of blood, or by means that the Vein ending in that place, is either opened, broken or fretted; It is opened many times by reason that the Blood abound∣eth too much, or that it is too fine or too subtil, and so pierceth through the Veins; Or it may be broken by some vi∣olent strain, cut or blow, Or it may be fretted or gnawn asunder, by sharpness of the blood, or by some other evil hu∣mours contained therein. 306 Botch in the Groyn cometh by reason that a horse being full of humours, and sud∣denly laboured, causeth them to resort to the weakest parts, and there gather to∣gether and breed a Botch, and especially in the hinder parts of the Thighs, not far from the Cods; The Signes be these, His hinder Legs will be all swoln, espe∣cially from the Gambrels or Hoofs up∣wards; and if you feel with your hand, you may find a great Knob or Swelling, and if it be round and hard it will ga∣ther to a head. 388 Blisters are certain hollow risings between the skin and the flesh, proceeding either from some Burn, Scald or Chasing, and are very full of thin water. 389 Burstness, vide Rupture C. A Canker is a very filthy and lothsom Sor∣rance, which if it continue long uncured, it will fester and putrifie the place so where it is, that it will eat to the very bone, and if it happens to come upon the Tongue it will eat it asunder; if it light∣eth upon the Nose, it will eat the Gristle through, and if it cometh upon any part of the flesh, it fretteth and gnaweth it in great breadth; you may easily know this Sorrance, for where it is the places will be raw, and bleed often, and many times a white Scurf will grow upon that place infected with it. It proceedeth many ways, either by Melancholy and filthy Blood ingendred in the Body, by un∣wholesom Meat, or by some sharp and salt humours coming by Cold not long before taken, which will make his Breath to stink very much. 302 and 318 Clifts and Cracks in the Heel, cometh se∣veral ways, either by over-hard riding or labour, which occasions Surfeits; or by giving him unwholesom Meat, or by washing him when he is hot, which corrupts his Blood, and causes the Pec∣cant humours to fall down and settle where the Sorrances are, which makes his Heels very raw, and run very offen∣sively with stinking Water and Matter, which prove very troublesom to the poor Creature▪ 266 Cods and Stones Swelled, cometh several Ways▪ Either by some Wound, or by the sting of some Venomous Crea∣ture, or by Fighting of one Horse with another, or by means of some
evil Humors, which corrupt the Mass of Blood, which fall down to the Cods sometimes after Sickness, or Surfeiting with Cold, and then it is a Sign of A∣mendment, and sometimes from having too much plenty of Seed. 386 and 387 Cord is a streight Sinew in the Fore-Legs, which cometh from the Shackle-Vein to the Gristle in the Nose, between the Lip, the length of a Bean. Or there b two strings like threads that lie above the Knee and the Body, and runneth like a small Cord through the Body to the Nostrils, which causes a Horse to stumble, and sometimes to fall, and is a defect, which is very common amongst young Horses. You may know this In∣firmity by his stiff going, and stumbling without any visible Sorrance. 341 Cholick is commonly occasioned by Wind, which makes it bear this Name of Wind Cholick; It causeth very violent pain, by Griping of the Belly of a Horse, which will make him strike at it, and sometimes to lie down and tumble, and stamp with his Feet, and be so painful as to make him forsake his Meat. 362 Colt-Evil, is a Disease that is subject both to a Horse or Gelding. It cometh to a Horse with an unnatural Swelling of the Yard and Cods, proceeding of Wind, filling the Arteries and hollow Sinew, or Pipe of the Yard▪ or else through the abundance of Seed; And to a Gelding for lack of Natural Heat to expel their seed any further. 330 Cold or Poze in a horses Head, is gotten by means and ways unknown, according to the Temper and Constitution of a Hor∣ses Body, and the best Keeper, that it cannot warrant his Horse from this In∣firmity. You must know, that if the Horse be subject to bad Humors, you must endeavour to expel them, by Purging of his Head. Now accor∣ding as the Cold which a Horse hath taken, is new or old; great or small, according as the Humours do a∣bound in his Head, and as those Hu∣mors be thick or thin, so is the Disease more or less dangerous: If he hath but a new taken Cold, he will have small Kernels like Wax Kernels under his Chaul about the Root of his Tongue▪ but if he hath great, then you may im∣agine his Cold of a longer date. His Cold may be new also, if you find him Rattle in his Head, or avoid thin Matter out of his Nose or Eyes, or if he hold down his Head in the Manger, or when he drinketh, his Water cometh up a∣gain out of his Nostrils, or if he chew∣eth between his Teeth Matterative stuff, but if he casteth foul stinking Matter out of his Nose, and Coughs grievously; Then it is a sign he may have the Glanders or Consumption of the Lungs 242 to 250 Consumptions are of two sorts; One is called, A dry Malady, the other A Con∣sumption of the Flesh. The first cometh by violent Heats and Colds, with fret∣ting and gnawing Humours, descending out of the Head, which fall upon the Lungs, which causeth at first thin Mat∣ter to Run from the Nose; but after some certain time it groweth thick, tough and vitious, which ceaseth and causeth a Maceration and Leanness of the whole Body, whereby he droopeth and pineth away, and though he doth eat and drink, yet he doth not digest it kindly, to do him good The Signes to know this Malady is, His Flesh will soon consume away, his Belly is gaunt, and the Skin thereof so hard stretched,
or rather shrunk up that if you strike it with your Hand it will sound like a Tabor, neither will his Hair shed in due season, as other Horses do, he will Cough, and that but Huskingly, as if he had swallowed some small Bones; And is a Disease hard to be Cured. The other Consumption is that of she Flesh which also is occasioned by a Cold, which for want of a Cure in time, cau∣seth this Maceration and Leanness throughout the whole Body, and com∣eth several Ways, either by violent Heats, or immoderate Labour, or Ri∣ding him into the Water before he be thoroughly Cold, and setting him up negligently afterwards. 333 and 334 Cramp or Convulsions are all of one Ma∣lady, they are forcible Contractions of the Sinews, Veins and Muscles, in any Member or part of the Body, which proceeds several Ways, Either from some Wound or Sinew cut asunder, or for want of Blood, or by over-heats and sudden cooling afterwards; Or lastly, by over-much Purging him; The Signes to know this Malady is, That the In∣fected will be so stiff, that the whole strength of a Man is not able to bow it, he will be Lame and well as it were in a moment. There is also another kind of them, which seizeth upon a Horses Neck, and Reins of his Back, and so al∣most universally over his whole Body, which proceedeth several Ways, Either from some great Cold, which may be catched several Ways, or by loss of Blood, whereby a great Windiness en∣tereth into the Veins, and so benumbeth the Sinews. This is also known by his Neck and Head standing awry, his Eares upright, and his Eyes hollow, his Mouth dry and clung, and his Back will Rise like a Camel, which must be Cu∣red by giving him something to make him Sweat, and by Loading him with warm Woollen Cloaths. 239, 240 Costiveness, is when a Horse is so bound in his Belly, that he cannot dung but with great pain and trouble, It is a Disease very dangerous and perillous to him, and is the Origen of several Maladies; you may know it by several Symptoms, sometimes it proceedeth from Glut of Provender, or over-much feeding, som∣times by eating too dry and hard meats, which sucketh and drieth up the moi∣sture of a Horses Body, viz. Beans, Pease, Wheat or Tares, &c. Not but that they are very wholesom food, and the heartiest Meat a Horse can eat; but feed∣ing too much upon them over-heats his Body, more then any other Grain what∣soever, which shuts up a Horses Office of Nature, so that it makes him he can∣not dung: And besides, they are very windy food, which causeth many bad humours and obstructions in the Body; sometimes Costiveness cometh also by much Fasting, in the Dieting of them for Races or Hunting, which doth suck up (like a Spunge) the phlegmatick moi∣sture of the Body. 378 and 381 Crown-b is a filthy, stinking and canke∣rous disease, breeding round about the Feet, upon the Coronets or top of the Hoof, next the Hair, which causeth much pain unto him; It cometh to him, by reason he hath been bred in some cold wet Soyl, striking corrupt Hu∣mours up to his Feet, and is more trou∣bled with these in the Summer then the Winter. The Signes to know it are these; The Hair about the Coronets will be thin and staring like Bristles, and run with Matterative Water. 372
Camery or Frounce, are small Warts or Pimples in the most of the Palate of a Horses Mouth, which are very soft and sore, and are bred also somtimes in his Lips and Tongue; It is occasioned many ways, somtimes by eating of wet Hay whereon Rats or other Vermin hath piss'd upon, somtimes by drawing frozen dust amongst the Grass into his Mouth, and sometimes by licking up of Venom; The Signes shew themselves, which are the Pimples or Whelks, and soreness of them, with the unsavoriness of his food that he hath eaten before▪ and his falling from his Meat. 301 Crb is a long Swelling beneath the elbow of the Hough in the great Sinew behind, above the top of the Horn, which ma∣keth him halt and go lame when he hath been heated; It cometh to him se∣veral Ways, either hereditary, or by some bruise or strain, or by heavy load∣ing him when he was too young. 263 Casting out of his Mouth and Nostrils his drink, proceedeth from a cold Stomach, or by some Cold taken in his Head, where the Rheum bindeth upon the Roots and Kernels of the Tongue, which hath as it were strangled and made strait the Passages of the Stomach. 383 Canker in the Eyes, cometh of a rank and corrupt Blood, descending from the Head into them, where it breedeth a little Worm like the Head of a Pismire, which groweth in the corner next his Nose, which will eat in time, if let a∣lone, through the Gristle of his Nose, and so pass into his Head, and kill him. You may know it by the great and small Pimples within and without the Eye∣lids, and the Eye it self will be full of cor∣rupt matter. What cures it in the Mouth cures this. 302, 318 Chops, Clefts or Rifts, in the Palate of a Horses Mouth, proceedeth either from course and rough Hay full of Thistles, and other pricking stuff, or by oul Provender full of sharp seeds, which by frequent pricking the Bats of his Mouth, doth cause them to wrankle and breed corrupt blood, which may turn to the Canker. What Cures the Canker in the Mouth, if it comes to this disease, cures this; but to prevent the Canker wash his Mouth with Vineger and Salt, and anoint it with Honey. 418 Canker in the Mouth, is a rawness of the Mouth and Tongue which is full of Bli∣sters, and cannot eat his meat; It pro∣ceeds from crude and undigested meat, rankness of blood, or unnatural heat coming from the Stomach. 302 and 418 Crick in the Neck is a kind of Convulsion, which I shall speak but briefly hereof, because I have handled it fully before in all the Kinds thereof. It is when the Horse cannot turn his Neck any man∣ner of ways, but hold it right forth, in∣somuch that he cannot take his Meat from the ground, but with great trouble and pain. 384 Crest-fallen is, when that part which a Hor∣ses Man groweth on, which is the up∣per part thereof, and called the Crest, leaneth either to one side or other, not standing upright as it ought to do. It cometh for the most part from Poverty, occasioned by ill keeping, and especially when a sat horse falleth away suddenly upon any inward sickness. 385 D. Dropsey is a disease which causeth a uni∣versal Swelling of the Body through the great quantity of Water that lieth be∣tween the Skin and the Flesh, occasioned by Melancholy Blood, Water and Wind
which will make his Belly and Legs to Swell, but his Back, Buttocks and Flanks will be dried and shrunk up to the very Bones, & if you thrust your Finger hard upon the place swollen, you shall leave the print thereof behind, for the Flesh wanting natural heat, will not return again to its place. Other Signes there be to know this disease, viz. he will be evil coloured, heavy, dull, and of no Face, Strength nor Spirit, and therefore pro∣ceedeth principally for want of good Nourishment and Digestion, which pas∣seth into Melancholy. It proceedeth also either from the Spleen or the Liver, or both, the Blood being putrified and turn∣ed into a thin Water, and sometimes for want of good Exercise, or over-much rest. He will be also short Breath'd, lose his Stomach, and be very dry, and though you bring him to the Water he will drink little, but only pudder long with his Nose in it. In a word, he will be as if he had a general Consumption o∣ver his whole Body, and his Hair will peal off with the least rubbing. 363 Dimness of Sight or Blindness, is occasion∣ed several ways. Either by some strain, violent Riding, hard Labour, and over∣charging him with a Burthen beyond his Strength, whereby the Strings of his Eyes are stretched beyond their due Compass hereditary. Lastly, by some blow or wound. The Sign is, want of Sight, or the ill effected colour of the Eye, 288 E. A Boney Excretion, is occasioned most an end by Causticks, or burning Corrasives, which are put to Wounds that lie close to the Bone; as when the Wound is in the Leg, or about the Pasterns, for the Flesh being very much burned by them, cause then Excretion to grow upon the Bone, which by the little Experience of the Farrier the wound is healed, but this Excretion doth remain; and somtimes it cometh by a Shackle, or the Galling of a Lock or Fetters, that has bin long con∣tinued upon the Foot. What Cures the Bone-spaven cures this. 262 and 379 Enterfering cometh several Ways, Either hereditary from the Parents, or by some stiffness in his Pace, or by evil and too broad Shooing, which maketh him to go so narrow behind with his hinden Feet, that he fretteth one Foot against another, so that there groweth hard mattery scabs, which are so sore that they make him to go Lame. The Signes are his ill going, and the visible Sign of the Scabs. 284 Eyes blood-shotten. See Blood-shotten Eyes. 288 to 293 Eyes Lunatick. See Lunatick Eyes. 293 F. Feltick is no other then a Galled Back. Fraying is stiffness taken in his Legs and Feet. 287 to 288 Farcin or Fashions is a creeping Ulcer, and is the most lothsom, stinking and filthy disease that can come to a Horse. It proceedeth first of corrupt Blood en∣gendred in the Body by over-heats and colds, which beginneth first with hard Knots and Pustles, which at last by spreading and dilating it self, will over∣run the whole Body of a Horse, but it commonly beginneth in a Vein, or near to some Master-Vein, which feedeth and nourisheth the Disease; It comth sometimes also by Spur-Galling with rusty Spurs, Snaffle, Bit, or the like; As also by the Bitng of some other Horse infected with the said Disease;
Or if it be in the Leg, it may come by Enterfering one Leg with another, and by many other ways, 323 and 324 Water Farcin cometh to a Horse by his feeding upon low Watery Grounds, and in Pits or Holes where the Grass grows above Water, which in picking out the Grass he licks up the Water with is▪ which will cause▪Horses sometimes to swell under the Belly and Chaps▪ which when you come to prick it with a hot Iron (bent back again about the length of a Fleam) there will Issue from it abundance of yellow, gray and oyly Water. 328 Flanks, is a Wrench, Crick, Stroke, or other Grief gotten in his Back, which word we are beholding to the French sor. Now there is another sort of Flanks, which is quite different from the other, which is a kind of Pleurisie, which is when he is over run with too much Blood, which endangereth a Mange, or else falleth dangerously sick thereby, who by reason that he hath been often blooded before, his Body now requires it, whereof he missing, fal∣leth into a lothsom and dangerous Ma∣lady. 300 Falling of the Fundament cometh several Ways, either by Weakness, being poor∣ly Fed, or by some Cold, which occasions a Scouring and Flux of Blood. 311 A Feaver, according to the Learned Phy∣sicians, is an unnatural and immoderate heat, which procedeth first from the Heart, and so spreadeth it self through all the Arteries and Veins of the Body, stopping all the natural Motions there∣of, and there be several sorts of them, viz. Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan and Pestilent, and are all of one Nature, though some be more Malignant then others are; Only a Hectick Feaver is of a Nature far different from the former, and so likewise a Pestilent Feaver. Ve∣getius speaketh of Summer, Autumn and Winter-Feavers, without making any great difference between them, more then that one is worse then another, by reason of the time and season of the year he hath it in; I shall shew you first the Causes from whence they pro∣ceed, and then give you the Signes how you may know it. It cometh by hard Labour or Exercise, as of too much Tra∣velling, and especially in hot Weather, and sometimes by extream heat of the Sun, and also by extream Cold of the Air, and sometimes it is bred of crudit or raw Digestion, which hapneth by too greedy eating of such Corn as was not throughly ored nor cleansed. Now the Signes to know a Feaver are these, The Horse doth continually hold down his Head, and is not able to lift it up, his Eyes are so Swelled, that he cannot easily open them for Matterative stuff, and will fall away and consume in his Flesh, his Lips and all his Body is Lush and Feeble, his Stones hang down, he will covet much to lie down, and often to rise again; If his Ague come with a cold Fit, he will shake and quiver, and when the Cold Fit is over, he will burn, and his Breath will be hot and will fail, and his Flanks beat, he will Reel as he goeth, he will Covet much to drink, and evermore keep his Mouth in the Water, although he will drink but little. These are the certain Signes of a Feaver as I know of. 321 Fistula is a deep, hollow, crooked Ʋlcer, for the most part springs from Malig∣nant Humours engendred in some Wound, Sore or Canker not well Cured,
sometimes it cometh by a Bruise which hath Festered inwardly, which ei∣ther burst forth of it self, or was opened by the Farrier, sometimes it cometh by a co-Wrench or pinch of a Collar in drawing, or by being wrung with the Tree of a Saddle. The Signes to know it, is the hollowness of it descending downwards from the Orifice, which is much straiter at the Mouth then the bottom, and sendeth forth thin Matter from the same. 319 and 370 Foundering in the Feet, cometh evermore by hard riding, or sore labour, by great heats and colds, whichdistemper the bo∣dy, and stirs up peccant and malignant humors, that inflames the Blood, melts the Grease, and causeth it to descend downwards into his Feet, and there set∣leth, which causeth such a numbness and pricking in his Hoofs, that he hath no sense nor feeling of them, for he is hard∣ly able to stand, which if he do, it is but after a feeble manner, for you may soon push him down with your hand; besides, he will stand shaking and quaking, as if he had a Fit of an Ague. This disease cometh several ways, sometimes by wa∣tering him when he is very Fat, and his Grease molten within him, and then sud∣denly cooled, by setting him upon cold Planks without Litter, or taking his Saddle off too soon, or else by letting him stand when he is hot in some shal∣low water up to the Feet-locks; by which means, through the extraordi∣nary coldness of it, causeth the Molten-Grease to descend into his Feet, and there to cake and congeal, which is the true reason of this Malady. A Horse also may be Foundred by wearing strait Shoos in the heat of Summer, and Tra∣velling upon hard Ground. To know when a horse is foundred upon his sore-feet, and not on his hinder-feet. You may know it by this, He will tread only upon his hinder-feet, and as little as he can on his fore-Feet, and go crouching and crimpling with his buttocks. Sometimes he will be Foundred on his hinder feet, and not on his fore-feet, (but this is very seldom) which you may know by his seeming very weak behind, and will rest himself as much upon his fore-feet as he can, being very fearful to set his hinder-feet to the Ground. 271 Foundering in the Body, cometh by eating too much Provender suddenly when he is too hot, & panting, whereby his meat not being well digested, breedeth evil humors, which by little and little do spread through all his members, and at length doth so oppress all his Body, that it taketh away his strength, and make him in such evil condition, that he can neither go nor bow his Joynts, and be∣ing once laid, is not able to rise again, neither can he stale nor dung but with great pain. Itcometh also if he drink too much upon Traveling when he is hot, and not riding him after it. The Signes to know it, He will be Chill and quake for Cold after drinking, and some of it will come out of his Nose, and some few days after his Legs will Swell, and after a while begin to Pill and have a dry Cough, which will make his Eyes to Water, his Nose to run with a white Phlegmatick stuff, and cause him to forsake his Meat, and make him hang down his Head for extream pain in the Manger. Foun∣dering is a French word, and signifieth no more then a Surfeit given in the Body of a Horse. 272 and 399
Chest-Foundered is discovered by this in∣firmity; He will often covet to lie down, and stand stradling with his fore-Legs. 275 Fa se Quarter is a Rift, Crack or Chink on the out-side, but most commonly on the inside of the Hoof, which is an unsound Quarter, seeming like a Piece put there∣in, and not all of one entire Piece; It com∣eth several ways, somtimes by ill Shooing and Parng, sometimes by Gravelling, or a prick with a Nail or Stub, which will make him halt, and waterish Blood will issue out of the Chink or Rift. 335 Flux cometh several ways, vide Lask or Loosness. Bloody Flux or Flix are of several kinds, sometimes the fat of the slimy filth that is avoided, is sprinkled with a little Blood, sometimes the Excrements is like waterish blood, and somtimes like pure Blood, and all these do spring from one and the same cause, which is the Ulce∣ration of the Guts. Now you may know by their several mixtures, whether the Ulceration be in the inner small Gut, or in the outward great Gut, if it be in the inner Guts, then the Matter and Blood will be mixt together, but if it be in the outward Gut, then they be not mingled together, but come out severally, the Blood most commonly following the Matter. It cometh com∣monly of some sharp Humour, breed∣ing by filthy raw Food, or sore Travel, or Labour, being violently driven through many crooked and narrow Pas∣sages, do cleave to his Guts, and with their heat and sharpness fret them, cau∣sing Ulceration and grievous pains. It cometh also by some great Cold, Heat or moistness, or by means of receiving some violent Purgation, as Scamony, Sti∣bium, or such like violent Simples ap∣plied in too great a quantity, or it may come by weakness of the Liver. 310 The Fig, this disease bears its name from a hard piece of Flesh growing upon the Frush or Heel, which resembleth the shape and fashion of a Fig. It cometh by reason of some hurt received in his Foot (be∣ing not throughly Cured) or by some Stub or Nail, Bone, Thorn or Stone, and sometimes by an over-reach upon the Heel or Frush. 389 Falling-Evil is a disease that is seldom seen, which is no other then the Falling Sick∣ness, proceeding from ill Blood, and cold and thick Phlegm gathered together in the fore-part of the Head, between the Panicle and the Brain, which being dis∣perst over the whole Brain, doth sudden∣ly cause the Beast to fall, and bereave him of all sense for a time. It is more subject to Italian, Spanish and French Horses then to English, Some are of o∣pinion, that at a certain course of the Moon, Horses and other Beasts many times do fall and die for a time, as well as Men. This Disease is known by these Signes, When they are fallen, thei Bodies will quiver and quake, and their Mouths will foam, and when you think they are dying, they will rise up imme∣diately and fall to their Meat. You may know whether they will fall often or not▪ by putting your Fingers to the Gristle of their Nostrils, and if it feel cold, he will have most, but if it be warm, he will seldom fall. 239, 397 Frenzy, vide Madness. G. Gigges, Bladders or Flappes in the Mouth of a Horse, are small Swellings or Pu∣stules,
with black Heads on the inside of his Lips, under his great Jaw-teeth, which will sometimes be as great as a Wall-Nut, and so painful withal, that they will make him let fall his Meat out of his Mouth, or at least keep it in his Mouth unchawed. They do proceed from foul Feeding, either of Grass or Provender, you may feel them with your Finger. 418 Gangrene, is a running and creeping Sore, that as far as it runs mortifies the Flesh, causing it to rot, so that of necessity, that Member wherein a Gangreen is Ra∣dicated must be cut off. 329 Grease Moltn, is when his Fat is melted by over-hard Riding or Labour: You may know it by his Panting at the Breast and Girting place, and heaving at the Flank, which will be visible to be seen the Night you bring him in, and the next Morning, and besides, his Body will be very hot and burning. ib. Glaunders is such a lothsom and filthy dis∣ease, and withal so infectious, that it will infect those that stand nigh him. It cometh first of Heats and Colds, which beginneth with a thin Rheum, and as∣cendeth up to the Head, and setleth near to the Brain, and so venteth it self at the Nose, which in time groweth thick∣er and thicker, till it comes of a yellow∣ish Colour, like unto Butter, which is then very hard to cure, but if it comes to a viscious, and of a tough and slimy substance, and the Colour be Green, and stink much, having run some Months with some reddish Specks in it; then the most Experienced Farrier may fail in the Cure thereof, and the Horse die un∣der his Hands; for then it is most cer∣tain, if he hath those last Symptomes, that his Lungs are Ulcerated, and his Cure not to be performed without great difficulty. Besides, these inward Signes to know this Disease, I shall give you one outward, one which is, He will have some Kernels and Knots that may be felt under his Chaul, and as they grow bigger and more inflamed, so doth the Glaunders more increase within the Body of the Horse. I would advise you before you begin his Cure, to prepare his Body for four or five days together with scalded Bran, and give it him in∣stead of his Provender, for this will dry up the moisture and bad humours in his Body, then let him Blood in the Neck▪ and the next day Rake him, and give him the Glister in the First Part. 254 and 414 Graveling cometh to a Horse in traveling, by meanes of little Gravel stones get∣ting betwixt the Hoof and the Shoo, which setleth at the Quick, and there festereth and fretteth. 364 H. Hoof-Brittle, or Brittle-hoof, cometh either by Nature or Accident. It cometh Na∣turally by the Sire or Dam; Acciden∣tally by a Surfeit that fell down into his Feet, or else in that he had been formerly Foundred. 335 to 340 Hair falling or shedding from his Mane or Tail cometh by Heat taken, which hath engendred a dry Mange therein, which occasionth their sheding; som∣times it comes by a Surfeit, causing Evil Hu mours to resort to those Parts, &c. 345
Head-ach is a pain that cometh either of some inward cause, as of some cholerick humour, bred in the Panicles of the Brain, or of some outward cause, as of extream heat or cold, or of some sudden blow or noisom favour. The Signes to know it are, The Horse will hang down his Head and Eares, his Sight will be dim, his Eyes swollen and waterish, and he will forsake his meat. See the First Part. Hoof-cast, or casing of the Hoof, is when the Coffin falleth clean away from the Foot, which cometh by means of some Foundering, Prick or Stab, which break∣eth on the top round about the Coro∣net, which in time causeth it to fall off. 336 Hoof-bound is a shrinking in of the Hoof, on the top thereof, and at the heel, which maketh the skin to stare above the hoof, and to grow over the same; It cometh to a horse several ways, either by keeping them too dry in the Stable, by strait Shooing, or by some unnatural heat af∣ter Foundering. The Signes to know it are, He will halt much, and his hoofs will be hot, and if you knock them with a Hammer, they will sound hollow, like an empty Pottle, and if they are not both Hoof-bound, you may know which is the grieved Foot, by the smalnes of it. Some call this Sorrance a dry Founder∣ing. 377 Hide-bound, is when the skin sticketh so fast to the Horses Back and Ribs, that you cannot pull it from his Flesh with your hand. It cometh to a horse several ways, sometimes by Poverty, sometimes for want of good ordering, sometimes by over-heating him by hard Riding, and carelessly letting him stand in the Wet and Rain, and sometimes of cor∣rupt and filthy Blood Siccicating the Flesh, which wanting its natural course, causeth this shrinking of the Skin together, which maketh him illy disposed, and to have a gaunt, shrivelled and shrunk up Belly to his Flanks, ma∣king his Hair to stare, and his Legs to swell, with many more Signes; but let these serve in stead of more. 258 Hip-shot is when the Hip-bone is removed out of his right place; It cometh to him many ways, sometimes by a wrench or stroke of a horse, sometimes by slip, strain, sliding or falling. The Signes to know it are, He will halt and go side∣ling in his going, and the sore Hip will fall lower then the other, and the Flesh in process of time, will consume away, and if you suffer him to run too long, it will never be restored to its pristine Estate. 397 The Hurle-bone is about the midst of the Buttock, and is very apt to go out of the Socket with a Slip or Strain, the Cure of it you may find in p. 397 Hoof-swelled, cometh sometimes to young Horses, when you over-Ride, or hard la∣boring them in their youth, which make them to swell in that place, by reason the blood falling down there, setleth, which if it be not speedily removed, will beget a wet Spaven. 340 Haw in the Eye, is a Gristle growing be∣tween the nether Eye-lid and the Eye, and will put it quite out, if it be not taken in time away. It cometh to him by gross, rough and phlegmatick hu∣mours, which falleth from the Head, and knitteth together, which in the end groweth to this Infirmity. The Signes of it are, the watering of the Eye, and unwilling opening of the nether Lid. 288
Hough-bouey, is a round boney swelling like a Paris Ball, growing upon the very top or elbow of the Hough, and cometh ever of some stripe or bruise, or by bruising himself in his Stall, by of∣fering to strike at the Horse that stand∣eth next him, striketh against the Bar that divides them. 389 Hoof-loosened, is a dissolution or dividing of the Horn or Coffin of the Hoof from the flesh, at the setting on of the Cronet. Now if the parting be round about the Cronet, it cometh by means of Foun∣dering; If it be in part, then it cometh by some prick of some Channel-Nail, Quitter-bone, Retreat, Graveling or Cloying, or such like thing, The Signes to know it are these, When Loosened by Foundering, it will break first in the fore-part of the Cronet right against the Toes, because the Humour doth al∣ways covet to descend towards the Toe; but if it proceeds from Pricking, Gra∣veling and such like Cankered thing, then the Hoof will loosen round about, equally even at the first; but if it pro∣ceeds from a Quitter-bone, or hurt up∣on the Cronet, then the Hoof will break right above the place that is grieved, and very rarely seen to go any further. 336 Hungry-evil is a great desire to eat, it com∣eth from some great emptiness or lack of meat, when the Horse being even at the Pinch, and almost Chap-fallen; It comes many times by Cold outwardly taken, sometimes by Travelling in Frost and Snow, and in barren places, which outward cold maketh the stomach cold, whereby all the inward Powers are be∣come weakned. The signes to know it, are a change and alteration in his feed∣ing, having lost all temperance, and snatching and chopping at his meat, as if he would devour the Manger. 383 Imposthumes are swellings which come se∣veral ways, either by gathering of filthy corrupt humours in any part or mem∣ber of the Body, making that to swell, which grows at last to an Inflammati∣on, and breaks out into foul, mattery and running Sores, which proceed from corrupt food or bad blood, and at the first very hard and sore; There are two sorts of them, hot and cold; you must first ripen them before they can be heal∣ed; sometimes they are occasioned by some blow upon the Eares, or bruise by a Hempen Halter, or of Cold taken in the Head, which remaining in the Body, make their Passage through the Eares; It is known by much burn∣ing, and his unwillingness to be hand∣led about that place. 346 and 347 K. Kibed heels is a scab breeding behind, som∣what above the nether Joynt, growing overthwart the Fet-lock. It cometh many ways, sometimes by being bred in cold Grounds, sometimes for lack of good dressing after he hath been ridden or laboured in foul ways, which dirt sticking to his Legs, retteth his skin, and maketh scabby rifts, which are ve∣ry painful to the Horse▪ causing his Legs to swell, especially in Winter and Spring-time, and then he goeth very stiffly. What Cures the Scratches cures this disease. 266
Kernels under the Chaul of a Horse, com∣eth by Heats and Colds, which bring∣eth the Glanders. I refer you therefore to the Cure of the Glanders. 157 L. Lask, Loosness or open Flux of a Horses body▪ bringing him to extream weakness and faintness; It cometh sometimes from cold taken, sometimes by reason that Nature is offended with too many cho∣lerick humors, descending from the Li∣ver or Gall down into the Guts, some∣times by drinking too much cold water presently after he hath had his Proven∣der, for by that means the Water get∣ting to the Provender causeth it to swell and breed Crudities, and ill humours in the Stomach, and so conveyeth them∣selves down into the Guts, sometimes by sudden Travelling or hasty Run∣ning upon a full Stomach, before his Meat be well digested, sometimes by drinking cold Water when he is too hot, and not presently warmed in his Belly, sometimes by licking up a Fea∣ther, or Hens dung, with many other ways which will occasion it; stop it not too suddenly, for Nature it self is the best Physician; but if you find he hath had it so long, that Nature is become weak and feeble, then you are to seek out for some Remedy for the Cure of it. 307 Lampass is a Swelling that proceedeth from abundance of Blood, resorting to the first Furrow of the Mouth, joyning to the fore-Teeth, which will cause the said Furrow to swell as high as his Ga∣thers, which will hinder his Feeding, and make him let fall his Meat half chawed, out of his Mouth again. This is a natural Infirmity which every Horse hath first or last. And every commo Smith can Cure. 30 Ligs are little Pustles or Bladders within a Horses Lips; There are many other Diseases that belongs to the Mouth, viz. Bloody Rifts, Gigs, Camery, Inflammati∣on, Tongue-hurt, Barbs, and are all Cured by this one Receipt hereunder written, except the Lampass, which every Coun∣trey-Smith can cure, viz. Take Worm-wood and Shirwit, and bruise them in a Mortar, with a little Honey, and an∣oint the Sores with it, and they will do well. Leprosie is a Cankered Manginess spread∣ing over all the Body, which is very in∣fectious, cometh of abundance of Me∣lancholy, corrupt and filthy Blood, in∣fected by Surfeits taken by over-hard Riding or Labour. The Signes to know this Disease are, The Horse will be all Mangy and Scurfey, full of Scabs and raw places about his Neck, and not very pleasant to look on, and be always rub∣ing and scrubing. 369 Lice cometh of Poverty, and will breed most about the Eares, Neck and Tail, and over all the Body; they may be catched also by running abroad in the Winter in Woods, or places full of Trees, for the dropping of the Trees falling upon his lean and thin Body breed them, sometimes he may catch them from another Horse; You may know when he hath them by this, He wil rub and scrub himself against Walls and Posts, and will be always poor when he hath them. 369 Low-worm is a disease hardly known from St. Anthonies Fire, or the Shinles, have∣ing the very self-same Symptomes. 'Tis a Worm that is bred in the Back of a
Horse between the Skin and the Bone, and runeth along the Neck to the Brain, and when it cometh to touch the Panicle thereof, it maketh him stark mad; 'Tis known by these Signes, viz. After a long and wearisom Journey, he will be Sick, and fall from his Meat, and stretch out himself at length with his Feet, bon∣ding his Back, and straining to Piss, but cannot, but if he doth Stale, it is but little, and that in his Sheath, which in time will make him so Mad, that he will gnaw the Manger, Rack-staves, or any thing within his reach. Some Farriers take this disease for the Staggere, and so kills many a good Horse. The Cure hereof being not put down in the dis∣eases I have here inserted it. Take Six Heads of Garlick clean pilled, of A∣crement a quarter of a pound, Rue, and that Turmentile that beareth the yel∣low Flower, of each one pound, bruise them in a Mortar together, and put so much white-Wine to them, that after they be strained, there may be of the Juice and Wine two quarts; Then after you have Blooded him in the Tail pret∣ty well, divide this Pottle of Liquor in∣to six parts giving him one part every Morning, till he hath taken all of them; And this will perfectly Cure him, vide St. Anthonies Fire. p. 33 Lungs, the diseases of them cometh from Heats and Colds, by hard Riding, which Iet run too long without Cure, causeth them to putrifie, corrupt and rot. You may know this Infirmity by the beat∣ing of his Flanks▪ and working of his Ribs▪ but most chiefly when he Cough∣th, and then the more slowly they do beat and heave, the more old and dan∣gerous is the disease. He will draw his. Wind short, and but little at once, and groan often, especially when he lieth down and riseth up again, out of his Nose will issue forth Corruption, and will seem to shewsomthing between his Teeth. 333 and 334 Lethargy or Sleeping Evil, is most subject to Dun and white Horses. It proceed∣eth from Phlegm, cold and moist Humors which getteth into the Brain, does so stupifie and benumb it, which bringeth this sleepiness upon him, and is the true Sign of this disease. 354 Lunatick Eyes look sometimes as if they were covered with White, and somtimes they will look clear, and alter their co∣lour, according to the Moons, from which they take their Name, vide Moon-Eyes▪ 288 M. Mattering of the Yard, vide Yard Matterd 331 Melancholy is called the Staggers, but the true Name thereof is the Stavers, vide the Saggers. 335 Mofoundred cometh from the French, which signifieth Molten Grease, or Foun∣dering in the Body. 364 and 399 Moon-Eyes bear that Name, by reason that at certain times of the Moon they will seem very well, & atother times they seem covered over with a white Phlegm, which is the worst sort of Blindness that is, and is not to be Cured, for the more you tam∣per with it, the worse it is; therefore my advice is, that you let them alone, for they will go in and out till they go quite out▪ It may be called a Lunatick-Eye,
which cometh several ways, sometimes from the Sire or Dam, sometimes from evil humors residing in the Head, which descend down to the Eyes, and they come also by hard riding, or labouring, which the poor Beast was put to per∣form more then he was able. 288 Mallender is a kind of a dry and hard scab, which hath chinks and chops in it, and hard, stubborn and long staring hairs, like to Hogs bristles, growing about it, upon the inward part of the Fore-legs, just against the bending of the Knee. It is an evil Sorrance which Cankereth and Corrupteth the Flesh, and makes him go Lame at first going out; It com∣eth to him several wayes, sometimes by corrupt Blood, by hard Labour, or Ri∣ding, sometimes for lack of clean keep∣ing and rubbing; and usually those hor∣ses that hath most hair upon their Legs, as the Flanders and Freezlad Horses hath, are most subject to this disease. 275 Mange is a most infectious and filthy dis∣ease, which will make him rub and scrub against every thing he can lean against, and if you remove not his fellow-Crea∣tures that are in company with him, at home or abroad, they are subject to catch it from him. The Signes to know it are, His Hair will stare, and in many places pill away from his Skin, and a Scurf will arise thereon; it cometh som∣times also by over-heats and colds, by hard Riding or Labour, whereby the Blood is corrupted, or by feeding upon unwholesom Meat. 369 Mourning of the Chine, in plain English is no other then the Glaunders, which hath its first Source and Origen from heats and colds by hard Riding or Labour, which being let run too long, cometh to this filthy disease, the Glaunders; which in time doth waste the Liver, and pu∣trifie the Lungs, which will in Conclu∣sion kill the poor Creature, if not taken in time. 254 Those that have opened a Horse that hath died of this disease, have found the Pith and Chine sound and good, and there∣fore this Malady in reason cannot be called the Mourning of the Chine, but the Glaunders. Madness or Frenzy is divided into four Passions. The first is, when some bad Humors or Blood getteth into the Pa∣nicle of the Brain, but in one part only, it quickly makes him dull of Spirit and Sight; which you will know by this Sign, He will turn round like one that is Giddy; the reason is, because the out∣ward part of the Head is grieved only. The second is, when the Venom of such bad Blood doth infect the middle of the Brain, then he becometh Frantick, leap∣ing against Walls or any thing else that standeth in his way. The third is, when corrupt and bad Blood filleth the Veins of the Stomach, and infecteth as much the Heart as Brain, then he is said to be mad. The fourth and last is, When the Blood infecteth not only the Brain and Heart, but even the Panicles also, and then he is said to be stark mad, which you may know by biting at eve∣ry man that comes near him, and by gnawing the Manger and Walls about him, and at last he will be so very mad that he will tear his own skin in pieces. 354
Malt-long or Malt-Worm is a cankerous sor∣rance about the hoof just upon the Cro∣net, which will break out into Knobs and Branches, which will run with waterish sharp Lye, or Humor, which will Venom the whole Feet, Which are Signs enough to know them. 340 Molten-Grease see Grease-Molten. Mules, vide Scratches, for what cures them cures these. Mellet is a dry Scab that grows upon the Heel of the fore-Feet. 388 N Navel-gall is a bruise on the back, or Pinch of a Saddle behind, which if let alone too long, is difficult to Cure 'Tis called a Navel-gall, because the Hurt is right against the Navel. 353 Night-Mare is a Melancholy blood that doth oppress the heart, making himsweat more in the night then in the day, which doth take from him his rest; the way to know it is, by taking notice of him in the Morning, whether he Sweats in the Flanks, Neck and short Ribs, which if he do, you may be sure that he hath it. 239 O, Over-reach is a painful Swelling of the master Sinew, which is by reason that he doth over-reach and strike that Sinew with the Toe of his hinder Foot, which maketh him to halt and go lame. vide Attaint upper and nether. 235 P. Pissing of blood cometh several ways, some∣times by riding him too hard, by labour∣ing him beyond his strength, or by carry∣ing too heavy a burden upon his back; sometimes it cometh by reason of some Vein broken in his Body, and then clean blood will issue forth many times; some∣times it cometh by some Stone fretting upon the Kidneys, by hard Riding or Labour; And lastly, it cometh by Jour∣neying him in Winter, being newly taken up from Grass, and travelling him before he is thoroughly cleansed from his Grass, which cannot be well under a week or two. Your Eyes are the Wit∣nesses of this disease, for he will Piss water like to Blood. 315 Powle-evil is a Fistula growing betwixt the Eares and the Powle, or nape of the neck, which proceedeth from evil humors that approach unto that place, or else of some blow or bruise, for that is the weakest and tenderest part of all the head, and therefore soonest offnded, which rude Carters do little consider of, whilst in their fury they beat them upon their Head with their Whip-stocks; And therefore no Horses more subject to this disease then they; This disease comethmost in the Winter. The Signs to know it is by the Swelling of the place, which in process of time will break of it self, rotting more inward then out∣ward, therefore is more dangerous, if not Cured in time. 317 Pursiveness or shortness of Breath cometh two ways, Natural and Accidental; Natural is when he is Cock-thropled, for that his Thropel or Wind-pipe be∣ing so long, that he is not able to draw it in and out, with so much ease and plea∣sure as other Horses do that are loose thropled, for that the Wind-pipe being
too strait that should convey his Breath to his Lungs, and vent it forth again at his Nose, makes him pant and fetch his Breath thus short; Likewise, when his Pipe is too much filled with fat or other Phlegmatick stuff, which suffocates him, and makes his Lungs labour the more; It cometh secondly by Accident, when he is hard ridden after a full stomach, or pre∣sently after drinking, which causth phlegmatick humors to distil out of the Head into the Wind-pipe, and so fall up∣on the Lungs, where they rest and con∣geal, &c. It cometh also by Heats, Colds, Glaunders, and the like; And brings with it a great many Inconvenien∣cies, viz. Dulness and Heaviness in Travel, subject to sweat much, and ready to fall down upon every little strain. 252 Prickt is called Accloyed, Cloyed or Retrait, &c. Most of which Names are borrowed of the French, and signifies no more then a Prick, by the negligence or unskilful∣ness of the Farrier, in driving of the Nails, by their weakness, ill pointing or breaking of them; which if not presently taken out, will in time break out into a foul sore; You may know it by his go∣ing lame; but if you desire to know it more certainly, pinch him round his Hoof with a pair of Pinchers, and when you come to the grieved place, he will shrink in his Foot; Or you may try him where he is prickt by throwing water upon this Hoof, for that place where he is prickt will be sooner dry then any of the rest. With many other Signes there are which your Ingenuity may find out. 396 Planet-struck or Shrow-running, is a depri∣privation of feeling or motion, not stir∣ring any of his Members, but remain in the same form as when he was first strick∣en. It cometh to a Horse several ways, sometimes by choler and phlegm super∣abundantly mixt together, sometimes from Melancholy Blood, being a cold and dry humour, which oppress and make sick the hinder part of the Brain, sometimes of extraordinary heat or cold, or raw digestion, striking into the Veins suddenly; Or lastly, from extream Hunger, occasioned by long Fasting, The Signes whereof you have had al∣ready, viz. Numbness and want of Motion. If this Disease cometh of Heat, You may know it by the hotness of his Breath, and the free fetching of his Wind; If it proceed from Cold, then you may know it by his stuffing and poze in his Head. 239 Palsie or Apoplexie is a Disease depri∣ving the whole Body of Sence, and which is called a General Palsey, and hath no Cure. But when he is deprived but of some part and Member of his Body, (and most commonly it is in his Neck) then it is called a particular Palsey; The Signes to know it are, He will go Groveling and side-ways like a Crab, carrying his Neck as if it were broken, and goeth crookedly with his Legs, beating his Head against the Walls, and yet forsaketh not his Meat nor Drink, and his Pro∣vender seemeth moist and wet. It pro∣ceeds from foul Feeding in Fenny Grounds, which breed gross and tough Humors, which joyneth with Crudities and raw Digestion, oppress the Brain, or it com∣eth by means of some wound or blow given him upon the Temples. 354 Pearl, Pin and Web, or any unnatural
spot or thick Felm over the Eye, cometh by some stroke or blow given him, or from descent of the Sire or Dam. The Pearl is known by a little round, thick white spot like a Pearl, (from which it hath its Name) growing on the Sight of the Eye. 288 The Pains is a kind of Ulcerous Scab full of Fretting Matterish Water, and breed∣eth in the Pastorns betwixt the Fet∣lock and the Heel, which cometh for want of clean keeping, and good rub∣bing, after the Horse hath been Jour∣neyed, by means whereof the Sand and dirt remaining in the Hair, fretteth the Skin and Flesh, which cometh to a Scab, and therefore those Horses that have long Hair, and are rough about the Feet, as the Friezland and Flanders Hor∣ses are, are soonest infected with this Dis∣ease, if they be not the cleanlier kept. The Signes be these, His Legs will swell with the vehemency and heat that is caused from the venom and filthy wa∣ter that issueth from the scabs, for it is so sharp and scaulding▪ that it will scauld off the Hair, and breed scabs so far as it goeth. What Cures the Scratches cures these. 266 Pestilence, Plague, Murrain or Garget is all one disease, which is very Infectious and Contagious; It cometh to a Horse many ways, sometimes by over-hard Riding or Labour, whereby a Horse is surfeited, somtimes by the Contagiousness of the Air, and Evil Vapours and Ex∣halations that springs out of the Earth, after great and sudden Floods, or coming into Fenny or Marish Ground that hath alwayes been bred in pure and wholesom Air. The Signes to know this Disease are these; 'Twill come sud∣denly upon him, but after three or four days drooping, he will swell under the Roots of his Eares, like the Swelling of the Vives, and under the Chaul, and come up to his Cheeks through the Malignancy thereof, and become very hard, he will forsake his Meat, and be very sleepy, hanging down his Head in the Manger, his Eyes will be yellowish, he will Breath short, which will be very hot and offensive, and sometimes he will break forth in a Carbuncle or Boyl in his Groine, as big as a Goose-Egg, and his Stones will hang Limp and Flaging, but not always. If you cannot recover him, but that he dieth, bury him very deep, that no scent, if possible, may re∣main on him to infect the rest. 314 Q. Quinsey is no other then a sore Throat, which if not carefully taken in time, will soon put a period or end to his days. It com∣eth sometimes by Cold and Phlegmatick Humors setling there, or for want of Blooding, when he is over-run there∣with. 368 Quarters false, vide false Quarters. Quick-scab doth putrifie and corrupt the Blood and Flesh, and at last breaketh forth into a lothsom and infectious Disease much like unto the Mange or Leprosic. It cometh by a Surfeit taken by over-Riding or hard Labour, it is called a Quick-scab, because it runneth from one Member to another, for sometimes it will be in the Neck, and at other times in the Breast, sometimes in the Main, and then another time in the Tail. 398 Quitter-bone is a hard Round Swelling
upon the Cronet, between the heel & the Quarter, and groweth most commonly on the inside of the Foot. It cometh to a Horse many ways, sometimes by Gra∣vel underneath the Shoo, sometimes by some Bruise, Stub, Prick of a Nail, or the like, which being neglected, will Impostumate and break out about the Hoof, it cometh sometimes also by evil humors which descend down to that place, whereof that Quitter-bone springeth. 355 R Red-water is that which issueth from any Wound, Sore or Ulcer, which so long as that remains in them, it doth so poison them, that till it get out, they are not to be Curd. 357 Rig-bone cometh two ways; Naturally, or Accidentally; Naturally, from the Stalli∣on or Mare, Accidentally by some blow of a Horse, or any other Acci∣dent, the Pain whereof breedeth a vi∣scous slimy Humour, like a Gristle upon the top of the Cronet, and sometimes goeth round about it, which resorting to the Bones that are of their own Nature, cold and dry, waxeth hard, and cleaveth to some Bone, which in process of time cometh to a Bone; the Signs to know it are, There will be a hard swelling round about the Cronet of the Hoof, which will be higher then any place of it; besides, his Hair there will stare and be bristly▪ and make him halt. 356 Rtenness is to have his inward Part, viz. His Liver Lights and Lungs so wasted and consumed, that he is not to be reco∣vered by Ar▪ Rheumatick or waterish Eyes, cometh by the Flux of Humors, distiling from the Brain, and sometimes by some stripe received; The Signes to discover it is, The con∣tinual watering of the Eye, and his close shutting of his Lids together, accompa∣nied somtimes with a little swelling. 288 Rupture, Incording or Burstness is, when the Rim or thin Film or Chaul, which holdeth up his Entrails, be broken or o∣ver-strained, or stretched, that the Guts fall down either into his Cod or Flank, which cometh several wayes, either by some stripe or blow, or by some strain in leaping over a Hedg, ditch or Pale, or by teaching him to bound when he is too young, or by forcing him when he is full to run beyond his strength; or by your sudden stoping him upon uneven ground, whereby he stradling and slipping his hinder Feet, teareth the Rim of his Belly, The Signs to know it are these, He will forsake his Meat, and stand shoring and leaning on that side that he is hurt; And if you search on that side with your Hand, betwixt his Stone and his Thigh upwards to the Body, and some∣what above the Stone; you shall find the Gut it self big and hard in the feel∣ing, whereas on the other side you shall find no such thing. 387 & 388 Rt-tails is a most venomous disease, and not much unlike to the Scratches of a horse. It cometh to him several ways, sometimes by too much rest, and the Keepers negligence in not rubing and dressing him well; and by reason of too much rest and good keeping without exercise, the blood corrupting in his body falls down into his Legs, which causeth this disease. 377
Retrat is no other then a Prick in the Foot by a Nail, vide Prickt. 395 Rheum cometh by Cold, which maketh his Teeth loose, and seem long by the shrink∣ing up of his Gums, which will spoil his feeding, that all the Meat will lie in Lumps in his Jaws, vide Colds 241 Rot is a disease so like unto a Dropsey, that it is hard to distinguish it from the same; mistake not this disease for rottenness; for if he be rotten, his Liver and Lights are so putrified, that they are not to be reco∣vered: But this Rot is of the Nature of a Sheeps Rot that is said to be rotten, when his Liver is become soul and taint∣ed, yet we do eat his flesh, and affirm it to be good meat, whereby the Sheep is not rotten, but hath a Disease called the Rot; It cometh several ways, sometimes to young Horses feeding in Wet or Fenny Grounds, and sometimes when they are over-heated in their breaking, whereby their Blood is enflamed, putrified and cor∣rupted, causing Obstructions in the Li∣ver, which cause putrefaction, and so knots and pustils do engender therein, which breedeth this Disease. The Signes are these, he will lose his Stomach, pant much, beat and heave in his Flanks, swell under his Belly, his Hair will stare, his Legs swell, burn and dint when you press it with your Finger, and his Coat will not shed at those usual times as other Horses do, and will be so faint and feeble that he will lose his courage and mettle. 398 Running of the Reins, vide Mattering of the Yard. 131 S. Shedding of the Seed cometh somtimes from abundance and rankness of the Seed, sometimes by Strains, or putting too hea∣vy a load upon his Back, and sometimes by weakness of the Stones and Seed-Ves∣sels, not being able to retain the Seed un∣til it be digested and thickned. 331 Strain or Sprain is the Sinews stretched be∣yond their strength, by reason of some slip or wrench. 294 Shackle-gall is on the Pastornes, vide Gall 284 Surbating is a beating of the Hoof against the Ground; It cometh sometimes by means of evil shooing, lying too flat to his Feet, sometimes by Travelling a Horse too young before his Feet are hardned, which many times doth oc∣casion a Foundring, sometimes by hard∣ness of the Ground, and high lifting up of the Horses Feet; and those Horses that are flat footed, their Cons are so tender and weak, that they be most sub∣ject to this Sorrance. The signes to know it is, he will Halt on both his fore-Legs, and go stiffely and creeping al∣though he were half Foundred. 373 Spleen, see the Nature of it. 329 Screw is the Nature of a splint, only the splint is on the inside of the Knee, and the screw is on the outside 263 Swellings and Tumors cometh by Heats and Colds, taken by hard Riding, or fore La∣bour, whereby the Horse being over∣much heated, the Grease falleth down and setleth in his Legs and other parts, which grow dry and hard, and breed∣eth splints, spavens, curbs, Ring-bones and the like sorrances, which in time are no other things then proper Tumors, Besides, it doth occasion other Knots
and swellings. See the First Part for the Cure of them. Scratches are of several sorts and kinds, though they are called by several Names, viz. Crepances, Rats-tails, Mules, Kibes, Pains, &c. being no other then the very Scratches which are certain dry Scabs, Chaps or Rifts, that breed between the Heel and the Pastorn-Joynt, and so goeth many times above the Pastorn, even up to the very Hoof of the hinder Legs, but sometimes they are upon all four Legs, though not very common, They proceed several ways, sometimes by dry melancholy Humors which fall down upon his Legs, some∣times by fuming of his own dung lying under his heels, or near him, sometimes by the Negligence of the Groom, in not rubbing his Heels well, especially after a Journey or hard Labour, when he brings in his Horse from Water, and doth not rub his Legs and Heels dry from the Sand and Dirt which doth burn and fret them, and so cause Swel∣lings, and those Swellings cause Scratch∣es: sometimes it cometh by corruption of the blood after great heats and sur∣feits, taken sometimes by being bred in Fenny, Marish and watery Grounds; and sometimes they come to a Horse after a very great Sickness taken by Surfeit; Or lastly, by over-hard Riding or Labour, whereby his Grease is molten, which falleth down and setleth in his Pastorns and Feet-locks, which doth oc∣casion this Sorrance. The Signes to know it are these, The staring, dividing and curling of the Hair; it beginneth first with a dry scab upon his Pastorn Joynts, like unto chaps or chinks, and are in several shapes and formes, some∣times long, sometimes downright, some∣times overthwart, which will cause the Legs to swell, and be very gourdy, and run with fretting, waterish, matterative and offensive stuff, which will make him go so lame at the first setting out, that he will be hardly able to go. 'Tis good to clip away his long shaggy hain from his Pastorns, (if he have any) which will in some measure prevent them, or or at least curb them. 266 Sit-fast or Stick-fast is a hard Knob, which is as hard as a Horn that grows in a Horses Skin, under the Saddle, fast to his Flesh, which cometh by a Saddle-Gall or Bruise, which not Imposthumating, the Skin falleth dead, and looketh like a hard piece of Leather. 352 A Surfeit is occasioned by Heats and Colds; The Signes to know it is, He will not thrive, but be gaunt Bellied, and dried up in his Body, and cannot Cough but Gruntingly. His Coat will stand sta∣ring, and doth not lie smooth, sometimes his Cods will swell; And when it fal∣leth out of his Body into his Legs, they will swell also and stink, by reason of the thin, moist, white, yellow, thick and stinking Water or Matter that flows from them, which will make them so stiff, that he is not able to go over the Threshold. 366 Not Staling or Dunging cometh several wayes, sometimes by being too high kept, and but little exercise given him; therefore exercise is as wholesom for a Horses Health, as good Food is nourish∣ing to his Body, sometimes it cometh
when you suddenly travel him, when he hath been newly taken from Grass, before his Body is emptied of it, and dry meat put into the room thereof, The Signes to know this Grief is, He will lie down and tumble with extream pain, as if he had the Bots. 357 Staling of Blood, vide Pissing of Blood. Selender is a kind of Scab, and is the same with the Mallender, only the difference is, that the Mallender breedeth upon the bending of the Knee, on the inside of the Fore-Legs, and the Selender is bred on the bending of the Hough in the Legs behind, proceeding both of like causes, and requireth like Cure. 275 Stinking Breath is occasioned by means of corrupted and infected Lungs, and you may know it by the Smell, vide Lungs in∣fected. 333 A Splint in the beginning is a very Gristle, and will, if let run too long, become to be as hard as a Bone, and will be greater or smaller according to the cause of its Coming, sometimes as big as a Wall-Nut, sometimes as big as a Hazel-Nut; It is found for the most part upon the inside of the Shank between the Knee and the Foot∣lock Joynt, and is very hard and diffi∣cult to Cure; It is so painful to Him, that it will not only cause him to Halt, Trip, Stumble, but also fall in his Travel; It cometh to him by means of too hard Travel, or sore Labour, whilst he is very young, or by oppressing him with too heavy a burden, whereby the tender Si∣news of his Legs are offended; It cometh also Hereditary, from the Sire or Dam being troubled therewith, and is known by the sight and feeling, for if you pinch it with your Thumb and Finger, he will shrink up his Leg. 263 Stumbling cometh two ways; First, Natu∣rally; Secondly, Accidentally; Natu∣rally, by reason that the Sinews of the fore-Legs are somewhat streight, so that he is not able to use his Legs▪ with that freedom and nimbleness he should; which to Cure him of this Disease, is to cut him of the Cords, viz. A Slit made upon the top of his Nose, and with your Cornet raise up the great Sinews, and cut them asunder, and heal it up again with some good Salve, and this will do him no harm but good, for it will give him the use of his Legs so perfectly, that he will seldom or never trip more. Secondly, Accidentally, by either Splint or Wind∣galls, or by being foundred, prickt, sub'd, graveled, Sinew-strained, hurt in the Shoulder or Withers, or by carelessly set∣ting him up when he is too hot, which maketh him go very stiff, which stiffness causes stumbling. 341 Stavers or Staggers, is a Giddiness in the Head, which when it seizeth the Brain, cometh to Madness; It is caused several ways; sometimes by corrupt blood, or gross and tough humors oppressing the Brain, and is very common to most Hor∣ses, and very dangerous if not taken in time; sometimes it cometh by turn∣ing him out too soon to Grass before he be cold, which by hanging down his Head to Seed, stirreth and make thin Humors that fall down to the head, and so by degrees seizeth the Brain, which bringeth this mortal Sickness; It com∣eth also by sore riding and hard labour;
which inflames and putrifies the Blood, and disorders the whole Body; The signes of this Disease are these, Dim∣ness of sight▪ reeling and staggering of the Horse, who for very pain will beat his Head against the Walls, and thrust it into his Litter, forsake his Meat, and have waterish Eyes 235 Swelled Legs cometh to a Horse several ways▪ sometimes by hard Riding or sore Labour when he is too fat, and carelessly putting him to Grass, or set∣ting him up in the Stable too hot, whereby he taketh cold which causeth the Blood, Grease and Humours to fall down into his Legs, and so cause them to swell, sometimes it cometh by long standing in the stable, when the Planks where his fore-Feet stand higher then his hinder-Feet doth, which uneasie po∣sture causeth the Blood to settle in the hinder Legs, which causeth them to swell. 287 Stifled, this Malady cometh to a Horse Ac¦cidentally, viz. Either by some strain in Leaping, or by a slip in the stable, or on his Travel, or by some stroke or blow with a horse, which either puts out the bone, or much hurts or strains the Joynt, The sign to know it is, by the dislocated bone, bearing it self out which will make him grow lame, and unwilling to touch the Ground, but on∣ly with his Toe, till it be put in again. 393 Stone cometh many ways, sometimes from the weakness of the Bladder, occasione▪ by gross and bad Humors, stoping the Water-Conduit, or principally by violent Labour, or immoderate Riding, sometimes it cometh by foul Matter descending from the Liver and Spleen, which falling down into the Kidneys and Bladder, setleth there; whereby there groweth in the Mouth of the Conduit, certain hard inflamed Knobs, which stoppeth his Urine, and causeth him to stale with great pain and trouble, by reason the Sinews and Pozes about the Neck of the Bladder are benumb∣ed, which taketh away the sense and feeling of the Bladder, sometimes it cometh by keeping a Horse in his Travel too long from staling, for his Water being over-heat by Exercise, doth conglutinate and become so vis∣cous and thick; that Nature cannot discharge it self so freely as it should do, and being pent up too long in his Kidneys, engendereth Gravel, some∣times red, and sometimes grey, which falling down into the Conduits, by mixture of Phlegm and gross Humours, is there brought by Conglutination, to become a hard stone, which stoppeth the Passage of the Urine, so as he will not be able to piss or stale, The signes to know this Distemper, needs no more then this, That he would fain piss, but cannot, and that many times drop by drop. 360 and 363 String-halt is a sudden twitching or snatching up of his hinder-Leg much higher then the other, and cometh most an end to the best Metled Horses. It cometh by taking cold suddenly after hard Riding or sore Labour, especially if you wash him when he is too hot, which will chill his Blood, and so stupisie and
benumb his Sinews, that it takes away the sense and feeling of that Member. 341 and 394 Strangury or Strangullion is when a Horse is provoked to stale often, and avoideth nothing but a few drops; It cometh to him several ways, sometimes by hard Riding or sore Labour, which heats and makes sharp the Urine, somtimes by hot meats and drinks, sometimes by Ulce∣ration of the Bladder, or by means of some Imposthume in the Liver and Kid∣neys, which being broken, the Matter falleth down into the Bladder, and with the sharpness thereof, causeth a conti∣nual provocation of Pissing, which will be with such pain, that he will whisk, wry, and beat about his Tail as he pis∣seth 360 The Strangle is not, as some suppose, a Quin∣zey, but an Inflammation of the throat, proceeding from some cholerick or bloody Fluxion, which cometh out of the branches of the Throat-veins into those parts, and there breedeth some hot Inflammation, stirred up by a hard cold Winter, or by cold taken after hard riding or labour. 'Tis a great and hard swelling between the Horses ne∣ther chaps, upon the roots of his Tongue, and about his Throat, which swelling, if it be not prevented, will stop his Wind-pipe, and so strangle or choke him: The Signes to know this disease are, His Temples of his Head will be hollow, his Tongue will hang out of his Mouth, his Head and Eyes will swell, and the passage of his Throat so stopt that he can neither eat nor drink, and his Breath will be very hot. 349 Swayed in the Back cometh several ways, sometimes by some great strain, slip or heavy burden, sometimes by turning him too hastily round: His Grief com∣monly lieth upon these kind of strains and wrenches, in the lower part of the back below his short ribs, and directly between his Fillets. You may perceive it by the reeling and rowling of his hinder parts in his going, and be ready to fall to the Ground by his frequent swaying backward and side-long, and when he is down, 'tis a great deal of trouble for him to rise again 399 Shoulder-pincht cometh either by labour∣ing or straining him too young, or by putting too great a burden upon his back. You may know it by the narrow∣ness of the Breast, and by the Con∣sumption of the flesh of the shoulders, insomuch as the fore-part of the shoul∣der bone will stick out, and be higher then the flesh. And if it be of a long standing, he will be very hollow upon the brisket, towards the Arm-holes, and will go wider beneath at the Feet, then above at the Knees. The Cure I set down here, because it is not in the place of Cures: 'Tis this, Give him a Slit with a sharp Knife an inch long, upon both sides, an inch under the shoulder-bone: then with a large Quill put into the Slit, blow up first one shoulder, and then the other, as big as you can pos∣sibly, even up to the Withers, and with your hand strike the Wind equally into every place of the shoulders, and when they be both full, beat all the windy pla∣ces, with a good Hazel wand over all the Shoulder, then with a flat Sclice of Iron loosen the skin within from the flesh: Then rowel the two slits or cuts, with two round Rowels made of the up∣per Leather of an old Shoo, with a hole in the midst, that the corruption may issue forth, and let the Rowels be three
inches road, and put in flat and plain within the Cut; Then make a Charge and lay upon the same: Look in the Table for a Charge, and there you may take your Choice. Shoulder-wrench or Strain cometh several ways, sometimes by turning or stop∣ping too suddenly upon some uneven ground, sometimes by running hastily out at some door, som etimes by slip∣ping or sliding in the Stable or abroad, sometimes by the stroke of another Horse, and sometimes by falls on the Planks or slippery Ground. You shall perceive it by his Trailing his Leg up∣on the Ground close after him. 351 Shoulder-splaiting or Shoulder-trn, cometh by some dangerous sliding, either a∣broad or at home, whereby the shoul∣der parteth from the Breast, and so leaves an open Rift, not in the Skin, but in the flesh and film next under the skin, which maketh him so lame that he is not able to go. You may know it by the trailing of his Leg after him in his going▪ 417 Shoulder-pight is, when the Shoulder-point or pitch of the Shoulder is displaced by some great Fall, Rack or Strain. You may know it by this, His Shoulder-point will stick out further then his fellow, and besides he will Halt down∣right. ib. Spaven-blood or bone, vide Blood or Bone∣spaven. Shrow-running, vide Planet-struck. T. Tongue-hurt cometh by accident, or with a Bit, Halter or the like. 374 Tetter, Flying-worm or Ring-worm, is a very evil sorrance, which runneth up and down the Skin of a Horses Body, from whence it bears its Name; It com∣eth to him several ways, sometimes by heat in the Blood, which engendreth a sharp and hot humour; sometimes by bad and foul feeding; it is most com∣monly found in his Rump, which run∣neth down the Joynts till it comes into his Tail, and if it continue there long it will turn to a Canker; But yet sometimes it will settle upon some fleshy part of his Body, which will so trouble him with itching and rubbing against walls and posts, that he will bring away the hair, yea, and the Skin and Flesh also with his Teeth, if he can come at it, so violent is his itching. You may know it by the falling away of the hair, by his continual rubbing, but if it get into the Joynt between the top of the Rump and the Tail, then it is known by a Scab, which you may feel with your Finger, and if you scrape or pick it away, there will come out of it by little and little a thin water, which being let long to run, will in time run into his Tail, and become a Canker, as I said before. 371 Trunchions are wormes in shape, short and thick, and of a pretty bigness, which have black and hard heads, vide more for Bots; and there you may find all the kinds of them that do engender in a Horses Body. 303 V. Aves, Avives or Fives, are all one Disease; They are certain flat Kernels, much like unto Bunches of Grapes, which grow in a Cluster close knotted together in the grieved place. They Center from the Ears, and creep downwards be∣tween the Chap and the Neck of the Horse toward the Throat; and when they come to inflame, they will swell, and not only be painful to the Horse,
but prove mortal by stopping his Wind, unless you take a speedy course for the Cure of him; 'Tis commonly rankness of Blood that is the cause of this Infir∣mity. When you go about the Cure of them, have a care you touch them not with your Fingers, for that will venom them. 376 W. Wind-broken, or broken Wind, cometh to a Horse, when you let him stand long in the stable without exercise, and foul food, whereby gross and thick humors are drawn into his Body so abundantly, that sticking to the hollow places of the Lungs stop up his Wind-pipe, that the Wind cannot get backward nor for∣ward: sometimes it cometh to a Horse when you run him off his Wind, when he is very fat and foul, you may know it by his heaving and drawing together of his Flanks, and by blowing wide his Nostrils. 251, 252 Wart or spungy Excression growing near to the Eye, doth come from condensed Phlegm residing there, which in time causeth the Eye, either to consume or to grow little, if it be not remedied. 279 A Wen is a hard Rising out of the flesh, like a Tumor and Swelling, and are of several Sizes, sometimes great, some∣times small, some are painful, and some are not painful; They proceed from gross and vitious humors, binding to∣gether in some sick part of the Body, but most commonly by some stroke, bruise, blow or a stone thrown at that place, it is outwardly flesh, but towards the root it is Matterative. 278 Wind-Galls are Bladders full of corrupt Gelly, which being let forth is thick, and of the colour of the Yolk of an Egg; they are sometimes great, and sometimes small, and grow upon each side of the Fet-lock Joynts upon all four legs, and are so painful to him, especially in the Summer season, when the Weather is hot, and the ways hard, that they make him not only halt downright, but some∣times fall; They come for the most part from extream labour and heat, whereby the humors being dissolved, do flow and resort into the hollow places about the nether Joynts, and there settle, which is the occasion of this evil Malady. 377 VVolfes-teeth are two small teeth growing in the upper Jaws, next unto the great grinding teeth, which are so painful to him, that he cannot endure to chaw his meat, but is forced either to let it fall out of his Mouth, or to keep it still half chewed. 384 Wormes vide Bots. and there you may find all sorts of them that breed in a Horses Body, and how you may distinguish them one from another. 303 VVind-cholick, vide Cholick. 363 and 377 Wrench in a Horses back, vide Flanks. 300 The Womb of a Mare is subject to many diseases, viz. Ascent, Descent, Falling out, Convulsion, Barrenness. Abortion, &c. She may be barren through the untemperateness of the Womb or Matrix, as for that it is too hot and fiery, or else too cold and moist, or else too dry, or else too short, or too nar∣row, or having the Neck thereof turn∣ed awry, or by means of some obstru∣ction or stopping in the Matrix, and that the Mare is too fat, or too lean, or sometimes for want of being well hor∣sed; the cure is, Take a good Handful of Leeks well stamped in a Mortar, with half a Glass full of white-Wine, then put to it twelve Flies called Cantharides, then strain altogether with a sufficient
quantity of water, that may serve her therewith two days together, by pouring the same into her nature with a Horn or Glister-Pipe made of purpose, and at the end of three days next following, offer the Horse unto her that should cover her, and immediately after she is covered, wash her Nature twice together with cold water. Or take Nitrum, Sparrows dung and Turpentine, of each a like quantity wrought together, and made like a Suppository, and put into her Na∣ture, causeth her to desire the Horse, and also to conceive. Y. Yellows in a horse is the same that the Physicians do call the Jaundice in a man, and there are two kinds of them, The yellow and the black, the yellow being moist, and the black dry; the yellow proceeds from the overflowing of the Gall, occasioned by Choler, and the black cometh from the overflowing of the Spleen, proceeding from Me∣lancholy, which are both dangerous in∣firmities, but the black is most deadly and mortal. The yellow is discovered by the changing his natural colour from white to yellow, viz. The Balls of his Eyes, The Tongue, the inside of his Lips and inward parts of his No∣strils are coloured yellow; The black Jaundice is discovered by the quite contrary symptomes; for having this disease, the whites of his Eyes, Tongue, Mouth and Lips will be of a duskish colour, and not so clear and sanguine as before. And though this distin∣ction of the yellow and black Jaundice be strange to some Farries, ye it is most certain, that when a Horse dieth of the Yellows, he dieth of the black Yellows, for when it cometh unto the case of Mortality, then are all the in∣ward parts converted to blackness, and the yellow substance is clean mastered. The Origen of this Malady cometh principally from unnatural heats given him by hard riding or labour, which inflames the Liver, Gall, Blood and Spleen, which causeth choler to have the sovereignty and dominion over the humors, which occasions this disease, which endeth in a sudden death, if not timely prevented. 237 Yard mattering or mattering of the Yard, cometh most commonly in covering time, by his over-freeness in spending upon Mares, when the Horse and Mare are both too hot, doth burn them, gi∣ving him the Running of the Reins, as we truly term it, The Signes to know it are, The falling down of yellow Mat∣ter from the Yard, and a swelling at the end thereof, and when he staleth, he will do it with a great deal of pain, and cannot well draw up his Yard a∣gain. 331 Yard fallen down, or Falling down of the Yard, cometh to him for want of strength, to draw it up within the Sheath, but let it hang down between his Legs; It is occasioned either through the weakness of that Member, or by means of some Resolution in the Muscles and Sinews serving the same, caused by some violent slip, strain or stroke in the Back, or else by some great weariness and tyring. 332 and 381
The TABLE of the Diseases and Cures. THE Nature, Temperature and Virtue of most Simples, set down Alphabetically. From page 175. to p. 224 A. Accloyed is Prickt. vide Prickt. An Advertisement, not only about the several sorts of Aloes, how you may know and distinguish them one from Another, but also some Directions for the Physicking of Horses, and for Dressing of Wounds. From p. 226 to 228 An Advertisement touching the Ʋse∣fulness, not only of the Table of Simples, but also of the General Simples set down one after another before every Disease. 229 Antimony crude or raw, the use of it declared. 232 Aches, Numbness, or any swelling or weakness in any Joynt or Sinew, Ge∣neral Simples good for them. ib. Aloes, how to make into Purges and Scourings, See the manner of it af∣ter the best Receipt for the Glanders, at the latter End of the Book. St. Anthonies Fire, General Things good for the Cure of it. 233 Particular Receipts good for the same. 234 Anticor or Heart-Sickness, General things good for the Cure of it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Attaint Upper or Nether, General Things good for the Cure of it. 235 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Aristes, vide Rats-Tails. Apoplexie, vide Palsey. Adders Tongue Ointment, vide Ointments Anberry cured 279 Aloes, several excellent Ways how you are to make it up into Purges. 414 and 415 B. Broken Wind, General Simples good to help it. 251 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Breath short, General Simples good to help it. 252 Particular Receipts good for the same. 253 Blood-Spaven, General Things good for the Cure of it. 260 Particular Receipts good for the same. 261 Bone Spaven Cured ib▪ and 379 Back Galled to Cure. From 283 to 285 Bruises or Swellings, either inward or outward, General Simples good for the Cure of them. 285 Particular Receipts good for the same▪ 286 Bruises and Strains, Observations upon the Cure of them. 293
Back-Wrench't, weak or swayed, General Things good for the Cure of it 330 and 331 Barbes cured 331 Bots or Wormes, General Things good for the destroying of them. 303 Particular Receipts good for the same. 304 Bangle-Eares help'd, vide First Part, 121 Bleeding, General Simples good to stanch it. 306 Particular Receipts good for the same. 307 Binding, Simples in General, which is good to stop a Loosness, Lask or bloody Flux, ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. 308 Biting of a mad Dog, to Cure, General things good for it. 312 Particular Receipts good for the same, ib. Blood-letting, swelling after it to cure, be it never so bad. 379 Burning or Scalding, either by Shot, Gun-powder or Wilde Fire, General Things good for the Cure of them. 380 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. A Bath for swelled Cods. 387 Botch in the Groin to cure. 388 Blisters cured. 389 Bones broken and out of Joynt cured. 391 A Bath very good for the same. 392 Back-swayed to cure. 399 C. A Caution about Aloes. 226 Comprehensive terms explained. 230 and 231 Cold and Hot Ointments repeated ver again, and the Vertues that belonged unto them made known. 231 Cramps or Convulsions of the Si∣news, General things good to help them. 239 Particular Receipts good for the same. 240 Colds and Coughs of all sorts, Ge∣neral Simples good for the Cure of them. 241 Particular Receipts good for all the sorts of them. 242 to 250 Curb to cure, general Things good for it. 265 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Cib'd Heels, vide Scratches, for what cures them cures these. 266 Crepances, vide Rat-tails. Camery, vide Frounce Canker cured 302 and 318 Canker, vide Fistula, and all other run∣ning and foul Sores to cure. Colt-Evil, General Things good for the cure of it. 330 Consumption, General Simples good for the cure of it. 333 Particular Receipts good for the same. 334 Cords, which is stumbling, General Things good for the Cure of it. 341 Cleansers of the Body from all manner of foul Humours, General Simples
good for it, 344 Cholick or Stone, General Simples good for the Cure of it 362 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Crown-scab, general things good for the Cure of it 372 Cut-Sinews, general Simples good for to help them 373 and 374 Costiveness to help 378 and 381 Casting forth of his drink, to Cure. 383 Crick in the Neck, general things good for the Cure of it 384 Crest Fallen raised up again 385 Cods swelled, to Cure, general things good for them 386 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. and 387 Chops, Clifts or Rifts, see for the cure of it in the Letter C. in the Alpha∣betical Table of the Diseases of a horse. Cooling Simples 395 Of Clifts and Cracks in the Heels; see for Scratches, for what cures them cures these Cleansers of all Sores by washing them, see the First Part. Charges of all sorts, see also in the First Part for them. D. Directions for the Drenching and Phy∣sicking of horses 225 and 226 Further Directions for the same. 228 and 416 Diseases and Infirmities of Mares to Cure 332 Drawers forth of any Stub, Thorn or Nail, either in the Foot, or any other part of the Body 340 Driers up of all manner of moist hu∣mors, General Simples good for them 341 Dropsey, general things good for the cure of it 363 Particular Receipts good for the same. 364 See for more Simples good for the Cure of it in the First Part Diseases in a horse to prevent the whole year, a very good Receipt to pre∣serve him sound 382 Casting forth of his Drink, General things good for to help it 383 E. Eaters away of proud Flesh, General things good for it 277 An Ointment for the same purpose. ib. Enterfering or Shackle-Gall to Cure 284 Eyes watery, Eyes blood-shotten, Wart in them, Inflammation Pearl, Pin or Web, general things good for all the Diseases of them 288 Particular Receipts good for all the dis∣eases of them, from 290 to 293 Eares Imposthumated, general Things good for the cure of them 348 Particular Receipts good for them. ib. F. Falling-Evil or Planet-struck general things good for the cure of it 239 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib.
Foundering, General things good for the cure of it. 271 Particular Receipts good for the same 272 and 399 Feltick is no other then a Galled Back, vide Back-Galled 283 to 285, Fraying or Stiffness taken in the Legs vide Imperfections of the Legs. Frounce or Camery to cure 301 Falling of the Fundament, General things good for it 311 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Fistula, Canker, or any other running sore to cure, general Things good for it. 319 and 375 Particular Receipts good for the same. 320 Feavers of all sorts, general Simples good for the Cure of them 321 Particular Receipts good for the same. 322 See more in the First Part for the several sorts of them 229 to 230 Farcey, general things inwardly Given for the cure of it 303 General things applied outwardly for the cure of it 224 Particular Receipts inwardly given, and outwardly applied for the cure of this Disease, from 223 to 328 Frush running, or Rotten, general things good for the cure of it 328 Falling of the Yard, General Simples good for the cure of it 332 False Quarters cured 335 Frenzie or Madness, General Things good for the cure of it. 354 Flies to keep from coming to a Horses Head to vex and trouble him 369 Fallen Crest or Crest-Fallen, to raise up again 385 Fig, General things good for the Cure of it 389 Falling Evil or Falling Sickness. 397 General Simples given inwardly for it. ib. A Particular Receipt for the same. ib. Flaps cured 418 Flanks, vide Wrinch in the Back. G. Glanders, General things good for the cure of it 254 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. and 413. The best Receipt that is for the Cure of this Disease is in 414 Glanders stopt for present sale 413 Galled or swayed Back to Cure, Ge∣neral things good for it, 283 Particular Receipts good for the same 284 Garded or swelled Legs, whether by Grease or any other Accident cured 299 Gall overflowed, general things good for the cure of it. 329 Gangreen cured, General things good for it. ib.
Griping or Fretting of the Guts, Cho∣lick or Stone, General Things good for the Cure of it. 362 and 363 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Graveling, General Things good for it. 364 Grease Molten, General Things good for it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. 365 Grease fallen into the Legs to Cure. ib. A very good Purge for it. 318 Gigs, Bladders or Flaps to cure. 418 H. Hide-bound, General Things good for the Cure of it. 258 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Hard swellings cured. 278 Head purged, vide perfumes in the first part good for it. Halting, vide Strains of all sorts Hair made to grow. 318 and 346 Hoofes, all the Imperfections of them cured. From 335 to 340 Hurts in the Hoof, of what sort soever, General Things good for the Cure of them. ib. Humours dried up, general Things good for them. 341 and 344 Humours dissolved. 343 Humors to stop. ib. Humors to drive back. ib. Humors made thin ib. Humors purged 344 Hair shedding from the Mane or Tail, General things to prevent it. 345 Hair to take away, General Things good for it. ib. Particular Receipts for the same ib. Hair made black ib. Hair made yellow ib. Hardness mollified, General Things good for to do it 367 Hens dung swallowed, or any other ve∣nomous things general Things good for the Cure of it 374 and 383 Hough-bonney cured 389 Hardness or Knots in the flesh 390 Hot Simples 395 Hip-shot 397 Hurle-bone out of Joynt cured ib. I. Joynts and Sinews, that hath in them any Ach or Numbness, Weakness or Swelling, General things good for them 232 and 233 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Joynts, Arteries and Sinews, Com∣forted after Travel, Cold or pain. 259 Infirmities of Mares to help 332 mposthumations and Inflammations, hot or Cold, general Simples good for them 346 and 390 Particular Receipts good for them. 34 Imposthumated Eares, general Things good for them 348
Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. K. Kidneys that hath ulcers in them cured. 360 Kidneys bruised. 368 Knots in the Joynts, or for Cramps and Inflammations general and particu∣lar, Receipts good for the same. 390 L. Legs swelled, general things good for the cure of them. 287 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. 288 and 300 Lampass. 301 Lameness of all sorts to help. 293 and 300 Loosening Simples. 103. See more of this in the First Part. 154 Lask or Looseness stopt, general things good for it. 307 Particular Receipts good for the same. 308 Lungs, general things good for them. 333 Particular Receipts good for the same. 334 Liver preserved, general Simples good for it. 335 Lethargy or sleeping Evil, general things good for it. 354 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Lice or Vermine killed, general things good for it. 369 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Leprosie or Mange, general things good for to kill it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. 370 Lust provoked. See for Simples good for the same in the First Part. 148 M. Mallender or Sellender, general things good for the cure of the m. 275 Particular Receipts good for the same. 276 Mattering of the Yard, or Running of the Reins. 331 Mares, their several diseases to cure, 332 Milk in Mares to increase. See the First Part for it. 148 Mouth-sore, general things good for it. 368 Mange or Leprosie. 369 Milt cured. 388 N. Night-Mare. 239 Neesing-powder. See the First Part for Perfumes for the Head. Navel-gall, general things good for it. 353 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. O. Oyl of Camomil, how to make for any grief in the Limbs, proceeding from a cold Cause. 230 Oyl of Spike, how to make for all man∣ner of Sinew-strains and Pains, and Aches in the Limbs. ib. Oyl of Mastick, how to make for any cold Griefs ib. An Ointment for the Killing and Sheal∣ing
all manner of Scabs. 270 Otments, general Simples good to put into them for the cure of all manner of Wounds. 279 Particular Receipts good for them. 280 Observations upon dressing of Wounds. 281 Observations upon bruises and strains. 293 Observations on the Liver and Spleen, and general things good for them. 335 Ointment of Theriacum, which is good for any Ach in the Joynts, Grief in the Hips, stifling Place, Legs, Pastern or any other Part of the Legs and Back, Sinew-strains only excepted. 394 P. Physicking of Horses, Observations and Directions for the use of it. 225 and 226 Pursiveness or shortness of Breath, Ge∣neral Simples good for it. 252 Particular Receipts good for the same. 253 Planet-struck or Falling Evil, General Simples good for it. 239 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Poison of all sorts expelled, General Simples good for it. 313 Particular Receipts good for the same. 314 Plague or Pestilence, General things good for it. ib. Particular Receipts good for the same. 315 Pissing of Blood, General Simples good for it. 314 Particular Receipts good for the same. 315 Pol-Evil, General things good for it. 317 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Pains; see Scratches, for what cures them cures these A Plaister to dry up any superfluous moisture, and to bind parts Loosened. 342 Prickt 396 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Purgers of the Head. See the First Part Another Plaister to dry up any Swel∣ling, Wound, Wind-all, Splint or Blad∣der in or about the Joints. 342 Palsie 354 Pissing or Staling with pain, General things good for it. 357 Particular Receipts good for the same. 358 A Plaister to lay upon the Wound to keep in the Tent or Salve. 377 A Purgation for a Horse that is sick of Grease or Costiveness. 378 Provokers of Lust, General Simples good for it in the First part. 148 Purges of Aloes, several excellent Ways how to make them up. 414 and 415 Physical Observations, 225 and 416 Q. Quarters false, to amend. 335 Quitter-bone, General things good for the cure of it. 355 Particular Receipts good for the same▪ ib. Quinsey or sore Throat, General things good for it. 38
Quick-scab. 398 R. Running foul Sores. See for Fistula Running and rotten Frush, General things good for the cure of it. 328 Running of the Reins. 331 Ring-bone, general and particular Re∣ceipts good for the same. 356 Red-water, general and particular Re∣ceipts good for the cure of the same. 357 Ring-worm, general and particular Re∣ceipts good for the cure of it. 371 and 372 Rot cured. 398 S. Sick Horses how ordered, see Directions how to do it in p. 225, 228 and 416 Simples put down in Order one after an∣other before every disease, and also an Account of the Table of Simples. 229 Stavers, Head-ach or Farcin, general and particular Receipts good for them. 235 and 236 Stomach hot, general things good for to help it. 260 Particular Receipts good for the same. ib. Spaven-blood to cure. ib. Spaven-bone to cure. 261 Another which will not only take it a∣way, but also a Curb, Ring-bone or any other Boney Excression. 262 Splint taken away, general and parti∣cular things good for it. 263 Swellings of all sorts to cure. See the First Part for them. Scratches, general and particular Re∣ceipts good for them. 266 and 267 Sellender or Mallender, general and particular Receipts good for them. 275 and 276 Salves and Ointments for all manner of Swellings of Wounds, from 279 to 284 Swellings dissolved without breaking. 283 Shackle-Gall to help. 284 and 288 Swellings and Bruises to cure, either in∣ward or outward. 285 Swelled Legs of all sorts to cure, Ge∣neral things good for them. 287, 299 and 300 Swellings by Shackle-gall to cure. 288 Strains, observations upon them and up∣on Bruises. 293 Strains of all sorts to cure, from 294 to 300 Swelled or Garded Legs, whether by Grease, or any other Accident. 299 Staling or Pissing of Blood, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 315 Spleen, what it is, general and parti∣cular Receipts good for the same. 329 and 330 Shedding of the Seed, General things good for it. 331 Strangles, General and particular Re∣ceipts good for the same. 349 and 350 Shoulder-strain or sprain. 351 Sit-fast, General things good for it. 352 Not staling and pissing of a horse, Ge∣neral and particular Receipts good
for the same. 357 and 358 Stone, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 360 and 361 Stone cholick, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 362 Surfeits, General and particular Receipts good for them. 366 Scab, Tetar or Ring-worm, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 371 and 372 Surbated, General things good for it. 373 Sinews, that are cut, prickt, bruised or shrunk, and for all Griefs belonging to them, General things good for them ib and 374 See more General Things good for them in the First Part. Swelling by Blood-letting, though it be never so bad. 379 Scaldings by Shot, Gun-powder or wilde-Fire; General and Particular Things good for the same. 380 Swelled Cods, General and Particular Receipts good for the same. 386 and 387 String-halt. 341 and 394 Stumbling, vide Cords Simples that are hot. 395 Simples that are Cooling. ib. Swayed back. 399 Strengthnng Simples. See the Fi st Part for General Simples good for it 151 Shoulder splaiting, which is a Tor Shoulder. 417 Shoulder-pight, General things good for the Cure of it. ib Shoulder-pincht. See the Alphabetical Table that shews you where the Dis∣eases of a Horse do grow, and there you may find the Cure. Sores of all sorts to wash. See the First Part for them. Swellings of what Nature soever, either hard or soft. See the First Part for them. p. 149 Sweat to cause. See the First Part. 150 Shortness of Breath. See more of it in the First Part. Stinging and biting of venomous Beasts. See more of this also in the First Part. Sores and Ulcers of all sorts to Cure; General Simples good for them in the First Part. Suppository what it is. See the First Part. 146 T. Tired Horses, General and Particular things good for to help them. 259, 260 Tetter-scab and Ring-bone, General and Particular Receipts good for them. 371 and 372 Tongue of a Horse hurt, General and particular things good for the Cure of it. 374 Teeth, all the infirmities of them cu∣red, viz pain in the Teeth, loose Teeth. Wolfes Teeth and Jaw Teeth. 384 V. Ulcers, Fistulaes and running Sores, general and particular Receipts good for the Cure of them. 319 and 320 See more Simples good for them in
the First Part. 151 Urine caused to a Horse that cannot stale, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 357 and 358 Ulcers in the Kidneys to Cure. 360 Ulcers in any Part, General and parti∣cular things good for them 375 Venomed things, general and parti∣cular Receipts good for the same. 374 and 383 Vives, Avives or Fives, General and particular Receipts good for the cure of it. 376 W. Wind-broken, vide broken wind. Wind preserved 252 A Water to wash and cleanse a Sore or Wound 377 Another Water to cleanse and heal a Sore. 28 A green Wound or Puncture cured. ib. Wen, or any other Excression taken a∣way in the Flesh. ib. Wounds, how to order and dress in the cure of them, and what Herbs are good to put into Wound Salves. 281, 282 and 283 Wrench, or weakness in the Back, Ge∣neral things good for the cure of it. 300 and 301 Worms of all sorts killed, General and particular Receipts good for the same. 303 and 304 Wind-cholick, General things good for it. 377 See for more general Simples good for it in the First Part, 150 Wind galls General and particular Re∣ceipts good for the same. 377 and 378 Wolfes-teeth cured. 384 Withers wrung cured. 385 Wounds by Shot cured. 391 Womb, see for the several Infirmities of it in the Alphabetical Table of the Diseases of a Horse. Wart spungy. 279 Y. Yellow, General and particular Re∣ceipts good for it. 237 and 238 Yellows black, general and particular Receipts good for the same. 239 Yard mattering to cure. 331 Yard fallen, General things good for it 332, 381 and 382 The Way of Gathering, Drying and Pre∣serving of Simples and their Juices, viz. Roots, Barks, Leaves, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds and Juices. 402 The Way of Making and Keeping all Ne∣cessary Compounds, viz. Electuaries, Pills, Waters, Ointments, Plaisters, Charges, Poultisses, Oyls, Syrups by Infusion, by Decoction and by Juices, from 403 to 408 Roots hot in the first degree. 408 Herbs hot in the second, hot in the third, hot in the fourth, Roots temperate, Roots cold in the first, cold in the se∣cond, cold in the third, cold in the fourth. Roots dry in the first, dry in the second, dry in the third, and dry in the fourth. Roots moist, from 408 to 409 Hot Medicaments appropriate to the
Parts of the Body, viz. Heating the Head, Heating the Throat, Heating the Breast and Lungs, Heating the Heart, Heating the Stomach, Heating the Liver, Heating the Spleen, Heat∣ing the Bowels, Heating the Reins and Bladder, Heating the Womb, Heat∣ing the Joynts, &c. from 409 to 410 Cold Medicaments appropriate to the Parts of the Body, viz. Cooling the Head, Throat, Breast, Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins▪ Bladder, Bowels and Joynts. 410 and 411 The Properties of purging Medica∣ments, viz. Choler, Phlegm, watery Humors, by Vomit, by Urine; Pur∣ging the Throat, by Sweat, and by the Nose. 111 and 112 The Properties of Altering Medica∣ments, viz. softning Simples, Loos∣ning Simples, Abolishing Simples, Binding Simples, Drying Simples, striking back Simples, Dissolving Simples, Cleansing Simples, Pain∣removing Simples, Simples that are good to clear the Wind, Humor-dis∣solving Simples, Simples that are good to expel poison, and Astonish∣ing Simples. ERRORS that have Escaped the Press in the Second Part of the Experienced FARRIER. PAge 176. line 4. for Jallop read Jallap. ib. p. l. 5. f. Turbich r. Turbith. l. 10. f. Zedory r. Ze∣doary. p. 177. l. 9. f. Humors r. Tumors. p. 178. l. 6. f. omforteth r. comforteth. l. 15. f. secure r. scour. p. 182. l. 6. f. Madders r. mad Dogs. p. 182. make 180. p. 179. m. 181. p. 186. m. 184. p. 183. m. 185. p. 179. m. 181. l. 16. f. weaknews r. weakness. l. 21. f. Woumbs drinks r. wound-Drinks. p. 186. m. 184. l. 38. f. droaped r. drooped. p. 183. m. 185. l. 6. f. reserved r. referred. p. 127. l. 29. f. half a dram r. one Ouuce. p. 208. l. 17. f. Six Drams r. one Ounce. p. 253. l. 3. f. Ashen skies. r. Ashen Keis. p. 256. l. 27. f. my First Part r. at the latter end of the Book. p. 266. l. 28. After Train Oyl put (are good) p. 269. l. 31. r. Cornfield. p. 273. l. 17. f. Hough r. Hoof. l. 20. f. Houghs r. Hoofs l. 29. f. Hough r. Hoof. p. 274. l. 3. f. Hough r. Hoof. l. 33. f. Hough r. Hoof. l. 37. f. Hough r. Hoof. p. 275. f. Contrive r. Continue. l. 20. f. Hough r. Hoof. p. 280. l. 9. f. Meal. r. Meat. p. 282. l. 5. f. free r. freer. 289, l. 36. f Bine-bole, r. fine-Bole. p, 290. l. 21. f. Tulba r. Tutia. l. 4. f. some years r. some years last. p. 294. l. 13. f. Sinew-strength r. Sinew-strain. p. 299. l. 8. f. better r. hotter. p. 310. l. 4. f. four or five Ounces of Issing-Glass, make one Ounce or better, and to dissolve it first in a little fair Water over the Fire, before you put it to the Milk. p. 327. l. 30. f! Turbich. r. Turbith. p. 352. l. 5. f. add r. and. p. 358. l. 14. f. the smoother not r. the smoother root of the. p. 362. l. 15. f. two Drams r. one Ounce, p. 363. l. 1. the Receipt for the Cholick and Stone, put it out, for the Quantities are all false. p. 370. l. 14. f. and tye him r. Tie him. p. 409. l. 25. f. Cala∣minth r. Calamint. p. 410. l. 1. f. Agrimonia r. Agrimony. l. 18. r. Agrimony. p. 411. l. 39: f. Jallup r. Jallap. p. 413. l. 5. f. in this Part. r. in the Fst Part. l. 32. f. Calaminth r. Calamint. p. 417. l. 23 f. it r. its. FINIS.
BOOKS, Printed for Richard Northcott, at the Mariner and Anchor, on the Lower End of Fish-street Hill, and at his Shop Adjoyning to St. Peters Alley in Cornhill. The Mariners Magazine, or STURMY'S Mathematical and Practical ARTS, contain∣ing the Description, Making and Use for the most useful Instruments for all Artists and Navigators, the Art of Navigation at large; A New Way of Surveying Land, Gauging, Gunnery, Astronomy and Dyalling; Performed Geometrically, Instru∣mentally, and by Calculation. The Compleat Academy, A Drawing Book Wright's Errors in Navigation detected and Corrected Mr. Norwood's Sea-mans Companion The Countrey Copy-Book Dr. Newton's Scale of Interest Dr. Newton's Art of Practical Gauging Mr. Cravens Aeternalia, or a Treatise on E∣ternity. The English Rogue Compleat in four parts Mr. Philips his Mathematical Manual Jehosaphat, being the History of the Five wise Philosophers. Where you may also be Furnished with all other Sea-books. The Art of Measuring, Containing the Description of the Carpenters New Rule; Fur∣nished with Variety of Scales, Fitted for the more speedy Mensuration of Superficies and Solids. Written by Sam▪Foster, sometime Professor of Astronomy in Gresham-Col∣ledge. Also certain Geometrical Problems, a Table of Logarithms to 30000, and some Uses of the same Exemplified in Arithmetick and Geometry; but more particu∣larly applied to the Mensuration of Superficies and Solids, as Board, Glass, Pavement▪ Wainseet, Plaistering, Fyling, Timber, Stone, Brick-work and Gauging of Cask. The second Edit on with Additions. By VV. Leybourn. To which is Added A Supplement, being the Description of the Line of Numbers, with its Use, in divers Practical Examples of Mensuration; Of Singular Use for Workmen, Artificers, and all other Ingenious Persons delighting there n. By John Wiblin Carpenter. A Description of the Five Orders of Columns and Tearms of Architecture: According to the Ancient Use and best Rules of the most Eminent Italian Architects, viz. The Tnscan, Drick, Ionick, Cornhian and Composite. Drawn and Described (with great Care and Diligence) after the right Symmetry and Measure of Free Masons. By HANS BLOOME. For the Use and Benefit of Free Masons, Carpenters▪ Joyners, Car∣vers, Painters, Bricklayers; In General, for all that are Concerned in the Famous Art of Building. Advertisement, ☞ THE True▪ Plain and Golden Spirit of Scurvey-Grass, being highly Ap∣proved for their Admirable CƲRES in the Scurvey, Dropsey, and se∣veral other General Distempers; Faithfully Prepared by Robert Bateman, the First Author, at his House at Pauls Chain, near Doctors Commons, London, and most Eminent Towns in the Countrey, with Printed Directions for their Ʋse: The Bottles are Sealed with his Coat of Arms, the Half-moon and Ermins, to Prevent Counterfeits. Price 1 s. each Bottle. Sold by the said Mr. Rch. Northcot next St. Peters Alley, and at the Marriner and Anchor, upon Fish-street Hill, near London-bridge.
