S131 11902874 50608
A Letter. Dunkirke, Novemb. 19th. 1688. Dear Sir, SInce my landing at New-Port, I went to see Ostend, where I delivered your Letter to Mr. H—lton, who hath paid me the money you order'd me to receive, and when you write to him, pray return him thanks for all his favours; I sound him a civil Gen∣tleman, and a moderate Papist. At New-Port, I met with a Relation at the Nunnery who would not acknowledge the Family, but the reason of her escape was on a Love account. Here I have been a Week, and have kept my self from any English Company, except Mr. H—ford, for indeed, I have little satisfaction to see things threaten so much our ruine, as now they do, if things be true as reported from London: And this King has again solemnly sworn, That he will hazard his Kingdom, rather than suffer the name of a Protestant to be in Europe. I was at Dinner at Monsieur Jacques Platt's House, where was a Gentleman newly come from Paris, and he reports that the King was much inraged upon the news that the Prince of Orange was Landed, saying, That he was re∣solved to give no Quarter to any Protestants; and I am credibly informed, that the new Converts are order'd to be put a Board the Fleet. I was to see the Risband here, which is one of the best Fortifications that I did ever see; and indeed, the charge of the Forti∣fications of this City, Cittadel and Port, cannot be equalled. The Port reaches above half a mile, defended with two Forts at the entrance; and now, above two hundred Vessels may be secure. Though as yet the War is not Proclaimed, here are several Dutch Vessels taken, and the poor Mariners are most hardly dealt with, being kept close Prisoners. Many Privateers are fitting out here, and they force the Dutch Ma∣riners to go aboard to get them in readiness. I am almost affrighted to proceed any further into France, for fear of being seized as some Gentlemen have lately been, and most barbarously used, so as now I will omit going to St. Omers, resolving to tarry here and at Furne, till I have your answer. Pray give my Salutes to all Friends, and let me hear from you by the next Post. I am Your Faithful Humble Servant R. S. P. S. The Post being gone, I resolve to send this by an Honest Master of a Ship, who has promised to deliver it into your own Hands, with a small Token which I have sent you: and now I have to add, That the King of France hath Proclaimed Wars with Holland; and Orders are given out, That all the Prisoners who will not abjure their Religion, shall be sent to Marseglia, to be put into the Gallys. It would make any heart relent to hear of the Cruelties they have used to several already taken; most fear he will give no Quarter in Holland, so inviterated is he against the Protestants; and was heard to say, That if the people of England should joyn with the Prince of Orange for a Parliament, he would burn every Englishman, that was in his Country, alive. I am now going to New-Port, in Company with one Monsieur Van Susteren, of Bridges, who is a very able Merchant, and has promised me his Protection there; from whence I will write to you more at large. I have only to add, that the Master of the Vessel is a very Honest Man, and I will be glad if you can serve him in his Employ. Pray my Service to Sir J. W. and rest of the Clubb. Again adieu R. S. 25th of Novem∣ber, 1688.
