S203 16267685 105191
THE POEMS OF Ben. Johnson JƲNIOR. Being A Miscelanie of Seriousness, Wit, Mirth, and Mysterie. In VULPONE. The DREAM. ITER BEVORIALE. SONGS. &c. Composed by W. S. Gent. Parce—vatem sceleris damnare— London Printed for Tho. Passenger at the three Bibles about the middle of London Bridge. 1672.
To the Right Honourable John Earl of Rutland, and his Ho∣nourable Son the Lord Ross. LEt Virgil and wise Homer crown'd with Bays Instruct my Pen to sing great Rutland's praise; Skie-mounting Belvoir my Pernassus be, Whre Bounty, Plenty, noble Charity Erect their throne, where the fair Heavens adjoin A Mannor, and a Mountegue divine.
To the Right Honourable Walter Lord Aston. ASton a Stone cut from the marble Quar, Fram'd to out-live the flames of civil war; With all the bounties of the heavens befriended Nineteen brave Knights, two princely Lords descended. From this great Stem laden with Honours spoil, That now o'respreads Great Brittains fruitful Isle. Tixal the Fountain, whence these Heroes flow, Where Hospitality and Bounty grow. Here Corydon doth act a pleasant Scean, While his swift grinders sweep the Table clean. Here I my noble Ancestors of old, Tracing the steps of Charity behold, By Loves fair hand to mine own Cradle led, Aston and Lucy joyned in one Bed.
To all the ancient Family of the Lucyes, and to all their Ho∣nourable Extractions Luci quasi Luxi. LUcy bright morning-star, pure light divine, Drawn from the Roman and the Norman line, In every Revolution still the same, Their Countreys Honour ad transcendent flame. From this clear Spring I am a little Stream, From this Apollo a derived beam. Ingratitude unto that Root and Ground, That noble Being, I my Being found; Lamp of their Countrey, to their endless praise, I dedicate these soft and humble Layes.
THE CONTENTS. In Vulpone. A Frir. Vulpone's School-master. His Pedigree. Mahomet Vulpone's Coat of Arms. His Friends. Usurers. Vulpone's Apologie, &c. In the Dream. Dreams. The Court of Spain. The Inquisition. London. Lawyers. Opinionists. The Rich. The Poor. The University.
Miscellanies. Iter Bevoriale. False and true Love. Egypt and the Brick-makers there. The Wilderness. Death. On the Royal Soveraign. A Poetical Strain. Two Poetical Epistles. A cold Journey. Upon my Return hence. A Dialogue, The Drainers are up. uch a Rogue's a Roundhead. A Catholick Hymn. A Hymn of Love. An Epitaph Hymn. The Angels Entertainment. Hymnus in eandem. A Song of Hospitality. Self. A Littany. A Soveraign Receipt. Dysticks.
THE POEMS OF BEN. JOHNSON Junior. VULPONE. AQuarius eb'd, and Pisces caught i'th' wile, The Ram skips in, when Thalia deignes to smile, Sol courts his Mistriss, gives her a green gown, I'm crown'd with joy, and tripping ore the Down I chanc'd to pass by a fair chrystal flood, Whose nearest neighbour, was an o'regrown wood, The little bubbling purling Fountains springing, The Nightingale on ev'ry bow sat singing,
The Fields, the Flowers, the Fruit so freely budding, Without all care I stumbled on a sudden Upon the Foxes hole; Reynard, quoth I, Why art thou banish't from society? This solitary, melancholy Cave, Looks like some desperate dungeon, or a grave; Thy sentence is severe; what! no reprieve? Must thou lye bury'd and intomb'd alive? The goodwives call thee trecherous, and sullen, A greedy dog, for killing all their pullen. The Shepheards too such loud complaints do bring, Make ev'ry corner of the Downs to ring The bloody slaughter of the harmless Sheep, Like a sly curr, when Shepherds are asleep. The cruel murder of the pretty Lambs, Slain on a heap together with their damms. Reynard to me his gentle paw did reach, And in smooth language thus began to preach; Many blind souls who cannot read their Psalter, Are too too bold and busie with the Altar. Let no man put his finger in the fire, I by profession am a reverend Fryer, Our order 'bove all earthly power was ranged Equal with Angels, but those times are changed, A dismal cloud hath shaded all our mirth, We now are call'd the Locusts of the earth By Schismaticks, who having lost the way, In a wild labyrinth of error stray
It was a golden age, when we did handle, Th' affrighted world, with our Bell, Book, and Candle. Lords of the World, Mens Consciences to boote, We made great Kings humbly to kiss our foot; We then were Emperors of all mens treasures, My brother Wolf, and I, did fare like Coesars, Our bellies strutting, nothing could we lack, The full cram'd dishes made the Table crack, Gammons of Bacon, Brawn, and what was chief, King in all feasts, a tall Sir Loyne of Beef. Fat Venison Pasties smoaking, 'tis no fable, Swans in their broath came swimming to the Table, Partridges, Pigeon, Plover, and the Hen, With all her broods, would it were there agen. My sides were wondrous plump, and in good plight, I had no cause to range abroad by night, Feasted with delicates beyond all measure; Our golden path was Pav'd with ease, and pleasure. The highway Huckster he delights in pillage, The Gypsie swaggers in a Country Village, The beggar under ev'ry bush doth feast, But of all lives the Monk's life is the best; The world in pure devotion was so holy, While we fed fat and laughed at their folly. The pretty Nuns and we agree so well, Whom we did pardon whatsoe'er befell. We put the fair side outward; what was foul Was closely hidden underneath our Cowl.
None in the Pulpet could become a lye, With face more bold and confident than I. Such melting words, that made the women weep. Into the closet of their souls I creep. The men from home, and dreaming of no harm, I kiss their wives, and keep their places warm; I led the fools in such a stupid blindness, At their return they thank me for my kindness. The world was fast asleep, and did not mind me, Where e're I came I left my spawn behind me. Like Bulls reserv'd for breed, from our fair Abbyes, We fill all countryes with our lusty Babyes. Hence in their mouthes this Proverb all men gather, 'Tis a wise child that knoweth his own Father. But I must now in deep contrition mourn, Fasting and praying for the swift return, I lay my bones upon this rocky hill, Besides the Lents I keep against my will; Since Abby's were dissolv'd, which I condole, I hid mine head e'er since in this dark hole, In this poor Hermitage my vows to pay, In deep devotion I consume the day, Shunning all company by Heavens direction, I keep my self untainted from infection. In meditation on my own thoughts feeding, Least they should spoil my manners and my breeding: I contemplate and study in my mind, Where I at night some pleasant bit may find.
Self preservation is a general rule, I suckt this lesson from dame nature's School. My Occupation, which some thiev'ry call, I learnt of man the greatest thief of all, By him I was instructed to indite; Man is my copy, what he writes I write; Look on my Book I'm sure I do not miss, Compare them well, my letters are like his. 'Tis true with Ducks and Geese I am at war, But he in cruelty exceeds me far; For one offence of mine number his ten, I prey on Lambs, but he doth prey on men. Upon a Pigg sometimes, I place my mind, Whole Nations he devours of his own kind. To satisfie fierce hunger, 'tis most just; Man playes the wanton Cannibal for lust. A Coney, or a Hare, small things we prize them; These Alexanders Worlds will not suffice them, He calls for more worlds, and he cryes Aloon Sir, As if one were too little for one Mounsieur. Such petty thieves as I are still dispraised; Your mighty Tories unto honour raised. We make the woods our dreadful habitations, They stear the healm of Kingdoms and of Nations. These Caesars placed on fair Fortunes brow, But we are taught to swim on every bow. The world is caught with toyes, things priz'd we see, Not as they are, but as they seem ro be.
Of our deserved honour she would barr us, Because our chamber is not hung with Arras. Truth standeth on the rock, 'tis no false Latin, A foole's a fool although he ride in Satin. Do not debase our royal pedigree, Our famous Line shines with the greatest He, Tho' I am forc'd to live in humble cote, Mine Ancestors were Beasts of princely note, And tho▪ I am by no man now befriended, I am from Kings and Emperors descended. With Hannibal I was in great request, I alwayes lodg'd in this brave Generals breast; 'Twas not his Sword that drave the Romans home Totally routed, to besieged Rome; It was my counsel gave the fatal blow, When Italy with blood did overflow, And had my policy found approbation, Rome had not been the Empress of each Nation. When wary Fabius drew his Bilbo blade, He circumvented him in his own trade; My Grandsire Herod, whose grave steps I follow, Taught how the great Thieves do the little swallow. From his example all men will confess, The tall ones are supplanters of the less: All wrestlers from the Matock to the Crown, The strongest arm tumbles the weakest down. Though in the art of fencing none could beat him A mighty Monarch! yet the Lice did eat him.
From Cain my lineal pedigree I draw, Who first proclaim'd the statute of clubb Law; 'Twas when the early world was newly blown, When Pistols, Sword, and Canons were not known, Nor that Italian trick, that layes men dead, Lull'd fast asleep, before they go to bed. So soon did fratricide mans mind invade, But parricide is now a common trade. My Cousin Nimrod learnt his skill from me, The first that hunted after soveraignty; He kept about him a flete pack of Beagles, Who had the Tallons and the Wings of Eagles. But when his deep mouth'd Hounds did roar & thunder, They did amaze poor Coridon with wonder. Beside he had his Blood-Hounds and Setters, Whereby freemen were frighted into Fetters. To build a Tower, he long time was brewing, That he might see what all the Gods were doing, Peeping into (although it were forbidden) Their wise decrees, and counsels that were hidden. And that which made it Luciferian treason, He thought to over-look them with blind reason. Here's the foundation of that City laid, Which into ruine all mankind betraid. When this ridiculous plot it would not be, He then unkennels all his Hounds on me. His Huntsman fury blew the Bugle Horn, Forewarn'd forearm'd i' th' top of all the morn,
I fled (as I had cause) through thick and thin, Through woods and dangerous floods to save my skin: Fear gave me wings, it was no time to dally, I scale the Mountains which o'relook the Vally; Untill I found this home, this homely bower, A castle stronger than his lofty Tower. Necessity my nimble pate refining, I taught the world the art of undermining, VVhich they have practis'd since in all their wars, To blow up Towns, and fix them all new stars. A figg for his Granado and redout, Although I am besieged round about, VVithin this Palisado safe am I, His Culvering and Canon to defie. My brother Mahomet did hold me dear, I taught the Dove to whisper in his eare, By this fine cheat the vulgar minds beguiling, His Alchoran was all of my compiling; VVith strong delusion, and devout pretences, I fram'd a pamphlet, pleasing to the senses. To charm mans appetite, was my sole aime, Some small additions; which I now disclaim, Foisted by fools, for that was none of mine, VVhen he forbad mankind the use of wine. That such brave liquor should be in disgrace, For this the Poets curse him to his face. They call him Sot, and Fool, and sensless wigeon, No Poet ever was of his Religion.
And had Anacreon been alive agen, He would have whipt their Armies with his Pen. Till he had bang'd them to the Scythian Rocs, From whence these Nomades first drave their Flocks. Sack gave Don John that Spanish brave Galanto, A glorious day i' th' battel of Lepanto. Had the Dutch there been arm'd with furious Brandy, The State of Venice had not lost their Candy. Wise Privy Counsellours, whose pates are running, In all their deep designs practise my running. Their greatest safety in my counsel lying To keep their Necks whole, and their Heads from flying. Statesmen attend my Chamber ev'ry minute, Their counsel failes, if Reynard be not in it. Popes, Cardinals, their Engines and Decoyes, Instructed to amuze the world with toyes. A world of subtle snares I hourly set, To bring blind Ideots headlong to my Net, To swallow down my charms, which I do season VVith bowles of wine that robs them of their reason, And that they may not smell my bitter potion, I colour all their liquour with devotion. I lend my hand to low ones that are down, VVithout my help none wear the tripple crown. Unto my painted lure all mortals bend, Old Simon Magus is a trusty friend; Achitophel whose policy was rare I griev'd to see him sailing in the Aire.
To Machiavel I nearly am allyde, Both my great Uncles by the surer side. I were ungrateful should I not commend her, My good old Grannam the grave Witch of Endor. She taught me Magick to foretell good hap, VVhen a fat Kid should fall into my lap. By Astrology instructed to discover, When I should plant my lips upon some plover. The Sun in Capricorn, the moon decreasing, I told each calf his minute of deceasing. My skill in Palmestry would much delight ye, From Venus mountain to the linea vitae, By secret lines the fortune I display Of ev'ry goose that came into my way. In all Arithmetick I was well read, I could divide the shoulder from the head; A capon, or a cock, If I could win him, I quickly did reduce into a minnim. The feathered fowl that fly I did Trappan 'um All this and more I learnt of my good Grannum. Fair Cleopatra, though the Roman kist her, Antonius minion, was my mothers Sister: She was his mate, he was her Turtle Dove, Shrin'd in one tombe, fond fools to die for love. Queen Jezabel, she was my mother dear, Whom cruel Dogs did all in pieces tear: I suckt her milk, a tender mother she, For which the dogs still lick their lips at me.
There is but two names in the world bear rule, Two mighty families, the Knave and Foole: Of these, the major part, in power, and place; The crafty knaves spring from the fox's race. Your Mountebanks, they daily do invoke us, The Juglers learn their tricks of hocus pocus, The crafty Lawyers, nimblest of the three, Lay by their Littleton to study me, Their Clients purses they do plow and harrow, Who gnaw the bone, when they have suckt the mar∣row. When I was young, and did an infant write, In books of Heraldry I took delight. Our predecessors fame, from Adams prime, I could reduce unto the present time. I and the serpent, joyned in commission, Gave Eve that apple caused mans perdition. Our coat of Arms is rich and wondrous good, Three lambs new slain in a fair field of blood. Some of our Ancestours wanting their fleeces Did bear a ragged coat all torn in pieces; An honourable badge, worn as a Jem, Won in the wars, between the hounds and them. Upon our Crest, a Duck, strugling and striving, Catch'd on a suddain, as she was a diving. These things are laid aside, and out of date, The leaf is changed in the book of fate. T'was all mine own, that came within mine eying, I could have ta'ne the swiftest swallow flying.
Nothing to clamber up the tallest cliff; But now my joynts and sinews are grown stiff; My grinders not so sharp to gnaw a bone, And all my vaulting, tumbling tricks are gone. This is my greatest grief, my friends abuse me; Thieves of my own profession, they accuse me: And by no people am I more besmeared, Than those whose fired fingers have been seared. The Gypsy, and the cutpurse in the stocks, Taylors, and Millers, all do curse the Fox. Envy swells like a toad ready to burst, But the poor fox fares best when he is curst. Two handed Lawyers rob both rich and poor; Wiping their mouths, they lay it at my door. The Justice and his Clark, who for a Fee Turn justice topsy turvy, rail at me; The Usurer, whose Soul is hell-fed bacon, Roares out of hell for stealing his fat capon; Widdows, and children, his wide throat doth swallow, Yet calls me thief as if I had no fellow; His own he sees not, but my pranks he'l tell ye Who hath whole Towns and Citties in his belly; When he hath chew'd a parish, and her people, At the next morsell he devours the steeple: Their thundring acclamations all lett fly, As if there were none other thief but I. When if you put all creatures to the test, Among the thieves I shall be found the lest.
The little chrystall springs do rob their Donor The envious rob their neighbour of his honor, The Sun doth rob the Sea, in Showrs of rain, The thirsty earth doth rob the Sun again, The Rivers rob the Brooks, which gently fall In silent streams, the Sea doth rob them all. When Cupid he doth throw his poisoned dart The lover steals away his Mistress heart: Not Lyons onely that for prey do ly, Nor whales, that swallow mighty shoals of fry; The little Wren, the Dove, the silly sheep, The Fowls, the Fishes of the watry deep, They live by rapine, brother robs his brother, And all subsist by plundring one another. Theft, the worlds prop, Dame natures chiefest friend, Banish all thieves the world will quickly end. I loved all my brethren wondrous well Who did in active feats of hand excell. thought those thieves who in the open Sun, Bid travellers stand, who have more mind to run, To be the greatest fools; I shun the light, My stratagems have safety in the night. The dogs are all asleep, and not one Mouse, That licks the cream, did move in all the house. The Trumpeter his trumpet sometime blowing, charm the busy tell-tale-cock from crowing, His trumpet shrill was heard through all the village, Disturbing my designed plot for pillage,
Forewarning man of future things to come, Of that black, blessed, dismall day of doom, When that loud trump shall sound, to raise up men To their last judgement, though they know not when▪ Who sounding in your ears with his shrill horn, Tells you, that it may be er'e the next morn. Whose crowing was to Peter a good morrow, When his repentance melts in tears of sorrow. It was not so with me, I was affraid, Least he should wake the Mistriss and her Maid: Whose thundring tongues, would gather in a cluster The neighborhood, all to a generall muster, Raising great tumults, high and mighty sturs, Pistolls, and Guns, and all the bawling curs. Who would not spare me, if they once did wind me, Compelling me to leave my skin behind me. The pleasant game stood fair before mine eyes, To make the cock sure was my master prize; At his vain babling I was sore offended, Griping his throat, his tale was quickly ended. My work done suddenly, without debating, I stop his whistle, and his tongue for prating, Upon the earth poor Chanticleer lies springing, His melody was marr'd for ever singing, And to accompany his dismal fall, Some cackling hen attends his funerall. To weigh these things, it makes me melancholly, I would redeem with tears my wanton folly,
That all is out of frame, all will confess, Anothers error makes not mine the less; I'm weary of the course which I have run, And do repent the mischiefs I have done. Let man begin, whom we poor Animals call, The Microcosme, the quintessence of all, Fram'd out of all worlds, copy of the three, A perfect figure of the Trinity, The lowest Angel, and the tallest beast, A goodly thing in all his titles drest; Let this great thing who doth in honour swim, Begin the dance, and we will follow him, I'le leave my thieving trade, and be his debtor, If his example teach me to be better. The crafty Fox doth solemnly protest Man unredeem'd is worse than any beast, Than Wolf, Dog, Lyon, Tiger, more uncivil, Without a Jesus an Apostate Devil.
THE DREAM. For forrain Lands I had a travelling mind, My main designe a trusty friend to find, If in the miriads of souls that are One real lover would fall to my share, Where soul to soul tune up one harmonie, I made no scruple were it he, or she: Jewel of jewels, which doth rarely grow, Richer then all the Gems in Mexico. He that is crowned with this part, is blest, Holds in his arms the Indies east and west. Musing upon the state of humane things, The slipperie fate of kingdoms, and of kings, Opprest with weighty grief, which made me weep, Clouding my sense, I fell into a sleep. Here swift Ideas made my brain their column, I saw the universe bound in one volumn; Me thought the whole was small, yet all did pant To win this thing, no bigger then an ant. Each would have all, they shoulder, and they sweat, The little world was fighting for the great:
A Sea appear'd, king Neptune seem'd to flout me, Millions of dreams like boats sailing about me: These roving run-agates my fancy smother, Dream after dream, and one succeeds another. Some say that dreams within the brain are toss't Of things which in the day we think of most. Some dreams are pleasant, some are troublesome, Some of things past, and some of things to come, Prophetick dreams that please, and sometime fear us, Convey'd by Angels when some mischief's near us; Some told of things they never knew before; Some dream of gold, and yet are alwayes poor; Some dream of rivers, mountains, Shores, and Seas; Some of a new world: mine was all of these. My wandring fancy did for Spain incline Famous for Sack, that Emperor of wine; Other, small princes of inferiour rank: This liquor Virgil and wise Homer drank When they did muster on the Ilian sands The Trojan armies and the Graecian bands. O're rockie hills and lofty mountains high, Whose tall aspiring heads do kiss the skie I search each corner of that crabbed coast, The cities which antiquity doth boast; Tracing those mountains many a tedious mile I stumble on the brave court of Castile. Here Hercules did all his labours end: But mine began, to find a faithful friend.
Monsters and Mino-taur's tam'd by his hand, For which he did encompass Sea, and Land: My labour did to greater things aspire, To find a Phoenix melted in the fire, Out of whose ashes should spring up to birth A friend, the quintessence of Heav'n and earth. The gentle Donna's in mine eye no less Than sparkling angels in a female dress: Their courtesie was rare, so wondrous free, With kind embraces they half ravish'd me: At the first flourish they appear like posies Compos'd with July flowers and fragrant roses: But flowers will fade; they bid me pick and prune▪ You may as well find constancy i'th' moon, Sweet melting manna from our northern dews, Knowledge in Lapland, chastity in the stews. Wouldst thou reap diamonds where they are not sow The pearl call'd friendship never here was known. Go gather grapes in Greenland, that dark hole, Pepper, and ginger, at the Artick pole. Canst thou bring all Religions into one, Whose quintessence is love: thy work is done, Thy mind at rest, thy travel at an end, The whole creation is become thy friend, Not only man, appointed to command, But every thing that moves by sea or land: Both heaven and earth with all their wealth shall st th Lyons and Tygres shall fall down before thee.
In countrey cottages friendship was rife, Leases of love they took for term of life; Love there is dead, Amintas doth not mind it; And dost thou think in pallaces to find it? Perfection dwells not in frail, mortal dust; Shew me the man that to himself is just. Damon, and Pitheas, are exil'd from hence: Vertue her self hath here no influence. The Pages tell her in their wanton play She is some countrey Lady of the May That knows no courtesie, or how to speak, Only train'd up to run at barley-break, Some canting Gypsie with a conjuring wand, Or petty Princess of the Fairie land; She is too judg'd by her brown olive hue A Lady errant of Don Gusmans crue. In this place thou wilt prosper, canst thou paint With all the colours of a seeming Saint; Thou mayst perhaps ascend bright honors hill If thou canst court where thou intend'st to kill; We call it pollicie, just in our sight, To cut those trees down that eclipse our light. The upright, simple, innocent, we slay: 'Tis crime enough that they stand in our way. We study not the morals of wise Plato; Nor that old fool whom they intitle Cato: To imitate their follies we want leisure; All our divinity is ease and pleasure.
Slaves chain'd to conscience no, no, we are free-men▪ And know no friend, no God, but wine and women. Hast thou the stone that turneth all to gold, Or teeming bags of Silver? then be bold. Melt all Peru into one mass of treasure, Then Call th'Infanta Cousin at your pleasure: Gentlemen kneel, and at their distance are, Esquires your foot-men, let the knight stand bare; From the grand Seignior you may take the Wall, Great Dons and Dukes, you Tom and Dick may call. Fortune's a Whore, my temples that were crown'd Must feel her lashes when the wheel turns round. Love winneth love, disdain begets disdain, Who scorn the world, the world scorns them again. Those that will live magnificent and feel His favour, must to mighty Mammon kneel: These were his minions, in his bosome lay. True loyal Subjects, they his Laws obey; These were rewarded with all earthly blisses, Swimm in his favour, crown'd with his kisses: But I that could not bow to this Apollo, Must nolens, volens, all disgraces swallow. My simple Outside did these Lapwings fright, Winters at hand, come let us take our flight, Beside the courtesie of friendly blows, They took their last adieu with their kind toes. The tall groom-porter spyde mine empty purse, Then whipt me from the presence with a curse.
My tongue was mute, my wrongs I durst not tell, But with my heels I bid this Court farewell; And had not patience armed me in hast, To ward their blows, that day had been my last. The Inquisition made me wondrous sick, east they should take me for some Heretique, Whence no redemption till the grand assize, When the graves open, and the dead arise: Criminal faults they might have found good store, What greater Blasphemy than to be poor; And in their flames I might a Martyr fry, Where simple honest is grand Heresy; What courtesie, what Civil entertainment, When poor and honest came to their arraignment. That some alledge there is a Purgatory, Experience proves it is no fabulous story. Tis easy to believe when we have seen it, can assure you I my self was in it, prayd to all the Saints on my bare knee, From limbus patrum now deliver me. Remembring Lot's wife I durst make no halt, Least I should be dissolved into Salt; Fear would not let me stay, nor look behind, But hoysing sail, with a brisk merry wind, With all my wings for England I am gone, To London, Empress of fair Albion; nto this royal City then I pack Sir, met this common greeting, what de'e lack Sir?
Methought the word was sweeter far then honey, Will these kind Souls supply me without money? This gentle salutation it did sound As if that Paradice were newly found Where the fair beams, of the bright heavens do smile▪ All things provided without care and toyle. Perhaps old Saturn, with his golden age, Is here arriv'd from his long Pilgrimage. Where cursed mine and thine was never known, And no man durst call any thing his own. Mens minds were not inclos'd, that crying sin, For all the world was then one common Inn, Landlord and Tennant names unknown, all share The whole creation common as the air, The hospitable earth mans friendly host, Nature his hostess, at whose proper cost Her guests were feasted with a liberal hand, To furnish them she plunders Sea and Land. At their departure hence, for their long stay The reckoning was brought in nothing to pay. 'Twas Saturns absence caus'd the City's mourning, And Bonfires now were made for his returning. To make his welcome equal their desire, The bells for joy were melted in the fire. I secretly within my self thus praid, Blest heavens, O noble City, be thine aid. May every Mayor be a Duke or Earl, Thy Ships return laden with gold and Pearl.
Buying and selling banisht, all things given With a full hand, as they descend from heaven. Let there be no Apprentice, but all Freemen, And every thing as common as some women; That fire which many thousands did undoe, O let it burn up their Opinions too; Let every Soul be ruled by the Dove, And no Religion in the world but Love, That all mens hearts may shout with joy and mirth, That heaven is now come down to dwell on earth. Credulity it hath deceived many, I would not be ungrateful unto any, Nor at his civil courtesie to spurn, This Answer to his Question I return. I want a Friend Sir. He in scorn did mutter, It is a ware we never use to utter, 'Tis not within the walls I dare be bold, Nor any where in the large Suburbs sold; 'Tis a commodity quite out of fashion, And rarely to be found in the whole Nation, Moore's brave Ʋtopia, with a deluge drown'd, Cover'd with water, no where to be found; This world affords it not, it is a Gem Was never seen but in Jerusalem; It hath no stain, nor intermitting foil; But groweth there as in his native soil; Their very walls are built with such rich stone,
Millions of Pearls cemented into one. The breath of love his friendly blast doth blow; 'Tis natural there, as enmity below: Dispos'd to good, so readily inclin'd, They know not what it is to be unkind. Some of our modern travellers do say, 'Twas lately found in terra incognita. Sir we expect some Ships, but O I fear, The voyage long, they'l not return this year. A friend! it is the thing we most desire, 'Twould save our shop from thieves, our house from fire. Pride's our best friend, on lust we make our dinner, At ev'ry meale we swallow up some sinner. But these thy friends scourge thee with many lashes; Melting thy stately buildings into Ashes; A dearth of friendship did invade this place, Where plenty did put on a smiling face; The thing call'd love, it was not to be found, Pride and ambition did besiege it round; Miracles cease, I had no cause to mourn, If Thames to wine, and stones to bread would turn; For aged Pauls was falling every day, The famine great I could no longer stay, My sides grew lean, my bowells out of Tune, Even in the height and heat of parching June; With frozen entertainment here benumm'd, I march, where the Knights templers lie intombed; These warriers, as I walk about the Isle,
Did seem to court me with a Souldiers smile, The marbles were less stony then the men, Who have exchang'd their swords into a pen, The cruel murdering pen that in a word Kills and cuts deeper than the keenest sword. Four fleeces from their clients they do shear, Four golden crops, four harvests in one year: Were Ceres to the Plowman half so kind, Hee'd skip and caper like the bouncing Hind; His horses too, taking their masters mow, Without their bells would dance before the Plow; Their Ship can sail with all winds that do blow, They reap the land which they did never sow: The fat of all they put into their purses, Together with the widdows tears and curses; Their long demurs their bawling in mine ears, Their Pedlers french drave me from hence with tears: My cause non-suited, no man could befriend me, Wanting my Guardian-Angel to defend me; My forma pauperis was thrown o're the Bar, uch men are mad that enter into war; The gowned battail is not for the poor, The remedy they find worse then the sore. My Dream continu'd; in my sleep I saw, A multitude in several bodies draw; n antique shapes they move with various paces, And yet methought there was more minds then faces: All would have all men amble in their way,
And each did think his neighbour went astray; Yet none did know upon what ground they stand, Mistake the right, and turn to the left hand. In the morning this side, which they change e're noon, Like the Chamelion, or the pale-fac'd moon. All strive to be aloft, their brains they beat Who shall be placed in the highest seat; In an uncertain slippery orb they reel, Moved by that great pow'r that guides the wheel; Those heads who now are crowned with a wreath, At the next revolution fall beneath; From their exalted Empire down they tumble, Blessed saith wisdome are the meek and humble; Who standing on the lowest step of all, Are sure to rise, but can no lower fall, Who swim in the smooth stream without a bladder; By slow sure steps they climb up Jacobs ladder. But these benighted wander from the road, Loosing the narrow way they take the broad. They are ignorant that great doth little grow, And to be less than nothing, less do know: Nothing no favour hath in mortal eyes, But to be something is their Master-prize. The battell is begun, see how they ruffle, And ev'ry man doth with his neighbour scuffle; Fury, grand captain of this cursed brawl, Opinion is Dictator of them all: Opinion with opinion is at odds,
And humane reason she prepares the rods, To whip the backs of strugling Souls that wander From the blind steps of this notorious Pander; Whose beauty now hath lost his virgin lustre, Like swarms of Bees or armies when they muster. Her bastards multiply all like the mother, And one opinion still begets another. Of this in estuous Strumpet old and rotten, That bloody fratricide Cain was begotten; Who when the world a little infant stood, Taught men to sacrifice with humane blood: Who e're doth play Religion wins the game, For now opinion she assumes that name; Thus by opinion and his brother fancy, The world is overgrown with Negromancy; True love, religion pure and undefiled, A wandring Pilgrim from all hearts exiled; With bloody noses and with broken bones, Like wanton boys they fight for cherry-stones; Their ordnances play, their fury swells, For a poor handfull of old rotten shells: The Nut is good, who would not strive to win it? It hath a pearl when the sweet kernell's in it: Fond Strife hath crackt the Nut, the kernell's gone, And now they quarrell for the shells alone. It is not coloured dutyes fac'd with lyes, Regeneration only wins the prize; Although Heaven-gates stand open all the year,
None but a little child can enter there. By their own works heavens pallace is not gain'd; Mans righteousnesse will not be entertain'd; The word, the living word, a thundring dart, Through bones & marrow wounds the panting heart: It made the world e're time and world began, And for mans sake this word became God-man. But they, O grand mistake! knowing no better, Confine the unconfined to the letter; A noval-paper deity compounding, The spirit with the written word confounding; Their Sun is set, thick darkness doth invade, In stead of light they dally in the shade: Aesops devouring dog, a greedy glutton, Diving to catch the shadow lost the mutton. Some Dina or Diana is the cause Of all our woes, the breach of natures laws; With an Acheldema of crimson blood, For trifling toys not rightly understood; True knowledge clouded with Egyptian blindness, All amity confounded with unkindness; The law of love, the livery and token Of Christs disciples, by division broken: This is great Babel, mother of delusion, Strumpet of Strumpets, city of confusion. No peace no truth where Jezabel doth reign, My hopes were dead, my heart was almost slain, Sighing to see how all things did deceive me;
Is this great world too narrow to receive me? What hideous deluge doth o'rewhelm thy face, That the poor Dove can find no resting place? A friend! an Ʋnicorn! not to be found, When instantly turning my body round, A man, more then a man, a God did meet me, With kind imbraces thus began to greet me: Through bogs and briers wading in distress, Why dost thou wander in this wilderness? When thou thy part hast acted on the stage, Poor Pilgrim thou must quit thy pilgrimage; Time with his Sickle these false joys will sever, And when you parted are, you part for ever; Wean thy bewitched Soul whilst thou hast breath, Know this, there's no returning after death. These short-liv'd transitory joys ride double, Delight with sorrow mixt, pleasure and trouble: Repentant tears of mourning after gladness, A showr of comfort interlin'd with madness. Look up to him whose love is still descending, Whose greatness no beginning hath nor ending: Enter sweet Paradice with Angels singing, Swim in the Fountain that is always springing: The glories of the world perish in tasting, Imbrace those pleasures that are everlasting. Follow my counsel, if thou wouldst have rest, I'le lead thee where the Doves do build their Nest; VVhere thou shalt feast in fulness all the day,
A lamb among the lambs frolick and play. Thou sow'st in fears and tears, hoping to find; All that thou reapest here is froth and wind; Hadst thou the whole world, 'Tis a little spot; Fond fool, thy native countrey this is not. This Fabrick is a cottage of small price, My heart's thy pallace and thy paradice. His breath was sweet, it sounded in mine ears More pleasant then the musick of the Spheres; Which gently blowing like a whisper came, To kindle up loves fire into a flame: Excellent consort, by whose charming tone Our nature with his nature is made one. Silencing man makes him for ever mute, Jesus the Lutanist, Christus the Lute; Christus the Lute the instrument of Jesus, On whom he playes what melody he pleases. Jesus Jehovah is the grand Creator, Jesus in Christo the Regenerator; Healer of Nations, good Samaritan, The Son of God is now the son of man: The mystery of mysteries indeed, The blessed Sower is himself the seed; The spirit by his overshadowing powers, Doth breath his flaming heart of love in ours: Duality confounded in this union, Where heaven and earth do meet in full communion. Ravish'd with wonder, I did kiss his feet
In whom all that is excellent doth meet; The lustre of his beauty all-divine, Speeds through my veins, and made my face to shine: I fix'd mine eye upon his face, that shone; But O! upon a sudden he was gone; I turn'd me round about if I could see The footsteps of my love, where he should be; My Love, my Dove, my Joy, my sole delight, What Cherubin hath snatch'd him from my sight? O where is my beloved? is he fled? Dwells he among the living or the dead? I'le search the graves, perhaps death hath inrol'd him; The marble Sepulcher could not hold him: I'le climb the clifts for him that is my crown; His power that made can pull the mountains down: I'le scale the walls of heaven but I will gain him; Fond fool! the heaven of heavens cannot contain him▪ I mount the rocks 'gainst which the North-wind rages▪ They answer me, he is the rock of ages: I travail to the Woods, is my Love here? Eccho did answer, he lives every where: To the starry region then I take my flight; He is the luminous center of all light, Whose glorious beams continually do pierce Through all the body of the Ʋniverse. Mans soul's a sparkle of this light divine, Inlightned Souls do all the stars outshine: Whose radiance here hath not his full disclosing,
Eclipsed by the bodies interposing. Thence to the springs that Issue from the mountains, Thy lover is the Fountain of all Fountains; His bosome is a hill, whiter then Snow, Whence water of eternal life doth flow; Convey'd by power, through secret unknown allyes, Descendeth down to bless the humble vallyes. It is not drain'd by drawing, but runs quicker; The thirsty Soul tasting this heavenly liquor, Drinks liberal draughts, greedily pouring in, Accounts sobriety the greatest sin. I sound the rivers, but they answer all, He is the Sea wherein all rivers fall; That bounteous, boundless, bottomless abyss, Where little streams are swallowed up in bliss: From this Apollo man's a sparkling beam, From this great Ocean a derived stream, Springs, Rivers, Brooks, by heavens distilling rain, United into one great Sea again. True love is not a quainted with pale sear: Armed with courage, to imbrace my Dear, Unto the Lyons den I boldly came, The Lyon rampant was an humble Lambe▪ Here in this Wilderness I am a King; When I do roar I make the Forrest ring.
The Elephant his fear cannot dissemble, I make the Leopard and the Tyger tremble; But I my self am couchant and do fall Before his presence who is King of all. Among the homely Shepherds then I stear, Such as King David and the Patriarchs were; Saw you my royal Prince? fond Soul, quoth they, Who trust in man are sure to loose the way: We are lambs as thou art, Sheep of his dear fold, In the number of his little ones inrol'd; Close by the river in fair flowry Meadows, And Mountains alwayes green, he gently leads us: 'Tis true, we spring from his immortal line, But he that is our Pastor now is thine; In his great power and glory we do swim, Our harps and hearts are tuned all by him: We are his instruments, his choice delights, We are the Song which he himself indites; With his own hand he toucheth all the strings; 'Tis one that plays, 'tis one alone that sings: We are his written word, he the Inditer, Look not upon the writing, but the Writer; Enquire of him alone, on yonder rock He sweetly pipeth to his fleecy flock; Go to him boldly man, thou needst not doubt him, His pretty lambs are dancing round about him, Dancing for joy, there's nothing now can fear them,
The greedy Wolf and Fox cannot come near them; The bearded Goats apart from him do stand, The little Lambs he feeds with his own hand: In his warm tender bosome they are nurst, With his heart-blood he satisfies their thirst. To pay their debts, upon the Cross he hung; Good Pellican that bleeds to feed his young. TRANSPORT. My soul mad drunk with love, that still did mi him Among the Doves I cannot choose but find him Drest in the flames of love; saw you my Dear? One milk-white Dove did whisper in mine ear, Behold in yonder flourishing Grove of Mirtles Thy Lover sits, the King of all the Turtles; His mate so constant, that he doth not doubt her, His love so great he cannot live without her; He courts, and to be courted she is willing; Musick of hearts whose melody is billing. In an eternal knot espous'd they be, He full of love, a modest Virgin she; His love eternal is, and hath no date, He is thy Turtle, and thou art his Mate: Father of Spirits, Angels, and the rest, Bright flame of love within Jehovahs brest, Upon the day of Penticost he came,
With cloven tongues, and in a fiery flame, This spreading fire from East to West was hurl'd, Whose holy sparks did kindle all the world; Till Antichrist did poyson this pure life, And quench this heavenly fire with floods of strife: But now he's come the second time, whose breath Will plague the Beast, and whip the Whore to death. Unto the sturdy Plowman then I pass, Such as of old the Prophet Amos was; Rid my Love this way on his milk white Steed? Amos reply'd, thy Lover is the Seed; He sows himself into thy fruitful mind, That at the Harvest he himself may find; There's nothing but himself that he doth save, All but himself lyes rotting in the Grave; The perfect new man which from heaven descended Returns, when this frail mortal life is ended; Thy Soul's the Land where he himself doth sow, The Spirits holy breath makes it to grow; Refreshed by the heavens distilling rain, It multiplies into a field of grain; All flowers of Paradice grow to delight 'um, Grace after grace springs up ad infinitum. Inquiring of the Shrubs, who weep and mourn, Hanging their heads, this answer they return; By resignation and humilitie, A little Plant becomes a stately Tree;
All look on Trees that on the Mountains grow, But those are safest that are plac'd below; Jehovah's thunder doth not overtake them, The wildest Hurricano cannot shake them: They flourish like the Lillies, without care; He is their life, and they his being are. I march among the Rich hoping to find him, Voluptuous pomp gave them no time to mind him; Ratling of Coaches in their brain did rout them, A train of Sycophants plac'd round about them, Whose soothing language lavishly did measure Their Summum bonum to consist in pleasure. The world's a Hogstye, (O that word hereafter!) Where men like Swine are fatted for the slaughter. I row my Boat unto the ragged shoar, To the despised, rich, contented poor, Who in the heavens have laid up all their treasure, Where they have riches without end or measure. Where rests my love, when Sol at noon is riding Upon his flaming Steeds? where's his abiding? He dwelleth in the low and humble mind, That prostrate lyes before his feet resign'd. Such simple innocence without all skill, Like new-born babes that know no good nor ill, Poor naked nothings, numbred with the dead, Have sold their ornaments for heavenly bread;
Whose souls are purifyed from filthy mire, By passing through the Purgatorian fire: A noble battail 'gainst themselves proclaim'd, Their passions and affections wholly tam'd; Great Alexander with his noble crew, Conquering the world, the world could not subdue; Another Empire large he had to win, To tame that little world that was within: We that are crown'd with double victory, In these poor Coats are greater Kings than he. To the Ʋniversity I set my face, Among the Rabbies of that reverend place: I hunted out the chief for fame reputed, And unexpectedly I was saluted By one whose beard was snow, whose face was frost, Train'd in the noble School of Penticost, In Christ-church Colledge a resplendent light, And by degree a learned Jesuite; Chief of that Order, with all knowledge blest, Skil'd in the heavenly Magick of the east; 'Twas one of those brave Magi, that from far Did visit Jesus, guided by a Star, Offering rich presents, Frankincense and Spice; To offer me his councel was not nice; And that he might my lawful audience win, He kist me thrice, and thus he did begin. What vanity, on childish arts to look!
And leave unstudied thine own learned book; Thy book hath but three leaves, leaves that are few, The wisdom great, all that all worlds can shew: Thy Soul's that noble book, wherein doth lye Heaven, hell, and earth, time, and Eternity; He that can read this book, he must inherit The wisdom of the Father, Son, and Spirit: This book hath long been claps'd and clos'd within, Seal'd and shut up by th' angry Cherubin: In heaven and earth none worthy, none was fit, But the dear Lamb, God's heart, to open it; To keep it lockt the anger did decree, Love did unseal the book and set it free; A Library of books in this book find Printed▪ and fairly written in thy mind, Whose lines are gold indited by the Dove, Whose letters are the sparkling flames of love: Teipsum nosce, leave their tittle tattle, And then thou knowest more then Aristotle; Study thy self, if thou wouldst knowledge win, Faith will unlock the golden gate within: Let wisdome bridle passions in the Soul, Good Servants, but ill Lords, if they controul: Hell lies in wait to crucify thy lover, Heaven with it's Angels at thy door doth hover, Seraphick Angels with immortal power, Thy Guardian strength, attend thee every hour: Vain roving thoughts, Moss troopers do way lay thee,
With their hail Master, kiss thee to betray thee; Thought follows thought as wave on waves do roul, And all to steal away the wandring Soul; Like thieving Pickaroons, in Neptunes hall, They sail about thy brain to plunder all; If they once bring thine heart unto their shoar, Poor Gally-slave they'l chain thee to the Oar; O keep thine heart intire for him alone Who rules the heavens, & makes thy heart his throne. This lower world is a deceitful cage, Where mortals act their part as on a stage: Some march into the field, and some retreat, Disguis'd like Maskers, all is but a cheat: Play how you please, when you have thrown your cast Death comes and sweeps away the stake at last; Look not so big, thy life is but a span, 'Tis a wise part to act the honest man; For toys thy future bliss do not destroy, Prepare thy mind for that sweet land of joy. Where all things do in equal temper grow, Nor hot nor cold, with you it is not so: The torrid Zone burns up the fruitful grass, The frigid turns it all to icy glass; There love and anger both together dwell, A countrey seated between heaven and hell; With you love friezes, and grows wondrous cold, Our constant amities are never old. That friendship which some thousand years hath run,
Is now as fresh as when it first begun. Things alwayes present, nothing past and gone, One heart, one mind, we number all by one. Arithmetick with us allows not two, To sing and love is all we have to doe. In every soul love throws his flaming darts; The flame's so great, no frost can frieze our hearts: Incompast with the glories of the Dove, Whose gentle breath doth melt us into love. Nothing so kind as he who is our brother, Nothing so dear as we to one another. Love without wrath, whose garment hath no spot, Tyes all our hearts in one eternal knot. No striving to be high or to be best, For he's the greatest Prince that is the least. He stands upon the mount and is most tall, Who is the humblest and the low'st of all; Titles of honour, bubbles in the air, Why should they soar? who noble princes are; Ambitious Nimrods, who to heaven wo'd climbe, The tower of honour, long before their time. All aim at greatness, all men wo'd be Kings: They take their flight with raw unplumed wings; Those that in sweet humility lye low, Are lifted up whether they will or no. To purchase Dukedoms we take no delight, The meanest Subject in this land's a Knight; The name of Earl, what honour doth it bring
To him that is enthron'd a crowned King? We wear the crown which you now strive to win. Look not on things below, but turn thou in With all the strength of faith, and thou shalt see The Star that guided us will tutor thee: He'l lay thy soul in such a slumbring trance, Thou wilt admire thy former ignorance, When he shall freely to thy Soul impart The open cabinet of his rich heart; n the clear beams of loves eternal light, The Prophets and Apostles, they did write: Their book stood open, where was drawn in pages The History of all succeeding ages; Things present, past, to come, as they did pass, Were represented in a perfect glass; And if their book of life were once unsealed, All things to all man-kind would be revealed. My time is spent appointed by the powers, The Angels call me to their cristal bowers; Since thou must dwell among the Sons of men, In this vain world a forlorn Citizen, ollow my Councel, and all Idols quit, The rock Self-love, where millions have been split: Tis self that seeks to mount into the Saddle, That he may murder Jesus in the cradle; t swept like a dire plague, where e're it ran, And hath infected all this world call'd man, n an insulting domineering high rant,
Stalks in the steps of the Sicilian Tyrant This word call'd Love, which makes the world run mad, Hath now more faces than e're Janus had; Many false loves there are, for in the tryal, The Touchstone proves there is but one that's loyal; The Puritan will sing an amorous Sonnet, To sensual love the Zelot vails his Bonnet, All light their Torches at Don Cupid's lamp; This bastard love hath not the royal stamp. For some fair face madmen and fools will dye, Because it is delightful to the eye. For gold men sail o're Seas of flaming fire, Because it gives them all they can desire; Flowers, whose pleasing odors do excell, We love not for themselves, but for their smell; Whatsoe're pleaseth, all men strive to win it, And at the bottome self is still within it: This coin it will not pass, 'tis counterfeit, Self love is grown to be a general cheat; 'Tis chaff that's blown away with every fan, All creatures have this love as much as man; Unfixed meteors like the wandring light, Which doth deceive the Passenger by night; Friendship's dissolv'd, and love grows wondrous lean, When greater interests do intervene; Love from the fountain, which is rarely found, Loves 'cause it loves, and hath none other ground. Canst thou love loveliness when clouds do shade it,
Not for thy interest, but his that made it? Canst thou with love and pity then bemoan it, Because it hath his superscription on it? Canst thou draw Fountain-water from a puddle, And swim in joy in the height and top of trouble? Canst thou make crosses thy delight and pleasure, And from the depths of hell drag heaps of treasure? A Virgin undefiled in the mire? Eat Thunderbolts and swallow flaming fire? Canst thou with Jonathan a David take, When Scepter, Crown and Kingdom, lye at stake? Canst thou imbrace what all men discommend? Call naked poverty thy bosome friend? What mortals fear, canst thou shake hands with, death, When he doth come to blow away thy breath? Couldst thou a sacrificed Victim be For him that lyes in wait to murder thee? Canst thou write self i'th' number of the Martyrs? And lay poor Lazarus where thy Strumpet quarters? Thy dear and onely Isaac, canst thou leave him In his fair hands from whom thou didst receive him? Hast thou this love, though it be ne're so little? Then thou hast something that deserves the title! The mysteries this good man did unfold I wish'd they had been written all in gold; Transported with high wonder and delight, Ending his speech, he vanisht out of sight. To Pharaoh's plenteous land I next did row,
Which famous fruitful Nile did overflow: The land was good but for a cursed law, That I my self must gather all my straw: To make my tale of bricks, if I grew dull, My shoulders paid the reckoning to the full; And what was worse, my mind doth yet abhor it, My work being done I had no wages for it; Some that did sing and caroll all the day, Carouse and tipple, they had all the pay; These spent their time in merriment and laughing, Rewarded richly with a crown for quaffing. We feed and intercommon with the swine, They at their great Lords table daily dine. To swallow bran and husks we are not nice, They banquet on the fruit of Paradice: Imprison'd like a blackbird in a Cage, Poor puddle-water is our beverage; Rich Nectar cannot their quick pallate scape, Nor the heart-blood of the most noble grape; With golden ornaments and silk arraid, On beds of down with diamonds o'relaid They rest, and feast in jollity and mirth: Our bones in rags on the despised earth. What e're they do, is paid with smiles and graces, Our crimes are all unboweld to our faces, For which, beside the sorrow and the cost, Our backs are feasted at some Whipping-post: These have no other leader but the Dove,
Their meat, their drink, their rich attire is love. They Kings and Princes are; no cruel law, Conscience to fright, or keep their minds in awe; They dance, they sing, they frollick, sport and play, For all the year is but one holyday; The father does the work, the children play, And yet the father does the children pay; These children dear he kindly doth imbrace; VVe are Abortives and of Bastard race; VVith full deep draughts they drink all sorrow down, The deepest drinker wears the greatest crown. VVith oaths they tear the stars out of the skie, And make the trembling fearful Devils fly, Frighting the Hypocrite out of his wits, Yet no dark cloud upon their conscience sits; Moses is dead long since, who did command, Jehovah takes the Scepter in his hand: Jesus the God of love, his love imparts, VVriting his Law of love in all their hearts; O what is Moses, what are all his laws, VVanting the witness to maintain the cause; The Holy Spirit he can only cure ye, He is the Judge, the witness, and the Jury: In Pharaohs land the laws they were not good, VVritten in Characters of humane blood; Those that dwelt here did labour to be poor, Had this reward, to wash the Blackamoor, VVith menaces and blows, because they went
On their own errant, when they were not sent. An unsure path, this was their overthrow, They wait not till their Leader bid them go. Instead of Peters pallace headlong tumbling Into the pit, where Cerberus sits grumbling. VVhat though heaven-gate stand open all the year, None but the new man hath admittance there: This little Infant is that lovely boy, That leads the Soul to everlasting joy. I fled from hence when no body did mind me, Leaving this Countrey with a curse behind me: Now for the Wilderness with all my sails, To gather Manna, but I met with Quails. A merry Crew with feasting and good cheer, About a foolish Calf were dauncing here; Moses was in the mount, where he did draw Tables of Stone; but who regards his Law? They'r not amaz'd, nor startle at the wonder, Though it receiv'd it's birth in horrid thunder, Unlike the Gospel, that with gentle voice Did make their hearts in melting tears rejoyce; Bewailing these this in my mind did come, How many Calves are there in Christendome? And those that see old Israel go astray, Perhaps do worship Calves as well as they. VVhat quarrels ev'ry where, what fruitless odds? About their wafer, water, paper-gods; VVe stile them heathens who the Stars did hallow,
Falling in zeal before their great Apollo; When those that see their error (that is known) With open eye cannot behold their own; All men are Archers roving in the dark, Their arrow flies to some mistaken mark. Our aim should be at heaven alone, but O! The earth is still between, we shoot too low; Some Dallila, some creature, we are wide all, And every man's his own beloved Idol: The griping Ʋsurer can take no rest, For dreaming of his Idol in the Chest; The ambitious man with new invented Oaths, Swears by his honour, and his painted cloaths: The Lover's fetter'd in Don Cupids cord, The Souldier boldly swears by his good sword; The Schollar on his Concubine doth look, Vows he will have no Mistriss but his Book; He call's it bigamy to sport and kiss, Or marry any other Wife but this; Out of his little senses he doth run, To find the earth dancing about the Sun; Man, man, too little, or too much doth prize, 'Tis safe to love, but not to Idolize, Wife, children, lands, descent from noble birth, Titles of honor, Demy-gods on earth. Rather then fail abroad, at home we find, Millions of Images within the mind, Neat Images carv'd out with curious art,
And all those flatt'ring Idolls of the heart; As Cannon-bullets with impetuous force Cut through the air, taking their violent course, Not resting, though they fly with eager wing, Til they return to earth whence they did spring. So man, whose Soul's a sparkle of that flame, Breath'd by the Holy spirit, whence it came, Like Noahs dove can find no steddy footing, Till it reenter where he had his rooting: In the true ballance 'tis most just and fit, To give the Soul to him that framed it. 'Twill stand in no place but where it first grew, 'Tis general peace when Caesar hath his due. This makes the IV to quarrell in great pain, Strugling and striving to return again: Into the only one pure element, Their first dear mother where they have content: This is the root of all their disagreeing, Because they are not in their pristine being; For which the universal frame doth mourn, Groaning with sighs, and panting to return: Israel for forty years was try'd and tost. But I could stay no longer in this coast, This countrey could not win my approbation, It look'd so like the land of desolation; Where parching Southern winds do always blow Where Corn and grass was never known to grow; For Canaan now wing'd with the rosy morn.
That holy land where my dear Prince was born; I found those sweet and blessed habitations Were Joshua dwelt, possest by barbarous nations; King Davids greatness like a Dream was gone, And all the gloryes of King Solomon: Old Jacob said with grave and reverent brow, The land thou seest, it is not Canaan now; Canaan a garden, which the heavens did dress, Is now become a barren wilderness; Here in this land a Sun arose most bright, Whose luster to the lower world gave light; The Son of God, the glory of each nation, In flesh and blood took up his habitation: To bless the world he from my loins did spring; But he that was my Son, is now my King. Transplendent light seal'd with Jehovahs stamp, My bastard children quench'd this glorious lamp; This land, which Prophets and Apostles nurst, Is for their crying murthering crime accurst, For which they are dispers'd in ev'ry part. Would'st thou see Canaan, 'tis within thy heart; This is King Davids Scepter, and his throne, This is the temple of King Solomon. Ʋrim and Thummim seek, and thou shalt find, Holy of holies is within thy mind, Wrestle with God as I did, boldly wrestle, Like some brave Souldier when he storms a Castle, Or's mounting up to some strong Cittadell,
Victorious faith doth conquer heaven and hell. The fearfull coward meets with many a cross, Returning from the battel still with loss: Laodicea was reprov'd of old, For her Lukewarmness, neither hot nor cold; In mine encounter I did boldly say, I am resolv'd to die, or win the day: 'Tis known through all the world, I do not boast, I did incounter with the Lord of host, Who holdeth in his hand lightning and fire, Till he had granted all I could desire. I would not let him go, but held him fast In my strong arm of confidence imbrac't; In this power Labans craft I overcame, Chang'd Esau's Lyon to a gentle lambe; And in the vision which was clearly given, Faith is the ladder which doth reach to heaven; Earth link'd to heavenboth kingdoms comprehending, Throne-Angels swift ascending and descending. 'Twas not a mess of pottage rarely drest, Cookt out with art, to furnish Esau's feast; All conquering faith begat that princely boy, Give me the blessing which you now enjoy, Promis'd to Abraham for's resignation, In Isaac's line, a crown to ev'ry nation; The blessing fix'd in ev'ry revolution, Though Solomons Temple had its dissolution. All outward glories are ecclips'd and gone,
The King of Kings call's for the heart alone. He is, he was before the world begun; All things do praise his name, why should not man? Uncomprehended, all things comprehending, His glory no beginning hath, nor ending. The Angels sing inspir'd with heavenly flame, All glory, glory, glory, to his name; Spirits of just men in a holy dance, Lift up their hands for their deliverance; Rejoycing that the tree which knowledge bore, Blasted in their fair garden, grows no more, Torn by the root with all its bastard race, The tree of Life replanted in the place. The Nightingal in warbling roundelaies, Doth make the Vallies eccho forth his praise. The little Lark mounts up with soaring wing, As he wo'd teach the Cherubins to sing. About Religion they are not at odds, But sing as merrily as the old Gods: The little worms which on the earth do crawl, Boldly intitle him, their all in all. All disagreeing forms in this agreeing, He is, he was, the being of all beings. And thou with cheerfull heart, chant forth his praise, Although thy pen cannot deserve the bays; Keep on that humble pace thou hast begun, Untill thy glass it's utmost Sand hath run.
Enough was said to satisfie my mind, I could not see, for Love had made me blind; Love hath no ears nor eyes, I call, I cry, Give me my Love again for whom I die; Let Cupids army all their forces joyn, Angels to boot, no Love was e're like mine: Bring Damons Love to Pithias on the stage, Who fear'd not death, nor Dyonisiu's rage: Set Davids love to his dear Jonathan, Bring all the love of all men into one, Bring womans too, whose quick mild sparkling beams Makes them most excellent in both extreams; Yet mine excells, exceeds them all as far As great Apollo doth the meanest star. The Ʋsurer, Italian-like, in's brest Locks his dear Dallila, in his dark chest. The love to woman doth with beauty die, If Vertues chain be not the sacred tie: But mine that cannot perish in the tasting, Is like the noble object everlasting; A love unmeasurable, and unbounded, Where firm Foundation cannot be confounded: Why then mine only joy dost thou remove, From him that hath no life but in thy love? The very earth where thou thy foot dost set, Doth smell more sweet than Rose or Violet. My happiness, my dear delight is lost, He's gone to heaven, and thither will I post;
If any Spirit in my way shall stand, Angels, Arch-angels, are at my command; Faith joyn'd with love controuleth the abyss, And forceth entrance where no entrance is; It batters walls, and breaks down ev'ry fence, For heaven it self is won by violence; It charms the Lyons heart with sacred Spell, They have no power to touch a Daniel; Subdueth Tyrants, and their armed band, Walks on the Sea as if it were dry land; It cuts a passage through the watry Stream, And raiseth Laz'rus from his drouzy dream: The walls of Jericho it doth deflowr, It stormeth hell, and conquers heaven with power, Commandeth trembling Devils to retreat, Removeth lofty mountains from their Seat; It bids one Sea divide it self in two; What thing so difficult Faith cannot do? Our Souls are tinder, burning in desire, Faith is the flint that striketh up the fire; Which being kindled by the gentle Lamb, The Spirit blows, and turns it all to flame. My dear and only jewel do not fly me, Arm'd with this faith, thy power can't deny me; It is decreed, though thousand deaths I die, Nothing shall seperate my Love and I; Through Daniels furnace, and the flames of hell, I'le pass to find where my dear Love doth dwell.
Let hell heap all her fire, fuell on fuell, Nor heaven nor hell shall rob me of my jewell; Though all created things should strive to thwart us, Devils, nor men, nor Angels shall not part us: With him for ever I'm resolv'd to dwell, Without whose presence heaven it self were hell. O what were Paradice, if we could win it, Heaven is not heaven, and my sweet Lord not in it: That heaven is heaven, where all delights do grow; It is the smiling eye that makes it so; His frown's the house of torment, and of night; 'Tis paradice to be his Favourite; My Soul's a prisoner, none but love can bail her, Give me that Prison, where love is the Gaoler. Hearing my cries, and into pitty breaking, He was within me while I was thus speaking; Words that did love and pitty, both provoke them, Though I was ignorant, 'twas he that spoke them; He toucht mine heart, but I had lost my feeling, He like the rock did stand, but I was reeling: With amorous wine mad drunk, my heart lay panting, Something I wanted, knew not what was wanting; I sought in forrain countreys every way, For that rich pearl which in my bosome lay; Through Asia, Europe, Affrica I roam, Hunting abroad, my Jewell was at home. He present was, his presence unrevealed,
He stood before me, but mine eyes were sealed. His seeming distance was a piercing dart, Though he was never absent from my heart; He alwayes lodged in mine heart I see, 'Twas my beloved was that faith in me; I knock at heavens bright gate, my way was blocedk, It was not I, but he in me, that knocked; Who like a wanton lamb, or skipping Hind, In jollity was sporting in my mind; With holy violence the door flew open, The brazen locks, all bolts and bars were broken. Enter the Royal Fort which thou hast gained, Fountain of wisdom, holy love unstained; Take up thy lodging in my smiling eye, Wherein unknown, unmeasured treasures lye; With keenest arrow draw thy bended bow, But when thou aim'st, aim not at things below: Thou shoot'st at such a mark, that will deceive thee, When storms arise, these treacherous friends will leave thee; They fleet & flutter like the air that's ranging, All Sublunaries subject are to changing: The Stars and Plannets, like the giddy Ocean, Wander uncertainly with wanton motion This day, as their aspects would never fade, Before the next morn they run retrograde. If Jupiter the knot of love doth tye, Saturn and Mars dissolve the harmony; Hath Venus a fine web of friendship spun,
Mercury ravells all that she hath done; Though Sol be hot, Luna is wondrous cold, Fresh youthful amities on earth grow old; Art thou infected with some strong disease, Why dost thou run unto the Stars for ease? How can thy Soul be cur'd with poisonous plaisters? These are thy Servants, make them not thy Masters. Their whirling wheel is alwayes running round, Build not thy hope on such uncertain ground; Though by thy fall thou art of low degree, I'le mount thee to a throne, and marry thee; That I am Lord all creatures they shall know, I made thee King Vicegerent here below: By disobedience thou didst forfeit all, I'le make thee greater, stronger by thy fall; I'le land thee on the sweet delightfull Shore, The land of Peace whence thou canst fall no more. Thou art my Virgin-bride, I will assure thee, With endless joys my heart shall be thy Dowry: Treasures and pleasures of the greatest price, With all the gloryes of sweet Paradice; In mine infolded arms Ile gently take thee; When all the world of slippery friends forsake thee. The world doth love it self, it's own is dearest, When it is furthest off, then am I nearest. When friendly death shall cut thy fatall clue, Thine extream unction, shall be Hallelue; Death shall no Cobling nor no Bugbear be,
But a safe passage to felicity. A friendly Ferry-man to waft thee o're, Safe from all danger to th' Elysian shore. What if he take this garment off that's worn, Withered with age, with winters fury torn? From mine own Wardrobe I will cloath my Dear, With garment rich, such as the Angels wear; I'le give thee Adams garment without spot, When he was naked, and yet knew it not; Rivers of heavenly wine full to the brim, Wherein the Prophets and Apostles swim; Anthems of joy, thy Soul for ever singing, The Tree of life in thine own bosome springing; With all the favours of my love I'le grace thee, With Doves and towring Eagles I will place thee, With all the little lambs that know no guile, With constant Martyrs that in death did smile; With Cherubins and Seraphims inrol'd, And all the princely Patriarchs of old, VVith Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Quire That chant my praises on King Davids lyre. And thou that dost delight in humble verse, Poor homely strains, my glory to rehearse, Chanting my praise and Babels overthrow, Shalt sing a new Song which thou dost not know; Thy Ship hath sail'd on Seas where billows roar, On thy right hand behold the pleasant shoar; Now having run thy rude tempestuous race,
Thy travells end, cast Anchor in this place. This is the place of pleasure and delight, Upon this Rock thy ne plus ultra write; Set up thy Pillar here, 'tis holy ground, This is the Rock which hell cannot confound; My sleep unto its period now was come, I wisht 'thad lasted till the day of doom. The miracles I saw in this short Dream, For some brave  were a noble Theam, Sweet flowing pens, tears from all eyes compelling, But mine perhaps hath spoyl'd the Tale in telling; The Sight, strange wonder and amazement drew, For when I wak'd, I found it to be true.
ITER Bevoriale. I sing no civil war, nor what did fall To Palmerine or Amdis de gaul: Prince Arthurs story shall no paper blot, Nor the conceited pranks of Don Quixot; If mad Orlando wild and furious be, What's his divine Angellica to me? Rouze they that list the Lyon in his den, A brisk and Bonny-Tale flows from my pen; Like the idle dreams fantaue Poets faign, Or those fond Fables Midwives entertain Over a smiling cup of simpering Ale Of tall Tom Thumb, and doughty Jack o' th' Vale. Now lend your ear, as we from Belvoir came, Own'd by a noble Lord, and princely Dame, All our discourse, our welcome, and our Our merry hearts light, as our Purses were: We had no ships at Sea, to make us sad, Lost in a tempest when the winds are mad; We never did abuse the Commonweal, By vertue of our place, and the Broad Seal, As some Land Pirates, nor all down the hate
And heavy curse of an incensed State; We broach no projects, no inventions brew, Nor damn old Doctrine by inventing new: Plunder the publick for our private gain, Nor are we Spyes or Pentioners to Spain: I hope it is no Treason then to sing, And say, God bless our Soveraign Lord the KING. With such cleer Souls like sober Snails we creep To our desired Harbour where we sleep Sounder than Swallows, or industrious Bees, Who rest all winter in old hollow trees. Sol now is climbing up the Eastern hill, Our mornings-draught good boy, and then a Bill. imis Sawee, what Reck'ning have we here? m for Fire, Tobacco, wine and Beer: Summa totalis: Well the to'ther pot, And then thy Mistriss lip shall cleer the shot. So taking leave of ev'ry Chamberlain, Lo at the door, the Ghost of Tamberlain, Of bulk as burly as an Oak, stood forth A sturdy Gallant sailing from the North: Fair Sirs, said he, will you be pleas'd to own A wandring Traveller that is unknown; The ways are foul, and we have far to ride, He that's alone doth measure ev'ry stride: That in the tented field I have been bred, Where winking Stars have lighted me to bed, Circled with pale-fac'd Death on ev'ry side,
s such a truth that cannot be deny'd; eap you the pleasure of my passed broils, eed on my language, and forget the miles. To this in courtesie we did consent, o up we got, and on our Journey went. To pay my love, which he accounts a charge, e draws the Picture of his life at large: y Jove said he, I more degrees have run, Than Drake or Candish, or the trav'ling Sun; he proudest Kingdoms in the world have kist y wandring foot, I have them in a list, uina, Madagascar, and Japan; ook in the Map, the world is but a span, e Globe a Foot-ball kickt from pole to pole; e that hath Gold is sure to win the Goale. y self first found the passage to Cathay, rra del Fogo, and incognita; hot the Gulph, leapt o're the Line at noon, hence passed to the new world in the moon; he horrid battails, O the dismall wars hat I have seen, witness these speaking skars, Which like so many gaping mouths appear, nd I as bracelets on my limbs do wear. s language was all Thunder, when he spake, e thought the center of the earth did shake. y Sanco panco, much dejected Reeve, ke a pale Image pulls me by the sleeve; en whispers in mine ear, good Sir be wise,
Do you not see those pistols in his eyes That shoot me dead? are all thy spirits fled? Where's that grave Oracle? that subtle head VVrapt in a Turbant Mahomet put on, VVhen he did frame his foolish Alchoran. Thy body too, in more warm woollen clad Than thy great Grandsire; courage then my Lad; Intrench'd in thine own Pallisado ly, And all the Instruments of death defy. Gun, Dagger, Sword, Grannado, and Petar, VVhat other engines by the Sons of war, At hand devis'd for slaughter, or aloof, A wastcoteer so lin'd is Cannon-proof. VVords are but wind, the silly Swain was sick, By nature and complexion Phlegmatick. A trembling Palsy on his heart did sit, Like one arrested with an Ague-fit, At last kind Soul he weeps, shaking his head, VVith broken hollow voice, Sir we are dead, VVe are beset, besieg'd, by Sea and land; And his companions in each corner stand Like forlorn Scouts, see see y'on yonder hill? I nothing see, but Bushes and a Mill. O they are men, it is in vain to fly, And I alas am not prepar'd to dy. I have that golden bait, that dainty dish, For which these greedy Cormorants do fish; False Traytor to betray me in distress,
Accursed gold I never lov'd thee less; VVith all my heart, wo'd I were rid of thee, A hand to boot, so my dear life were free. How will my wife and children entertain The heavy news, to hear that I am slain? My sides grew fat with laughter at the man, Methought they were inlarg'd more than a span; Yet putting on a seeming face of fear, VVhen lo, my Servant who did over-bear All our discourse, and understood my mind, Spurs up his Palfry swifter than the wind; Breathless a while he pauses, then in hast Tells the bold Cavaleer all that had past: And that he may be suted for the Scean, Lays open all Johns gold, his heart I mean. The morn was close, fit for the work in hand, A misty darkness covers all the Land; His liquid fear did much increase by this, And Fear the mother of devotion is; His Soul extracted from immortal birth Had till this hour been buried in the earth, But now was fairly travelling to heaven, Large his accounts, and how to make them even His time was little, but his voyage long, His faith was weak, his sins were wondrous strong, Yet now he sends his hovering thoughts before, Like nimble spyes to scale the narrow doore. Up comes my Gallant, on whom John did look
As doth the pris'ner that's deny'd his book. But he grim Sir, pitching his subtle hay, Least over acting should undoe the play: Inquires how rotten sheep did stand that year, VVhat prices cattel, corn, and wool did bear; Seasons and times, for selling and for seeding, As if his whole time had been spent in reading Old Almanacks nine Summers out of date; On whom he leans, more than the book of Fate. Then Bookers Prophecies he doth unfold, Valued with those Scybilla sang of old. O happy men said he, who never roame In forraign countreys from your native home; Your days with plenty crown'd, ending your lives In the chast arms of your beloved wives: But we torn from our cradles to be hurl'd By cruel fate into the rugged world, Like Bastards of the earth at our return, Incounter nothing but contempt and scorn: VVhere you in pitty of our wants allow, VVretched reward, a halter and a bough. But by this steel, this steel that I unsheath, E're I will end my days so dry a death. A grinning wry-mouth'd death, Ile kill pell mell Five hundred churls, and send them all to hell: And this by Mars, and all the Gods I swear. The amazed Swain seeing the storm so near, For shelter sought his fearful head to hide,
His rusty Sword hung loosely by his side. But he thereon dare not his safety build, His Rippon Spurs are now both sword and shield. His foaming Steed companion of his fright, Did like a Whirl-wind, snatch him from our sight: We follow after like the greedy Hound, And when he cannot to our eye be found, We haunt him by the nose; for in the wind, The Fox had left a filthy scent behind: In this sweet pickle, melancholly sick, Bath'd all in Sweat, and something that did stick Like yellow Birdlime, to his limber thighs, The stingless Bee to his own cottage flies; 'Tis true, he brought no Honey to his Hive; But Wax good store: 'twas well he scap'd alive. His Wife salutes him, in whose welcome arms, In brief he tells part of his passed harms; The rest he apprehends; for out of doubt The witty Girl soon smelt the matter out.
On the Royal Soveraign. PRoteus grand Shepherd of the foaming deep, That feed'st thy scaley herds like flocks of sheep, Hold up thy shaggie head; lo here doth come A greater miracle than Thetis womb Did ever bear; a royal frame compos'd May vie with Noahs Vessel, that inclos'd All natures store; who else had found her grave, A floating Island dancing on the wave. So Delos wandering Isle, or Poets feign, Till mighty Jove did fix her in the main. In ages that succeed why may not she Pull'd from the Sea, part of the firm land be? Part did I say; how vainly do I doat? Thou art a little world; the world a boat Compar'd to thee: the passenger no more Salutes thee for a Ship, but for a shoar: Who scorch'd with heat, then nipt with northern blast With storm and tempest toss'd, when he at last His long desired harbour sees at hand, Shall spring for joy, and throw himself on land.
The nice Philosopher with curious eye, Finds in the horned Moon a Collonie: As they to us, why may not this afar Appear to them to be a blazing Star? But whether thou a Star or Comet be, That wandering world stands gazing now on thee, On thee their Sun: blest nations of the night Who from thy beams receive their borrowed light, Neptune no more a god, for thou shalt reign Star of the Sea and shine in Charles his VVain.
A Poetical Strain. To Dr. Hiam Theolog. Medicum. I were uncharitable should I desire Consumption, pestilence, fierce raging fire Of scorching Feaver, Surfet, and the Wench, That borrows English coyn, but pays in French; Cold poisonous air, hot meteors that inflame, With thousand others which I fear to name, Should blast the widdowed world and make her wear A mourning weed: thy fame and art t' indear. My Love shall be more modest, I will pray Thy charms may conjure all these Fiends away. May'st thou by quintessence of thy great skill Restore more lives then Mountebanks do kill; While they imploy'd to cure the leprous Itch, The worms in children, or some Female stitch Got by a wanton slip, from Pispots win Brown-bread, and thread-bare-cloaths; or in the sin Share with the Devil, and converse with Smocks, Til they themselves be peppered with the Pox.
Mayst thou things high and excellent acquire; That all thy Tribe may envy and admire; The Gout, the Stone, which ope' the Ʋsurers eye To see the torture, rack, and crueltie, Which he hath laid on others; for his health, Wo'd now (tho' unwilling) part with all his wealth, Be fully cur'd by thee; but not before His bags be safely landed on thy shoare; And thou with this rich prize so justly won, Build Hospitals for those he hath undone. May the young frie fall sick, grow lean and wan, And long for thee more than they do for man. May every female-patient be a lover, By feeling of their pulse let them recover Green-sickness: VVere their fame and honour fled et them redeem both that and Maiden-head, et them from all diseases be set free Not by thy Drugs, but confidence in thee. et aged Madams on whose furrowed brow ald time hath worn deep wrinkles with his plow, Their hour-glass turn as full of juicie sap s when they danced in their mothers lap: ick nature by thy help as healthful grow, s when our father Adam held the plow: ay all thy Patients live the perfect date Of old Methusalem, and in a state s strong. And thou for making others sound With glorious immortality be crown'd.
Two Poetical Epistles to two Friends. Epist. 1. VVHen all things out of frame grow wondro scurvy, And nature from her course turns tops turvy; When horses ride on men with Spur and Switch, And Schollars do put down their masters britch; When Princes to their people do stand bare, When Dogs do fly before the fearful Hare, When Maids command their Mistresses by patten, When beggars ruffle in their Silk and Sattin, When Ostlers teach their horses Greek and Lattin▪ When Gallants walk on foot, and foot-men ride, When Noble-men run lacquies by their side:
When th' elements from natures course do turn, VVhen fire shall drown the earth, and water burn; VVhen lofty mountains congee to the vale, VVhen Pigs sing sweeter then the Nightingale, VVhen Pearls and Oisters grow on Oaken trees, VVhen in the midst of Summer it shall freeze, VVhen all this comes to pass, which cannot be, Yet shall I then prove faithfull unto thee.
Epist. 2. GIve me a Sidney's Pen, which dipt in wine Made his Philoclea more then half divine: Summon the Poets, none shall march before us, Thou my Pancela, I thy Musidorus. Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, fram'd in story To mint a female, made of Masc'line glory; Muster to these all the brave old Commanders, The Scipio's, Caesars, and the Alexanders, VVith bills and swords they made all nations flie: But Livia with the Magick of her eye, Doth lead the world in chains of love divine, Conq'ring all hearts; I'm sure sh' hath conquered mine. Since I am grown to be thy Gally-slave, Give me the priviledge which prisn'ers have, My liberty being lost, by Cupids charms, To live and die a pris'ner in thine arms. Nectar, Ambrosia, purely here I sip; The Muses nine they all dwell on thy lip. Swimming in love, no pleasure now shall pass us, Thou art my Hellicon and my Parnassus.
On a Gentleman who lost his Mi∣stress called Nancy, (at the same time) also his Hawk of the same Name. VVilt thou forsake me thus my dearest Nancy, To wander o're the world in a wild fancy, To couple with an Owl wantonly ranging Til thou hast cloy'd thy self with often changing? An Eagle was my Dove, True, as the Turtle-Dove If she a faller prove, Farewel my Nancy. Come my bird of Paradice thus I conjure thee, Illo, ho, ho, my love, when I did lure thee
Thou would'st come stooping down like clap of Thunder, And like a falling star cleave the air asunder. Then hovering o're my head, Whoo, hoop, the game is dead; Yet thou art from me fled, Farewel &c. Thy feathers were more soft then maiden tresses, I gave thee bells to wear, Varvels and jesses, Casting to keep thee clean Made of white Flannel, VVhen thy limbs bathing were, I was thy Spani'l, I gave the stones good store, Yet thou dist play the whore, And wilt return no more. Farewel &c Sweet Plover was thy food, Patridge and Pigeon, Thrush, Feldifare and Snipe Woodcock and Widgeon, Quail, Pheasant, Duck and Teal, the pretty Bunting,
And she that sweetly sings whilst she is mounting. Yet thou art gone astray, On worms and mice to prey, Beetles that shun the day. Farewel &c. Now since thou art so coy If e're I catch thee, False Kite, to keep thee tame I'le sit and watch thee; I'le hood those rouling eyes that shoot at rovers, And mew thee in a cage from thy fond lovers. Cupid's a wanton child, True lovers are beguil'd, Ware Hawk and Wenches wild. Farewel &c.
A cold Journey, and cold Entertainment. UNto a countrey farm I lately came, Where I hung like a picture in a frame, 'Twas in the wintrie cold month of December, Her frosty frowns forget, her smiles remember. Fare would content Apicius to his mind, Then who dare say my Landlord was unkind. His broth was wondrous good, but with the ladle He bang'd my noddle, till my brains grew addle. A trembling School-boy I demurely stand My master with a ferrula in his hand If I but blow my nose, or wink, or nod, Or smile, or look awry, fetch me my rod: Poor men are fools, wisdom attends the rich; Which made me readily put down my brich. He that at great mens tables takes a seat, Hath freedom to do nothing else but eat; If he have wit he must not spread his banners, For that were blasphemy against good manners;
This learned Lesson my Praeceptor knew, His what, his when, and why, even to a cue. Quick-ey'd he was to see and understand, And alwayes carried in his reverend hand A multiplying glass, wherein was shewn The errors of mankind, all but his own. The good and evil mixt, made me believe This was the garden where our mother Eve Upon that cursed fruit did freely feed, Which poisoned her self, and all her seed. Words steep'd in vinegar, and spending money; Hemlock and itter wormwood, mixt with honey: Such as poor beggars purchase to their cost, A gentle aims, and then a whipping-post. I came invited to this double banquet, Laid in a bed of down, tost in a blanket; The Gospel here, there, Moses bloody banners, A lincic-woolsie Medly of all manners: Kindness, unkindness, should I sum up all, Sugar two ounces with one ounce of Gall. Which being tempered with the oyl of Saunders, Would make an excellent med'cine for the Glaunders; Hallo my fancy whither wilt thou fly? Hath my kind host some faults, and have not I? God pardon all; O be not too sharp sighted, If he be in the dark, thou art benighted. He's in the oven, and I am in the fire, He's in the dirt, and I wade in the mire.
He hath some pimples on his face that shine: And have not I, poor I! a mole on mine? Now that I may not crow, or hang the wing, In equal ballance let me weigh the thing: The good I have receiv'd I will inroll, Fairly ingraved in a marble scroll; All stains and blemishes I'l blot with Ink, And not to see I'l shut mine eyes and wink.
Ʋpon my return hence, with little wit, and less money, being alone; I took a dangerous fall from my Horse. REnowned Drake from Pole to Pole was hurl'd, In his long voyage round about the world: Such strange, miraculous wonders, could not see, As I, who shot a greater gulf than he; When I fell from my horse in deadly swoon, Where I saw stars, to Ticho Brache unknown; Fire from mine eyes did flame, the skies flew open, My back quoth I, and all my ribs are broken. Here I beheld as I lay on the ground, In pain and grief, that th' Ʋniverse went round: Upon my back, which made me much dismaid, The burthen of the world was wholly laid.
A fancy took me which did little please, That I was sailing to th' Antipodes; Had not some mountains interpos'd my way, I had discovered them that fatal day. False friends, and dirty ways, henceforth forbear; Dull jades and winter journeys, I forswear: With pitty to poor carriers, forc't to goe O're rocks of ice and monstrous hills of snow; Let others travell countreys strange, to see Surely I thought 'twas the worlds end with me.
A DIALOGUE. A conference between two plain countreymen, Tom, and Will, about deep matters of Religion. CANTO. Tune — The Drainers are up Tom. Good Neighbour Will, I prethee be plain, With what religion shall we close, Since every Sect doth stifly maintain That the tree of life in their garden grows? Will. Ic'h tell thee Tom, 'chave found the best, Whatever men do write or say, If thy vessel be bound for the city of rest, True neighbourly love is the only way.
Let us fly away from the land of strife, The Lamb hath bought us with a price, And post to the holy river of life Which glideth through our Paradice. See how those heavenly streams do set To fill our Souls with a living flood, The tree of knowledge we will forget, But the tree of life shall be our food. The way to this river so pure and so cleer, Which through the valley of love doth glide, By resignation we must steer, Humility is our faithful guide. By faith we travell to a princely town Which wise men do call the fathers will, Here we in the Sabaoth of rest will sit down, And set up our tents on Mount Sion's hill. In the Ocean of love let us freely swim: To thee, my Joy, I drink this cup, Come fill up the bowl unto the brim, 'Tis liquor divine, then drink it all up; Drink merrily Tom, the Fountain it flows, We have no enmity nor gall; This cup to our friends, and this to our foes, A hearty carouze we tipple to all. Tom. Let us take the to 'ther pull,
This liquor will make all darkness fly, Why should we spare? the Fountain is full, And never can be drained dry. Let greedy Misers wade in the mire, Let squint-ey'd envy murder his brother, Let hatred and malice remain in the fire, Pure Nectar we drink and love one another. Let Pharisees pray till their knees grow bare, Let Gamesters cog the subtle dye Let Huntsmen pursue the silly Hare Let sober Citizens cozen and lie; Let Courtiers dissemble, let Scholars read The quirks and quibbles of old Aristotle, Let Souldiers fight, let Littleton plead, We'l cheerfully tame the to'ther bottle. From North to South, from East to West Inventions through the world do range, Opinions in fine garments drest Like blazing Comets of the brain, About religion they make foul work, And into bloody wars they fall, The Heathen, the Jew, the Christian, the Turk, This liquor will reconcile them all. The flowers drink the pearly dew, Like merry drunkards all in a row,
What though they are of various hue In neighbourly love together grow; They merrily tipple and sweetly agree, No quarrell about their cups they move, They drink to each other, then why should not we Drink liberal cups of innocent love?
A SONG. TUNE. Such a Rogue's a Round-head. What's he who breaks the thunder crack, And bids the raging Sea go back, Unto his voice inclined; Who doth the angry Ocean still, And makes the winds obey his will? Jehovah unconfined. What's he who gives the Sparrows meat, And moves the rocks out of their seat, Where first they were designed; Who doth the crystal Springs invite, And cloaths the lillies all in white? Jehovah unconfined. VVhat's he who doth the stars advance, VVhil'st round about the Globe they dance, VVith earth-quake and with thunder; Destroys great Cities of renown, And makes the hills come tumbling down? It is the Lord of wonder.
The Tyger I do keep in awe And to the Lyon am a law By my sole power confined; 'Tis I that bound the Sea and land, Yet I above all bounds do stand, Jehovah unconfined. With Eagles wings survey all lands Number th' innumerable sands, And write them in a story; View every thing that's gone and past, Though time it self must end at last There's no end of my glory. The clouds I suck out of the Seas, And make them fall where I do please To fill the earth with treasure; The Sea, the Sands, the stars survey, The mountains in a ballance weigh, My power thou canst not measure. All things do in and to me flow, The things above and those below Are Servants to my pleasure; The heighths, the depths, are in my hand, The bredths and lengths at my command, My power thou canst not measure.
The Rant is dead, the Quake must dy, All forms before my presence fly, By my sole power designed, The Names they are the stumbling stone, Eternal life in all is one. Jehovah unconfined. Thy wisdom, will, and holy shew, Must perish like the early dew; And when thou art resigned, I'le take thee in mine arms again, For I in thee alone will reign Jehovah unconfined. If sweetness be thy souls delight, Carnation, Pink, and Lillies white, All flowers bound up in posies, Arabian Gums and Indian spice, My bosome is the Paradice The Paradice of Roses. The secret Cabinets below, Where yellow gold and silver grow Do all obey my pleasure, Pearls, Diamonds, that sparkling be, All these am I, come dwell with me, And I will be thy treasure.
A Catholick Hymn. TUNE. If there be a Phoenix in the world, 'tis she. OPinion rules the humane state, And domineers in ev'ry land, Shall Seas and Mountains seperate Whom God hath joyn'd in natures band? Dwell they far off or dwell they near, They are all my Fathers children dear. Features and colours of the hair, Why meet they not in harmony? The yellow, black, the brown, the fair, All tinctures of variety; In single simple love alone, Millions of colours are but one. The Nightingale doth never say, Though he be King of harmony, Unto the Cuckoo, and the Jay, Why sing you not so sweet as I? Each sing their own in loves fair eye, Their tongues complete one melody.
Lend me the bright wings of the morn, That I about the world may run, From Cancer unto Capricorn, Far swifter than the flaming Sun. Where e're my winged Soul doth fly; All's fair and lovely in mine eye. In the phlegmatick I sweetness find, The melancholly grave and wise, The sanguine merry to my mind, From choller flames of love arise: In single simple love alone, All these complexions are but one. Behold the painful labouring hand, And those that keep their harmless sheep, The country Swain that ploughs the land, The Merchant that doth plough the deep; Each do their work in love alone, One works for all, and all for one. With open arms let me imbrace The Heathen, Christian, Turk and Jew, The lovely and deformed face, The sober and the Jovial Crew; For this I see, in love alone All forms and features are but one.
I love with all mine heart and soul, The French, the Dutch, the Englishman, The Dane, the Swede, the Turk the Pole, The Spaniard and the African; For this I see, in love alone All nations reconcil'd are one. Thence sail I with my love as far As China, to the Indian shoar, The Artick and Antartick Star, The Tawny and the Blackamoor, From thence I travell round about To countreys never yet found out. My heart, my heart, is very sick, All nations of the earth I woo, My Soul is turning Catholick, And so is my religion too; The Deity in all doth move, So universal is my love.
An Hymn of Love, TUNE. True blew &c. Gentle love hath no dissention In our holy Christendom, He will end all wild contention, Hell and death he'l overcome. Love that's of no price accounted Tossed like a Tennis-ball, On his white horse bravely mounted, He will ride to conquer all. Heav'n and Hell with wealth shall store him, The fatness of the holy land, Victory doth march before him, The Lamb and Dove at his right hand. To the battel he advances; His colour's oriental blew, Not with guns and ordinances, Adversaries to subdue.
In his eye there are such blisses, Enemies it overthrows; With imbraces smiles and kisses, He will conquer all his foes. Low humility befriends him, Meekness patience and the rest, Noble charity attends him To provide for every guest. Here's no begging or intreating, None do labour plow or sow, od provided without sweating, The tree of life doth freely grow. In his house there dwells no danger, Steward Hospitality Kindly welcomes every stranger Prest with friendless poverty. Bounty crowneth all their wishes, Entertains with chearful breast, Plenty ushers in the dishes, Grand purveyor of the feast. Dishes rich innumerable: But of all this princely fare, Quoth love mine heart is on the table, Feed, my Joy, and do not spare.
Noble Angels sweetly singing Tunes of heav'nly melody, In the midst a fountain springing, They that drink can never dye. Measured dances nimbly tracing, Fires of love that always flame, Hugging, kissing, and imbracing, Singing praises to the Lambe. Love within, and love without them, Love doth all his treasure lend, Peace and joy dwells round about them, Peace and joy that hath no end. Immanuel is all our story, He is our royal diadem, To him be glory, glory, glory, We are his new Hierusalem.
An Epitaph Hymn, &c. On the death of the Lady Maria Mannors, daughter to the noble Earl and Heroick Countess of Rutland, and Sister to the Lord Ross. Maiden of honour born of princely stem, A virgin in the new Hierusalem, Rose in sweet Paradice, pluckt in the morn, In her dear Virgin bridegrooms bosome worn; Angels about this angel dance and sing, Musick when love doth move on every string; Among the Martyrs and the heav'nly Quire, Numbred with those who chant to David's lyre. New triumphs now exchang'd for transitory, On her fair temples a rich crown of glory; Rivers of pleasure full unto the brink, Such as the Prophets and Apostles drink.
The Angels entertainment in eandem. VVElcome sweet Angel to our christal bowers, A star thou art among the immortal powers; To be a Lamb in the grand shepherds flock Is more than to be born of princely stock. Thou now hast scap'd those doubts, those cares, and fears, Which would have waited on thy riper years; Thy lover till December would not stay, But hug'd thee hence in thy fresh blooming May. A Dove among the Doves thou here may'st play, Cutting thy passage through the milkie way: Till thy dear Bridegroom with his favour grace thee, Whose arms are always open to imbrace thee.
Hymnus in eandem. The Bridegrooms Salutation. TUNE. When the stormy winds do blow. I Took thee on a suddain In all thy glories drest, I cropt thee in the budding To wear thee in my brest: My rosie blooming blossome, My lovely flower thou art, I'le hug thee in my bosome A jewel in mine heart. Thou hast given me thy virgin power Mine honour to advance, And all the joys that heaven can showr Are thine inheritance; I'le tincture thee with blisses My flames of love to pay
With sweet unnumbered kisses We dally out the day. The Angels are invited, The Supper ready drest, The holy lamps are lighted For our eternal feast: Banquets to thy desiring On tables rich appear, I'le give thee such attiring The noble Angels wear. The sacred knot which I have knit No power can untie, Duallity I'le not admit, Our We is turn'd to I; One heav'nly flesh, one blood and bone, One life not transitory, The Male, and Female both in one, One undivided glory. I'le gather thee sweet posies, Sweet posies of rich price, Of July-flowers and Roses That grow in Paradice. Let shepherds call on Phillis As fair as fair may be, More beautifull than Lillies My Jewel is to me.
The Cherubims advancing In all their beams of light, The little Angels dancing About this Angel bright. Sweet harmony rebounded In all the heav'nly Spheres, Such melody ne're sounded In any mortal ears.
A Song of Hospitality. TUNE. The Drainers are up, They threaten to drain the Kingdom dry▪ GIve me the golden age again When wine did welcome every guest, When that good Knight Sr. Loyn did reign, Plover and Patridge did flie to the feast, Since bold Copernicus hath found New nations never known before; The tottering world by turning round Hath turn'd poor Charity out of door. Where's the bouncing Buck we so much boast, Whereon good fellows did heartily feed, When Shoulder of mutton did rule the roast; O then 'twas a merry world indeed! What's become of our Capon, our Chicken and Veal, The Miser ingrosseth them all in his Hutch, Long-winded prayer, and left-handed zeal Makes lame hospitality lean on a crutch.
A Gammon of Bacon is very good meat With a piping Pig new drawn from the spit, With plowing on both sides the Plowman doth sweat; That worlds at an end, now the Devil a bitt; March beer in black Jacks as big as ones waste, But locks and keys have robbed the Hall, When our friendlywine of Ca∣tholick Love. liquor they free∣ly do taste. The Butterie and Pantrie will fly open to all.
SELF. O Self! that art the cause of all our sadness, The whole world is involved in thy madness; And I that write this, would that I could see, Accursed Self, that I were rid of thee. Had Self been hang'd on Judas tree, Had he been drown'd in Pharaoh's fall, But O! he lives in thee and me, To plague and to torment us all: Self-reason doth all mischief breed. The Tyrant proud that would be King, The Serpent and the Serpents seed, The Dragon with invenom'd sting, Herod that did the children slay, False Judas that did Christ betray, True love doth conquer hell and sin VVer't not for love that cures all evils, Disarms the angry Cherubin, This world were a meer den of Devils; Th'arraign, condemn, at their own bar, Thieves punish thieves, all Judges are.
A Littany. FRom drinking up the labourers sweat, From making war without a Warrant, From climbing to the Judgment Seat, From running on a sleeveless errant, From all my fetters set me free And from my Self deliver me. From the dissemblers yea and nay, From Pharaoh's kindnesse, Kedars Tent, From daubing with untempered clay, From stoning of the innocent, Good Lord deliver me. From unbelief, fond cares, and fears, From a long Bill of a Taylor, From the Hiena's murthering tears; From the deep dungeon of a Jaylor, Good Lord &c. From close dissemblers with two faces, From a false, lying, double tongue, From Catch-poles and their kind imbraces, From lingring Law-suits nine lives long Good Lord &c.
From all stubborn disobedience, From Wolves that would devour the flock, From Peters foolish confidence, But give me Peters watchful Cock, Good Lord I pray thee. From the inventions of mans brain, From the foul curse of being rich, From Gog and Magogs cursed train, And from the Apple that did Eve bewitch, Good Lord deliver me. From Sina's thunder, Babels Tower, From those that fly with borrowed wing, From Caterpillers that devour The noble Lilly that doth spring, Good Lord &c. From Herod and the man of sin, From Jonah's Whale and perishing Gourd, From the fierce angry Cherubin And from the fiery flaming sword, Good Lord &c. From north-east winds when they do blow, From winter journeys without coyn From travelling to Jericho, Where Thieves my jewel did purloin, Good Lord &c.
Let me escape thy raging ire, Thy Thunder-bolts O do not dart! And from thine angry flaming fire, O hide me in thy tender heart; In thy dear heart I shall be free Inthron'd in perfect libertie. Good Lord hear me. Drain up those weeping springs of tears, Thy Hurricano's let them cease, Thy frowns awaken horrid fears, But in thy smiles are joy and peace. Good Lord hear me. Give me a constant faithful mind, To meet thy mercy at the last, That I may full forgiveness find: Let me forgive all that is past. Good Lord hear me.
A Soveraign Receipt for the Eyes, and Hearing, &c. LOok not asquint, or neighbours failing mind, The faults thine own, which thou in him dost find; To all his errors lend thy deaf'ned ear, Speak well of him, and then thou well shalt hear. Probatum est.
Dysticks. BLess me from Guns, they kill the lame, the blind: The Ordinance of love saves all Mankind. Seek not to man, a meer created thing For what thou want'st, go boldly to the King. The Soul with life continually is fed When Love and Charity lie in one bed. The water of eternal life we gather, When we receive the meek love of the Father. My dark drie Soul was Aarons withered rod, By Jesus springeth 'it'h Paradise of God. God breathed life into this little span, Himself the Breather breathed into man. Carry my thirsty Soul, O holy Dove! Into my Fathers flaming heart of love.
Christ and the Father's one, and we in him, Crowned with joy, in all his glory swim. They needs must live a sweet and pleasant life, Where Love's the Husband, Charity the Wife. FINIS.
A New-found Medicine for maladies, not hazar∣dous, desperate, or violent; but safe, and sure, pleasant, pallatable, and comfortable; not putting nature to any stress, but greatly strenthening, relie∣ving, and enabling her to encounter with her ma∣lignant enemies, &c. Found out (this instant — 1671) By the great care and study of ABC. H. Item There may be had pleasant cordialities, for the prevention of Diseases, procuration of cheerfulness, improvement of Diet, and sup∣ply of Spirits. From Mr. Waddis his House in Barns September 24. 1671. Enquire at Mr. Horners at the Kings head in Whites Alley in Chancerie lane for Capt. Sambach, betimes any morning, and from eleven till one, and you may have farther Information and directions, &c.
Books sold by Thomas Passenger at the Three Bibles on London-Bridge. A Mirror or Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners, shewing the justice of God on the one, and his mercy towards the other. Set forth in some thousand of examples by Sam. Clark late Minister of Bennet-Finck London, in 2 Volumns in folio. Royal and Practical Chymistry, by Oswaldus Crollius, and John Hartman, faithfully rendred into English, folio, price 10 s. Gods revenge against murther, by John Reynolds, containing thirty Tragical stories, digested into six Books, newly reprinted, folio, price 10 s. Lord Bacons Natural history, folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels, containing a description of the Turkish Empire, of Egypt and the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and Islands adjoyning, folio, price 8 s. Markham's Master-piece. Roman Antiquitiess by Tho. Godwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d. The famous History of the destruction of Troy, in three books, quarto, price 3 s. Valentine and Orson, price 18 d.
Etimologicum parvum, by Francis Gregory, octavo, prite 3 s. Chymical essays, by John Begumis, price 1 s. 8 d. Spiritual Antidotes against sinful contagion, by Tho. Doolittle, price 18 d. Pools Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a Protestant, twelves, price bound 1 s. Monasticon Favershamiense; or a description of the Abby of Faversham, octavo, price bound 18 d. The Christians Crown of glory; or Holiness the way to happiness, octavo, price bound 18 d. The path way to health, price bound 18 d. The complete Academy, or Nursery of comple∣ments, bound 1 s. The book of knowledge in three parts, price 10 d. The book of Palmistry in octavo, price bound 18 d. The Wise Virgin, being a narrative of Gods dea∣ling with Martha Hatfield, price bound 18 d. The Pilgrim's port, or the weary man's rest in the grave, in twelves, price bound 1 s. The famous History of the five wise Philosophers, containing the Life of Jehosaphat, Son of Avenerio, Emperor of Carma, and his wonderful conversion to the Christian faith. The great Assize by Sam. Smith. The delectable History of Amadis de Gaul. The pleasant History of Paladine of England. The Bear-baiting of Women. The History of Frier Bacon and Fryer Bungy.
New conceited Letters. The Jovial Garland containing all the newest songs that are now used. The penitent Prodigal, or a gratious Reproof for pharisaical Saints, by J. H. The Christians best exercise in the worst of times, by J. H. Scarborough Spaw, being a description of the nature and virtues of the Spaw of Scarborough in Yorkshire, by Doctor Wittie. The French School-master. Farnabies Epigrams. Newtons Art of Logick. Newtons Art of Rhetorick. The famous History of Don Bellianis of Greece, in three parts being now complete. The famous History of Montelion, Knight of the Oracle.
