s4430 99831109 35571
THE SOLDIER's Religious Exercise IN THE TIME of WAR. BEING Some Proper Texts, Portions of Holy-Scripture, and Prayers, useful for those OFFICERS and SOLDIERS, who are engaged abroad in Their Majesties Service. Publish'd by a late Chaplain to the Army. JOSH. 1. 8, 9. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever thou goest. LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCXC.
Imprimatur. Jan. 4. 1689.
To the Honourable the Colo∣nels, and others the chief Offi∣cers of Their Majesties Army. HAving been some time since ingaged in the Service of the Army, I con∣sidered with my self, what course would be most proper and expedient, to discharge the Obligations of the Chaplain's Duty; And (I am of Opinion) That there is no way more useful, to his purpose, in order to promote the Practical Exercise of Religion, among the ordinary and private Soldiers, (who are generally very ignorant of the common Rudiments and Principles of Christianity) than to advise the frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures; which indeed, I found by sad ex∣perience, was shamefully neglected by some of them, to the great scandal and abuse of Re∣ligion. And this I chiefly impute to the want of Bibles among them: for I dare say, were a strict search and enquiry made in every Re∣giment of the Army, we should not find many possess'd of this Holy Treasure, which does so nearly concern the necessary good and Salva∣tion of their Precious and Immortal Souls. And therefore, to supply that defect, or rather the want of Holy Instruction from those sacred
Oracles of God's inspired Word, give me leave, I pray you, to dedicate to your use this small Bible, or Summary of Devotional Scripture, which being of a lesser size, is more fitly ac∣commodated for the Soldier's carriage, and may be in some sense, as useful, as it contains a brief Collection of all those necessary and pertinent Txts, which are adapted for a Sol∣dier's Christian Duty and Service, in the time of War. And which, as it may serve to in∣struct the more ignorant and unlearned in the common rules and ways of Salvation; so (I hope) it will not altogether prove useless or in∣sufficient to remember those who are more know∣ing of their Christian Duty and Calling, that so both may become more sincerely vertuous and Religions towards God, and honestly faith∣ful and serviceable to the Interest of Their Majesties present Government, as they desire to serve the common Rights and Liberties of the Church and Nation. And now I humbly desire all the chief Officers and Commanders of Their Majesties Army, (to whose faour I present this small Treatie, or Religious Ex∣ercise of Devotional Scripture) that they will be pleased to give in strict charge or command to all their subalterns, both Officers and Sol∣diers, that this may be read by them, as they have leisure and opportunity, either in the Camp or Garison; and especially to those who are engaged in Their Majesties Service
both in Holland and Ireland, for whom I have fitted those Holy Collects, or Offices of Morning and Evening Prayer, in the Close of this Book, which will not be improper to be used by every particular Officer or Soldier, who keeps constant to the Exercise of daily De∣votion; and besides, 'tis necessary that he do reflect upon some of those Holy Passages of Scripture, which I have here reduced under so many several Heads, which I judged to be most proper for the Soldier's Christian Duty, during his Service in the Wars. And now, because among the private Men, the Education of some is so Illiterate, that they cannot Read; I have thought of this expedient to help the ignorant, which is, That his fellow Soldier or Comrade do by frequent reading in∣culcate unto his Memory, some few of those chief Texts or Portions of Holy Scripture. And if these Orders and Rules of Religion be strictly observed and put in Execution by you, who are the chief Officers, you will soon find the benefit of this Holy Discipline to be not only serviceable to your seives, in keeping your Men orderly and sober in their Behviour; and so no less quietly submissive and obedient to the Words of your Command. But then, what is more happy, this will be in some measure greatly instrumental for the publick. Service of Religi∣on, in reforming those Scandalous Vices and Immoralities of Drunkenness and Swearing,
which are so generally risen among the more Ignoble and Plebeian sort. And thus you will come to gain not only the credit of esteem and Reputation to your selves, but you will do no less real honour and service to Their Majesties by your diligence and fidelity in this present juncture, wherein we must expect either the lasting happi∣ness or intire Ruine of the Peace and Prosperity of this Church and Nation; as God is pleased to give success to Their Majesties Arms, which (we all know) are now chiefly engaged to maintain the free Exercise of our Religion, which is so happily modelled according to the excellent Doctrine and Precepts of the Holy Bible; And of which this being a small Epitome, or Part, I hope it will come the more acceptable for that publick Good and Practical Exercise of Holiness, for which 'tis chiefly intended, for the use of those Officers and Soldiers, who are now employ'd a∣broad in Their Majesties Service, for the common safety and defence of our Religion and Country, and to which I pray God give a Blessing, that we may all fight the good fight of faith, to lay hold of eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
THE SOLDIER's Religious Exercise IN THE TIME of WAR. EXERCISE I. A Christian Soldier must be strictly Ver∣tuous and Religious in his Life and Conversation. WHEN the Host goeth forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing, Deut. 23. v. 9. For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine Enemies before thee; therefore shall thy Camp be Holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee, Deut. 23. ver. 14.
If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will turn, and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you good, Josh. 24. ver. 20. Be ye therefore very couragious, to keep and do all that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom, to the right hand, or to the left, Josh. 23. v. 6. But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day, Josh. 23. v. 8. —If thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe, to do all his commandments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day Deut. 28. v. 15. The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies; thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them, and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth, Deut. 28. v. 25. And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, Deut. 10. v. 12. Up, sanctifie the people, and say, Sanctifie your selves against to morrow: for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you, Josh. 7. v. 13. And you, in any wise, keep your selves from the accursed thing, lest ye make your selves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it, Josh 6. v. 18. Take good heed therefore unto your selves, that ye love the Lord your God, Josh. 23. v. 11. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12. v. 13.
And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsly, and be content with your wages, Luke. 3. v. 14. Besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, vertue; and to vertue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kind∣ness; and to brotherly kindness, charity: for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall be neither barren, nor unfruitful in the know∣ledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1.10. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revilings, and such like: they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 22. But as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. v. 15. EXERCISE II. A Christian Soldier must exercise the Acts of daily Repentance, by hearty Contrition, sorrow ful Confession, and the sincere Resolution of Holy amendment for the time to come. HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lo∣ving kindness, according unto the multitude of thy mercies, blot out my transgressions, Ps. 51. v. 1. Wash me throughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Ps. 51. v. 2, &c.
For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is e∣ver before me. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine ini∣quities, Ps. 51. v. 9. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me, Ps. 51 v. 10. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise, Ps. 51.17. Deliver me then, O God, from blood guiltiness, from the sins of malice and uncharita∣bleness, of whoredom and drunken∣ness, of murmuring and disobedience, of swearing and profanation of thy name, &c.Here recol∣lect the sins you are guilty of. thou God of my salva∣tion, Ps. 51. v. 14. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Job 7. v. 20. — I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin For this shall every one, that is godly, pay unto thee, in a time, when thou mayest be found, Psal. 36.5, 6. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to for∣give us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous∣ness, 1 Joh. 1.9. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, — Luk. 3. v. 8. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, Joh. 5.14. God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities, Act. 3.26. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
And be not conformed to this world, but be ye trans∣formed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Rom. 12. v. 1, 2. EXERCISE III. A Christian Soldier must meditate upon the infi∣nite love and goodness of God, in giving his Son to be the Saviour of the World. THis is a faithful saying, and worthy of all accep∣tation, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 1 Tim. 1.15. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begot∣ten son: that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, St. Joh. 3.16. John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Be∣hold the lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Is. 53.5. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him, shall receive remis∣sion of sins, Act. 10.43. God commendeth his love towards us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him, Rom. 5. v. 8, 9. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the pro∣pitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, 1 Joh. 2. v. 1, 2.
EXERCISE IV. A Christian Soldier must exercise himself in a constant and babitual Preparation for Death, considering the many fatal Accidents and Dan∣gers, to which his life is exposed in the time of War. O That they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end, Deut. 32. v. 20. Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? it is even a vapour that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away, Jam. 4.14. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are alike, to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, Ps. 62.9. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14.5. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Ps 90.12. — All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come. For now thou numberest my steps, dost thou not watch over my sin? Job 14.14, 16. God will not cast away a perfect man — Job 8.20. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace, Ps. 37.37. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, Mich. 7.8. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Psal. 42.5. I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Psal. 16. v. 8, 11. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5. v. 1, 2. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righte∣ousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also which love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. — Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, saith the spirit, that they may rest from their labours. and their works do follow them, Rev 14.13. Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he com∣eth, shall find so doing, Matth. 24.46. EXERCISE V. A Christian Soldier must give all due submis∣sion and obedience to the Commands of his chief Officer or Leader, and the Officer must be no less faithful and diligent in his Trust. AND Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before the Lord to war, Numb. 32.20.
And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he hath driven out his enemies from be∣fore him, Numb. 32. v. 20. And the land be subdued before the Lord: then af∣terwards ye shall return, and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel, and this land shall be your pos∣session before the Lord, Numb. 32.22. But if ye will not do so, behold ye have sinned a∣gainst the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out, Numb 32.23. And the children of Gad, and the children of Reu∣ben spake unto Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my Lord commandeth, Numb. 32.5. Thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the Lord, to battle, as my lord saith. Numb. 32. v. 27. And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou com∣mandest us, we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go, Josh. 1. v 16. According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee, only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses, Josh. 1. v. 17. Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy com∣mandment, and will not hearken unto thy words, in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death; only be strong and of good courage, Josh. 1. v. 18. And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and capains of hun∣dreds, came near unto Moses, Numb. 31.48. And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war, which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us, Numb. 31.49. And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the Hold unto David, 1 Chron. 12.16. And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them, If ye be come peaceably unto me, to help me, mine heart shall be kind unto you; but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is
no wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke it, 1 Chron. 12.17. Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse; peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers, for thy God helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them cap∣tains of the band, 1 Chron. 12.18. And they helped David against the band of the ro∣vers, for they were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host, 1 Chron. 12.21. All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king, 1 Chron. 12.38. For I also am a man, set under authority, having un∣der me soldiers; and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my ser∣vant, Do this, and he doth it, Luk. 7.8. Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in all things, not answering a∣gain, Tit. 2.9. Not purloyning, but shewing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our saviour in all things, Tit. 2.10. EXERCISE VI. A Soldier must exercise his Valour and Courage for the Cause of God, and fight for the Defence of his Religion and Country. — BE thou valiant, and fight the Lord's battles, 1 Sam. 18.17. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God; and the Lord do that which seemeth him good, 2 Sam. 10.12.
And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the battle against the Syrians; and they fled before him, 2 Sam. 10.13. — For the battel is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands, 1 Sam 17.47. For the Lord your God is he, that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies to save you, Deut. 20. v. 4 When thou goest out to battel against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God is with thee — Deut. 20.1. Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies, Ps. 60.12. The right hand of the Lord is exalted, the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly, Ps. 118.16. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephes. 6. v. 10. Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day — Ephes. 6.13. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life—1 Tim. 6.12. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 2.3. — For the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barack, and of Samson, and of Jephtha, of David also, and of Samuel the prophets, Heb. 11.32. Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, Heb. 11.33. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of aliens, Heb. 1.34. Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer — be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10.
EXERCISE VII. A good Soldier must exercise his Christian hope and confidence in the strength and power of God, and not trust in the Arm of Flesh. THE Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Psal. 27.1. When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psal. 27.2. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident, Psal. 27.3. —The God of Israel is he, that giveth strength and power unto his people: blessed be God, Psal. 68.35. Be strong and couragious, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria; nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be mo with us, than with him, 2 Chron. 32. v. 7. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and to fight our battels — 2 Chron. 32. v. 8. There is no king saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, Psal. 33.16. An horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he deliver any by his great strength, Psal. 33. v. 17. For I will not trust in my bow; neither shall my sword save me, Psal. 44.6. But thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame that hated us, Psal. 44.7.
Then said David to the Philistin, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts the God of the armies of Israel — 1 Sam. 17.45. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight, Psal. 144. v. 1. My goodness and my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I trust, who subdueth my people under me, Psal. 144. v. 2. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation, Isai. 12. v. 2. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Cursed be man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord, Jer. 17.5. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, Jer. 17. v. 7. — Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephes 6.10. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord, Psal. 31.24. He hath shewed strength with his arm, he hath scat∣terred the proud in the imgination of their hearts, Luk. 1.51. Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us; according as we hope in thee, Psal. 33.22.
EXERCISE VIII. The Christian Soldier must then firmly de∣pend upon the Promises of God's help, when he is to engage the Enemy in Battel. AND Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew you to day — Exod. 14.13. The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace, Exod. 14.14. — Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto battel against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them, Deut. 20.3. For the Lord your God is he, that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies to save you; ye shall not need to fight in this battel; set your selves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem, fear not, nor be dismayed, to morrow go out against them, for the Lord will be with you — 2 Chron. 20. v. 17. And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehosaphat stood, and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established: believe his pro∣phets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chron. 20. v. 20. Were not the Ethiopians, and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet be∣cause thou didst rely on the Lord, he delivered them into thine hand, 2 Chron. 16. v. 8. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of
them, whose heart is perfect towards him— 2 Chron. 16. v. 9. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence cometh my help, Psal. 121.1. My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth, Psal. 121.2. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness, Isa. 41.10. Behold, all they that were incensed against thee, shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as no∣thing, and they that strive with thee shall perish, Isa. 41.11. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be delivered: for in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, — Joel 2.32. — And they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, John 10.28. Nevertheless, the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his — 2 Tim. 2.19. Wherein God willing more abundantly to shew un∣to the heirs of promise, the immutability of his coun∣sel, confirmed it by an oath, Heb. 6.17. That by two immutable things, in which it was im∣possible for God to lie, we might have a strong consola∣tion, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18.
EXERCISE IX. A devout Soldier must exercise the duty of Prayer before he goes upon Action, or at∣tempt to fight his Enemies in Battel. AND the children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee, deliver us only, we pray thee, this day, Judg. 10.15. And Sampson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God — Judg. 16. v. 28. I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies, 2 Sam. 22. v. 4. And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude: O Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee, 2 Chron. 14. v. 11. So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah, and the Ethiopians fled, 2 Chron. 14. v. 12. And when Judah looked back, behold, the battel was before and behind; and they cried unto the Lord, 2 Chron. 13.14. Then the men of Judah gave a shout, and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam, and all Israel before Abijah and Judah, 2 Chron. 13. v. 15.
And the Children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand, 2 Chron. 13. v. 16. Plead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight against them that fight against me, Psal. 35. v. 1. Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help, Psal. 35. v. 2. Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salva∣tion, Psal. 35. v. 3. As for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me, Psal. 55. v. 16. Evening, and morning, and at noon day, will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice, Psal. 55. v. 17. He hath delivered my soul in peace, from the battel that was against me — Psal. 55. v. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him in truth, Psal. 145.18. He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them, Psal. 145. v. 19. But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdo dites heard that the walls of Jerusa em were made up and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth, Neh. 4. v. 7. And conspired all of them together, to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it, Neh. 4. v. 8. Nevertheless, we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them, Neh. 4. v. 9. And he spake a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. v. 1. — Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you, Joh. 16. v. 23.
Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, Phil. 4.6. — The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much, Jam. 5.16. EXERCISE X. A Christian Soldier must not fear his Ene∣mies, but pray for happy Deliverance and Victory. AND Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew you to day, Exod. 14.13. Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the Lord thy God, he it is that doth go with thee, he will not fail thee, nor for∣sake thee, Deut. 31. v. 6. And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee, Josh. 10. ver. 8. And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong; and of good courage: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye fight, Josh. 10. v. 25. O our God, wilt not thou judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh a∣gainst us; neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chron. 20. v. 12. And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye in∣habitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehosaphat, Thus saith the Lord unto you, be not afraid, nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude, for the battel is not yours, but Gods, 2 Chron. 20. v. 15.
To morrow go ye down against them — 2 Chron. 20. v. 16. Ye shall not need to fight in this battel: set your selves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them, for the Lord will be with you, 2 Chron. 20.17. And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood, and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established, believe his pro∣phets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chron. 20. v. 20. My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me, Psal. 31.15. Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: de∣fend me from them that rise up against me, Psal. 59. v. 1. Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men, Psal. 59. v. 2. Thou art my king, O God: command deliverances for Jacob, Psal. 44. v. 4. Through thee will we push down our enemies; through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us, Psal. 44. v. 5. Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee, to deliver thee, saith the Lord, Jer. 1. v. 8. And fear not them which kill the body — Matth. 10. v. 28. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might be saved, Rom. 10.1. — For he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13. v. 6.
EXERCISE XI. If our Forces become weakned, and the Ene∣my grows strong and powerful, we must hum∣ble our Souls, and pray more earnestly, that God may avert the Judgement of the Sword which is sent to punish the sins of the Nation. EVen all Nations shall say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger? Deut. 29.24. Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers — Deut 29. v. 25. Up, sanctifie the people, and say, Sanctifie your selves against to morrow: for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand be∣fore thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you, Josh. 7.13. If my people which are called by my name, shalt humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal their land, 2 Chron. 7.14. O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low, Psal. 79. v. 8. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy names sake, Psal. 79. v. 9. O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee, because of this, Ezra 9. v. 15.
I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul, Psal. 142. v. 4. Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, deliver me from my persecutors: for they are stronger than I, Psal. 142. v. 6. Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us: for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly, Neh. 9. v. 33. Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy com∣mandments, and thy testimonies, wherewith thou didst testifie against them. Neh. 9. v. 34. For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and far land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works, Neh. 9. v. 35. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name Psal. 79. v. 9. O Lord, be gracious unto us, we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble, Isal. 33. v. 2. Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help, Psal. 22. v. 11. Deliver my soul from the sword—Psal. 22. v. 20. O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us: neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chron. 20. v. 12. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5.6. The God of all grace, who hath called us unto his e∣ternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you, 1 Pet. 5. v. 10. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this, Ezza 9. v. 13.
Should we again break thy commandments, and joyn in affinity with the people of these abo∣minations? wouldest thou not be angry with us, till thou hast consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? Err. 9. v. 14. EXERCISE XII. But if it please God to bless our Forces with happy Victory and Success; then let all the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and all the People of the Land, ascribe the Power and Glory to the Lord, and devoutly say, HAppy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people: saved by the Lord the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thine excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liers unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places, Deut. 33. v. 29. Thy right hand is become glorious in power, thy right hand hath dashed in pieces the enemy, Exod. 15. v. 6. And in the greatness of thine excellency, thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee — Exod. 15. v. 7. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Exod. 15. v. 11. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory: for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake, Psal. 115.1. He arose, and smote the Philistins until his hand was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the Lord wrought a great victory that day — 2 Sam. 23. v. 10.
Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will ren∣der vengeance to his adversaries, and will be mer∣ciful to his land, and to his people, Deut. 32.43. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them, Deut. 32. v. 27. Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm hath gotten him the victory, Psal. 98. v. 1. Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel, our father, for ever and ever, 1 Chron. 29. v. 10. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth, is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all, 1 Chron. 29. v. 11. Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all, 1 Chron. 29. v. 12. Now therefore our God, we thank thee and praise thy glorious name, 1 Chron. 29.13. —For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever. Amen. Matth. 6.13.
Some COLLECTS proper for the Exercise of the Soldier's Morning and Evening Service, of Private Devotion, in the Camp or Garison. COLLECT I. For God's assistance in Prayer. LET thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the Prayers of thy humble servant; and that I may obtain my Petitions, make me to ask such things as shall please thee, through Je∣sus Christ my Lord. Amen. COLLECT II. Of Contrition and Confession. ALmighty and Everlasting God, who hatest no∣thing that thou hast made, and doest forgive the sins of all them that are truly penitent; create and make in me a new and contrite heart, that I
worthily lamenting my sins, and acknowledging my wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mer∣cy, perfect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. COLLECT III. For God's free Pardon and Absolution. ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who of thy great goodness hast promised forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty repentance and true Faith turn unto thee; have mercy upon me, par∣don and deliver me from all my sins, confirm and strengthen me in all grace and holiness, and bring me unto everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Another for the same. ALmighty and everlasting God, I beseech thee to absolve me from all mine offences, that through thy mercy in Christ Jesus, I may be delivered from the bonds of those sins, which by my frailty I have committed; Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Je∣sus Christ his sake, our blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen.
COLLECT IV. For Grace. [Note, That this Collect is for the Morning.] O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and ever∣lasting God, who hast safely brought me to the beginning of this day, defend me in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that I may fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but that all my thoughts, words and actions may be ordered by thy governance, to do alwaies that is righteous in thy fight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. COLLECT V. For aid against Perils. [Note, That this Collect is to be said at Night.] LIghten mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in darkness, nor in the shadow of death; but by thy great mercy defend me from all perils and dan∣gers this night, that the Enemy may have no advan∣tage over me, nor yet the wicked approach to hurt me; but preserve me both in body and soul, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen.
COLLECT VI. For a Blessing upon the Church and State. O Lord look down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy Salvation, have mercy upon these sinful and distracted Kingdoms, pardon our great and crying sins, divert thy Judgments; and give us all grace thankfully to accept thy mercies: defend this Church with thy continual help and government: Bless and preserve Their Majesties King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, prosper Their Forces with all happiness, both by Sea and Land, and make them eminent Instruments of doing good for the further∣ance of thy glory; and do thou at last bring Them to thy everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour. Amen. COLLECT V. For Victory over our Enemies. O God the protector of all them that trust in thee, the Lord of all power and might, be ready, I beseech thee, to save and deliver me, and all my Superior Officers and fellow Soldiers of this This to be used as neces∣sary. Camp or Garison from the hands of our Enemies, that we may be preserved and comforted in all the dangers and Calamities of War: do thou strengthen the hands of our General, and go along with our Officers and Soldiers, and stand by us all in the day of Battel, that we being armed by the power of thy Divine Providence, may do great
and valiant Acts, and so magnifie thy honour and glory in giving us Victory and deliverance, through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. COLLECT VI. For the Peace of the Christian World. GRant, I beseech thee, O merciful Lord, to all thy faithful People pardon and peace, that they being cleansed from all their sins, may walk in bro∣therly love and agreement of Mind, and serve thee with a quiet Mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. COLLECT VII. For heavenly Hope and Confidence. O God, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou dost bring up in thy stedfast fear and love; grant, I beseech thee, that I may lean only upon the hope of thy heavenly grace, and in all my troubles put my whole trust and con∣fidence in thy mercy, that thou being my Ruler and Guide, I may so pass through things temporal, that I lose not the things Eternal, but may obtain thy gracious Promises, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour. Amen.
COLLECT VIII. To Conclude. ALmighty God, who hast promised to hear the Pe∣titions of them that ask in thy Son's name; I be∣seech thee mercifully to incline thine ears, now that in his name, I have made my Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those things which I have faith∣fully asked according to thy will, may be effectu∣ally obtained to the relief of my necessity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. COLLECT IX. For a Blessing. THE Lord fulfil the desires and Prayers of thy humble Servant, as may be most expedient for me. The Lord bless and keep me in the day of Battel, in the hour of death, and in the time of Judgment: The Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon me, and give me Peace both now and evermore.
A COLLECT in case the Soldier be visited with Sickness, or lie dangerously ill of his Wounds. O Lord look down from Heaven, visit and re∣lieve me thy As the case requires. afflicted or wounded Servant, whom thou hast made the object of thy heavy wrath and displeasure for the punishment of my sins, san∣ctifie, I beseech thee, this thy fatherly correction to me, that the sense of my weakness may add strength to my Faith, and seriousness to my repentance; that if it shall be thy good pleasure to restore me to my former health, I may lead the re∣sidue of my life, in thy fear and to thy glory; or else give me grace so to take thy visitation, that after this painful life ended, I may dwell with thee in life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A Private Prayer for the Morning. O Lord God of Hosts, who rulest over all the Kingdoms of the Earth, in whose Hands there is power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee, look down from Heaven, and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness and Glory, upon me, and all the Camp of our Israel, who lie before thee dead in Trespasses and Sins; be thou pleased to quicken us all by thy heavenly grace and power, that we may arise from the Death of sin, unto the Life of righteousness; particularly be merciful unto me, (the unworthiest of all thy Servants) give ear unto my Prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my supplication, who come un∣to thee with all humility and devotion of Soul and Body, imploring thy fatherly mercy and forgiveness of all those grievous sins and transgressions, which I do now confess before thee. Here re∣collect your particular sins. O cleanse thou me from all my faults, wash me in the Blood of that Immaculate Lamb, who of∣fered up himself a Sacrifice for the sins of
the whole World, look upon the inter∣cession of the Blessed Jesus, and let his saving power and efficacy plead pardon for my sins; hear, O Lord, and forgive; give grace and strength to thy Servant, that he may reform all the errors and miscarriages of his former Life, and be renewed in the Spirit of a sober Mind, to think, and do always those things, that be righteous in thy sight; Shew thy Pity and Compassion to this sinful and divided Nation, wherein we live; pardon our great and crying sins, prevent the wrath of thy terrible Judgments, and give us not over a prey unto the will of our Enemies; for thou art the hope of our Israel, and the Saviour thereof in the time of trouble; and therefore, that we may enjoy security and rest, from all our Ene∣mies round about us, be thou pleased to bless and defend, with thy peculiar favour and providence, Their Sacred Majesties, King William and Queen Mary; make Them the saving Instruments of this Church and Nation; and to this end, do thou prosper Their Forces, both by Land and Sea, with happy Success and Victory. Be thou, O Lord, the God of our de∣fence and Salvation, in the Day of Battel, and strengthen the Hands of our General, and bless all our Officers and Soldiers, that
we may be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his might, to fight valiantly for the cause of God. And now, O Lord, lest any unthankful∣ness for former mercies, may make me uncapable of thy future favours: I desire to praise and glorifie thy holy name for all thy Temporal and Spiritual Blessings, for the particular preservations of thy good Pro∣vidence, that thou hast defended my life hitherto from the violence of the Ene∣my; and be thou pleased to continue still watchful over me; help me. O God of my Salvation, for the glory of thy name; and let me not be delivered over into the Hands of merciless and cruel Men: and since I know not what sudden dangers may encompass me, give me serious thoughts to prepare for the Hour of Death, and the Day of Judgment, that I may not be sur∣prized at any sudden change or accident of mortality, but may patiently submit to thy Holy Will, and whether I live or die, chearfully resign both my Soul and Body into the Protection of thy good Providence, for the sake of Christ Jesus, who is the God of my hope and Salva∣tion, and in whom I will trust for my deliverance from the Enemy; and therefore devoutly pray, as he hath taught me in his Holy Gospel, saying, Our Father, &c.
A Private Prayer for the Evening. O Lord God, merciful and gracious Fa∣ther, who bearest the most tender love and compassion to the Children of Men; who hath no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn from his way and live: Be graciously pleased to accept of the hearty Contrition and repen∣tance of thy humble Servant, who meekly confess my sins, and acknowledge my vile∣ness, Hear men∣tion the sins of the day. I have sinned against thee; O what shall I do unto thee? O thou preserver of Men! I have indeed sinned a∣gainst thy Mercies and thy Judgments, against the checks of my own Conscience, and the deliberate Vows and Purposes of Holy amendment; But now, O Father, I come unto thee, in the mercies of the Holy Jesus, and pray thee, That thou wilt ac∣cept of the Sacrifice of his Blood to be a Propitiation for my sins; O let the sprink∣ling of that everlasting Covenant wash and purifie my Soul clean and undefiled from all the Pollutions of Vice and Wickedness, and do thou fill me with such a Measure
and Portion of thy Grace, that I may resist all future Temptations, and diligently ap∣ply my heart to fulfil all thy Command∣ments, by serving thee in true Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my life; remember with me, the sorrowful State and Condition of Mankind; shew thy mer∣cy and compassion to the manifold fins and Provocations of this Land and Nation, and punish us not according to our iniquities: for then how shall we escape, O God, if thou be extreme to mark what we have done amiss? O remember not a∣gainst us our former iniquities; but let thy tender mercies speedily help and pre∣vent us, heal all our Divisions and Diffe∣rences in Opinion, and unite us all by the bands of Brotherly Love and Charity, that we may become a chosen Generation, and a peculiar People zealous of Good Works. Let us not continue unthankful for thy late Mercies, but let us all, O Lord, consider thy Work, and the power of thy Providence, and so repent of this our backsliding wickedness, that iniquity may not be out Ruine. And that Truth and Peace may flourish in our daies, bless the Supream Power and Government of Their Majesties, King William and Queen Mary; prosper thou the Great Work of Their Hands, O prosper thou Their handywork, that
They may become Victorious over all Their Enemies; And to this end, give a bles∣sing of strength and courage to Their Forces, both by Land and Sea: particular∣ly, I pray for the chief Commanders, the Officers and Soldiers of this As occasion requires.Camp or Garison; Give us all the Spirit of Christian For∣titude and Resolution, that we may be strong, and of good courage, to stand before the Enemy in the day of Battel; O preserve thou the Life of thy Servant who now calls upon thee, let the Enemy have no advantage over me, nor the wicked approach to hurt me; but let me be continually guarded by the Pro∣tection of thy good Providence until these Calamities be over-past. And as thou hast been pleased to defend me this day, and all the days of my Life; (for which my Soul does praise and magnifie thy Holy Name, for this and all other thy mercies) so let no evil happen unto me this Night, nor any Destruction come nigh my Tent or Dwelling; but, O blessed Lord, the keeper of Israel, who never slumberest nor sleepest, watch over me, and all the Camp of our Israel, that we may be secure from all dangers both of Soul and Body; Give me serious Apprehensions of Death, that I may consider the few and uncer∣tain
days of my Pilgrimage here: and since I know not how short my time is to live, make me sensible of all the sudden accidents and dangers of War, that I may never live in such a state, as I shall be afraid to die, but may be always ready with chear∣fulness and joy to resign my self into the Hands of my merciful Redeemer; and grant, O Lord, that whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I may always continue thy faithful Servant, even unto the end of my life; for the sake of Jesus Christ my only Lord and Saviour, in whose Name I further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that tres∣pass against us. And lead us not into tempta∣tion; But deliver us from evil. Amen.
Repeat the Apostles Creed, which is the right Confession of your Christian Faith. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered un∣der Pontius Pilate, Was crucified, dead, and buried: He descended into Hell; The third day he rose again from the dead. He ascended into Heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost; The holy Catholick Church; The Communion of saints; The forgiveness of sins; The resur∣rection of the body, And the life ever∣lasting. Amen. —And this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4. That is the word of faith which we preach, that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart, that God hat raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved, Rom. 10.8, 9.
Repeat often the Decalogue, or the Ten Commandments, which is the Rule of your Obedience. GOD spake these words and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shalt have none other Gods but me. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and shew mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my com∣mandments. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.
Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, thy cattel, and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Thou shalt do no murther. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law.
Thou shalt not commit adultery. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Thou shalt not steal. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this law. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. Lord, have mercy upon me, and write all these thy laws in my heart, I beseech thee. —Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. Matth. 22. v. 37, 38, 39, 40.
The Lord's Prayer the best form of your Christian Devotion, either for the beginning or end of your Prayers. OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hal∣lowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation: But de∣liver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, The power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, &c. Matth. 6. v. 9. When the Soldier stands Sentinel. Take ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not when the time is, Mark. 13.33.
When he goes out to mount or dismount the Guard. The Lord preserve my going out and my coming in, from this time forth and for evermore, Psal. 121. v. 8. When he goes to fight the Enemy. Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou against them, that fight against thee. Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help, Psal. 35. v. 1, 2. ¶ God be with you in your life, and at your death, and make your Soul and Body pre∣cious in the sight of the Lord; with whom, I pray, that you may live for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
