T1581 12283312 58792
TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, Who are in place to do Justice, and to break the Bonds of the Oppressed. A NARRATIVE OF THE Cruel, and Unjust Sufferings of the People of God in the Nation of IRELAND, CALLED QUAKERS. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.
EDward Braifield (a Souldier in the Deputies Troops) for speaking to the people in the Steeple-house at King-saile, (after the Teacher had ended) saying, Oh, what would a man give in exchange for his soul? was sent to prison by Rob. South∣well for six moneths, and whiped at the house of Correction in Bandon-bridge. Daniel Massey a Souldier, for speaking a few words to a Priest in the Steeple-house at King-sail; after he had ended, was imprisoned ten times: And for not paying towards the Repair of the Steeple-house, had his goods taken from him, to the value of twenty shillings. Sarah Massey, for speaking a few words in her own shop to the Priest and People, was sent to prison, and there kept many dayes. Rob. Malin a souldier, for speaking a few words to the Priest and people in Cork, was imprisoned by the Mayor, and afterwards for the like thing was set in the Stocks at Bandon-bridge. Edw. Cook, Cornet to the Protectors own Troop, was put out of the armie for Owning the Truth; and afterwards for speaking to a Priest at Cork, was almost murthered, and for speaking a few words in a Steeple-house at Dublin, was imprisoned near a quarter of a year by the Mayor there: And Rob. Southwell of Kingsail meeting him in the street there, sent him to prison, and no cause given; and had his Brasse and Pewter taken from him (worth about thirty shillings) for not paying to the Repair of the Steeple-house in Bandon? and he being an Inhabitant of that Town, at whose house the servants of the Lord Meet together every First day, hath his windowes broken by the people of that Town, and great stones thrown in thereat; and had one of his Children wounded, so that he and his Family are in danger of their lives. Lucretia Cook, for speaking a few words to the Priest and people at King-sail, was imprisoned by Will. Hovel; and a∣gain was imprisoned there, for desiring to speak to the chief Magistrate there about Prisoners. And there for speak∣ing a few words to one of Inchequins Priests, was imprisoned
at Cork, by Hen. Bathurst, and afterwards sent to the house of Correction for two moneths: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Limerick, was imprisoned by the Mayor there; And for the like thing at Dublin, was by the Mayor there committed to New-gate. Ananias Kelloe, and John Moor, Souldiers of Major Hod∣dens Company, were put out of the Army, for Owning the Truth, and for setting up a paper against Drunkenness, and refusing to go to the Steeple-house. Evan Davis of Bandon, for endeavoring to speak a few words in the Steeple-house at King-sail, after the Priest had done, was imprisoned, and set upon a horse with his face towards the horse tail, and so carried through the street, with a pa∣per sewed on his hat, written in great letters. Fran. Smith was banished out of Ireland, for Truths sake, by Will. Hovels own order, chief Magistrate of King-sail. John Butler, for speaking a few words in the Grave-Yard at Bandon, was imprisoned there; And another time was put in prison at Kingsaile; for onely visiting Prisoners. Two Souldiers belonging to Kingsaile Fort, for speaking to a Priest, were put into a Hog-stie. James Atteridge, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Bandon, was imprisoned there; And another time for speaking a few words to the People at Corke (before their worship began) was imprisoned, and after sent to the house of Correction at Bandon, where he was twice whipped, and received Eighty stripes, and when he was let out of the whipping stocks, he kneeled down and prayed, and the Goa∣ler whipt him till he arose from prayers; and for asking the Priest a question (with his Bible in his hand) was put into the house of Correction two Moneths and there whipped. Mary Sicklemore, had a Cowe worth three pound taken from her, for not paying tythe to the value of four shilling six pence: And another time had a Cowe worth two pound sixteen shillings, taken from her, by the Sheriffs order, for the value of four shillings demanded for Tyths. Rob. Sandham, because for conscience sake he could not Swear, was fined, by Henry Bathurst, fourty shillings, and for
the same had a horse taken from him, worth four pound ten shillings. Thomas Alio, because for conscience sake he could not Swear, was fined by Henry Bathurst two pounds, and for the same had his Horse taken from him worth four pounds. Thomas Shawe, for propounding two Questions to a Priest in the Steeple-house at Bandon Bridge, was imprisoned nine-weekes in Corke, and after kept seven weekes more in Bride∣well, where he received about thirty stripes. William Morris (late a Capt. in the Army) for owning Truth, was put out of the Army: And for appearing in the in the Court at Bandon (being warned thither) with his hat on his head, was committed to Bridewell by Henry Bathurst: and for speaking a few words to the People and Souldiers in the Guard-house at Mount Melick, was put in∣to the Stocks there, and afterwards committed to the Goale by Walter Willingford till the next Sessions. Thomas Michell (late a Lt. in the Army) for speaking to the Mayor of Corke, was kicked and abused, and sent to Prison by the said Mayor: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Corke, was kept in Goale five weekes. Susanna Michell, for speaking to a Priet in the Steeple-house at Corke, was imprisoned by the Mayor. Jane Tadpoole for speaking to the Mayor of Corke in be∣half of Prisoners, was by the said Mayor imprisoned about one Moneth, Francis Bostocke, for speaking a few words to a Priest in Corke, was imprisoned by the Mayors Order. Mary Gregory, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Corke, was imprisoned by the Mayor there. Phylip Dymond for speaking to a Priest in Corke, had his Cloak torne from his back, and his hair from his head: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Kingsaile (after the Priest had ended, was sent to Prison and received many stroakes: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Limericke was imprisoned by the Mayor's order till the next Sessions there: And because for conscience sake he could not Swear, was fined, and had the value of about twenty shillings taken out of his shop.
Alexander Rich, for the Truths sake, was put out of his place; as Wayter to the Custome house in Youghall. Michaell Richards, for coming into the Court (with his hat on his heed) at Corke, as a witness for his Master, who was then at the Barr, was fined twenty pound by John Bisse Judge of the Assize then. John Conor passing the Street in Corke towards a meeting was committed to the Guard: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Waterford, was committed by one Vaughan called a Justice, and examined after by George Cauldron then Mayor, and kept in Prison nine Moneths. Stev. Harris, for speaking a few words to the Mayor of Cork was imprisoned by him, who commanded the Goaler to put the biggest Iron bolts on him, which was done: And for reading a Paper in the Street, (which contained words of Soberness & Truth) was by the said Mayor. kept six moneths in Prison: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house there, was kept in Prison about six weekes. John Browne, for owning the Truth, was put out of his place, a Mr. Gunner in Youghall by Col. Saunders: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house there, was sent to Prison by Nicho. Stout Bayliffe. Thomas Carter, passing the Streets in Youghall from a Meeting, was set in the Stocks. John Stanton, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Youghall, was imprisoned by the Mayor there: And for the like matter was buffitted, and haled by the hair of the head, and committed to Prison till the next Sessions. Edward Erberry, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Youghall, was sent to the Marshalls. Sarah Chivers, for speaking in the Steeple-house at Youghall, was sent to the Marshals. Thomas Loe, Will. Blanch, John Smith, and diverse others of the People of God being in a peaceable Meeting in Youg∣hall, were violently haled out of the Meeting, by order of John Netle Mayor then, and committed to Prison. Edw. Lawndy, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Youghall to the Priest and people, was by force
thrust out of the door, by John Hancock; and having Meetings in his house, had much hurt done to the windows by stones, being throwed, with hazard to himself and Family. Rob. Turner, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Bandon, (after the Priest had done) had his Hat taken away, and was beaten: And for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Dublin, was very much abused, had his coat taken from him in the said place, and not restored to him again: And for asking a Question of a Priest in Dublin, was sent to Bridewell, and after kept three moneths in pri∣son, was put into a Cell, or Dungeon, a very noisome place, graves being over his head, and under his feet: And being in a Meeting at London-Derry, was violently haled there∣out, and drawn along the street by the Armes and Legs, (the Mayor of that City then present, and helped with his own hands) and put him out of the said town; and two dayes after hailed him as before, and one with a Knif in his hand, threatned to cut off his Members, and turned him out again, and tyed him back and legs on a Horses bare back, with a haire rope, and led him about as their sport, at their pleasure. Major Hoddens wife, for speaking to a Priest in the Steeple-house at King-sail was put into Prison. In the year 1656. Col. Henry Ingoldsby set forth a Pro∣clamation in Limerick, where he was and is Governour, that no Inhabitant of that City should receive any Qua∣ker into their house, upon Penalty of being turned out of that Town: Richard Pierce of Limerick Apothecary, (formerly of the Army) received a friend of his into his house, one John Brown of Youghall, who came thither to receive Moneys due to him from a Merchant in that Town, to the sum of about sixty pounds; but the said Col. Ingoldsby issued his Warrant for the said John Brown to send him from Constable to Constable to Youghal, with∣out being brought before him or any other Magistrate to be examined, and so would not suffer him to do his said business, and so the said Richard Pierce for the entertain∣ing
his Friend (a lawful Subject) had by Col. Ingoldsbyes Order, several goods taken from him to the value of five pounds. James Sicklemore (late a Capt. in the Armie) and John Perrot being in a peaceable meeting in Limerick, were ha∣led thereout by Col. Ingoldsbyes Order, with a guard of Souldiers committed to Prison, and after banished out of the County. And John Perrot was again haled out of a meeting by the said Col. Ingoldsbyes Order, and commit∣ted to Prison for many days, and after sent above 80 miles to Dublin, where he endured Imprisonment a long season: And for speaking to a Priest in the Steeple-house in Water∣ford, was much beaten, his head broken, and his blood drawn. Thomas Phelps and several of the people of God, being met together on a first day of the week in Limerick, were (by Col. Ingoldsbyes order) with a guard of Souldiers vio∣lently pulled thereout, and committed prisoners to the Main-guard, and afterwards were brought before the said Colonel, who himself beat one Friend, and uttered threat∣ning words to the Inhabitants. Barbara Blagdon going along the streets of Limerick was apprehended by Col. Ingoldsbyes Souldiers, and put into prison, (and without any examination) was banished the City; and one John Luffe speaking to the said Col. to ex∣amine the matter before she was banished; the said Col. being then at Bowles (as his usual manner was) did kick and beat him, and said, This rogue hath bewitched my Bowls. And the said Barbara for speaking in the Steeple-house at Youghall, was imprisoned by the Mayor there, and after put out of that town as a Vagabond. Sarah Bennet, being in a Meeting at Limerick, was haled thereout, put into prison, and there ill used; the Governour (Col. Ingoldsby) ordering that none should visit her in the Prison, nor have necessary supply of food and beding brought to her by her friends, nor yet pen ink and paper to make known her want, or the want of any other friend then in bonds with her, and afterward she and Barbara Blagdon
were sent towards Corke (as Vagabonds) from Constable to Constable, to be banished the land. William Ames, for being in a peaceable meeting at Lime∣rick, was haled thereout, and imprisoned: And after for be∣ing at the Steeple-house there, was again put into Prison, and for Writing to the Govern. (Col. Ingoldesby) was by him caused to be brought out of the Prison into the Main-Guard, and there with his own hand did beat and strick him to the ground, and kicked him, and caused him to be tied neck and heels in the street, the bloud running down from him as he lay tyed; and at the same time did beat William Blanch, and put him in Prison severall dayes, for visiting his friends then in Prison there. Mary Peirce, was twice imprisoned for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Limericke, by the Mayor there. Thomas Phelps of Limerick, had taken from him by Major Ralph Willson (late Mayor there) seventy barrells of Salt, because for conscience sake, he did not Swear to that Cor∣poration, though he offered to prove his faithfull service to the Parliament: And he had his house broken open and rifled with a Guard of Sould. from the Governour (Col. Ingoldesby) which Guard by the same Order riflled the houses of Richard Piercy and Thomas Holme, and took away what books and papers they pleased. John Stubs and William Shaw, for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Galoway, were committed to the Marshalls for severall weeks: and the said Jo. Stubs was taken out of a meeting in Lemericke, and imprisoned. Humphry Norton and William Shaw (with severall others) being in a peaceable Meeting in Galoway, where (by Colo. Sadlers order Govern. there) with a Guard of Sould. vio∣lently taken thereout, and brake the Meeting, and turned them out of the City, and would not suffer them to go in for their horses. Samuell Newton, travailing towards a meeting at Water∣ford, was by Major Redmons order stopt, and kept prisoner three dayes. Charles Collins, William Blanch, Edward Cooke, and di∣vers
others of the Servants of the Lord, being at a meet-at Cashell, were violenty laid on, and the Meeting broken with a Guard of Sould. by order from Col. Lehunt, and put some of the friends there in Prison, and forcibly turn∣ed out others out of the Towne. Thomas Loe, Thomas Holme, William Blanch, and John Wrenn, being in Cashell on their Journey, were apprehen∣ded by Colo. Lehunts order, and brought before him, and he commanded the Sould. (violently) to turne them out out of the town, and to cut their pates, three of them were not suffered to go into the town again for their horses. Richard Roper, for asking the Priest a Question in the Steeple-house at Waterford, was haled to prison, and there kept fifteen weeks, at the will of Thomas Wats and John Horton, the Goaler and others. Richard Waller at the same time, only for being at the said Steeple-house, and not speaking one word there, was also imprisoned fifteen weeks, by the said Thomas Wats Mayor there, and John Horton Recorder. William Blanch (late of the Army) had taken from him his whole Plough of Horses worth about twenty pounds, by the Sheriffs of the City of Waterford, and not any of them restored to him; and this because for Conscience sake, he could not pay Tythes demanded, to the value of two pound eight shillings. Mary Window, for speaking a few words to the Priest in the Steeple-house at Waterford, was imprisoned by the said Thomas Wats and John Horton during their pleasure. Humphrey Norton and William Shaw, being in a peace∣able meeting at Wexford, were (by a Lieutenant and a guard of Souldiers) taken thereout, and by force brought into the Steeple-house, and thence committed to Goal by Lieutenant Col. Bret until the next Assizes. John Radman of New-Rosse for keeping on his Hat, be∣fore Judge Lowther, when called before him; was impri∣soned three moneths, and forced from his calling out of the said Town by the same Judges Order. Charles Collins (late a Lieutenant in the Armie) was fi∣ned
by Judge Lowther in the sum of twenty pounds, because for Conscience-sake he could not swear, and respect mens persons, by putting off his hat. Thomas Holme (late a Captain in the Army) Charles Col∣lins, and several of the Lords people, being in a peace∣able meeting at Wexford, had their meeting forcibly bro∣ken, and many of them violently haled and turned out of the Town, by order from Edward Withers Mayor then. Charles Collins, Robert Turner and several of the Lords people, being in a peaceable meeting at New-Rosse, had their meeting broken up, by order of John Puckle Gover∣nour there, and cruelly and forcibly haled, and put into a Boat upon the great River many of the said people, and took away the Oares, leaving them for several hours there, to the endangering bodily health. James Becket of New-Ross had goods to the worth of thirteen shillings taken out of his house, and sold in the Market-place, by order from John Puckle and Thomas Scot, because for Conscience sake, he could not go to the Steeple-house Worship. Richard Pool was put out of the Army for his love to the Truth, and for speaking a few words to the people in a Steeple-house at Wexford, was imprisoned by the Mayor there till the next Sessions; and for speaking to a Priest in the Steeple-house at Waterford, was imprisoned by Thomas Watts there. James Atteridge, for speaking a few words to the people in the street in New Ross, was imprisoned till the then next Sessions, by John Puckle, and for speaking to the people in the guard-house at Melick, was put into the stocks, and after committed to the Goal, till the next Ses∣sions, by Walter Wallingford. Edward Lord for desiring the Priest to prove by Scrip∣ture what he had said, was also at the same time put into the stocks, and imprisoned by Walter Wallingford, and for speaking to the people in the Steeple-house at New-Ross af∣ter the Priest had ended, was committed to the Goal (by John Puckle) and there remains in bonds.
Francis Randall was imprisoned eight weeks, because for conscience sake, he could not pay Tythe, and had his goods taken from him, during his imprisonment. Samuell Adams, Oliver Hopley, and others, travelling towards a Meeting at Waterford, were stopped in the high∣way, by Major Redman, and his Souldiers, who drew their Swords, tore the freinds cloaths, and much abused them: And the said Samuell Adams passing on the road near Ca∣telough, met with a man called Lord of Barry-Moore, who drew his Pistoll and preented it at his face, and smote him on the head and face, till he spilt much of his blood, and called him rogue, and Quaker. William Haukins, for speaking a few words as the people were passing out of a Steeple-house in Dublin, was put into Newgate for ten weeks, by the Mayor there. Samuell Claridge, Samuell Newton, and others, had about five pounds worth of Books taken away by the Officer of the Custome house, in Dublin, and still detained; though it hath been laid before the Deputy and Counsel. Elizabeth Gardiner of Dublin, had taken from her three pewter dishes worth nine shillings, by Will. Taylor, and Tho. Alvin, because for Conscience sake she could not pay six shillings, demanded for the repair of Patrick Steeple-house. Elizabeth Jones for speaking a few words in the Steeple-house at Dublin, was committed to Bridewell, and from thence sent to Newgate. John Boran, and Samuell Claridge passing quietly in the Streets in Dublin, were apprehended by the Mayor there, and kept prisoners in Newgate seven daies. Richard Jackson, because for Conscience sake he could not pay Tythe, to the value of nine shillings, demanded for eight Cows and nine Lambs; had taken from him a Cow worth two pound ten shillings, by Jacob Knolls. William Parker had a Kittle taken from him (by the said Jacob Knolls) worth one pound, for eleven shillings de∣manded for Tythe. John Thompson had goods taken away from him worth twenty shillings, by the said Jacob Knolls, for five shillings demanded for Tythe.
William Moore had goods taken from him to the value of two pound, for 8 shillings 4 pence demanded for Tythe, by the said Jacob Knolls; so that the said J. K. for one pound 13 shillings demanded for Tythe, hath taken 6 pound 18 shil. William and John Edmonson for fifteen shillings, demand∣ed of them for Tythe, had a Mare and a Colt taken from them, worth five pound, by Knogher, Mc. Daniel, who rent∣ed the Tythe of Henry Waldrom: And the said Waldrom sued William Edmonson for the same Tythe, and gained an Order; by which he took from the said Edmonson, one Horse, bridle and sadle, worth three pounds eighteen shil∣lings; So here, William and John Edmonson, for fifteen shil∣lings demanded for Tythe, had taken from them the worth of eight bounds eight shillings in Goods. Francis Howgill, and Edward Borrough, in the year 1655. were apprehended by the Sheriff at Corke (by order of Councel at Dublin) and from thence (by Guards of Sould.) carryed from Garrison to Garrison, unto Dublin, and there committed to the Sergeant at Armes, and afterwards in a violent manner forced into a ship, and banished the Nation; and all this onely for being called Quakers, and without any cause at all shewed them, or the transgression of any law charged upon them. The particulars of the unjust pro∣ceedings against them, would be large to relate; for they came into the Nation, & were made a blessing to us, and the Lord wrought mightily by them to the turning of many from the darknesse to the Light, and from Satans power unto God; and their conversation and doctrine was such as truely answered the witness of God in our Consciences, to the Converting of us unto the right way of God; and we may praise the Lord on their behalf, who were made unto us Messengers of salvation, and instruments of great good unto many, in faithfull bearing the Testimony of the Lord amongst us, to the glad tidings of our Souls. But such was the rage of the Priests against them; that upon their lying complaints, by order from the then called Deputy H. Cromwell and his Counsell, were apprehended by the high Shreife in the City of Corke, and brought up by guards of horse to Dublin, and brought to examination before
Hen. and his Counsell; but no manner of Evill charged upon them; though they were committed to the Sergeant at Armes, and kept prisoners for many dayes, and unjustly sent away contrary to all law and equity; and without any manner of reason shewne to them for such proceedings; who could not be convinced of the breach of any law, nor any other thing charged against them saying that they were the servants of God, and thus for the name of Jesus they were persecuted by unrighteous men; contrary to the law of God and of these nations; likewise Ann Gold and Juliana Browne were also then banished by order of the Counsell of Dublin, and James Lancaster and severall others of the Servants of the Lord were (by the said coun∣sell) banished and many Ministers have been haled out of meetings, when they have been declaring the word of truth put into prisons and shamefully entreated. Mary Malin for speaking to the People at Kingsaile, was imprisoned by the cheif Magistrate there Christian Hitch∣more of Kingsaile was put in Prison, for seeing what the people were doing to Edward Cooke and his wife, as they were waiting to speak with the Magistrate about prisoners. The Justices of Drogadogh, hath put William Hakings a Friend in prison there, and fined him forty pounds for saying, that Word was not the Scriptures that divided be∣tween the joynts and the marrow, and words to that pur∣pose, and will let none come to visit him but the Goa∣ler; and the Officers of that Parish fetched Robert Evanes a Friend in Dublin from a friends house upon a first day, and made him go to Saint Patricks Church, and when he came there and spoke they put him in prison, and such work they make in Dublin: And about 3 weeks ago some Al∣dermen and Constables came to our meeting at Dublin, and haled Tho. Loe and Sam. Clarage out of the meeting to Pri∣son, and Captain Rich they carried away, and broke up the meeting; and the same day we met again, the Offi∣cers came and broke up the meeting the second time, and carried seven more Friends to Prison, and tumbled Friends down the stairs, and broke down the meeting-Room
door, and prest into the room, and broke down Timbers that kept up the floor, and plucked a woman off her knees as she was praying, and made an uproar in the Citie, and the next day swore before the Mayor (at the Town-Hall) that we had caused the Tumult, when as we sat quietly in our own hired room: and this work they make, and no Justice can we get, for most of the former sufferings have been laid before the Councel at Dublin, and they refer us to the Judges of Assize, and the Judges of Assize reports the matter to the Councel back again, and so they toss us up and down, that we cannot get so much as common Justice amongst them. Also one Phi∣lip Dymond of Cork had a Pack of Wool taken from him by the Mayor of Cork, upon the same account of not swearing to be a Freeman of their Corporation, though he be a Freeman by the Wars: And the Mayor of Cork sent Richard Brockelby a Clothier in Cork, to prison as a Traitor, for having a few Books in his house, that another Friend wrote against two or three Priests which had spo∣ken against the truth; this the Mayor of Cork called Trea∣son, and caused the mans locks to be broken open, and his Books they carried away, and the man not quite freed yet. WE whose Names are here under-written do witness, to the Truth of these things, and much more cru∣elties, that have been acted and brought forth by unjust Rulers in Ireland, against the people of God from time to time within these five yeers, and there is always a conti∣nued suffering remains upon them, because of the unjust∣ness of some in Authority, and the unjust suffering of the Lords people, is the overthrow of a Government, and the undoing of a Nation, and brings the wrath and in∣dignation of God upon a people, and because of these things will the Lord overturn and overturn till the King∣dome of Christ be established, and the Kingdoms of this World be changed, and become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ: Wherefore ye Rulers of the Earth now be wise, and fear the Lord God Almighty, who hath all power
in his hand, and pulleth down, and setteth up whom∣soever he will, at his own pleasure, his Rod is held over you all; and if you ease the oppressed, and break the bonds of the oppressors yoke, ye may be happy; but if you do not, the Lord will break you to pieces, and ye shall never be healed. Tho. Holme. Richard Pool. James Becket. Richard Pierce. Thomas Phelps. Charles Collins. William Draper. Rich. Heritage. Sam. Adams. William Abbot. R. Picke. Alex. Rich. James Atteridg. Tho. Biss. Tho. Wait. Daniel Marcy. Edw. Cook. Phil. Dymond. Steph. Harris. Will. Morris. Tho. Michel. Rob. Sandham. John Smith. Francis Randal. John Wren. Rich. Brokeby. Tho. Ally. John Brown. Edw. Landy. Robert Cook. Paul Morris. Richard Jackson Will. Blanch. Walter Palmer. Hen. Tatlock. Abrah. Nexball. John Redman. Edw. Lord. Thomas Moor. Thomas Ridge. William Moon. Jane Fade. John Barnes. John Cobb. Sam. Newton. John Moore. Steph. Warne. Matth. Perrin. Sam. Clarridge. Robert Turner. Will. Edmondson. Joh. Edmondson. Stephen Rich. The End.
