T2486 13798852 101900
A true and good RELATION, of the Valliant Exploits, and Victorious Enterprises of Sir Simon Harcourt, and Sir Charles Coote, with their valliant overthrow, of at least 5000. Rebels, with the burning of three Townes, where the Rebels lay incamped neare Dublin. AND ALSO The relief of Droghedaugh, and other particulars related in a Letter, dated Jan. 20. 1641. from Mr. Chappell of Dublin, to his friend, a Draper in London, and brought by the last post, Ian. 25. Whereunto is added another Relation concerning (these particulars) the taking of the Towne, and Castle of Enishannon from the Rebels, by Sir Simon Harcourt, and Sir Thomas Temple, with a notable Victory over the Rebell Mac-Carty at Enishannon Foord: Mac-Con the Re∣bels attempt upon the Towne of Bandon Bridge, and their happy Defeate by Sir Richard Grinfield. depiction of two roosters staring angrily at one another LONDON, Printed for F. Coules, and W. Ley at Paules Chain, 1641▪
A Letter sent from M. Chappell out of Ireland, to a friend of his in London. YOur Letter bearing date the 8 of the last Month, I have re∣ceived, being sorry to heare of your discontents in London; but I hope God will in his good time turne all to the best: for those that that truly feare him. Our Rebellion heare day∣ly increaseth, so that we cannot travell any way from this City above a mile or 2 without danger; since S. Samuel Harcourt came over, we in this City have been much incouraged, his men were landed on Newyears day, and though they were but one regiment, concisting but of 7 Companies, yet they have bred some terror to our enemies, who before reported that the King would send us no help, and cals us English Rebels; they began to incamp close about us at Clanta, which is but 2 miles hence; but Sr. Charles Coote, the week before Christmas, with about 1500 horse and foot march towards them, and was with them as soon as there was any light in the morning, and put them to slight; some he kill'd some he caused to be hanged, and 3 or 4 he took prisoners, and after the Town was pillaged by his Souldiers, he set it a fire with the Corne, which fire was not out in 3 or 4 dayes after: it is thought that there were at least 2000 Rebels in the town when Sr Charles came to it, he lost not one man at that time that I can heare of. The last week the Earle of Ormand and Sr Charles march't forth, both of them about 1 and 2 of the clock in the morning, and when they weare without the Town, my L. of Ormand with his forces march't toward Finglas, and Sr. Charles with his marcht towards Santrey, in both which Towns the Rebels lay in garrison, the Towns are both al∣most one distance fron hence, the farthest of them is accounted but 2 miles and they are about a middle distant the one from the other; Sr Charles quickly put his Rebels to slight, who seemed to bee furious at first, and made great shews with their coullers display'd, but durst not stand to sight; Sr Charles burnt the Towne and the next Towne to it, and then marcht towards my Lord of Ormand, who was then in fight with the Rebels of Finglas, and twas reported that he was in danger at that time; the Rebels seeing another Army comming towards them from the way of Santrey, thought it had been their own comming to helpe them, but as soon as they perceived the contrary they fled; their Coro∣nall (being a man too familliar amongst us) amongst the rest of his Re∣bell rout fled, leaving behind him his hat, scarlet coate, and blue plush lump lin'd with fur, which were no sooner seen but were known to be Luke Neterfeelds, the L. Neterfeelds son, who is likewise a Rebell, after
they had pillaged the Town, they set the Irish houses on fire, hanged some, brought some 4 or 5 prisoners, releast some of our English that were for∣merly taken by them, and should have been hanged that very morning: The Rebels that were in both Towns were thought to be at least 6000, and both our Armies were not above 4000. It is thought that there were slaine of them that day almost 200, but I heare not of above 2 or 3 of ours. The 10 day of this Month, Sr Charles marcht forth towards Tallow and the Mountaine foot, about 4 or 5 miles from Dublin, where there were thousands of Rebels that night, but perceiving Sr Charles coming towards them, of which tis thought they had intelligence, they fled, but he burnt 4 of their Irish Towns where they were; and the Sol∣diers bringing home their pillage, came into Dublin before Sun-set: a∣bout 10 of the clock that night, he took other Souldiers and marcht to∣wards Swords, which is about 6 mil. from hence Northward, where he was with his Army before break of day the next morning, and as soon as it was light he began to charge the Rebels, but at a great disadvantage, for he was forcd to keep the body of his armye in a lane, and the Rebels shot from their works and tampars of earth: but the wings of our Ar∣mey got into the next fields where they did very good service, but within an hours fight he put them to flight; and after the Souldiers had made their pillage, they burnt the Town to the ground, not leaving one house standing: there were slaine of them that day about 150, and of ours but 4 men, whereof one was Sr Lorence Caray my L. Fancklands brother, who was shot in the head as he was bringing up his men to fight, and is to be buried on Sunday next. Sr Charles with the army returned to Du∣blin that night, where he was of the Protestants blest; but by the Papists curst: for some of them could not forbeare, but openly to wish that all our Army were in the same case and served as Sir Lorence was, one of them, as I heare, was hanged this morning. Sr Charles Coots name is terrible to the Irish, and I could wish that the E. of Ormands were so too but as long as his Troopers are most of them Papist, and so many Papist to his servants, that they lay, eate and atend on him, I feare it will not be. Our Parliament is proroged till June next, the Rebels threaten to bring 60000 before Dublin very shortly, but we feare not their worst, had we but here but 8 or 10000 Souldiers more, so that we might go to meet them in the field, and yet leave strength enough to defend our City. On Monday last there was a supply of victuals sent from this Port by Sea to releave our Souldiers in Droghedagh, the which I pray God to send them ther ways they are like to suffer; and the Town lost, the which God forbid they have been now beleager'd above 2 Months, the Rebels are grown more bloudy in their cruelties and mercilesse dealing with those
poore Protestants, that they now dayly take than heretofore they have been▪ They lately tooke the▪ Town of Strongford, and ript up the Mini∣sters belly, whose name was Traford, his wife being in the street with him, she with her hands put his bowels into his belly again, and with the help of some other, drew him a little way where there was straw, with which she covered him, and run to the house to see her children, which the Rebels were striping, and in pulling off of one of the children cots they brok the childes neck, she run again to her husband and found him to have received a wound in his head to the very braines, she run to seek again, but whilst she was gone the Surgeon past by, and Mr. Traford spoke to him, and he replyed that he durst not medle with him: his wife was meet by others of the Rebels, which stript her stark naked, she retur∣ning in that case to her husband, put away the straw and found him dead with his throt cut: they have barbarously murdered, hanged and de∣stroyed divers others of our Ministers, & now say Mase in their Churches. It is too tedious for me to writ the tithe of their cruell and mercilesse dealing which dayly I heare of, and with my own eyes see, those people that have been stript stark naked, and come through frost, snow, and rain to this City for succour; have here died for want, 30 of them in a day & night, there are at this instant between 4 and 500 of them shipt to be sent to West Chester. Should you see the multitudes of them and their mise∣ries, and know the plenty that most of them lately lived in, it could not but make the hardest heart to grieve: God in mercy comfort them, & send them reliefe according to their severall wants. If there be so many in this City, how many may there be through the whole Kingdome, and have and do perish in the high ways and open fields, besides those that the Rebels have in prison, and are dayly like to fall into their merciles hands, If that they have not speedy relief from England and Scotland, the which I pray God send us in due time; otherwise many that at this time, which are in Castles and other holes, being environed with their ene∣mies, will be forc'd out of them or starved to death: there are very few Papists, but they are Rebels, either in part or wish well unto their pro∣ceedings, (I meane in this Kingdome) and I pray God to turn the hearts of all those which seem to be, what indeed they are not, but more especiall those: If there be any such brearing Office in our Armies, and to roote them out from amongst us, which wish well to this Rebellion, yet seem other wayes; For many have promist faire, which ment nothing lesse than open Rebellion, as dayly they discover themselves, for one day they come as good and loyall subjects, and the next being returned into the Countrey, shew themselves to be Rebels, and this is too usuall a thing amongst us, God in mercy aend it: Many of our Citizens and most of
the richest sort that are Papist, have sent their goods, wives and children into the Countrey, some to their Countrey houses, other to their friends: But all amongst the Rebels where no Protestant may live or come, ex∣cept with strength, and what differ these from Rebels thinke you? Some of our Aldermen are returned to Dublin, and some others whose wives, and children are not as I take it: Aldeman Joanes, who was the last Summer at London, and brought over a Pattent to make a Lord Major of our City: I dare sweare rejoyceth to heare that his son is a Captaine a∣mongst the Rebels; and should you meet those men as I do dayly, and heare their discourse: You would say they had brasen faces indeed: for should we go into the Countrey amongst them, there were no death or misery bad enough for us, and as long as such false brethren are amongst us, I feare there is but little quietnesse or peace to be expected? There are 4 Lords, whose names are Butler, that are Rebels, I pray God the sift, who I feare, is to curtious and favorable to his Countreymen, may ne∣ver affect their Religion, or covertly countenance, or other wayes vio∣late the trust reposed in him. Hereafter I may chance write you more, as the time gives occasion, but for the present with my love and best re∣spects to your selfe and the rest of my friends, I remaine Your loving friend, Richard Chappell. SInce that I had ended this Letter, I am now told that Captain Bart∣let hath relieved Droghedaugh with the victuals that were sent from hence, and that he is now come to Dublin again with 2 prisoners that he brought from thence; upon the relieving of the Town the Rebels made a breach in the wall thereof, and there came in of them above 400, who were quickly for the most part slain, to the number of 360 or there about, the rest taken prisoners, and how many were slaine by the long Boats, Gaboards and Pinnases that went to the Town is not known, for they were furnished with store of Musketiers and small pieces of Ordenance, the which they discharg'd towards the rebels on the shore, who thought to have stopt their passage, as fast as they could let fly for 2 miles space, we lost not a man, but their could not so, being so thick, 2000 on the shore.
More nevves from Corke, in Ireland, the 16. of Ian. 1641. SVnday, Jan. 16. Sir Simon Harcourt, and Sir Thomas Temple hearing that the late risen Rebell, Dominick Mack Carty was drawing toward the Towne and Castle of Enishan∣non: with intent to victuall and man it better, as we con∣ceived: considering how neere that Castle stands unto Kingsale, lately recovered, and how bad an enemy likely to prove, if we should suffer the Rebels, not only to nestle there, but even to passe by our doore, and to relieve them in a Bravado, desired of God dispensation for breach of the Sabbath, and after some short prayers, and recommending our selves unto God: with refreshing our bodies with such food, as the condition of the time, and place, would permit: We ad∣vanced 200. Horses, and 115. Foot, and five small field Peeces, with this equipage; we came unto the foord of Enishannon, being very exceeding broad, but not very deep, hard chalky clay, being the siedge of the Foord: An arme of the Sea flowing up from Kingsale, three Irish miles: we must needs pasle this Foord unto Enishannon, other way there is none. Monsieur Mack-Carty passed along the other side of the Foord upon the Strand, in passing good order, as ever saw Rebels, since I came over, his Horses being at least foure or five hundred compleately armed: his Foot two thousand, and about sixe or seven hundred compleatly armed with Pike, half Pike, Musked, or Calliver, (which makes me suspect some∣thing, seeing that a Rebeell but lately risen, and of no great note, this be∣ing the very first exploit that ever he took in hand, as we heare of, should in so short a time be able to raise so many men, and in that manner to fur∣nish them) we expected not, till he should bid us now come over: but forthwith sent over our Cavalery to charge him, and a little to stay his hast, and to peswade him to take us along with him to Enish. if we could not obtain so much as to be there before him: Sr Simons 200. Horses were
as good▪ and as serviceably fitted, as ever were horses, that went out of England, and the Cavallieers that sate them, as experienced Fire-men: Yet their marching so far in the water; and the enemy standing on the dry strand, much broke their charge, and advantaged the Enemies, who received their charge boldly, and answered it stoutly: at least whether that they wanted powder, or (which I rather beleeve) their powder was dame, being carried in bags by their side, (as their manner is) whether it was one or the other, their Pistols would no longer fire, which Mack-Cartie percelving, caused his Cavallery to retire: and advanced his In∣fantery against onr Cavalery: and not the worst in front you may be sure. We victualled and mannerd the Castle with such provision and Am∣munition as we could well spare, untill we shall heare farther from you; and on Monday were backe againe at Kingsale. Tuesday the eighteene we heard newes that Bandon Bridge was sud∣denly surprized by the Rebell Mac Con; and most fortunately relieved by Sir Richard Greenvill, a very fine Eeglish Towne walled in, belong∣ing unto the Farle of Cork; the manner thus: Sir Richard at his arivall to Corke, it being a thicke and foggy aire, was something ill disposed; Captaine Thomas Fineh Captaine of the Fort, perswaded him to take his Troope, and to scoure the Countrey, passing as far as Bandon, thereto lodge a night or two, being a most sweet ayre, thereby not only to re∣create himselfe, but also to revive the drooping hearts of his deare Coun∣try-men, with the presence of so worthy a Commander: Sir Richard consented, and the next morning being Monday, Ian. 11. with 80. Horses, and only thirty Muskettiers, passed thither; when he came upon an hill, within a mile of the Towne, he heard their Drum beat, and saw their co∣lours fly, The Town standing in a bottome; likewise about some hundred shot play, wondring that they played so fast: within half a mile we heard lamentations of women, and crying out of children, we liked not that: Sir Richard caused his Trumpets to sound, his Horses and Muskets to order and thus they all crying courage countreymen, a Grinfield, a Grinfield: we came to the gates, which by reason of the great confusion in the Towne, were not opened scarce within a quarter of an houre. Being entred, they found the enemy to have entred in the Low Towne thorough the water, betwen two buts of wale; some 40 were en∣tred, and scirmishing with the Townes men: the rest to the number of 600. were passing the foord a maine; when they saw our trumpets and such a number of fresh Horses in that equipage, and the shot plainly en∣creased, they in the passage retired with all speed they could make, into the wood and bog, some Two miles above the River, never staying for their fellowes in the Towne, who were all slaine to the number of 45.
nine▪ Bandon men were either slaine or dangerously hurt: Thus was that prety Town happily relieved, but all other newes is not of this nature, I wish it were, Towns of greater importance are taken, that way we had sustained some harme, had not Sr Simon, so wisly considered the Rebels advantage, (having not only the strand, but divers high and broken sandy banckes behind him shocked with his supplies) and caused his infantery upon the falling back of his horses to come up anckle deep in water in one whole body and to powre in such a valley of shot into the Rebels grosse, that they dropped wonderfully, neither could their shot at that distance reach onr men, as appeared afterward, being most of them Calivers: Sir Simon perceiving how the game plaid, would not suffer his men to move any further, but to play their shot at such distance, which he perceived sufficiently anoyed their Enemies, and did them much harme; at the third volley, the Enemies Infantery gave over and retired to the banks upon their horses, how much they retired as neare as could be guessed, ours at distance advanced, till at length, the Enemy gave the freedome of the strand: then after one volley more, our horses now under the com∣mand of Sir Thomas Temple, having recovered the strand also, as now our foot had already the bancks. At last, having found wher they got up two horses a breast, (the foot in the mean time awing the Enemie, fell upon them in such a fierce manner) that no resistance in a manner was made; there was dead upon the ground eight hundred horses and foot, with Mac-Carty and his two bastard brethen, whose heads were strait way smitten off, and carried upon poles unto Enishannon. Whither being come, the Town made, nor could make no resistance; The Castle would not answer; whereupon Sir Simon with his five pie∣ces battered the gate, and wicket, entered by force, found thirty desperate Villans in it, hanged some of them over the Castle wall, some in other parts of the Town. {inverted ⁂} FINIS.
