T2925 R2326 12265901 58069
A TRUE RELATION OF THE ACTIONS OF THE French FLEET BEFORE GENOVA. Together with the messages that passed between the said Fleet, and the City. THE Sieur du Quesne, General of the Maritine Forces of France with the Duke de Mortemar Lieutenant General, and Com∣mander of the Galleys, and the Marquess Seignelay Superin∣tendent of the Maritine Affairs, with a Fleet consisting of 20 Galleys, 10 Galliots, carrying each 2 Mortar-pieces for Bombes, 14 Men of War, 6 Fly-Boats, 18 Tartanes, 20 Chaloups, and 40 great Fisher-boats cast Anker on the 16th of May 1684. in the Port of Vade near Savona, depending on the Republick of Genova, and situated between Savona, and Final, the Fort of Savona saluted the French Fleet in the usual manner, and she answered accordingly. The same day being the 16th the Marquess de Seignelay sent order to the French Consul at Genova, for him to come on board, which he did, and next day being the 17th, he return∣ed to Genova, with Orders not to demand of the Republick, the Admission of the French Navy into the Port; but to signifie to them they must clear the two Moles, to the end the Fleet might Anker there on the 18th, and this Message was, performed with so much Authority and Haughtiness, as if Monsieur de Seignelay had commanded in the Port of Marseilles, where doubtless he would have spa∣red; treating a Governour, that depends on the King his Master so rudely. The Republick made the most modest answer that could be, giving at the same time the reasons, that hindred them from admitting that Fleet into their Ports, because of the threats the most Christian King had sent them by the English Am∣bassador, at such time as he used all good office in their behalf, with him by His Majesty of Great Brittains order, and because of the advice they had re∣ceived, that that Fleet had not come out of the Ports of France upon any o∣ther design, but to brave that State, but however that should not hinder them from giving them all the assistance they could in refreshments, and any thing else they should stand in need of: and the republick foreseeing what the effects of their resolution might be, sent immediatly to hasten the March of a Spanish Regiment of Foot, which a little before, they had desired of the Count de Mel∣gar
Governour of the State of Milan, to the end it should be ready upon the Fronteers in case they should stand in need of it. The said Regiments used such diligence in their March, that they Travelled 10 Leagues without resting, and entred the Town of the 18th, at the same time that the French Fleet begun to appear, and draw up in Battel array, about a League and a half from Ge∣nova. The Town saluted the Fleet as the custom is, as much in regard of the number of Vessels and Galleys, as of the Generals, who also answered as has been always used; and because the Deputies that use to go to compliment the Generals, staid somewhat long, the Marquess de Seignelay sent to complain to the Republick, saying, he wondered they stayed so long, and immediatly Six Gentlemen Deputies went out to make him the said compliment, and offer him the refreshment which is usually sent; but instead of corresponding to the civi∣lity of the Republick, the Marquess de Seignelay began to exaggerate the dis∣respect, that had been used towards the King his Master, adding a Thousand impertinencies, and in conclusion gave them a Paper composed of so much haughtiness, and so many extravagancies, that it seemed to have been dictated by the great Turk, the principal points whereof were, that the Republick should yield up to the King their four new Galleys, and one of the others per∣fectly rigged and fitted for service; should send six of their principal Senators, to beg his pardon for their proceedings, and not having obeyed his Orders, to assure him they repent, and shall amend for the future: promising to obey and follow the Orders and Will of his most Christian Majesty in all things, and so doing, they might perhaps find grace and pardon for their faults. The Deputies answered, they would make their report to the Republick, but this they could say they were most assured, they had done nothing that they ought to ask pardon for of His Majesty, and knew the respect was due to his Royal Person; that the Republick never had fewer Galleys, and they well knew the Government lost them, by the frequent prizes the Turkish Pyrats took of their provisions, and they were now resolved to oppose it and encrease the number of their Galleys, by four new ones, without the least design of offend∣ing any body, but to send them to joyn with the Pope's against the Turks, and thought in so doing, they had not failed of their respect towards His Most Chri∣stian Majesty. The Marquess de Seignelay made answer, that if neither five hours time he had not a satisfactory answer to what the writing, he had given them contained, he would execute the Orders he had from the King his Master. The Deputies being returned to the City, and having made their report to the Republick, who considering how the Marquess treated them in a minute by the full consent of all resolved to defend their liberty; and having to this effect given Don Carlo Tasso, a Person of great understanding and capacity the necessary orders, and chose him Camp Master General, and Governour of their Armes, the Republick in a very little time disposed all things for a vigorous defence, giving the posts that were most exposed to the Spaniards, and the term of five hours being elapsed, without their coming to any reso∣lution to the Marquess de Seignelay's liking; the Enemies being buried in coming nearer the City, Don Carlo Tasso gave the sign with a smoke to make ready to fire; but whereas at the same time the enemies came nearer and desisted not at the second sign they began to discharge the Artillery on both sides, and play upon each other vigorously, and the French to cast their Bombes and Granadoes, by which the Palace of the Duke or Doge took fire the third day. The People began to take the fright, the confusion growing the greater by the burning of two convents of Nuns, which were burnt to the ground, and are those of St. Andrew, and St. Sebastian, whence the Nuns being retired in the night to secure themselves, all the religious of the other Convents and Monasteries did the same: in the mean time the People enraged against the French began to plunder all their houses, and going yet farther, in a little time did the same to the other inhabitants houses, but the General Don Carlo Tasso speedily remedied it with the assistance of the Spa∣nish and Neapolitan Troops, the latter having come in the 20th day in the
morning; the general took and executed several of these Robbers, so that we may say Genova owes its preservation to the arrival of the Spanish Regiments that came in so luckily. In Fine, the rabble of the City and that which had flocked in from the Country, was capable with the French to destroy the City, but God preserved it. The Count de Melgor sent also a detachment of the Country foot, and the rest of the Army of Millain advanced to the Frontier of this State. The Count de Melgar General and Captain General being come to Torto∣na on the 21 of this month, to be nearer at hand for whatever should happen, being advertised of the consternation there began to be here many of the peo∣ple and even of the Majestrates having left all with the fright of the fire and Bombes to save themselves the Count advanced in person till this place, to calme the affrighted spirits with his presents, and encourage them to their de∣fence and preservation, and in effect it happened: insomuch that from the time he came into the City, every body took courage, and in a moment all order was restored to the great satisfact, and consent of the City and its in∣habitants. The French continued casting Bombes and Granadoes four days and three nights, and the 22th about noon they ceased and Monsteur de Seignelay sent an Officer a shore with a Folucca who demanded to speak with the Duke, but it was not granted, and he was forced to stay on board the Admiral Galley of the Republick in the Port, a Secretary was sent to him from the Senate to know his message who said Monsieur de Seignelay much resented the damage was done to the City, and if they resolved to send Deputies, and were disposed to give the King his Master satisfaction according as he demanded, abandon∣ing the protection of Spain, mercy should still be used; but if they obstinatly persist in the state they are, he can let them know he had already spent 6000 Bombes against the City, but had still 10000 left him, with which he would ruine the said City, and gave a farther declaration of his intention in a pa∣per. A Counsel was held in hast, and the juncto of the Government answered that the Duke not being able to take any resolution alone, he would assemble the Senate to give a positive answer: this was done to gain time and prolong this little truce, during which time the treasure of St. George could be saved and past into a place of security, as was done that night, when part of it was removed to a safer place, chose for that purpose. After which the French taking for a full answer that the Town was more fully resolved than ever to defend it self, they began on the 23d to play their canon upon the City, and endamage it with their Bombes and granadoes, though with less violence then before, and being they could not reach farther than they had, the people began to cast of their fear, and remain firm against the threats of the French. The batteries of the City continued firing upon the Fleet, but without much damage to them, because they kept out of the reach of Canon and the Gallies that carry the Bombes are proof against our Artillery. The 24th in the Morning the Enemies attempted two descents, one on the side of Bisagno, and the other on the side of St. Peter d' Arena, they were loaded with Bombes, Granadoes, Petards, Faggots, Scaling ladders and other warlike instruments, but those two places being guarded by good Troops drawn out of the Spanish, and Neapolitan Regiments they fought stoutly, and the French were quite driven from their posts. On the side of Bisagno were taken 30 prisoners, most Officers, and Knights of Malta; among the deal was found the Sieur de la Motthe Captain of a man of War, much lamented among his People. At St. Peter de Arena there also remained many dead upon the place, Captain Don Antonio de Luna a Neapolitan Signalireh himself extremely, for having broke into the midst of his Enemies with his Sword in his hand, he killed seve∣ral, and among the rest a French Captain, and received a wound in his throat by a Musket shot; the French betook themselves to a disorderly Flight, leaving behind them Pick-axes, Mattocks, and other Instruments they had brought to fortifie themselves.
The 25, 26, and 27. they continued casting their Bombes with all possible fury, but Don Basilio Marini, Lieutenant General of the Artillery of Millan, who the Count de Melgar had sent to Genova with a number of Canoneers, having viewed the Order of the Galliots, whence the Enemies cast their Bombs, and considered how he could best annoy them, resolved to make some artifici∣al Fire-works, and on the 28 came down towards the Sea, where he thought he could best reach them with his Calverins, and sped so well that he sunk one of the said Galliots of the Bombes, and obliged the rest to make off to Sea; and did also some damage to the Galleys. The same day being the Twenty eighth about noon, the French ceased cast∣ing their Bombes, and sent again a Shaloup to shore, and the Commander of the Vessels of Genova having also advanced half a League in a Shaloup to meet him, and prevent his coming sooner, he found there a Trumpeter with a Letter for a Captain of one of the Galleys of the Republick, called Lomellino, by which he was desired to send word, whether Monsieur de la Motthe was a Prisoner and alive. He took the Letter to see what answer must be made, which was done, by letting them know that having viewed all the Prisoners, which are very ma∣ny, he was not to be found. The same day about night, the French withdrew all their Galliots of Bombes, some small Vessels two Galleys and a Man of War, and gave demonstration of some disposition the whole Fleet would do the same, as appeared next day being the 29th at break of day, steering their course to the west-ward, and it is thought with intention to return to some port of Provance, whereby the City of Genova is left free, to the great satisfaction of the Republick, which openly confesseth it owes its preservation to the Spanish protection, and its arms which latred the City very seasonably, and to the particular activity, wherewith the Count de Melgar always acted upon this occasion. The Writing. That Mr. the Marquess de Seignelay gave to the Sir Francesco Saoli, head of the Deputation of the Six Gentlemen, that the Republick sent to com∣pliment him at his Arrival before Genova May the 16th. 1684. at eleven in the Morning. It is long since the behaviour of your republick in all things that concern the King, has given you sufficient occasion to apprehend the effects of his just in∣dignation. You have upon all occasions discovered your union, and adherence to the in∣terest of his Enemies; and you have besides of late given manifest proofs of it, in suffering the King of Spain to take upon him the quality of Protector of your City. To purchase this disadvantagious protection, you have encreased the number of your Galleys, with a design to joyn them with those of Spain. You have refused to disarm these new Galleys, and intended to send them to Sea last Summer, notwithstanding what was signified unto you from a Prince, from whom alone you can hope for protection, and whose will should be a rule to your Government, if you love your own safety. You have suffered the wrong done to his Ministers Domesticks to pass unpu∣nished. You have ruined his subjects by the ill usage you have made them suffer in their commerce, and have been so perfidious, as to refuse the proposal we made to you, for allowing a Magazine of Salt to be made at Savona. It was in truth a thing of small importance, but however has served to discover the more how little respect you bear His Majesty, and the difference you make between what concerns him and Spain. So ill a carriage deserved an immediate punishment; but His Majesty will ne∣vertheless of his goodness grant you time to repent, and take better measures.
And that you may divert the effects of his just resentments, you must presently deliver into the hands of his Officers the four Galleys equipped, and give ano∣ther well furnished with its company, so that it be in a condition to go immedi∣atly to Sea, you must depute four of your Principal Senators to beg pardon of His Majesty, for your past miscarriages, giving him sufficient testimony of your entire Submission to his Orders, in all things that shall be laid upon you by him, and in whatever hereafter he may have need of you either for his service, or sa∣tisfaction. His Majesty allows you till five of the Clock in the Evening, to consider upon his proposals. But I declare to you on his behalf, that it is the last effect of his clemency, and goodness you are to look for, and that if within this time you do not accept of it, and suffer the first act of hostility to begin, you must no lon∣ger hope to obtain such moderate conditions; and the useless protection of Spain will not be able to secure you from a resentment, that will be followed by the total ruine and destruction of your Country, and will make you feel how terri∣ble the effects of so great a Kings Indignation are. The Writing. Given by an Officer of the French Fleet to the Secretary of the Republick. May the 22. 1684. at two in the Afternoon in the Admiral Galley of the most Serene Republick. The Marquess de Seignelay sends me to tell you, that he is much concerned to see the condition your Town is reduced to, and the dismal effects of what he foretold you, before you had refused the proposals he made you from the King. You may judge by the terrible destruction 6000 Bombes have made, what you are to fear from 10000 more that remain. And you ought not to doubt but he is in a better condition than before to make you fale their effects. We know what places in your City have suffer'd most, and shall for the future fire at the farthest that are not as yet prejudiced, so that you cannot hope one stone will be left upon another. Yet these great ils, are but inconsiderable compared with those you must apprehend from the continuation of a War you are so unable to maintain. He will still tell you, he has power to reconcile you to the King, so that all what is past shall be forgotten, and that putting your selves in a condition of hindring the burning of your Town, you may expect nothing but marks of protection from His Majesty. If you accept his offers of Accommodation, you may send those you shall think fit to agree the conditions, but if you persist in your obstinacy, and the vain hope you have placed in the Spanish Succors, and continue to reject the mercy the King is willing to grant you, all the world shall know you exposed your selves of your own will to the invitable danger of loosing your City, and that by the refusal you make of the advantages might be had in the Kings clemency and goodness, you have drawn upon your selves all the rigour of his Justice. The answer given to the Officer of the Vessels by the Secretary of the Repub∣lick. His sereness having heared the report I made him of what was said to me from the Marquess de Seignelay, has ordered me to answer, that sending of De∣puties is a thing must of necessity be resolved in Council, according to the Laws, and it should be assembled the next day to that effect. As for the rest that how great soever the damage received the last days was, it bore no proportion with the courage and resolution of the Citizens for
maintaining their liberty, besides that the republick has all reason imaginable to be perswaded, that it has given His Majesty no occasion to be thus used. The Reply of Mr. de Seignelay given that same Night to the Secretary of the most Serene Republick, to the answer of the said Secretary upon the proposition made at Noon. Memoire of Mr. de Bonrepans Controuler of the Kings Fleet, to be deliver∣ed to the Deputies of the Republick of Genova. Since it appears by the answer given to the Major of the Fleet the Sir the Mar∣quess de Seignelay's Deputy, that the necessity of assembling the Council, as well for the sending of Deputies, as deliberating upon the propositions to be made, will require a considerable time, wheras a short and satisfactory answer is re∣quired, either to make all acts of hastily quite cease, or begin them again in a more sensible manner: the said Marquess de Seignelay declares that the propo∣sals he can make for the King his Master are, that the 4 new Galleys that were fited last year shall be delivered into the hands of His Majesties Officers; that they shall be in a condition to go to Sea, and two shall be provided with men and guns. That the Republick shall give 600000 Liures in ready money, for part of the charges of the Fleet. That it shall depute 4 of its Principal Senators to the King, to beg of him to forget what is past, and give him new testimonies of their submission and respect. That a Magazine of salt shall be allowed to be made at Savona upon the con∣ditions already proposed. The Marquess de Seignelay moreover declares, that he can grant no longer time to deliberate upon these Propositions, then till 10 of the Clock next Morn∣ing, and if the Republick consents to accept of them, they must send Depu∣ties with the necessary Authority to conclude with him; which failing, he shall see though with regret into what great inconveniencies it brings it self, by fall∣ing out with the greatest Prince in Europe. Next he asked of the Secretary of the Republick, at what time the Counsel assembled, and he having answered at 14. which after our reckoning is 10, the other replied, that if the Answer could not be sent precisely at that hour, it would be well done to acquaint the Marquess de Seignelay at what hour Deputies could be sent, in hopes that the Marquess being advertised, would make no dif∣ficulty of waiting a little longer. The Answer of the little Counsel sent to the Marquess de Seignelay by the Offi∣cer of War. That there was no opportunity of regulating propositions in the midst of the fire of the Bombes. That the Republick had such confidence in the Justice of their cause, and the undaunted courage of its Citizens, that they would see without the least concern the ruine of the whole City, and besides had that sa∣tisfaction before God and the World, that they were assured they had given no occasion for such Barbarous resentments. FINIS. London, Printed for William Cadman at the lower end of the New-Exchange. 1684.
