t825a 11950300 51380
Sir Thomas Levingstons LETTER to the Ho∣nourable Major General Mackay, Commander in Chief of their Maje∣sties Forces in Scotland, giving a true Account of the Battel at Cromb∣del, with the Number kill'd, and Prisoners taken; as likewise a List of the Names of the Officers that was taken Ma the first, 1690. From the Copy Printed in Scotland. Honoured Sir, AS I have in several Letters before, given you nothing but ill News, so I am glad I have now the occasion of fending you somewhat better: The General Buchan; and rigadeer , with his Highland Army, having for a while marched up and down this Country, increased as a  daily, which affrighted and discouraged the Country so far, that upon  resolved to march out of Inverness, with a Detatchment of fo  men of Sir James Leslies, si  Grants, the Highland Company of Captain Mackay, three Troops of my Dragoons, and my Lord Tester's Troop of Horse, and Camped that Night near Brodie, where I was forced to slay two dayes, for my Baggage Horses coming in very slow from the Country, as likewise for the three other Troops of Dragoons from Elgin, and Capt. Burnets of Horse. The Enemy was at this time at Strathspey, threatning to slay and burn all that would not joyn; where∣upon I resolved the thirtieth of April, about 12 a Clock in the day, having then got certain Intelligence where they Camped, and what number they were, to march to∣wards them; we marched the whole Night in as bad Ground as Lochabar may be, till at last, by two a Clock in the Morning we got to Ball-Chastle, where being arri∣ved, we discovered by the Enemies Fires their Camp; I informed my self of the Na∣ture of the Ground, and the depth of the River, and notwithstanding they told me, the Ground was somewhat Boggish, I formed my Design to Attaque them by Sur∣prize, for they did not know of my being arrived, but my Men and Horse being so extreamly wearied, I gave them about half an hour to refresh themselves; after which time I called the Officers together, and told them y Resolution, so that they might examine their Soldiers if they were able to do it; who unanimously told me, They would stand by me to he  man,  earnestly to go on. I having got Guides by this time in readiness, we ssed the  by three a Clock in the Morning at one Fod, whe the was a Ch, the Enemy keeping a strong Guard, where I sent some Foot, and  Dragoons to fire upon them, and amuse them, and in the mean time past the  at another Fod below it: two Troops of Dragoons, and Capt. Mackay's  Company was  passed before the Enemy perceived us, and  in Parties up and down not know∣ing which way to turn  surprized, so I commanded all the Horse and Dragoons to jo, , which affrighted , so t they took themselves to the Hills, and at the foot of Crompdel we overtook them, attacked them, killing betwixt 3 or 400 upon the Place, and took about 100 Prisoners, the greater part of them Officers, the rest got off by a Mist that came just at that time upon the top of the Hill, so that we could scarcely see one another, otherways the slaughter should have been greater; so I caused to bat a Retreat, our Horses being ready to fall down, and drew up upon the low Ground, Prisoners being brought to me from all hands: Buchan, when they took the Alarm first, sent a Nephew of his, with some more Officers and Soldiers, in an old Castle, who at first seemed to be Opinionate, I caused to surround them, and finding the Ground proper to under∣mind them, which they finding, surrendred themselves to the King's Mercy. Buchan got off, without Hat, Coat, or Sword, and was seen that day, and in that posture, in Glenlives, very much fatigued, carried in a Cosins House of his; Canon got away in his Night Gown; Dumfermling had gone from them about some Business the day before.
We have taken all the Baggage and Ammunition, and the Soldiers have got more considerable Plunder, as I thought, they carried about with them. Thier King & Queens Standard, where they cited th Country People to repair to, are taken; there are said to be People of Note that are killed, but of this I can give you no certain Account, being that when we came to visit them, they were all naked, by what we could judge, there was some appearance of it. The Resolution and forwardness of all the Troops is admirable; and although the Foot could not get up to us, they marched after us with as great diligence as possible. It is Remarkable, that in this whole business there is not one man lost, three or four wounded, but not dangerously either, and about a dozen of Horses, but many Horses disabled. This Night we have had one of the severest that could be. I design to pursue this, and see if I can disperse what is of them yet together, which will be but a small number, being that they ran to all Arts; but the Weather is so horrible, that I fear I shall be obliged to give it over. I pray God this beginning of this Years Campaign my Prognosticate a Blessing upon Their Majesties Forces, so that an end may be made of this troublesome War this Summer. I desire, Sir, you would send me immediately Orders what to do with the Pri∣soners, for at Inverness they cannot be kept. Expecting your Honours Orders, what you think fit shall be done further; I am extreamly troubled to make the Horse subsist, and remain, Honoured Sir, Yours, &c. T. Livingstone. The Letter is Directed thus, For the Honourable Major-General Mackay, Com∣mander in Chief of Their Majesties Forces in Scotland. POSTSCRIPT. Captain Mackay and his High-land Company behaved very well: If, as Major Mackay says, that we can have more of them, it would not be amiss. After the business was over, we drank your Health in good Claret taken from the Rebels. The Narration is somewhat long, and lame, but it is the true and real Account of all. Here inclosed is a List of some of the Prisoners Names, and some Papers that are taken. The Officers that are taken declare the High-land Army was betwixt fourteen and fifteen hundred. A List of Officers taken at the Battel of Crombdell, on the First of May, 1690. Capt. Huchins. Capt. John Macclean. Capt. Allan Macclean, Capt. John Colloe. Lieutenant John Macclean. Lieutenant Alex. Halliburton. Coret Andrew Baird. Ensign John Macclean. Ensign John Macnaughton. Charles Cornwell, Volunteer. Officers taken in the Castle of Lethen-dee. Capt. James Buchan. Capt. Brown. Lieutenant Scratcher. Lieutenant Middleton. Lieutenant Brawdie. Lieutenant Sewell. Lieutenant Auchinmootie. Lieutenant Drummer. Ensign Dunbar. Ensign Ross. Many more Gentlemen are taken, who will not own themselves Officers. London, Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple near Temple-Bar in Fleetstreet. 1690.
