V13 99827516 31936
SEVERAL REASONS AND MOTIVES, For the speedie passing of the ACT Against Transporting of Treasure, and the Preventing of other Abuses practi∣sed on the Coyns and Bullion of the NATION. printer's or publisher's device DEUS EST NOBIS SOL ET SCUTUM Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, Anno Domini MDCL.
SEVERAL REASONS AND MOTIVES, For the speedie passing of the ACT against Transporting of Treasure, and the Preventing other Abuses practised on the Coyns and Bullion of the NATION. IT hath been daily practised by some perticular Mer∣chants, both Native and Strangers, to Transport the Treasure of this Nation, to the great prejudice of the State; who for their own private gain, have not spared to damnifie the Common-wealth (so highly) that their Persons and Estates cannot give a full satis∣saction for the great mischief done and practised by them to this Common-wealth, and without a strict Examination, and exemplarie punishment of the offendours, or some of the chief of them, these mischiefs will never be prevented, (and the Common-wealth be still undermined by those Moles, to the unspeakable dammage thereof) and for that some, through ignorance, do not understand and con∣ceave the great dammage which may come to the Common-wealth, by the suffering these abovesaid abuses to continue, and others more craftie and subtile, both Gold-smiths and Merchants, that are Trans∣porters of Gold and Silver, and practizers of several high frauds and abuses upon Coyn and Bullion, have the confidence (or impudence) to make arguments for defending the Transgressours. Now for the information of some in their judgements, that have desired a true ac∣count,
what Laws are now in force in this Nation, for prevention of these mischiefs; what Order and Laws in France, Holland, and Flan∣ders, for the regulating of their Mints, Money, and Bollion; what pu∣nishments and restriction upon the offenders, I have procured the Ordinance, and Placcaets of France, Holland, and Flanders to be translated; have breviated them for your informa∣tion; and coated some Laws of this Nation now in force, as hereafter follow. And if you please to make the Law, now presented to the House, stricter than it is now drawn, I humbly conceave you will do the Com∣mon-wealth the greater benefit, considering the present condition of the Common-wealth. Transporting of Treasure hath been Felonie, 4. Henry 7. cap. 13. and 17. Edward 4. this Statute to endure for twentie years. I hum∣bly conceive the Common-wealth hath now as much reason to look to keep the Treasures in the Nation as they had then, considering all things. That you would be pleased to give one Moyetie at the least to any person or persons that will or can discover the Offendours: that so by this reward, all persons may be invited to discover the Offendours all over the Nation, and the same rule followed which was in 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. where Commissions by Act of Parliament, were granted throughout the Realm, to inquire of such as had conveyed the Mo∣ney of England out of the Nation; in doing whereof great sums throughout the Nation will come to the State, and the Offendours will remember the Proverb, Sweet meat must have sower sance: when they shall be enforced to pay back to the State that which they have defrauded them of, and will prevent them and all others hereafter for to take the boldness to get themselves fortunes by any of the a∣foresaid indirect courses, which so highly tend to the dammage of this Common-wealth. By these deceits, Commerce is spoiled, Traffick decayeth, those things that are needfull for mans preservation grow dear, the handle-crafts∣work seaceth, the work-men betake themselves to some other places, and the Commonaltie, to speak all in a word, is brought to Povertie, (as is Gravely observed by the Master Generall and Councel of the Mint in Flanders, 2. October 1647. with their Decleration, clearly demon∣strating, That the carefull and punctual keeping of the Placcaet of the Mint, is very necessary, and withall profitable to all persons of what state, qualitie, or condition soever; shewing, that if the Placaet be not observed, but that money should be paid out above the true value through these disorders, they shall never be able to keep their Treasure within their Countrey. And in their Declaration shewing, most judicially, the great mis∣chiefs
that befall a Nation by enhauncing and raising there Money, being no real cure for the Common-wealth, but utterly destructive to all sorts of people, even from the Prince to the poor Labourer, to any Free-State or Common-wealth, to all Merchandize and Comodi∣ties: all which considerations, although very potent, yet do not often∣times come into the minds & comprehensions, not onely of the Com∣mon people, but also of those to whom the imployment of Publick Office, have given more judgement and credit in managing of affairs themselves, & who dare to spread it abroad, that there is no harm nor evil in enhauncing the Coyn above its true value & worth, because they can put it away at the same price as they receive it; not taking notice by the way, that by raising and augmenting the price of money, does or must by consequence, augment and encrease the price of all mer∣chandizes and provisions proportionable, whereby of necessitie must follow, that if the Moneys be augmented and heightened, the Land∣lords and Creditours receive so much less; the merchandize, victuals and all other wares grow presently dearer; the Publick Treasure either Excise or Customs are abated, by so much as you enhaunce or lessen your Moneys, for it is not the Denomination of a high price of Gold or Silver sets the value, but it must have weight and fineness propor∣tionable to what you call it, or else you go upon a wrong ground; As for example, in Scotland they call Thirteen pence halspenie, A Mark; and Twentie pence, they call Twentie shillings; this denomination of a great value gives not the intrinsicate value. Placcaet and Ordinance. Concerning the generall course and regulating of the Mints and Monies, as also concerning the Exchange and Exchangers, Refiners, Gold-smiths, and others in the Ʋnited Provinces 1586. ARTIC. xi. ANd as for the Gold and Silver-Monies whose value is valued by this Ordinance, Wee forbid every one to present pay away or receive the same at a higher rate than is here Ordered, upon the for∣feiture of such Monies or the worth of it in case the fact be not pre∣sently discovered, and besides upon penaltie of ten golden Angelots the first time; for the second time twenty golden Angelots; and for the third four times as much; and besides Arbitrary punishment ac∣cording to the hainousness of the fact: and Wee understand the same forfeitures and penalties to take place as well upon the Receiver as the Payer away, unless one of them presently after the Receiving or Paying away do present himself to an Officer, in which case the denū∣ntiator either Receiver or Payer away shall be freed or quitted of the
above-said penalty and forfeiture, and besides to enjoy the third part of the same forfeit and penalty. ARTIC. xiv. So that Wee expresly forbid and interdict every one to over-buy or over-sell, Change or Chop any Species of Monies rated by these presents, either in taking or giving upon the same any profit, gain, or advantage after what manner soever, upon the same pain and penalty as above said, against those who shall Receive or Pay away the same at a higher rate than that of the Ordinance. ARTIC. xv. We forbid also every one to Cull any Gold or Silver-Monies, and so by this means to sort the weighty and good ones from the light and bad ones, to Pay away the light ones and make their profit of the weighty upon penalty as abovesaid. ARTIC. xvi. And as for the Stuff and Materials of Gold and Silver being in Mass or sweepings, Wee forbid to buy or sell them at a higher rate than according to the rule of this Ordinance, upon penalty of confis∣cation of the abovesaid Materials, and moreover to forfeit double the worth of them at the charge as well of the buyer as of the seller for the first time; for the second time twice as much; and for the third time four times as much; and afterwards Arbitrary punishment. ARTIC. xvii. We expresly forbid henceforth to Transport or cause to be Tran∣sported out of the abovesaid Province towards any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver-Monies, and also any Materials in Mass or Monies, also any Materials in Mass or Ingots fit to Coyn Monies of them, upon fofeit of confiscation of the abovesaid Monies and Materialls, or the worth of them in case they were already transported; and besides this upon penalty of one hundred Golden Angelots for every Mark of Gold, and twenty Angelots for every Mark of Silver, and of more or less proportionably for the first time; for the second time upon the same forfeit and penalty; and moreover to undergo bodily punish∣ment and if they have not wherewithall to Pay the above-said for∣feits and amendments, they shall be bodily punished according to the manner of the fact, under which penaltie and amendments Wee un∣derstand are comprehended all those who had assisted, and had a hand in the above-said transportation or conveying them away, al∣though the Monies or Materials did not belong unto them.
ARTIC. xx. Moreover, Wee forbid every one to File, Cut, or Wash with strong Water or Sement or any otherwise any Gold, or Silver-Monies, nor to Saulder, Gild, Peece or Nail the same, or any way to make the same lighter or heavier, upon the forfeit of life and goods, where con∣fiscation taketh place. ARTIC. xxii. Wee forbid henceforth every one to melt any God or Silver-Mo∣nies of her Majesties of Englands stamp, valued by these presents up∣on penalty of life and goods, where confiscation taketh place: And the Monies of Gold which are found to be too light by three grains, or otherwise Clipped, Washed, Nailed or Saudered, shall be brought to the Exchange after the old custom. Placcaet and Ordinance for Flanders at Antwerp the fourth of October 1585. ARTIC. xiii. ANd to hinder the transporting of the good and true Monies, We forbid all and every one henceforth to buy or sell any Species of Gold and Silver-Monies, to give any profit or gain for it, upon penalty of the seller to forfeit the Pieces which are sold, or shall be sold, and besides the buyer as the seller to forfeit three-score Pounds of the above-said good Monies for the first time; and twice as much for the second time; and for the third time four times as much; and besides they are to be Arbitrarily punished. ARTIC. xiv. We also forbid all and every one to Weigh, Clip, File, or make choice of any Species of Gold and Silver, for to make any profit with Melting or Transporting of them, upon penalty of Criminall punish∣ment, besides the loss of the above-said Pieces. ARTIC. xv. Furthermore, We forbid and interdict well Expresly; that no one of what qualitie, degree or condition soever, shall henceforth endea∣vor to transport or carry into any strange Mints, or into any other than our own, any Gold, or Silver-Monies of our Stamp, or others tollerated by this our Ordinance, nor also any other Monies being Clipt or declared Bullion melted or in Mass or otherwise, nor also any other stuff fit to Coyn Monies of them, upon forfeit of the above-said Gold and Silver, and besides of two hundred Golden-Reals for every
Mark of Gold, and twenty Golden-Reals for every Mark of Silver, and of more or less in proportion for the first time that this shall hap∣pen; and for the second time, besides the above-said forfeit, to be bo∣dily punished, and otherwise as occasion shall serve. And if so be that any person have transported any some of Monies without being taken in the fact, wee will nevertheless that whensoever it shall be perceived and di∣scovered, they shall proceed against the transgressors by execution of the said penalties, even as if they were taken in the same fact, well understanding that instead of confiscation of the Species, they shall be bound to pay the price and estimation of the transported Monies; and besides, the double worth of them, and besides to be Criminally punished. We will and Command also, that those who shall have helped to pack, or secretly convey and transport the above-said Monies, either in Mass or Species, although the above-said Monies did not belong unto them, they shall be bodily or Arbitrarily punished according to the qualitie of the fact and Persons. The Policie and Laws of this Realm have alwayes aimed at, and in∣tended the Increase and Augmentation of Money, especially that of Silver and this diverse ways. I. 9. E. 3. c. 1.38. E. 3. c. 2.17. E. 3.21.5. R. 2. c. 2. 2. H. 4. c. 5. 2. H. 6. c. 6.17. E. 4. c. 1. Made Feonie 19. H. 7. c. 5. 3. H. 8. c. 1. By providing against Exportation of it. II. 9. E. 3. c. 3.17. R. 2. c. 1.17. E. 4. c. 1.2. H. 6. c. 13. By proving against the Melting it down to make Plate or other Manifactures of it. III. E. 1. Statute de monet parvam Rastall Tit. Mo∣ney. By providing that if any Monies through time or other pra∣ctice became uncurrant, then the same to be converted into Money again, and not be diverted from Coyn. IV. 2. H. 6. c. 13. 25. E. 3. c. 12. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 19. By providing that none should give a price for Bullion or Coyned Money above the rate of the Mint, or what the same is currant for: for it is not to be expected that any Bullion either of Gold or Sil∣ver shall ever be brought to the Mint, when the Owner may have a greater Price than at the Mint, either to be transported or to be con∣verted to make Plate, or other things: of this agreeth likewise with the Policie of Spain, which though it be the Spring and Fountain from whence the greatest Streams of Silver have been derived into other parts, yet Silver there, will always yield the seller six pence, or one Real more upon the Mark at the Mint, than to be sold to any other for any purpose whatsoever, concurring likewise with the practise of other States.
That all se Acts are defective and not effectuall to the ends above∣said, for the reasons following. The Acts against Transportation, some extend not to Gold as 9. E. 3. c. 1. others have effect onely upon the Money that is tran∣sported, and that comes too late, and is seldom or never known as, 38. E. 3. c. 2.5. R. 2. c. 2.2. H. 6. c. 6.17. E. 4. c. 1. being now dis∣continued. Those that extend to the shipping of it, &c. viz. 2. H. 4. c. 5.19. H. 7. c. 5. and 3. H. 8. c. 1. Give the whole forfeiture to the King and no part to the Informer, whereby they are not at all made use of, no man being willing to be at charge to prosecute another, doing no good to himself. None of those Acts do give sufficient forfeitures to restrain the Offences as hath been manifested by experience. Lastly, they have not given any means for discovery thereof, with∣out which the Offendors will not be deterred from finding out close and secret wayes to adventure and practice against them, when op∣pertunity of great gain and hope of concealment shall invite and in∣courage them thereunto. And for the Act now drawn and propounded to be passed. BEsides the frame and body of it comprehending and fully exten∣ding to all the wayes and means of the abuses, the same for the forfeitures. Is drawn by the example and president of 18. Eliz. c. 9. against transportation of Leather, Tallow, and Raw-Hides, and others in the Queens time, and the late Ordinance 1647. Against transportation of Wool, Fullers-Earth, &c. The Clauses touching the proceeding by Information, &c. are the same with the like Clauses of the said Ordinance for Wool 1647. And the Clauses to incourage the Instrument and others to disco∣ver the Offences, wherein themselves are lyable to the penalties, are framed in Imitation and by the President of the said Act of 18. Eliz. and other Ordinances and Edicts of other Kingdoms and Estates that give like Exemptions and Incouragements, to such, as though guilty themselves in the second degree, shall reveal and discover others more principall Offendors, taking likewise from them the confidence they would have, that the persons they imployed should conceal their
Offences, whereby they will be much deterred from hazarding and adventuring upon the practice. And the Clause touching the Commission and Examination of Witnesses for discovery, &c. And to commit them in case of their refusall to be Examined, is Exampled by 13. Eliz. c. 7. The Act against Banckrupts and discovery of their Estates; There being greater Reason and Equity for the discovery of fraud concerning the Common-wealth, than concerning any private person. In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the general Regula∣ting of the MINT, published at Brussel the 18 of March 1633, is inserted. ARTIC. xxv. WE declare, That although any of our Subjects or others, who shall have acted any thing contrary to this Ordinance, and were not taken in the fact, yet notwithstanding, after they shall be convinced of the said transgression, they shall be proceeded against with condemnation of the said penalties and amendments; well un∣derstanding, that instead of forfeiting the said moneys and materials, they shall be condemned to pay the worth of them. ARTIC. xxvi. And if it happeneth that the just qualitie and quantitie of the said Species, Bullion or materials cannot be precisely known or verified, We will, that such transgressours be punished according to the hai∣nousness of the fact, being left to the discretion of the Judges. ARTIC. xxvii. Which we intend shall take place, in regard of those who shall be convinced, to have paid away, presented, or received any forbidden Moneys, or at a higher price than by this present Ordinance is decla∣red, although the said qualitie and quantitie of the same could not be precisely verified. ARTIC. xxviii. We have Authorized and Authorize by these, all Officers, for to cease upon and break open the packs, letters, and portmantles of the Messengers, or of others whom they shall know or suspect, to bring in any of the forbidden Species or Materials, or to transport and con∣vey out of our said Lands, any of our Species, & that in the presence of those to whom the said packets are sent to or do belong, if so be they
are residing in that place; as also in the presence of one of the Magi∣strates of the said place, onely to know the name of those who caused the said Gold and Silver to be transported, and to no other end. ARTIC. xxxvii. We also order, that all those that shall be found to have counter∣feited, coyned, stamped, prest, or cast in the sand, any moneys of what manner stuff or metall soever, shall be executed, as false Mo∣niers, in a kettle with boyling oyl and water, and with confiscation of all their goods. ARTIC. lv. If so be any one be convinced, that he had pickt or chosen out, or caused to be chosen out any of the said valued Species, for to keep the heavie ones for his profit, and to pay away the light ones to the dammage of the Commonaltie, We will that he, besides the said For∣feits and Amendments, shall be banished out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years. ARTIC lvi. In case that any of the perticular Masters of our Mints, or Exchan∣gers were convinced of the said abuse, or that they should have pre∣sented or paid away, or cause to be presented or paid away any of the said clipt or other forbidden Species, after that they had recei∣ved the same for Bullion or not currant, then shall they be banished for ever out of Our said Lands, and their goods confiscated. ARTIC. lvii. And because the price of the Species is commonly regulated ac∣cording to the price of the Gold and Silver materials, therefore We have forbidden, and forbid every one of what qualitie or condition soever, to by or sell any Gold or Silver materials, or Species declared for Bullion or not currant, at a higher-price than the Ordinance of Our said Mint permitteth, upon penaltie of confiscation of the said Materials and the worth of them, at the charge as well of the Buyer as Seller for the first time; for the second time four times as much, besides the confiscation and forfeit, and of other arbitral correction. ARTIC. lxiii. We order also, that the Brokers, who did assist and help to con∣clude or treat upon such parsels, either in regard of money given up∣on exchange, upon Use or Obligation, either in payment of the sold merchandizes, or otherwise, shall be publickly whipt and banished out of our said Lands for the space of ten years.
ARTIC. lvi. And as we have understood, and are truly informed, that a great part of the irregularitie concerning the said Placcaets, is risen and oc∣casioned, by reason that many Merchants and Factours will not buy the works and manufactures of the work-men and handiecrafts-men, unless they will receive the Gold and Silver at such a price as they will give it them; or when they have almost bought the goods, they give the merchandizes back again to the sellers, if they will be paid according to the price ordered in our Placcaet: Therefore We will, that such oppressours of the poor Commonaltie, shall be rigorously proceeded against and punished, by apprehension of their persons, and that they, their Proces being summarily and criminally formed, and found guiltie of what is abovesaid, shall be banished for ever, and their goods confiscated, or instead hereof to be condemned in a great sum of money, according to the hainousness of the fact; of which con∣fiscation and amendment, the half shall be given to the Plaintif or discoverer. ARTIC. lxx. In like manner shall be punished those with the same forfeits and amendments, who shall have received, paid away, or presented any clipt Moneys, or declared for Bullion, with Protestation or decla∣ration, that it is for to deliver them into our Mints, or to the Ex∣changers, unless they had presently cut them in pieces or deformed them, or caused the same to be done by others. ARTIC. xci We declare, that although it be that any of the Transgressours do obtain favour and pardon from Us or from Our Councel. We do not intend, nor we will not, that therefore they should be quitted, and discharged from the parts of the said forfeits and amendments, granted by Us to the Officers, Callers in question, and Plaintifs, or Discoverers respectively; but such favour and pardon onely to take place for as much as belongeth unto Us. ARTIC. cv. We order well expresly, all Our Fiscals and Officers, to take their conclusions, and all our Councellors, Magistrates, and other Judges, to give their sentences in conformitie of this Our present Placaet, without using any moderation of the penalties and amendments therein contained, under what pretext soever, nor also any compen∣sation of Charges, to the prejudice of the Officer founded in the prin∣cipal, upon penaltie of our indignation, and for to answer for it in their own persons, without that they shall plead any ignorance, or the general transgression. Which excuses, We do not intend shall avail or
help them in any manner of way: but our intention is, that they shall be punished because of their negligence and connivence. This Ordinance and Placcact of the 18 of March 1633, is again con∣firmed; and all Magistrates and Officers are required to do their ut∣most endeavours to see it strictly observed in all points. Published at Brussels the 26 of August 1643. In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the Regulating of the Mint; Published in Brussels the last day of May, 1644. is inserted. ARTIC. xi. WE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents, every one of what qualitie or condition soever; as well our Subjects as others, to Transport any Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, directly or indirectly, or cause the same to be Transported, ei∣ther Minted or Unminted; or also in Mass, Ingots, or Bullion; without having obtained of us before-hand express leave and consent for to do the same, upon penaltie of forfeiting the Gold, Silver, and Bullion, and to pay besides the double of their worth, and upon forfeit of the merchandizes, if so be the above-said Gold, Silver, or Bullion shall be found to be packt in them; as also of the horses and waggons of those who shall willingly and wittingly have brought and conveyed the same. ARTIC. xv. And if any one be found and taken to have Transported or caused to be Transported out of our Lands, any Moneys by Us valued, or other declared Bullion, or any materials of Gold and Silver, and have delivered or caused to be delivered the same into any strange Mints; We will that such persons shall be proceeded against, sharply and vi∣gorously by imprisonment of their persons, and that they, besides, the forfeits of the said Species and materials, and four times the worth of them, for the first time shall be banished out of our abovesaid Lands, for the space of five years; and for the second time for ever. ARTIC. xvi. And those who willingly and wittingly have assisted for to pack and Transport the above-said Moneys or Materials, shall be punished according to pleasures, or banished according to the qualitie of the person. Other Countreys you may see strictly provide against these offences; and it will never be mended here, if you make not as strict Laws as they.
In a Declaration of the King of France, for the Regu∣laring of the new price set upon the Light and Clipt Species of Money: likewise for the observation of the prices of Gold and Silver imployed for the Gold-smiths work. It is also well expresly forbidden to melt the Money, and to Trasport them or other materials of Gold and Sil∣ver out of the said Kingdom. Printed at Paris 30 of October. 1640. FOLIO 8, 9. VVE expresly forbid, that all materials of Gold and Silver, ei∣ther coyned or uncoyned, shall not be bought or sold at a higher rate than is exprefly set down in this Placcaet, which doth contain the true value that must be paid for the Mark of Gold and Silver. FOLIO 13. We expresly forbid every one, of what codition or qualitie soever, to Transport out of our Kingdom, any Gold and Silver coyned or un∣coyned, nor any other Gold-smithswork, upon penaltie of forfeiting the materials and merchandizes, and other things wherein they shall be found to be packt up in; besides the penaltie of fiftie pounds and bodily punishment. Whereas this Parliament, by their Ordinance 6. of Sept. 1647. did decrie all Clipped, Fyled, or diminished Money (by means where∣of great quantities were sold to some Gold-Smiths) who have made it a Trade to deal with Receivers of Publick Cashes, Graishers, and severall other Persons (and instead of melting of these Monies down) some Gold-smiths have Ishewed these Monies out again in payment, whereas at the Tower thse Clipped Monies would make but five shillings the Ounce-Troy, these men have vented out these Clipped Monies to divers Il-affected people at five shillings six pence, and five shillings eight pence, and six shillings the Ounce, who have disper∣sed the said Clipped Monies so bought from Gold-smiths up and down the Nation again, to the great Inriching of themselves, and de∣frauding of the good people of this Nation, by buying up this Clip∣ped Money since the Ordinance 1647. at the least twenty times over, and venting it for currant again (which had been helped, if there had been but six words put into the Ordinance (which was to have re∣quired all persons exchanging any Clipt or uncurrant English Money with any Gold-smith or others, upon forfeiture of duble the value, to see it cut in two peices or so defaced that it should not be passable after.) I humbly present this defect of that Ordinance, that it may be looked after and amended, and I humbly desire that the Act against transporting Treasure now committed, may be enacted with such vi∣gour, that the Common-wealth may have the reall benefit, and the offenders brought to exemplarie Justice.
There hath been twenty Millions of Money Coyned within this twenty five years as will appear by the Mint-Boooks, and almost all of it tran∣sported out of the Nation, the Gold all gone, the currant silver culled out, the weightiest melted & transported: & that Silver-Monies which remains is but little, and all culled, Gold is made as pretious in this Common-wealth as Diamonds. What inconveniences will arise by the indirect deal∣ing of private men in this particular to the Common-wealth, I shall hum∣bly leave it to you to consider. In the year 1643. It was humbly offered to this Parliament, to have the offendours discovered and to bring them to Justice, and this mischief stopped; but by the great Interest of the offendours, that had then power in this Nation, the Proposition was slighted, and these mischiefs ever since dayly practised, to the unspeakable damage of this Common-wealth: for it is far easier to keep the Treasure in the Nation by making strict Laws against transportation, than when it is gon to bring it back, as too late experience will make this Common-wealth feel: but you have the power to call these offendours to a strict account, if you pass the Act fully to inable all people to make their discoveries, how, and in what manner other Nations do punish these of∣fendours, you have already presented out of their Placcaets, This evil is grown to such a height that both our own Laws put in the strictest execu∣tion, and the Customs and Laws of other Countries added to them for this particular, with the greatest diligence of expert men, to make the search for what is past, and to prevent these mischiefs for the time to come, will be little enough: and to make this discovery is a service of more Importance to the Common-wealth than at first sight can be apprehended. This is a certain rule, no great action in any Common-wealth or State can be done but by Money, which all ages have held to be the Sinews of War, and Garland of Peace; and what occasions we have to use it both for commerce and safety, is humbly left to you to consider; and in all well regulated States it hath ever been accounted a great service to discover the offendours and abuses practised upon the Treasure of their Nation: and to prevent the growth of these mis∣chiefs is the work of every faithfull lover of his Countrey; And here they that shall be against the discovery of these offences and offendours, may amongst judicious men be justly suspected to be Parties themselves. And though some Merchants and other Interested Persons (may for their own Interest, either for their profit (or fear of Punishment for what they have done) speak themselves, or get others, to oppose the Act against transporting Treasure to pass the House, or procure it to be so altered as it shall not be effectuall to give a full cure to the Common-wealth, of the great inconveniences it is now under, by se∣verall abuses practised under Coyn and Bullion. To give a cure to the Common-wealth of these great inconveni∣ences,
and also to take away the great obstructions of your Mint; which will never be done till this Act pass, and if it were more stricter, it would be more benificiall to the Common-wealth, especially in these times when you have so many occasions of Money, by bringing in presently very great sums of Money to the State by the Punishment of the Offendours. You have here, with all humility, set down to you, the ways and means whereby your neighbour-Countreys use to prevent these mischiefs, and to punish the Offendours for what is past, with severall old Statutes of this Nation: out of which if you exstract the quintisence, and make a sharp and vigorous Law, and require all your Officers and others to put it in full execution, you may in a short time cure this Common-wealth of these dangerous diseases, which if you let it go on, will prove a Gangrene. I humbly beseech you to take notice, there hath been within seven years Coyned in ten dayes, more money in the Tower of London, than hath been Coyned near upon this three last years: now if you suffer Treasure to go out of the Nation every day for want of a Law, to give all people power to discover and examine the Offendours, in a short time you will not have any Money left in the Common-wealth (for ex∣perience in all ages shew, that little and slight penalties can never stop some Merchants from their profit, so they get to their private) they care not what mischiefs the Common-wealth suffers: (for a Common-wealth without plenty of Money, looks like a great House unfurnisht, and bare Walls is no hansome sight) and you will find there will not be Money left to pay your just Taxes, Customs and Exsice, and to maintain Trade and commerce if you clear not the obstruction of the Mint, and take some effectuall course to set it a work: and this Act is but a preparation and ground-work to cause your Mint to go: and till it pass, you will never see your Mint flourish: for to alow any man to outgive the Mint for Bullion is, to shut up the Mint: for all men will vent their Treasure where they can have the greatest price, and not to make a way for the opening of the Mint at this time, especially when you have such occasions of Money, I shall humbly leave it to you to consider the consequence and in∣convenience, what is here said, is with all humility presented to the Parliament for the service of the Common-wealth, by a faithfull lover of his Countrey, being desired to state my Reasons by some in Autho∣rity for passing the aforesaid Act; I have humbly obeyed it and hum∣bly conceive (if it were made stricter than it is) it were far better for the Common-wealth: for transporting Treasure heretofore hath been made Feloney, when the Common-wealth, I humbly conceive, had not so much occation to see to keep their Treasure in the Nation, and their Mint going as now they have. T. V. FINIS.
