V458 14575726 102642
VINCULUM SOCIETATIS, OR THE Tie of good Company. Being a Choice COLLECTION Of the Newest SONGS now in Use. WITH THOROW BASS to each SONG for the Harpsichord, Theorbo, or Bass-Viol. The FIRST BOOK of this CHARACTER. depiction of angels playing musical instruments LONDON, Printed by F. Clark, T. Moore, and J. Heptinstall, for John Carr, and R. C. and are to be Sold by John Carr at the Middle Temple-Gate, and Sam. Scott at the Miter by Temple-Barr. Anno Domini, 1687.
TO ALL TRUE LOVERS OE MUSICK. Gentlemen, WE well hope, our former diligent endeavors, (according to our capacity) to serve the Musical Souls of our Nation, have been so hearty, that no very great aspersion can ly upon us for a total neglect of our duty: We also thankfully acknowledg the kind reception our labours have hitherto found from the Ingenious, and the good natur'd; by which we have been so far encouraged, as yet to add One (Ornament at least) to our many former Attempts, and that is, this New Character of the Notes of the Songs in this Book, less troublesome to the Eye, then those of the Old way, which (if acceptable) will add fresh vigour to our future industry, and add much to the numerous obligations you have already heaped upon, Gentlemen, Yours JOHN CARR. Licensed June the 8th 1687. R. C.
A Table of the SONGS contain'd in this Book. A. Page. Page. AH Charming Nymph 4 B. Bring out your Cunny Skins 6 Bring back my Comforts 20 C. Celia at last thy pride 5 Cease mighty Love 10 Cinthia tis own'd I too long 24 Cou'd softning melting looks 32 F. Farewell all the Arts of Love 13 H. How long Devine Celinda 25 Set by Mr. Sam. Ackroyd. I I Love without measure 8 I'le Languish no more 12 L Let formall Lovers 1 Leave to him all our Cares 33 M My wanderer at last Retreats 11 P Phillis I must needs Confess 26 Phillis what ever Love 30 S Spite of thy Godhead 9 See the Lovely Maid 22 Silvia be no longer Kind 23 She alass whom all admir'd 28 T These full too hours 18 The Gods are not more blest 21 Thyrsis unjustly you complain 29 W When Cloris once thought 2 When the Gods at a banquet 14 When first I sought my Jenny's love 17 When V and I together meet 31 MƲSICK Books sold by John Carr at the Middle-Temple Gate. THE Musical Entertainment performed at a Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's Day. Nov. 22. 1683. The Words made by Mr. Christopher Fishburn, and set to Musick, in two, three, four & six Parts, by Mr. Henry Purcel, Composer in Ordinary to His Sacred Majesty, and one of the Organists of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal. The second Book of the Musical Entertainment, performed at a Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's day, Nov. 22. 1684. The Words made by the late ingenious Mr. John Oldham, Author of the Satyr on the Jesuits, and other excellent Poems; and set to Muscik; in two, three, four and five Parts, by Dr. John Blow, Master of the Children, and one of the Organists, of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal. An Essay to the Advancement of Musick, by T. Salmon Price 2 s. The Vocal and Instrumental Musick in Psyche, with the Instrumental Musick in the Tempest. Price 2 s. Melothesia, or Rules for Playing a continual Bass on the Harpsichord. Price 3 s. Tripla Concordia, or new Ayres for three Parts for Treble and Bass-Viol. Easie Lessons on the Gettars for young Practitioners, Single, and some of 2 Parts, by Seignior Francisco. Also all sorts of Musical Instruments, and Strings.
Mr. Hen. Purcell. LET formal Lovers still pursue I envy not their Care, a tedious Seige perhaps may do at last to gain the Fair, such whining Methods I disdain a Mistress to o—blige, where a fair summons will not gain the Town's not worth a Siege. The Eastern Monarchs Victories Had not gone on so far Had he Ingag'd his Enemies By formal steps of War, To general Beauty I lay claim, From each fair Eye tis hurld, Where e're I come like him I'le gain And love ore all the World.
Mr. Fran. Forcer. WHen Cloris once thought her Conquest Compleat, and her Charms had made way for her Pride, and Languishing Strephon had thrown at her Feet a Heart She so often had try'd, and the faithful young Lover did over and over discover a Passion, that were She not Marble, might move her: The hard hearted Nymph to requite all his pain, instead of his Love paid him with dis∣dain,
She bids him re-tire and not feed his desire with the hopes of her Love which he never must gain; Whilst Cruel, Cruel Cloris Strephon cry'd, pity, pity him that lies to Love and to your Eyes a Loyal and unblemish'd Sacrifice. Oh ye Shepheards take heed where your Flocks you do seed, lest your Hearts as your Lambs should stray, for if Cloris surprise you once with her Eyes, you'r lost and un∣done, your Liberty's gone, and you must be for ever her Prey.
Mr. Fran. Forcer. Ah Charming Nymph were I a Swain too weak I fear wou'd prove my resolutions a—gainst Love, tho they were fortifi'd by your disdain, oft I with discontented Sighs have said, oh, why was I a feeble Woman made, but what I thought my Misery is now become my Guard, and from a Fate more hard, it was ordain'd to rescue me, else to thy Charms Philoclia I had bow'd, and dy'd un∣pityed, unpityed, unpityed by the gazing Crowd.
CElia at last thy Pride and Scorn has lost the Man thy Slave was Born, I've broke my Heart to break my Chain, and now must never Love a—gain Yet much of Torture in the Cure I do confess I do indure. Thus is the Battle lost and won, but Oh the Victor is undone. Glory has now my Heart possest, And love of Arms Enflam'd my Brest; The puny God in Chains shall wait, Whilst Pride and Honour sit in state, But oh my Glories I despise Since I must shun those Killing Eyes. Thus is the Battle, &c. Farewel my Trophies since I find No Beauty left to tempt my mind, To make my last of Actions brave, I'le die her Victor and her Slave: Weep that the World no more can give, But scorn this Conquest to outlive. Thus is the Battle, &c. Mr. Sam. Ackroyd.
BRing out your Cunny Skins, bring out your Cunny Skins Maids to me, and hold them fair that I may see, Gray, Black and Blew, for the smaller Skins I'le give you Bracelets, Laces, Pins, and for your whole Cunny here's ready Mony, come gentle Jone do thou begin with thy black Cunny thy black Cunny Skin, and Mary and Jone will follow with their Silver Haird Skins and Yallow, the White Cunny
Skin I will not lay by, for though it be faint it is fair to the Eye, the Gray it is worn, but yet for my Mony, give me the bonny bonny black Cunny, come away fair Maids your Skins will decay, come and take Mony Maids put your Wares away, ha'ye any Cunny Skins, ha'ye any Cunny Skins, ha'ye any Cunny Skins here to sell. Mr. Sam. Ackroyd.
I Love without measure, and sure I shall find a Fountain of Pleasure for my Celia's now kind: My Heart so In—spir'd I kist and ad—mir'd and She ne're re-tir'd but I still de—sir'd. There's no such Devertion As in her soft Arms, To tell her my passion, And to talk of her Charms, I must be possessing, I long for the Blessing Of Loves sweet expressing By natures kind Dressing. With my passion I strove To wait for the pow'r, And the pleasure of Love But for one happy houre, With eager desire At last I came nier, Her Eyes darted Fire, My Soul did expire. Mr. Rob. King.
Mr. Hen. Purcel. SPite of the Godhead powerful Love I will my torments hide, but what Vail of life must prove a Sa—cri—fice to Pride, Pride thou art be∣come my Goddess now, to Thee Il'e Alters Rear, to Thee each Morning pay my Vow and offer every Tear, but oh, but oh I fear, should Philomon once take thy Injur'd part, I soon should cast the Idol down and offer him my heart.
Mr. D. Purcel. CEase mighty Love to tear a Heart that owns thy Power Divine, thou needs no Quiver nor no Dart to make the Conquest thine; for who a—lass thy Deities durst despise, when thou hast weapons suc—h as Celia's Eyes. Now Celia you my Heart have won, Oh be not too severe, Do not your humble Slave disown, Nor kill him with Dispair; Be not unjust to scorn my Vestal Fire, Which you and none but you cou'd ere Expire.
Mr. Moses Snow. MY Wan—der—er at at last re—Xtreats to his forsaken Breast, having discover'd all the Cheats, that drew him from his rest thought himself safe in this a—bode, when Cloe prov'd it vain, by ways as in—no—cent as odd, she tempts him or a—gain. With untaught Eyes, unpractic'd Art, She does her Slave subdue: Scorns meanly to beguile a Heart, But clams it as her due. Let Tyrants then her Conquest boast, And keep their few in awe: She governs all and ever must, Who reigns by Nature Law.
Mr. Rich. Brown. ILe languish no more at the glance of your Eye; can view you all o're and ne're fetch a deep sigh: No more shall your voice Siren—like charm my Heart; in vain you may sigh, use in vain all your Art: No Madam I'm free, when I'm Captive a—gain, let me unpity'd feel a—gen my old pain. I'le Libertine turn, use all things in Common, No more than one Dish be bound to one Woman, Yet I still love the Sex but my Bottle before 'em, I'le use 'em sometimes but I'le never Adore 'em, Go Madam be wise when a Woodcocks ith noose, Be sure hold him fast least like me he get loose.
A 2 Voc. FArewel all the Arts of Love Fancy to Witch first did move, and at the last did empty prove, the Goddess which you did a—dore enjoy'd con—ti—nues to be so no more, but turns to a Woman as before, the Goddess which you did adore enjoy'd con—ti—nues to be so no more, but turns to Wo—man as be—fore. Why then all this thought of care, Hopes and fears and oft dispair, All to possess your self that's fair, An easy Beauty's every best, Tho she lodg not in your Brest, You soon shall find a place of rest, An easie Beauty's, &c.
A 2 Voc. Mr. Sam. Ackroyd. WHen the Gods at a Banquet did Revel above, did When the Gods at a Banquet did Revel, did Revel above and Gannimed fill'd out a Bumper to Jove, A—pollo and Bacchus their Revel above and Gannimed fill'd out a Bumper to Jove, A—pollo and Bacchus their Joy to Inspire, the Muses and Graces call'd in to the Quuire: Divine was the Joy to Inspire, the Muses and Graces call'd in to the Quire: Divine was the Musick, their Pleasure extream, and Beauty and Loyalty still was the Theam, to Musick, their Pleasure extream, and Beauty and Loyalty still was the Theam, to Jove and Juno's Health full Bowls were Crown'd, and to th'Immortal, and to th'im∣mortall Jove and Juno's Health full Bowls were Crown'd, and to th'immortall
Powers went round who from their Thrones did their bright Goblets throw in Frollick Pow'rs, Pow'rs went round from their Thrones, from their Thrones did their bright Goblets throw in Frollick down upon the world, upon the world below: then to express how Loyal down upon the world, upon the world, the world below: then to express how Loyal we'll appear, tho' we're no Gods we'll i—mi—tate 'em near, and drink full we'll appear, tho' we're no Gods we'll i—mi—tate 'em near, and Bowls, and drink full Bowls to Jove and Juno here. Caesar and drink full Bowls, and drink full Bowls to Jove and Juno here. Caesar and Gloria—na let it be the brightest Queen on Earth, the greatest Monarch he Gloria—na let it be the brightest Queen on Earth, and greatest Monarch he
and if the Gods deny to pledge the same, we'll throw our empty Glasses up to them. Mighty and if the Gods deny to pledge the same, we'll throw our empty Glasses up to them. James and Apollo upon us does smile, upon us does smile, the God of this Year and the Mighty James & Apollo upon us, upon us does smile, the God of this Year and the King of this Isle, all feuds we will shun that e—nervate his sway, since all are his King of this Isle, all feuds we will shun that e—nervate his sway, since all are his Subjects we'll joyntly o—bey: both English and Irish in this shall a—gree, who Subjects we'll joyntly o—bey: both English and Irish in this shall a—gree, who serve the King best the best Nation shall be. serve the King best the best Nation shall be.
WHen first I sought my Jenny's Love she dash'd my hopes with cold disdain, no Tears the Cruel Lass could move to hear my Vows or ease my pain, She'd chide and frown and call me Loon and bid me from her sight be gone, with scorn my Presents She'd return, and all my Amorous Letters burn. But now my Constancy She's found, The lovely fair relenting Maid With kind consent my hopes has Crown'd, And all my suffrings over paid; She'll kiss and toy And call me Joy, In Love the livelong day imploy, She'll look and smile on me alone, And only grieve she e're did frown.
Mr. Fran. Forcer. These full two hours now have I gazing been, what Comfort by it can I gain, to look on Heav'n with mighty gulph be—tween was the great Miser's greatest pain: so near was he to Heav'ns delight as with the blest converse he might, yet could not get one drop of Water by't. Ah wretch I seem to touch her now: but oh, but oh, what boundless spaces does us part! fortune and
Friends & all Earths emty show my lowness and her high desert, but those might Conquerable prove nothing does me so far remove as the hard Souls Aversion of my Love; so Travellers that lose their way by night when from afar they came to espy th'uncertain glimmerings of a tapers light, like flatt'ring hopes and think it night, till wearied with the fruitless pain they sit them down and weep in vain, and there in darkness and dispair re—main.
Mr. Ric. Brown. BRing back my Comforts and re—turn for well you know that I, in such a vig'rous passion burn, that missing you I die. slow Re—turn return in—sult no more, re—turn return and me re—store to those slow sequester'd Joys, to those sequester'd Joys I had be—fore. Absence in most, that quenches Love, And cool their warm desire, The Ardour of my Heart improve, And makes the flame aspire. The Maxim therefore I deny, And term it, tho a Tyrany, A Nurse to purest Faith and Constancy.
Mr. Tho. Tedway. The Gods are not more blest then he who fixing his glad Eyes on thee does ever hear and ev'—ry long Charm'd with the Mu—sick, Charm'd with the Mu—sick of thy Tongue that sees with more then hu—mane Grace sweet smiles A—dorn A—minta's Face. But when to pity you incline, And so become much more Devine, What mortal can support the Joy The mighty blessing does destroy, Ah! wou'd you have your Damon live, Your Favours less profusely give.
A 2 Voc. Mr. Tho. Tedway. SEE, see, see the lovely Maid and Paradise and See, see, see, see, see the lovely Maid and Para∣dise Pa—ra—dise in Bed display'd, like blushing Morn, like blushing Morn she in Bed in Bed display'd, like blushing Morn, like blushing Morn she lyes, and lyes and sings the tryumphs, sings the try—umph of her Eyes. The wanton Cupids sings the tryumphs of her Eyes, and sings the tryumph of her Eyes. The wanton Cupids play and sport their—lit—tle Hearts away, whilst all a round them throng. To play and sport their little Hearts away whilst all a round them throng, to hear the Musick hear the Musick of her Tongne, to hear the Musick, hear the Musick of her Tongue. of her Tongue, to hear the Musick of her Tongue, to hear the Musick of her Tongue.
SIlvia be no lon—ger kind, the kind be—tray their pow'r still to the proud and false inclin'd our Ty—rants we A—dore, fru—ition which shou'd make our bliss di—stroys, and kindness which shou'd most in—gage us cloys. Be cruel and secure your Reign, Myrtilla's Pride and Scorn, Her haughty looks and fierce disdain, Show her for Empire born; Oh curst disease of our fantastick mind, The Cruel we pursue and fly the Kind.
Mr. Tho. Tedway. CYnthia 'tis own'd that I too long on Woman-kind did rail, to think that a re—can—ting Song shou'd after all prevail, but had you then but markt my Eyes, or cou'd have vew'd my heart you'd seen thro'all that thin dis∣guise they all—ways took your part, they all—ways took your part.
HOW long devine Ce—lin—da shall I mourn how long disclose my sorrow all in vain yet find not one soft look or kind return no sign of ease to sooth my growing pain. Ah Cruel, ah Cru—el, Cru—el Charming fair, or cure my love or my dis—pair, or cure my love or my dis—pair. All night the thoughts of you forbids my rest, Nor can the noisie business of the day Divert the constant trouble of my brest, Or the tormenting Passions there allay; Ah cruel charming Maid, When shall this mighty debt of Love be paid.
PHillis I must needs confess that I am fic—kle grown of late, and now to Celia's Charms Ad—dress that love which yours did first create. Not that I think your Beauty less then hers who does my Heart possess, but tis the will of fate, tis the will of fate, but tis the will of fate, tho you may
think the practice strange I'le Ju—sti—fie the roring flame, nor fear the Am'rous Gods revenge, since I still love tho not the same, for tho my heart does hourly range he looses nothing by the change, since I still play his game, I still play his game, since I still play his game.
SHE, She, alass, She, a-lass, whom all admir'd is dead, She a—lass whom all admir'd is dead, a—lass She's dead, and with her all that's brisk or gay is fled, She a—lass, She a—lass, whom all admir'd is dead, no Rat—ling Coaches now run up and down, nor Am'—rous Sparks amuse the wondring Town all pen—sive in their Chambers sit and mourn and mourn the fair the sweet Cor—rin—na's dead & gone, She a—lass, She a—lass whom all admir'd is dead.
A Song in Bellamira, or, the Mistress. Set by Mr. Tho. Shndwell. THyrsis un—just—ly you com—plain, and tax my tender heart, with want of pity for your pain, or sence of your dissert. By secret and misterious Springs alass our passions move, we Women are fan-tastick things that like be—fore we love. You may be handsome and have Wit, Be secret and well bred, The Parson Love must to us fit, He onely can succeed. Some die and yet are ne're believ'd, Others we trust too soon, Helping our selves to be deceiv'd, And proud to be undone.
PHillis what ever love or you for my dis—pairing shall or—dain, my suff'ring Heart shall still be true, and with the Tor—ments and with the Tor—ments that en—sue may break but ne're com—plain. My grief when Phil—lis Is un—kind no rude re—sent—ments shall be—tray tis calm as Vows for Hea—ven de—sign'd, and gentle as the Southern Winds that
fans the blooming May. No slights shall make my pas—sion less, my Love shall me—rit tho it starve for as possession we confess the highest degree of happiness the next is to de—serve. A Catch for 3 Voc. Mr. Henry Purcel. WHen V and I to—gether meet, we make up 6 in House or Street, yet I and V may meet once more, and then we 2 can make but 4, but when that V from I am gone, alass poor I can make but one.
Dr. John COuld softning melting looks pre—vail, Phillis might ever hope success, her beauties pow'r wou'd not fail, did not her cheapness make it less, but such advances, but such advances she does make, who lov'd her once must her for∣sake, but such advances she does make, who lov'd her once must her for—sake. She who's too eagerly enclin'd To catch at Love lets go her fame, And 'tis beneath a generous mind To catch ignoble yeilding game. But in resistance, but in resistance such force lies, It Charms beyond the brightest Eyes.
