W253 12635776 64860
Preparation FOR DEATH. Being A Letter sent to a Young Gen∣tlewoman in France, in a dangerous Distemper, of which She died. Numb. xxiii. 10.Let me die the death of the righ∣teous, and let my latter end be like his. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown, in S. Paul's Church-Yard. 1687.
Advertisement. COuld either my desires, or endeavours have prevailed for the suppressing of the following Letter, it had been buri∣ed in the same
Grave with her to whom it was ad∣dress'd. But be∣ing fallen into the Hands of her Re∣lations after her Death, many Co∣pies were disper∣sed before my re∣turn into England, and thereby a ne∣cessity put upon
me either to pub∣lish it my self, or to have the dis∣satisfaction of see∣ing others do it, for me. This being the true account of the Edition of this short Treatise, I shall need the less
Apology, if there seem nothing in it for which it should be exposed to a publick view. It was writ as a pri∣vate Letter, to a person of more Piety, than Cu∣riosity; and with∣out any prospect; nay I may add
more, upon an assurance that it should never come to any ones sight but her own. And therefore it ought not to be won∣der'd if it appear with all the plain∣ness and freedom, which an Episto∣lary Stile and Cha∣racter
required. For the rest, as I can sincerely pro∣fess that it was no principle of vani∣ty that led me first to write it, so much less does any such Motive induce me now to publish it. It was to serve a greater
and better end, I both then did, and now do design it: And if those who shall hereafter per∣use it, do it but with the same pi∣ety that she did for whom it was composed, I am perswaded neither they nor I shall
have any cause to repent us of our Labour.
Paris April 25. S. N. 1684. Madam▪ THE Address I here make you, how meanly so∣ever I have performed it; is yet so suitable to your circumstances, and so well befits▪ my character;
that I make no doubt but you will accept it with the same charity that I have designed it. And therefore instead of making Apologies for my undertaking, I will rather send it to you with my hearty Prayers, that those few directions I have here put together, may be as truly useful to you, as I do assure you they were really by me inten∣ded for your service.
You are not, Ma∣dam, to expect in this short draught any thing but what you have often already heard, and, I perswade my self, have long practised. Reli∣gion is none of those things that change with the Fashion, and accommodate them∣selves to the mode: And though we have of late met with some who
have endeavoured upon the foundations of Chri∣stianity to erect a new Scheme of Court-Di∣vinity, by making the way to Heaven both broader and smoother than it is: yet both the projectors and those that follow them will sadly find themselves mistaken in the end; when the one shall perish for betray∣ing their Master, and the others be condemn'd
for not rejecting their In∣novations. But, Madam, if you find nothing new in the matter, I am sure much less will you have a∣ny thing in the Stile and Method, but what is plain and easie. In such discourses as these, he seems to me to speak most properly, that ex∣presses himself most clear∣ly. Some things indeed I
should have added; others have changed, and have dress'd the whole with greater care; but I had little time, and much o∣ther business, which I am sure you know to be more than pretence. The rules yet I am con∣fident are sound and use∣ful, and may as they are, serve your devotion; But if your abundance of better helps frustrate that design, yet at least
you will be pleased to esteem it an undoubted testimony of that sinceri∣ty with which I am, Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, W. W.
INTRODUCTION. THERE is nothing hath proved more fatal to that due Prepara∣tion we ought to make for another life, than our unhappy mistake of the nature of this. We are brought into the World, Children, Ignorant▪ and Impotent; we grow up in vanity and folly; and when we come to be Men, we are but very little more prudent and
more considerate. The whole of our Reflections terminates in this, what course we are to take to pass our time; some to get, others to spend their Estates; and when Interest or Inclination, Friends or Fortune have determined the choice, we are then entred in, and our remaining busi∣ness is to pursue this end to the best advantage, for our present ease and our future establishment. Thus are our thoughts and our desires wholly tied to this World; we
vainly project a settle∣ment in it, nor look we any farther than the lit∣tle Interests and Employ∣ments thereof engage us. 2. I AM sure, Madam, I need not say much to convince you, who have had so many opportuni∣ties to settle this Reflecti∣on upon your own Expe∣rience, and who, I am perswaded, have so pro∣fitably employ'd them, that this is the just cha∣racter of the far greater part of Mankind: And
for the unhappy influ∣ence of it to the Decay of Christianity, I think it is not to be doubted that 'tis the tying of our affecti∣ons so much to this World, that above any thing indisposes us to think of another. Whilest we set up our Hopes and our Establishment here, we either altogether for∣get, or at least do not so vigorously consider, That God has provided another and better place for us, whither we shall in a very little time be transferred by him, and
for which therefore the great affair of our whole lives now should be to provide. 3. IS IT possible to be imagined that we should see such num∣bers engage their lives and Labours, some to heap together A little dirt that shall bury them in the end; Others to gain an Honour, that at best can be celebrated but by an inconsiderable part of the World, and is envied and calumniated by more than 'tis truly
given; Most to pursue the pleasures (as they call them) of their Na∣tures; which begin in sin, are carried on with Danger, and end in bit∣terness; and scarce one that troubles himself a∣bout the Blessings of Hea∣ven, or at least lives as if he did so; would Men seriously perswade them∣selves that they have here no abiding place, no City to dwell in: but are on∣ly in their passage to the heavenly Jerusalem, their City which is above, where alone true happi∣ness
is to be found, and upon which therefore their thoughts and their endeavours ought chiefly to be employed. 4. CAN we behold the vices and debaucheries of many; the carelessness and irreligion of almost all; and believe that the Christian World is seri∣ously convinced of those great truths their Religi∣on teaches them of A fu∣ture life, and A vast Eter∣nity of rewards and pu∣nishments, according as we observe or neglect the
Duties it commands in This? 5. How shall we be∣lieve that those Men are perswaded of the true business of this Life, that 'tis the time of tryal, that God has thrown us into this World as into A Cir∣cle, to exercise our selves in it, and receive the Crown if we come off with Victory, who so shame∣fully decline the Combat; and are so far from ob∣taining the victory, that we are scarcely to be brought but even to do
any thing towards it. 6. IN a word; were it possible that the thoughts of Eternity, but especially the near ap∣proaches of it, by a ma∣ture age, a crasy con∣stitution, or a violent sickness, should amaze so many as we find it does, make them so un∣willing to go to Christ, and receive the Reward of their Labours; had they ever truly conside∣red all these things; and not rather with old Sime∣on sing their Nunc dimit∣tis,
with comfort and assurance; and cry out with S. Paul,Luk. 2. 29. Phil. 1. 21. To me to live is Christ,Phil. 1. 21. 23. and to dye is gain; and again, v. 23. I have a desire to depart and to be with Christ. 7. WERE I now, Ma∣dam, to deal with any other than your self, these and the like considerati∣ons would engage me, before I entred on the following prescriptions,
to dispose your mind to a reception of them, by shewing you the great interest we have in Eter∣nity; That our Lives are uncertain, to be sure can∣not be long here, and that therefore we ought to hasten all we can, be∣fore it be too late, to examine our Souls, and provide for futurity. That all the little Ob∣jects we now pursue, for which our ease, our con∣science, nay our very Re∣ligion it self is sacri∣ficed by us, are but vani∣ties and trifles, neither
worthy in themselves, nor satisfying in their enjoyment; But, Madam, your vertue, and your prudence, make all such preparations unnecessary formalities, and instead of opening the way to the following Address by such insinuations, I ought rather to apologize for my indiscretion in the whole undertaking, which your piety prevents, and which your dayly▪ practice shews you already to un∣derstand beyond any thing I am able to offer for your assistance.
8. NEVERTHELESS since it has pleased God to an excellent natural disposition to add yet o∣ther Obligations, and by the troubles of this Life to draw you to himself; to shew you worthy of his favour, and I trust more highly to reward you in the next; be plea∣sed to give me leave this way to congratulate with you those Evils, which so many are wont to lament, and which no one more sincerely wishes (if it please God) to see you free from,
than my self; and as you have done me the honour to command my atten∣dance whilst you were with us here, pardon me if I intrude upon your meditations a few of my most serious Re∣flections, to supply my ab∣sence; and be a testi∣mony of that real respect wherewith I honour you now in your retire∣ment.
CHAP. I. Of Contentedness under your Condition. THO' I am infi∣nitely distant from that excellent perfection which made the Primi∣tive Christians glory in their tribulations, and St. Paul rejoice in that sting in the flesh which God had given him as a pecu∣liar Blessing from above; yet is it really some satis∣faction
to me, that I am not now wholly liable to that Censure, which is so usually made on these occasions, that 'tis easie for any Man when he is well to give advice to them that are not. It hath pleased God, for the rashness per∣haps of my usual dis∣course, to make it at pre∣sent very uneasy for me to speak at all. I can∣not but acknowledge his Mercy in the Admoni∣tion, and if it please him altogether to silence me, so, That I shall not only, as now, speak with diffi∣culty,
but wholly▪ be disabled to open my mouth, to any articulate utterance, yet I hope he will give me grace even in my thoughts to praise him; To consider the justice of his proceeding with me, and to implore his pardon of what my sins have justly deser∣ved. 2. IT cannot be de∣ny'd but that this is an exercise of the most diffi∣cult Nature, and the Apostle himself confesses even where he most ex∣horts
us to an acquies∣cence in it,Heb. 12. v. 11. That no cha∣stening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous; Yet considerations there are that are able to alleviate our greatest miseries, and make us, if not come up to the character of those who rejoyce in Tribula∣tions, yet at least satisfy the duty I am now re∣commending, of being patient and contented un∣der our sufferings.
3. AND the first of these both in our pra∣ctice and this Discourse ought to be, To look up to that Hand that in∣flicts them. IT is our great unhap∣piness when any calami∣ties fall upon us, that we are uneasie and dissatisfi∣ed; and our whole bu∣siness and project is, how to remove them, not to consider from whence they come. Sometimes indeed, if the cause be visible, we dis∣course
of it as of a chance or a misfortune, but we stop at the instrument, and never pass on to him that directed it; the second cause we know, but trouble our selves no further to re∣cur to the first: where∣as, would we seriously consider, * that the Pro∣vidence of God orders all the affairs of the World; * that without his assi∣stance we can no more get quit of our Affliction, than but by his permis∣sion we first fell into it; * that this unquietness
therefore is a murmuring against his justice, a re∣bellion against his Provi∣dence, upon whom alone we ought to rely; and whose mercy we should by all imaginable submission implore; We should then acquiesce in his dispen∣sation, till it pleased his goodness to remove our evils; cry out with old Eli,1 Sam. 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good: and as we dayly pray that his will may be done in Earth, so by our submis∣sion shew that we truly desire it.
4. LET us to this add, Secondly; That God delights not to afflict, nor ever willingly grieves the Children of Men. * IT may be we suf∣fer in our calamity the punishment of our sins, and then let us not mur∣mur at that which is the just reward of our de∣servings. * Perhaps God proves us in this life, that he may the more plen∣teously reward us in the next; and how then
shall we repine against his mercy, which makes these light af∣flictions that are but for a moment,2 Cor. 4. 17. work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glo∣ry; To be sure if we make that use of them which he intends, if we repent seriously, submit contentedly, and serve him faithfully, they shall turn to our advantage: tho' the passage be trou∣blesome, yet is it secure, and shall in a little time bring us ease and quiet, and peace at the last.
5. FOR let us not mis∣take the goodness of God, nor imagine that because he smites us, therefore we are forsaken by him, but let us consider rather, Thirdly; That 'tis the very Condition of all his promises, through much Tribulation to bring us to his Kingdom; That blessed place where all evils shall be removed,Revel. 21. 4. and there shall be no more any death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. We have a full account of this, Heb. 12. A place so satisfactory, that I will transcribe only one passage, to engage you to recur your self to the rest; My son despise not thou the chastning of the Lord,v. 5. 6. nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loveth he chastneth, and scourg∣eth every son whom he re∣ceiveth. But, Fourthly; 6. Let us look into the Ages that have gone before us;
LET us consult our own experience in the present; we shall find the observation of our Apostle ever to have been verified, that the best men generally fall under the severest pressures, Our Saviour Christ was our forerunner in this trial, as well as in the reward that accompanies it: He began as we ought to follow after, and for the joy which was set before him endured the cross,Heb. 12. 2. despising the shame. Which of his holy Apo∣stles
escaped this trial; What numbers of the Pri∣mitive Saints were under the perpetual persecution of the most malicious ene∣mies that Hell could raise against them, for many hundred Years. They were stoned, they were sawn as under, were slain with the sword, they wandred up and down in sheeps skins and Goats skins,Heb. 11. 37. being de∣stitute, afflicted, tormen∣ted, and yet were these the Men, of whom the world was not worthy,—38. whom
we ought with comfort to look up unto, and run with pati∣ence the race that is set before us.Heb. 12. 1. 7. THESE considera∣tions, though I have (as I ought) proposed in general terms, yet I am sure, Madam, you will not fail by a particular ap∣plication to bring them home to your own concerns; and for your easier performance I will go on if you please to make yet a reflection or two that may fortifie you in it.
8. IN enquiring into the goods that you have lost, or the evils, you ei∣ther fear or suffer; I shall not trouble you with an Enumeration of that which I know you despise, the flatteries, the courtship, the other va∣nities of the World; The very loss of these is a happiness almost e∣qual to what you un∣dergo for it. And though that Beauty, which yet others, I perswade my self, valued too more highly than your self,
was a Blessing which you owed much to Hea∣ven for; yet the additi∣onal ornaments you have hereby the oppor∣tunity of making to your Soul, will in the end give you a more solid satisfaction, and as much chain to you the affecti∣ons of the good and wise, as the other at∣tracted the eyes of the rest. 9. FOR your present distemper; it is, God be thanked, neither so trou∣blesome for the present,
as to take you off from all satisfaction; nor, I am willing to perswade my self, shall it prove so dangerous in its conse∣quence, as to deprive you of all hope of see∣ing your self again in your former health, on∣ly disciplined and in∣structed, not utterly cut off by sickness. 10. HOWEVER, let us suppose now, as well as fear the worst; Is there any thing parti∣cular in dying young? Do not thousands every
day do it? And have you known none in health and vigour, who have pitied your con∣dition, and behold they are themselves gone be∣fore you, even since you fell into this Di∣stemper: And what is the harm then of this? that you have fairer warning than others, who are unexpectedly cut off, and so have a better opportunity, as well as greater engage∣ments, to cultivate your Soul, and provide for your latter end? To
dye is no pain, to leave this World is only to get quit of a trouble∣some place, where you could never find any ease or quiet, any solid satisfaction and comfort. To go to Heaven is to be transferr'd to that Kingdom you have e∣ver long'd for; to enjoy all the glories of eter∣nity, to become compa∣ny for Saints and Angels, and behold the Blessed presence of God, in whose presence there is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand there
are pleasures for ever∣more. 11. THE truth is, the greatest part of your misfortune is founded on the opinion of the World: we fools esteem these things evils, and this makes others be∣lieve they really are so. But the good Christian who considers them on∣ly as necessary passages to a glorious immortality; that through this dark scene of fansied horror sees a Crown and a Throne, and everlasting blessings
prepared for him; joy∣fully receives his Sum∣mons as he has long impatiently expected it: goes off out of the World as contentedly as the Actor when the Play is ended leaves the Stage. His only con∣cern is, whilst he ap∣pears upon it, so to de∣mean himself, that he may have a Plaudite at last; and then 'tis all one whether his part ended in the Third Act, or continues on to the very last Scene.
12. SUCH, Madam, are your Obligations to this first Duty, and the per∣formance of them will e∣specially engage you to these three things; 1. Never despair ei∣ther of Gods blessings here, or of his reward hereaf∣ter; but go on as you have begun; fulfil your duty as he has com∣manded; embrace his promises with Faith and assurance; and for the rest, leave it in his hands; as in the hands of a most
merciful Saviour, who himself became Man, and suffer'd Death upon the Cross for our sakes, and by that stupendious act of Mercy, has taught us ever to rely in all things upon his Good∣ness. 2. Murmur not at your sickness, for thereby you will sin against God's Providence and Go∣vernment; but submit with peace to what you suffer, and pray for your deliverance. I do not say you should af∣fect
a rude insensibili∣ty: Sighs and Groans and mournful expressi∣ons, this is the sick Mans proper language; David roared for the disquietness of his soul;Ps. 38. 8. our blessed Lord himself in his last and sharpest pang of sorrow, cryed out with a loud voice,Matthew xxvii 46. before he gave up the ghost. There is no∣thing in this but what is innocent; and though too much of it may be∣tray your weakness, yet whilst you keep still a
resignation to God's dis∣posal, it cannot be im∣puted to you for any sin. 3. TAKE heed of that, which is the ge∣neral fault of sick per∣sons, and which a long disorder almost unavoid∣ably brings with it, and that is Peevishness. This will but render you uneasie to your self, and to those about you; it troubles your repose, without doing you a∣ny good; and is equal∣ly to be avoided both
for the folly, and for the sin. 13. I SHALL close this reflection with one neces∣sary remark, which I de∣sire you to apply to all the following; That in speaking thus to you, I am so far from charg∣ing you as guilty in this matter, that I can sincerely say, I believe the exhortation wholly needless, only it was my duty in so impor∣tant a concern to omit nothing that might any way be thought neces∣sary;
and it will be your satisfaction to see how far you are advanced in your duty; and your engagement to pursue that very little, which you may perhaps find to be still wanting.
CHAP. II. That you ought not to be amazed at the fear of Death. THERE is nothing in the world more generally dreaded, and yet less to be feared than Death. Indeed for those unhappy Men, whose hopes terminate in this life, no wonder if the prospect of another seems terrible and amazing.
Hell is a place which the most resolute Soul cannot but tremble to think of, how much more to enter into? But for him who has lived well, and who there∣fore relies on God's mercies for an eternal Salvation, to shew this concern, it betrays ei∣ther much weakness or great doubt, and either his faith, or his hopes, or both, are less firm than they ought to be,
HE therefore that will not fear to dye, must first be careful to live well. 2. THE stroak of death is nothing; Children en∣dure it, and the greatest Cowards find it no pain: But when to this we shall add the certain ap∣prehension of its being the gate to an eternal life, then may we pre∣sume to say, we have wholly conquer'd this King of terrours, and sing the Epinikion of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 15. O death where is thy sting!—v. 55. O grave where is thy victory!—v. 57. Thanks be to God who gi∣veth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly; He must take off his Affections from this world. 3. IT was the reflection of the Son of Sirach Ecclus 4. 1. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a Man that liveth at rest in his possessi∣ons, to the Man that hath
nothing to vex him, but hath prosperity in all things. Whilst we please our selves with the vani∣ties we enjoy here, we cannot expect but that it must needs be a trouble to us to be divorced from them: But let us only change the scene; instead of these earthly, tran∣sient goods; let us raise our Souls to the Heavenly and Eternal: then shall we begin to think the time long, that we are divorced from them, and wish for that end, we before feared. Tully tells
us that Cleombrotus was so taken with this spe∣culation, that having on∣ly read in Plato the con∣jectures of that great Man concerning the state of the Soul after death, he had not patience to tarry the tedious course of nature, but by a vio∣lent death cut the thread himself, that he might immediately enjoy what he so infinitely desired. 4. NOR may we forti∣fy our selves much less a∣gainst the fear of death, Thirdly,
From the Considera∣tion of those evils it frees us from, than of that happiness it transfers us to. When the Great Em∣peror of Persia wept over his Army upon this Con∣sideration, that within the revolution of a single Age, not a Man of all that innumerable conflu∣ence would be left alive; Artabanus standing by, improved his meditation; by adding, that yet all of them should meet
with so many and great evils, that every one should wish himself dead long before that. It is the true character of our lives which Job once gave.Job 14. 1. Man that is born of a Woman hath but a short time to live, and is full of trouble. It is the great blessing of Heaven that as our lives are very miserable, so are they ve∣ry short too, and what we usually complain of as our misfortune, we ought rather to congra∣tulate as our happiness.
Had David died a little sooner, How much trou∣ble had he escaped which now he endured, in the rebellion and death of his own Son, and all the mi∣series of a Civil War that was raised against him. Let any Man consult his own experience, and say, how many sorrows he had miss'd, had God called him to his rest but a few years before; and there∣fore whether the promise he has made to deliver the just from the evils to come, ought not to be made our dayly prayer for its ac∣complishment,
rather than fill our Souls with terror at the apprehen∣sion. But fourthly: Death do's not only free us from misery, but sin too. 5. THE life of a Chri∣stian is a continual war∣fare, full of dangerous conflicts and doubtful consequences: Our lusts sollicit us, the World encourages, the Devil tempts us; we fall often, and are never secure.
But Death frees us from all danger, sets us safely on Shore in our long-ex∣pected Canaan, where there are no temptations, no dangers, no possibility of falling; but eternal purity, and immortal joys secure our happiness for evermore. 6. THERE is yet an advice which may use∣fully be added here, and it is this, That since the time of our dying is uncertain, we should every day ex∣pect
what every hour may bring to us: IT is our great un∣happiness in this matter that though we live ne∣ver so many years, we are still surprized. We put the evil day far from us, and then it catches us at unawares, and we tremble at the prospect. But let us stand on our guard, let us live like those who expect to dye, and then we shall find these ter∣rors very much lessen, and that we fear'd
Death only because we were unacquainted with it. Philip King of Ma∣cedon had a Page con∣stantly attending in his Chamber to tell him e∣very morning as soon as he awaked, Remem∣ber, O King, that thou art mortal. 7. BUT to quit you wholly of this fear, and that▪ I may close this point too with something particular, give me leave, Madam, to desire you, instead of a thousand arguments, to recur only
to your own experience; you have already lookt death in the face, you are acquainted with it, what have you found so terrible in it as to disturb the repose of a good Christian, i.e. of such a one as your self. I cannot without satis∣faction remember the calm, the quiet, the peace you were then in; when every hour seem∣ed to tell you 'twas your last. Death is an enemy you have already met, and already con∣quer'd; you have pull'd
out his sting, by the preparation you have made for it, and you know he has nothing now remaining that can injure or affright you. Only maintain your con∣quest, by securing your innocence; and working out your Salvation, and then you may with con∣fidence undervalue that which so much terrifies the world, and which yet all, even those who the most dread it, must in a little time meet whether they will or no.
CHAP. III. That you ought to be careful to provide for another World. THIS is the great duty of our lives, and ought to be the chief business of us all every day of them. No Man knows what the next hour may bring forth, and to put our Salvation, and the hopes of eternity to so dange∣rous
a hazard as we do, when we procrastinate (though never so lit∣tle) our working of it out with fear and trem∣bling, is to shew either a very unwarrantable presumption upon God's goodness, or a very light esteem of our own Souls. 2. OUR lives depend on so many curious parts and organs, so many dis∣eases assail them every moment, so many ac∣cidents may take them from us, that we can
never say the next mi∣nute is our own; and that he therefore who neglects his salvati∣on to day, may with∣out danger put it off to to morrows conside∣ration. God has told us that his Spirit shall not alway strive with Man, but as he offers to every one a space to repent, so there is a time too (if we omit that op∣portunity) when there shall be no longer any space for it.
AND how can any of us tell that this hour is not the last wherein God will give us his grace for so great a work; so that though we should live to see the next, yet that then our sentence shall not be found already pro∣nounced, and we shall not be able to repent, though we never so much desire it. 3. SUCH obligations therefore have we all immediately to consider
our ways,Psal. 119. 55. and turn our feet to God's testimonies: But, Madam, it has pleased his great goodness to lay more than ordinary ties upon you, to do this: He has taken you off, by a peculiar instance of his Mercy, from the vani∣ties and tempations of the World: He has disabled you from falling into many sins; and calls up∣on you to watch against the rest; He has brought you to an early know∣ledge of your self, and of him, at an age when
most others are the ser∣vants of sin, and creatures of vanity. He has given you op∣portunity from the wri∣tings and conversation of the best Men, to un∣derstand your duty, your danger, and your interest: And, Madam, what you ought above all things to bless him for, he has given you a heart too, to receive in∣struction, and that is desirous of his glory; and though after so ma∣ny better means as you have had of informing
your self how to pro∣ceed in this important business; after the know∣ledge you have attain'd, and the progress you have made, there is lit∣tle need for me to add any thing on this sub∣ject; yet I know I can∣not better satisfie your piety, or discharge my own duty, than by lay∣ing before you, in a short view, a prospect of your labours, through which you have so long been travelling, and are now so nearly come, to ever∣lasting life.
4. AT the first Cre∣ation, when God crea∣ted Man upon the Earth, he planted in him a Law teaching him his whole Duty, he gave him besides, a positive Law not to eat of the fruit of the tree of Knowledge;Gen. 2. 17. and to perform this, he added a perfect strength and ability whereby he might for ever have lived without the least sin; had Adam done this, his perfecti∣on (the Knowledge and
Ability God created in him) had still conti∣nued, and after a cer∣tain period of years, which God should have determined, he had been rewarded with an as∣sumption to eternal fe∣licity. 5. THIS is that which is usually called THE FIRST COVE∣NANT, which A∣dam fatally breaking by his disobedience, soon forfeited; and came short of that Glory which God had prepared for
him: yet it pleased the Lord to enter into a SECOND with him, the tenour of which was, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Ser∣pent's head:Gen. 3. 15. i. e. That Christ taking our nature upon him, and so becom∣ing the seed of the Woman, should perform that Co∣venant of unsinning obedi∣ence which Adam broke, and yet being fault∣less, undergo a shame∣ful, and ignominious death for him and his Posterity; and so bruise
the Serpent's head; i. e. de∣liver us from the power of the Devil, who by this transgression had got the dominion over us. 6. AND this is that Co∣venant we now live un∣der, the Promises of which are * pardon of sins through the blood of Christ; * strength and grace to perform the con∣ditions, * and eternal glory to reward our la∣bours; This is what God on his part has de∣clared to us; for the re∣quisites on ours, what
we must do to obtain these blessings, that is the great business of us all to know, and the peculiar design of this place briefly to consider. 7. WHERE, first, I must lay down this for your encouragement, that we are no longer now tied to the heavy yoke of a perfect, unsinning Obe∣dience; not to have com∣mitted any deliberate sin, nay or even to have per∣sisted in a habit and course of it; but it is, * a sincere endeavour to perform
whatsoever God enables us; * an unfeigned Obedi∣ence to the whole Gospel of Christ: and * a hearty bewailing of our own in∣firmities, as often as we come short of it; with * a real▪ desire, and * true endeavour of doing better for the future. 8. To enter on a mi∣nute consideration of this would engage me to lay before you a Summary of the whole Gospel of Christ: But, Madam, this were to exceed the limits of my design, & you have
abundant assistances for this Knowledge, in those excellent books which you have chosen for the companions of your Tra∣vels. Only because cer∣tain it is that the very best of us come short of our duty, and stand in need of God's pardon, and forgiveness; I will briefly lay before you the method you are to take to obtain this, in the particular consideration of those two great duties of Faith and Repentance.
Sect. I. Of Faith. TTHERE is scarce any duty which ha's been so obscured in the writings of learned Men as this. I will not enter here into any of their disputes, but briefly say, what I think fit for your practice and per∣formance of it. 2. FAITH then is an assenting to, or believing
* the whole word of God, but especially of his Gospel, and of the * Commands & * Threats and * Promises therein contained. This is the nature of that Faith which is required of us, and it is then per∣fect when it affords to every one of these that assent which is proporti∣oned to it, viz. 1. A firm assent to whatever the Gospel has revealed: 2. an obediential submission to the Commands: 3. An humble fear and awe of the Threats: and 4. a fiducial relyance on the promises of it.
3. To have the first of these you must in gene∣ral firmly believe, that whatever God hath said, is infallibly true; and though in particular, there be many revelati∣ons which you cannot it may be understand the possibility of; as that God became Man, was born of a Mother still remaining a Virgin; that he suffered and died, and yet lives for ever; yet must you un∣doubtedly conclude, that since he has plainly told you these things are so,
you ought firmly to be∣lieve him, seem they ne∣ver so repugnant other∣wise to your apprehen∣sion. 4. To have the se∣cond, you must in gene∣ral assent to God's com∣mands, that they are most fitting, just, and righte∣ous; and that all men therefore ought diligent∣ly to fulfill them; and in particular you must resolve that by the assi∣stance of Heaven you your self will.
5. FOR the third you must believe stedfastly that these threats shall certainly, as most justly they ought, be executed upon all those impenitent Sinners against whom they are denounced, and that except you take care to work out your Re∣conciliation, and get out of the number of these unhappy creatures, you shall certainly find your part in them. 6. FOR the last you are infallibly to believe
what God has promised; especially that he will give pardon of sin, and everlasting salvation to all humble and repenting sin∣ners; and for what re∣fers to your own particu∣lar, you are confidently to rely upon his word, that if you perform your part, Christ will never fail in his; and that there∣fore you ought to fulfill those duties, which he commands, and to which alone this promise of Re∣ward is given.
7. IT is a question which my little experi∣ence lets me know do's oftentimes trouble very good Men, that certainly their faith in this last in∣stance is not right, because they still find it accom∣panied with fears and doubts of their own Sal∣vation. But, Madam, you must consider that the faith which God requires in this matter is only this, That he will certainly re∣ward all those that believe in him, and obey his Com∣mandments; This we are
undoubtedly to assent to; but now for the particu∣lar application of this Faith to our selves, that deserves no more of our assent, nor can indeed warrantably have it, than what is founded on the serious consideration of our own performances. Now though our consci∣ence bearing witness to our sincerity, may give us great cause to hope we are in a State of Salvati∣on, yet is it no part of any man's Faith undoubtedly to believe it; Nay rather some degree of fear and
trembling mixt with it may be a good means to secure us in our duty; whilst a confident depen∣dance is very often ill grounded, and may cre∣ate such a negligence as will certainly ruine us. 8. LET your endeavour therefore be to fulfill God's commands, to re∣pent as often as you fail of it, and to hope for pardon and acceptance of him. Infinite reason you have for all this; and this will be sufficient for your present comfort,
and for your future ac∣ceptance. But if still, ei∣ther * the greatness of the danger, or * glory of the reward; * either your desires of becoming better, * or a true and humble sense of your own unworthiness (which is almost the perpetual case of the best persons) keep your Soul under an awe and a concern, and will not suffer you to rise up to that confidence, which some Men, I fear, un∣warrantably themselves pretend to, I am sure un∣warrantably require of
others; Assure your self, that whilst you firmly ac∣quiesce in the general be∣lief, That God will re∣ward all them that love him, and doubt of your self only because you fear whether you do this so well as you ought; this doubting shall prepare you to receive the re∣ward of your Humility, but never bring you in danger of any punish∣ment for your infidelity.
Sect. II. Of Repentance. REPENTANCE is usually defined to be a change of mind, an absolute entire conversion of our Souls from sin to God. It is not a thing to be done at certain times, as when we give an Alms, we exercise a particular act of charity; but 'tis a state of life, and consists in a continual sincere practice of all those
duties which God has re∣quired, and a hearty sor∣row, confession, and re∣solution of better obedi∣ence, as often as we vio∣late any of his com∣mands. 2. THE passage to it is difficult and uneasie; It contains many steps which the habitual sinner will find it hard to over∣pass. I shall here consi∣der only four of the more principal, and which are ever found in that Chri∣stian who truly lives in a State of it.
3. THE first is, To have a true sense of sin, of its Odiousness, and of its danger. i.e. YOU must firm∣ly be convinced that eve∣ry sin you commit, sets you at enmity with Heaven, and will (if not forsaken) render you un∣capable of it: That to persevere in any evil course, is the way to make you unhappy in this Life, and shall cer∣tainly throw you into everlasting torments in
the next: Of all this you must seriously perswade your self, and that not lightly and in general, deceiving your own Soul; but bringing it home to your particular concern in it; affecting your mind, and engaging your utmost endeavours to avoid that evil, which is thus odious to God, and thus dangerous to your Everlasting Salvation. THE second step to this Duty, is, To have a hearty sorrow and contri∣tion for your sin.
4. AND this you must endeavour after, not by being frighted and terri∣fied, and so upon that ac∣count troubled, as often as you reflect on those infinite evils your sins are like to bring upon you. There is no Man living so wicked, but would do the same; But, Madam, you must really sorrow that you have ever sinn'd; That you have provoked so loving and merciful a Father; That you have disobey'd so gracious a Redeemer, and
all to gratify your passi∣ons in some baser in∣stance, which you ought to abhor upon these grounds alone, though there were no punish∣ment awaiting your transgressions. 5. NOR must this sorrow and contrition be only for the grosser evils of our unregenerate estate, but even when we live best we must repeat it as often as we trans∣gress the divine com∣mand; nay we should em∣ploy it too, even upon the
weaknesses, the frailties, the pollutions of our na∣tures: our very proneness and inclination to sin: for however these (uncon∣sented to) are no actual transgressions; yet are they matter of sorrow and grief to every true Christian, and therefore ought to be part of his humiliation also. THE third preparatory to this Duty, is, Con∣fession. 6. AND this so neces∣sary to our pardon, that
we have no promise of any forgiveness without it: To fulfill this you must not satisfy your self to ac∣knowledge to God Al∣mighty in general, That you are a sinner; but you must carefully remark, and particularly enume∣rate also, at least the se∣veral kinds of sin whereof you know your self guil∣ty: You must shew your sense of them by aggra∣vating them with all the unhappy circumstances, and heightning accidents of them; and for the rest, you must comprise
your unknown and les∣ser sins under some such general confession as that of the holy David, Who can tell how oft he offendeth?Psal. 19. 12. O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. 7. YOU will, Ma∣dam, doubtless expect that I should here add somewhat of another sort of Confession, which I have sometimes had the honour to discourse with you about; I then told you that unless some Accident rendred
it so, I did not esteem it absolutely necessary. The expediency of it, I must confess, I ever much approved, and have often wish'd o∣thers would do so too; and the reasons I have at large given you may be summed up into these: 1. That St. James has advised us to con∣fess our faults one to an∣other, Chap. 5. 16. and pray one for another. 2. If we have injured ano∣ther, then we ought to go and confess our fault to him, as ever we mean
to obtain the forgive∣ness of God. 3. But if our sin belongs only to him, yet to confess to his Minister is in some sort a fuller satisfaction to his justice; It declares our greater detestation of that offence, for which we are content to commit this violence upon our selves. It gives us this comfort too, that thereby we get the opinion of our Spiritual Guide concer∣ning the state of our Repentance; and his di∣rection and assistance for
the perfecting of it; and if we desire his par∣ticular absolution, we must then make our confession to him be∣fore we can obtain it. What force these mo∣tives may have upon you, I cannot tell; but for the present you are passing into a place where you will have little opportunity to practise it, and should therefore resolve to sup∣ply it, by a more due and careful performance of it to God Almighty.
THE last thing prepa∣ratory to a true Re∣pentance, is, A firm resolution and vow of a new life. 8. THAT you will immediately quit all your Sins, and all the oc∣casions that are wont to lead you into those sins; That you will wholly resign your self up to the guidance of Christ; and perform whatsoe∣ver you know to be his will; and this do truly
and sincerely all the days of your life. 9. AND here, Ma∣dam, behold in short the duties that are required of you: This is what you must do to inherit eternal Life; And if you have (as I make no doubt) already come up thus far, you are then firmly to persevere in it unto the end; If you fulfil this Resoluti∣on, though you * fall sometimes by infirmity; * are betrayed by Igno∣rance, * or surprized
by some sudden, and dayly incurring temptati∣ons; * Nay, though you should be so unhappy as to fall into some greater Act, even of deliberate sin, which you might have avoided, and which you presently re∣tract by confession and amendment, you are ne∣vertheless in a regene∣rate estate, you live the Life of a Christian here, and shall inherit the re∣ward that is promised to him, in a glorious Immortality hereafter.
10. I SHALL close this with my earnest de∣sires, which not any doubts of your goodness, but my real concern for your welfare, ex∣tort from me; that you will seriously consider your own state as to this affair; Flatter not your self, * neither a transient sorrow that you have sinned, * nor a wish that you had not, * neither a faint and general, God be mer∣ciful to me a sinner; * nor an imperfect re∣solution
not to be so a∣ny longer; * not an ob∣serving, for the rest, the whole Law, if you in∣dulge your self but in any one habit of sin; * not praying to God to give you his grace; without your own sin∣cere endeavours of using it; nothing but a steady resolution brought to practice; God's grace used, his commandments obey'd as far as your infirmities will permit, and his pardon begg'd where you have not; This is that which a∣lone
must save your Soul, and carry you on to that glorious Im∣mortality, which I be∣seech him to give you for his Son Jesus Christ's sake.
CHAP. IV. A consideration of some particular duties which I would more espe∣cially recommend to you. I THOUGHT, Madam, here to have en∣ded your trouble, and referr'd my self  what may concern your far∣ther practice, to those excellent and useful
Treatises you have so wisely provided for that purpose; But they speak in general, and though I know the care you take to apply them to your self, yet I cannot but beg leave to add two or three considera∣tions that may more im∣mediately be accommo∣dated to your particu∣lar circumstances. First, That you duely implore the blessings of Heaven by your constant Prayers to God Almighty
I NEED not tell you that you have * many wants to be supplied, * many blessings to re∣ceive, * many sins to be forgiven, and that there is nothing can obtain all these for you but your prayers▪ or were you so all-sufficient as not to need the influences of Providence to support you, yet would sure every day bring to your remembrance slips and infirmities to be con∣fess'd to him, to be sure blessings and mercies to
be gratefully acknow∣ledged, in a perpetual return of praises and thanksgivings to the great Donor. Upon all which accounts there can never be any pretence for your neglect of that duty, which so many continual engage∣ments oblige you to. 2. LET me to this, add the great assistance it will afford you in the performance of all the rest of your duty; whilst thus you have your conversation in
Heaven, all the little goods here below will seem poor and inconsiderable in your sight;Phil. 3. 20. this will strengthen your patience in bearing your calami∣ties, whilst with faith you contemplate the glo∣rious end to which they lead; It will raise in your Soul the greatest care of fulfilling the divine will, lest you lose so excellent a re∣ward; in a word; this exercise will call down the favour of Heaven upon you, either to re∣move
those afflictions you now labour under, from you, or you from them; will bring you peace, and comfort, and satisfaction in this life, and an everlasting peace and repose in the next. 3. IT has been the great discouragement of some Christians in the exercise of this duty, that they do not find these great Benefits of their devotion: That they are told indeed of the mighty influences of prayer: and have read
how that by it Joshua changed the order of nature, and made the Sun stand still in the midst of the Firmament; Elias tied up the Windows of Hea∣ven that it rai∣ned not for three whole years in Is∣rael;Josh. 10. 12. 1 Kings 17. Hezekias added fifteen years to his life;2 Kings 20. 6. The Apo∣stles gave feet to the Lame, Eyes to the Blind; and even life to the Dead; But themselves are so far from working such miracles, that they
cannot so much as ob∣tain the supply of those ordinary wants they very often labour un∣der. 4. BUT, Madam, we must not for all this think either that the Arm of the Lord is shortned, that he can∣not, or his will alter'd that he should not hear us, as well as he did them; indeed for such miraculous effects, we have now no longer need of them, and it would therefore be a
fond presumption in us to expect them; But for the rest there are two considerations which Men would do well to reflect on before they charge God foolishly. 1. WHETHER we do not very often receive the benefit of our pray∣ers, when yet ungrate∣fully we charge Heaven with denying our Peti∣tions. 2. IF our Requests are really deny'd, whe∣ther the fault do's not
ly at our own doors that they are so. 5. FOR the former of these we may very easily be mistaken, and I doubt very often are so: Did we indeed per∣fectly know the state of our own condition, and what was most pro∣per and convenient for us, we might then have some reason to conclude our Prayers were not heard, if our desires were not answered: But now that such is our igno∣rance that though we
are sensible enough of the evils that lie upon us, yet we cannot say either whether they are fit to be removed at all; or when, or by what means; or for what state; we ought to be very wary in our thoughts of God's Pro∣vidence, and not rashly pronounce what we can never be sure of▪ 6. SHOULD you now, for instance, your self, Madam, pray to God for a recovery from this sickness; how rash
would it be to accuse God of not hearing your Prayers, because you found your Disease to continue still? * It may be he sees it has not yet perfectly wrought in you all those good effects he intends; That if you should at this time recover your health, it might occasion your return to the sins and follies of your age. * It may be he intends yet longer to prove your vertue, that so he may afterwards more plente∣ously reward it; * Per∣haps
he punishes your sins by it in this Life, that he may spare you in the next. Now if these or the like are the causes of your af∣fliction, certainly you could not have a great∣er injury done you, than the removing of your distemper: and those Prayers you make for a recovery are to be lookt upon as best heard by God, and best answer'd for you, if they move him to a longer conti∣nuance of your sickness. Again: * Though God
does not answer your requests in the very re∣moval of your distem∣per; it may be yet he shews their efficacy in supporting you with strength and patience to bear it; Infinite are the methods of his Provi∣dence, and impossible it is for us to trace them all, and though we are not able to point out the very mer∣cy which our devotion has obtained, yet this God has promised, and we must therefore firm∣ly believe and rely up∣on
it, That if we ask, we shall, we do, receive. 7. BUT here my o∣ther consideration must come in, St. James, speak∣ing of the ineffectualness of some mens Devotion, tells them, Ye ask, and re∣ceive not, because ye ask amiss;James 4. 3. and that I fear is too often our condition; And there∣fore that you may be able both to know and avoid this, I will beg leave, Madam, to give you only a short Catalogue of what qualifications seem to
me more immediately re∣quisite to render your Devotion prevalent. 1. TAKE heed that the things you desire be such as are fit for God to give, and you to receive; Let not any instances of sin defile your requests; and even in the most in∣nocent matters, rather beg in general the bles∣sings of God which he knows requisite, whe∣ther for your Soul or Bo∣dy, than descend too much to the particulars your self, and prescribe
to him, who so little understand your own wants. Secondly BEFORE you pray, clear your Soul from all those sins which you know displeasing to God Almighty; for till that be done he regards you as his Enemy; and you can∣not therefore expect that he should reward you as his servant. Thirdly PREPARE your Soul with all those necessary Graces that are more immediately requi∣site
to this performance: with Humility and Resig∣nation; with Faith in his power and Hope of his mercy, with Love and Charity towards God and towards your Neigh∣bour; All which will infinitely dispose him to give, and prepare you to receive. Fourthly, WHEN you pray, let it be with at∣tention, with fervency, with perseverance; To which end I should think it better that your pray∣ers were short and fre∣quent,
than over long; which only make them tedious and uneasie to you in your present state, but never the more ac∣ceptable to God; who delights not in mens words, but requires their hearts; and hears the shortest ejaculation, as certainly as the longest prayer. Fifthly, IN a word: Having pray'd, leave the issue contentedly in his hands: Let it satisfy you that you have his promise for your security, and
that if thus you make your requests to him, you shall sooner or later most cer∣tainly find that your labour has not been in vain,1 Cor. 15. 58. in the Lord. A SECOND duty, that I must more particu∣larly recommend to you is Charity: A GRACE That has more promises annext to it than any other moral or theological vertue, St. Paul prefers it even to Faith it self, 1 Cor. 13.
And could we have every other vertue which the Gospel enjoyns in the highest perfection, yet he plainly assures us that without this, they would all avail us nothing. 2. CHARITY taken in its largest extent is no∣thing else but, The sincere Love of God and our Neighbour: The former of these requires not only your highest esteem of him, your desires of go∣ing to him, and filling your self with his good∣ness; but also a sincere
endeavour to please and obey him, to fulfill his commands, and hate all those things that he dis∣likes, and may any way set you at enmity with him. 3. THE latter enga∣ges you to a universal love of all Men, even your very Enemies; to retain no malice nor ha∣tred against any; to be ready to do them all the kindness you are able, by reproving the Vicious, instructing the ignorant, relieving the poor; for
all which, you have the peculiar promise of God for your engagement; and shall receive the par∣don of your sins, and everlasting glory for your Reward. I MUST now hasten to a conclusion, and there∣fore will presume to add only this one caution more, I THIRDLY, that you would take an especial care how you employ your time.
IT is not, Madam, for me to divine what op∣portunities you may have for this, nor can I there∣fore advise you any thing in particular: Only let me beg you to lose no occasion of doing all the good you can; which whatever the issue of your present sickness be, is to be sure your duty, and shall prove your bles∣sing either in this World or another.
2. I NEED not desire you to spend the hours you may have for your friends and your diversion innocently, but if I may presume to speak my thoughts in a matter of no great importance, I should perswade you not only to do this, but even to deny your self somewhat of that full liberty which others do usually allow themselves; the Wise man has told us, that Mirth is not proper in the time of sorrow; since it has pleased God to lay his
inflictions upon you, You ought so far (I had al∣most said in civility to him) to comply with your circumstances, as to be a little more reser∣ved than otherwise were needful, and though not to fly▪ to the other extreme (which, I rather ought to disswade you from) yet to keep in such a tem∣per, as may both speak you sensible, as you ought, of your condition, and yet not discontented at God's dispensations.
3. BUT, Madam, what∣ever your employs be, let no day pass without some time to retire into your self, and either by reading, meditating, or some other pious exercise to feed your zeal, and confirm your devotion. 4. LASTLY, in your most busy occupations, when you are never so much taken up with o∣ther affairs, yet steal now and then a minute to the thoughts of Heaven, send up an Ejaculation to the
God of your Salvation; This is a piece of thrift that by frequent exercise will do you much good, and yet never injure any other business. Augustus Caesar is highly commen∣ded by the ancient Poet, that in the midst of his most troublesome occu∣pations he could still find time to look up to Hea∣ven, and consider the frame, and contemplate the parts and motions of it. How much more should we always be at leisure to reflect on him that framed both
that and us; to whose Providence we owe every minute of our lives, and whom therefore we ought, above all other things, incessantly to praise for his unspeaka∣ble Mercies.
CLOSE. AND now, Madam, that I may close with what I begun, after so long an intrusion upon your Meditations, with these reflections, which I am confident make a great part of your dayly entertainment; The only thing that can render ei∣ther these Papers or their
recommendations accep∣table unto you; that can secure you against sin, and endear Vertue and Religion to your practice, will be to raise your af∣fections above this World, by seriously considering the excellence and cer∣tainty of another life; and how vain and tran∣sient, indeed how trouble∣some and unsatisfying are the highest felicities of this. 2. I HAVE not here time to delineate to you the glories of God's hea∣venly
Kingdom, nor in∣deed could I tell you (if I had) what the hap∣piness of that place is like∣ly to be, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain;When our Bodies shall be freed from every disease; our Souls from every trouble; those shall be chang'd into incorrupti∣ble and immortal sub∣stances, these be enter∣tain'd with the most com∣fortable and ravishing ob∣jects, and both continue
to be thus unspeakably happy throughout all Eternity, without the least danger of either losing or lessening their enjoy∣ments. 3. BLESSED God! How contrary is this to our melancholy and un∣comfortable portion here below? a place, where not a day passes, but we eat our Bread with sorrow and cares; The present troubles us, the future amazes us; and even the past fills us with grief and anguish. I for∣bear
to mention the par∣ticular evils which every Man best knows by his own experience: If we look abroad upon the pre∣sent face of the World, What do we see in the several Kingdoms about us, but Wars and confu∣sion, all things running to ruine, and destruction, to the confounding and devouring of each other. If we consider the Church, that holy Mother of us all, how do her unna∣tural Children rend and tear her sacred bowels by their contentions?
What Schisms, What Heresies, what Profane∣ness is there in it? On∣ly in Sin and Impiety we agree on all sides; here there is neither Jew nor Gentile; but all are uni∣ted in a monstrous con∣federacy against God and our own Souls. 4. IF we contract our view, and confine it to our own sinful nation; It has pleased God to pre∣serve us yet in peace, to see if we will repent and anticipate his Judgments; But alas! his hand is
lifted up to strike, and we do nothing to pre∣vent the blow: and what can we expect but that it should at last fall upon us to our confusi∣on. 5. PARDON me, Madam, if I freely con∣fess to you my fears, that I tremble to think what shall be the issue of so great an Impenitence, as we have now these many years shew'd under all the various methods of God's Providence to redeem us.
6. HE has sent the sword, both of civil Trou∣bles and publick War a∣mongst us, and it has been deeply stain'd in the blood of the best and chiefest of our strength; Our Princes have been forced into Captivity; Our Church been chased into the Wilderness; The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord▪ has been cut off by the vilest of his Subjects, yet have we not return'd, nor sought our God.
7. THE Fire has con∣sumed our dwellings, the Plague destroy'd its Thou∣sands and ten thousands in our Streets, yet behold we are still incorrigible, we go on as before in the ways of our own hearts, and speak peace to our souls even in the midst of all these dangers. 8. GREAT certainly is our sin, and fatal, I fear, shall be the pu∣nishment of it, and what shall we do, (for, Ma∣dam, I must here beg
leave to joyn my self in this reflection) to pre∣vent our part in the com∣mon destruction? Let us take heed that we have no share in their sins, and then by God's mercy we shall have none in the punishment. Let us live as those who at∣tend such trials, and then he will either be pleased to take us from the evil to come, or co∣ver us with his hand in the midst of it: He will to be sure with the dan∣ger make a way for us to escape; and being
past through this short storm, will bring us to that Port where we shall find everlasting Rest, and a consummated felicity; Those blessings, which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor does it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive; but which God has pre∣pared for them that love him: Among which bles∣sed number that you may then be found, as it was the only inten∣tion of these reflections to prepare you, so shall it ever be the hearty
prayer of him who with all imaginable re∣spect and sincerity re∣mains, Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, W. W.
THE CONTENTS. * 1. INtroduction to Pag. 30 That the fatal source of all our evil is, That our af∣fections are tied to this World, and we do not as we ought, consider another. * 2. The Letter it self divided into 4. Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of Contentedness. p. 30. This I. A duty very diffi∣cult. n. 2. Yet which we are engaged to, 1. Because 'tis God who smites us. n. 3. 2. He always designs our good in it. n. 4. 3. And by our Afflictions shews that we are his. n. 5. 4. That the best Men have still had their share. n. 6. 5. Particular considerati∣ons. n. 7. to 1.
This II. Expressed in 3. par∣ticulars: 1. Of not despairing; nor, 2. Murmuring; nor, 3. Being fretful under our Calamities. CHAP. II. Of the Fear of Death. p. 57 Nothing more generally dread∣ed. n. 1. Yet this fear may be ba∣nished, 1. By living well. n. 2. 2. By taking off our▪ Af∣fections
from this World. n. 3 3. By considering the evils it frees us from. n. 4 4. By viewing the sins it pre∣vents. n. 5 5. By expecting it every day. n. 6 6. Particular considerations. n. 7 CHAP. III. Of providing for ano∣ther World. p. 72 This we ought immediately to set about. n. 1, 2, 3. How we ought to do it, 1. In general. n. 4. to 8.
2. In particular by I. Faith. II. Repentance. I. Faith. p. 86 What it is. n. 1, 2. The parts of it. n. 4. ib. these fulfilled 1. In a firm assent to God's truths. n. 3. 2. An obedience to his Commands. n. 4. 3. A fear of his punish∣ment. n. 5. 4. A hope of his promi∣ses. n. 6. What faith every man is bound to have of his own Salvati∣on. n. 7, 8. II. Repentance. p. 97
What it is. n. 1. The parts of it. n. 4. 1. A sense of sin. n. 3. 2. Contrition for it. n. 4, 5. 3. Confession of sin. n. 6, 7. 4. Resolution against it. n. 8, 9, 10. CHAP. IV. Of particular Duties. p. 115. I. Prayer. p. 116 Its necessity. n. 1, 2. Why we do not always per∣ceive the benefit of it. n. 3, 4.
1. We often receive it when we think we do not. n. 5, 6. 2. If we receive it not, the fault lies at our own doors. n. 7. The qualifications re∣quisite that we may obtain it. II. Charity. p. 134 Its Excellence. n. 1. Parts Towards God. n. 2. Towards our Neighbour. n. 3. III. Of spending your time well. p. 137 1. Take all occasions of do∣ing good. n. 1. 2. Live innocently. n. 2.
3. Often return to holy Ex∣ercises. n. 3. 4. Constantly intermix pi∣ous ejaculations. n. 4. * The Close. p. 144 FINIS. Advertisement. Private Devotions digested into six Litanies, with Directions and Prayers, by Hen. Valentine. A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. Newly published. Both Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
