w2482 08247018 41166
His HIGHNESS the Prince of ORANGE HIS SPEECH TO THE Scots, LORDS and Gentlemen. WITH Their Address, and his Highness his Answer. With a true Account of what past at their Meeting in the Council-Chamber at WHITE-HALL, Jan. 1688/9. His Highness the PRINCE of Orange having caused Advertise such of the Scots, Lords and Gentlemen, as were in Town, met them in a Room at St. James's, up∣on Monday the Seventh of January at three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and had this Speech to them. My Lords and Gentlemen, THE only Reason that induced me to undergo so Great an Under∣taking, was, That I saw the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms over∣turned, and the Protestant Religion in Emi∣nent Danger; and seeing you are here so many Noblemen and Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have your Advice, what is to be done for Securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring your Laws and Liberties, according to my De∣claration. As soon as His Highness had retire the Lords and Gentlemen went to the Council C  White-Hall, and having Chosen the Duke  their President, they fell a Consulting, what ce was fit to be given to His Highness in this Conjunce▪ and after some hours reasoning, they Agreed upon the Materials of it, and appointed the Clerks, with such as were to Assist them, to Draw up in writing, what the Meeting thought expedient, to Advise His Highness, and to bring it in to the Meeting, the next day in the Afternoon. Tuesday the Eighth Instant, the Writing was pre∣sented in the Meeting, and some time being spent in Reasoning about the fittest way of Conveening a Ge∣neral Meeting of the Estates of Scotland: At last the Meeting came to Agree in their Opinion, and ap∣pointed the Advice to be Writ clean over, according to the Amendments. But as they were about to part, for that Dyet, the Earl of Arran proposed to them, as his Lordships Advice, that they should move the PRINCE of Orange, to desire the KING to return, and Call a Free-Parliament, which would be the best way to Secure the Protestant Religion and Property, and to Heal all Breaches. This Proposal seemed to dissatisfy the whole Meeting, and the Duke of Ha∣milton their President, Father to the Earl, but they presently parted. Wednesday the Ninth of January, They met at three of the clock in the same Room, and Sir Patrick Hume took notice of the Proposal made by the Earl of Arran, and desired to know if there was any there that would second it: But none appearing to do it, He said, That what the Earl had proposed, was evidently opposit and inimicous to His Highness the Prince of Orange's Undertaking, his Declaration, and the Good Inten∣tions of Preserving the Protestant Religion, and of Restoring their Laws and Liberties exprest in it. and further, desired that the Meeting should Declare this to be their Opinion of it. The Lord Cardross se∣conded Sir Patricks Motion; it was answered by the
Duke of Hamilton, President of the Meeting, That their business was to prepare an Advice to be offered to the Prince; & the Advice being now ready to go to the Vote, there was no need that the Meeting should give their Sense of the Earls Proposal, which nei∣ther before nor after Sir Patricks Motion, any had pretended to own or second; so that it was fallen, and out of doors; and that the Vote of the Meeting, upon the Advice brought in by their Order, would sufficiently declare their Opinion: Thus being secon∣ded by the Earl of Sutherland, the Lord Cardross, and Sir Patrick did acquiesse; and the Meeting Voted unanimously the Address following. To His Highness the PRINCE of Orange. WE the Lords and Gentlemen of the King∣dom of Scotland, Assembled at Your Highness's desire, in this Extraordinary Conjunction, do give Your Highness our humble and hearty Thanks for Your Pious and Generous Undertaking, for Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws andLiberties of these Kingdoms. In order to the Attaining of these Ends, our humble Advice and Desire is, That Your Highness take upon YOU the Administration of All Affairs, both Civil and Military; the Disposal of the pub∣lick Revenues and Fortresses of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the doing every Thing that is ne∣cessary for the Preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, until a General Meeting of the States of the Nation, which we humbly desire Your High∣ness to Call, to be Holden at Edenburg the Four∣teenth day of March next, by Your Letters or Proclamation, to be published at the Market Cros∣ses of Edenburg, and other Head-Boroughs of the several Shires and Stewartries, as sufficient Inti∣mation to All concerned, according to the Custome of the Kingdom: And that the Publication of these Your Letters or Proclamation, be by the Sheriff or Stewart Clerks, for the Free-holders, who have the value of Lands, Holden according to Law, for making Elections; and by the Town-Clerks of the several Burroughs, for the meeting of the whole Bur∣geses of the Respective Royal Burroughs, to make their Elections at least Fifteen Dayes before the Meeting of the Estates at Edenburg; and the Respective Clerks to make Intimation thereof, at least.Ten dayes before the Meetings for Elections: And that the whole Electors and Members of the said Meeting at Edenburg, qualified as above ex∣prest, be Protestants, without any other Exception, or Limitation whatsoever; to Deliberate and Re∣solve what is to be done for Securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, according to Your Highness Declara∣tion. Dated at the Council Chamber in White-Hall the Tenth Day of January 1689. This Address being Subscribed by Thirty Lords, and about Fourscore Gentlemen, was presented in their presence at St. James's, by the Duke of Hamil∣ton their President, to His Highness the Prince of Orange, who Thanked them for the Trust they re∣posed in him, and desired a Time to consider upon so VVeighty an Affair. Upon the Fourteenth of January, His Highness, the Prince of Orange met again with the Scots Lords and Gentlemen, at St. James's; And spoke to them as follows. My Lords and Gentlemen, IN persuance of Your Advice, I will, until the Meeting of the Estates in March next, give such Orders con∣cerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are ne∣cessary for the Calling of the said Mee∣ting, for the Preserving of the Peace; the Applying of the publick Revenue to the most pressing Uses, and putting the For∣tresses in the Hands of Persons, in whom the Nation can have a Just Confidence: And I do further Assure you, That you will always find Me ready to Concur with You in every Thing that may be found necessary for Securing the Protestant Re∣ligion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation. The Earl of Crawfourd desired of His Highness, That himself, the Earl of Louthian, and others, come to Town since the Address was presented, might have an opportunity to Subscribe it; which was accordingly done: His Highness retired, and All shewed great Satisfaction with His Answer. Sold by R. Janeway, inQueens-Head-Ally in Pater-Noster-Row. 1689.
