w3066 11983691 51922
THE LOYALL Martyrology, OR Brief Catalogues and Cha∣racters of the most Eminent Persons who Suffered for their Conscience during the late times of Rebellion, either by Death, Imprisonment, Banishment, or Sequestra∣tion; Together with those who were Slain in the Kings Service. AS ALSO, Dregs of Treachery: With the Catalogue and Characters of those Regicides who Sat as Judges on our late Dread Soveraign of ever Blessed Memory; with others of that Gang, most Eminent for Villany. For encouragement to Virtue, and determent from Vice. By William Winstanley. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witch-craft. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Brittain, 1665.
ON THE FRONTISPIECE. O What a glorious sight do I behold, Apples of Silver Pictured thus in Gold; Immortal Hero's, who of life bereaven, Are now become bright fixed Stars of Heaven. The first of all this Glorious Company King 1 Charles presents himself unto your eye, Like Phoebus glistering in the Morning tide, Surrounded with Brave Hero's on each side. Under him 2 Strafford that Great Pro-toto-Martyr, On each side Loyal 3 Derby, Gallant Arthur Lord 4 Capell, three such Peeres we may conclude For to be Stars of the first Magnitude. Brave 5 Lucas, and Stout 6 Lisle, whose Gallant Worth Deserves a Golden Pen to set them forth; Undaunted 7 Morris, 8 Penruddock, and 9 Grove, Stout 10 Andrews, who deserv'd all Peoples love, Brave 11 Gerard, 12 Benbow, 13 Burleigh, 14 Pitcher, 15 Poyer Who for their Country did their best devoyer; 16 Fetherstonhaugh, 17 Hamilton, 18 Holland's Earle, 19 Blackburn, 20 Benson, 21 Bushel, each a Pearle Of Valourous Loyalty; 22 Ashton well skill'd in Wars, Kind 32 Slingsby, 24 Symkins, all stout Sons of Mars; Who for King Charles his Cause so strongly stood, And seal'd their Love to't with their dearest blood. Next view great 25 Laud, whose worth doth strike me dumb, The Reverend 26 Hewyt, England's Chrysostome; Grave 27 Beaumont, and Religious 28 Vowel, who With 29 Love for Loyalty their Lives forgo. Learn'd 30 Levens Glory of his Family, Well skill'd in Law, practised in Loyalty. Next view that unmatchless Hero, Gallant 31 Hide, 32 Yeomans and 33 Bowcher, who at Bristol dy'd; 34 Tomkins and 35 Challoner of Active Spirits, 36 Kniveton, 37 Gibbons, 38 Kensy, men whose merits▪ With those foregoing Hero's rais'd them High, Whil'st Traytors live Infam'd in Hystory.
THE LOYALL MARTYROLOGY Printed for Edward Thomas 1665.
To the Honourable Sir John Robinson, Knight and Baronet; His Majesties Lievtenant of the Tower of LONDON. SIR, TWo Things have Emboldened me to Dedicate this Book unto You; The First is your known Loyalty, and Integrity to the Royal Cause, which hath made Your Name as Conspicu∣ous as the Sun in the Firmament in a serene day, not only since the Happy Restauration of his Sacred Majesty, but in those Times of Rebellion when Loyalty was accounted a Crime of the Highest Nature, which as it made you one of Those Loyal Confessors, that by your Sufferings have indeared your Me∣mory to all Posterity; so no doubt, had not that Gangreen of Rebellion been the sooner cut off, your Eminent Parts would by those bloody Regicides, who were Enemies to Worth and Loyalty, have brought you into
the Number of These Royal Martyrs who laid down their Lives in Defence of Gods Laws, and his Annointed's Cause, of both which you were so Gallant an Assertor. The Second is the Relation you had to that Reverend Mar∣tyr, Arch-Bishop Laud, who laid down his Life in Defence of the Church, and is now involved in that Glorious Company who Suffered for the Testimony of a Good Conscience, of whose Worth and Abilities to speak, were to show the light of the Sun by a can∣dle; Daigne Sir, to Accept this Mite of Ac∣knowledgement of Your Worth, from him who Subscribes himself, Your Most Humbly Devoted Servant, William Winstanley.
THE PREFACE TO THE Reader. WHat sad Effects the Miseries and Calami∣ties of a Civil War doth produce, this Nation cannot but be sensible of, and our late Times do sufficiently evidence; How all things were turned topsie turvy, Religion subverted by Rebellion, Truth troden down by Trea∣son, the Gown giving place to the Corslet, and the Law over-awed by the Sword. How under pretense of a Reformation, all things were turned into Con∣fusion; The Law (which should be the Rule and Di∣rection whereby to walk) made useless, or at least like
unto a Spiders Webb through which those Rebellious Bug-bears could with ease break out, but the poor Caveliers were insnared in the same. How under a pretense of the breach of our Fundamental Laws, they Murthered divers Gallant Persons, when they themselves committed the greatest breaches on it, by riding over the Royal Power of the King, putting down the Bishops, and the Book of Common Prayer, Usurping the Militia, Counterfeiting the great Seal, Seizing on the Kings Forts, Ports, Shipping, Castles, and all his Revenue; Raising Rumors, put∣ting out Declarations, and giving out words to alie∣nate the Peoples Affections from their Soveraign; Sessing Souldiers upon the People of the Kingdom without their Consent; making Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs contrary to the Kings mind, breaking all Law themselves, and Governing the Land by New-found Ordinances of their own, imposing se∣veral Taxes on the People by wayes never before known in this Kingdom; namely Contributions, Sequestrations, Meal-Money, Sale of Plundred Goods, Loans, Collections upon their Fast-Dayes; new Imposition upon Merchandizes, Guards main∣tained at the charge of Private Men, Compositions, Sale of Bishops Lands, with divers other strange Impositions, all wracked from the People to main∣tain them in their Rebellious Pride; But had they
stay'd here, their crimes had been the more inex∣cusable, but they proceeded to the Murther of their King, and that under a pretense of Justice, a Crime so great, that History cannot shew a parallel, that people professing themselves Chri∣stians, Protestants, yea the most Reformed of all the Protestants, should in the face of the whole World, in the Metropolis of the Kingdom, under a formal show of Justice, Condemn the most Pious, Prudent and Gracious Prince then living in the whole World, contrary to the Word of God, the Laws of the Land, the Oaths of Supremacy and Al∣legiancy, it was a matter of Wonder and Astonish∣ment, not only to all Good and Godly Christians, but even to the very Turks and Pagans. Now notwithstanding their specious pretenses of Religion and Liberty, who can be so blind as not plainly to see that the main drift of their pretenses was only to Tyrannize over the People, and to wal∣low in all manner of Pleasure and Epicurisme; for how notoriously debauched were some of the Chief of those Grand Reformers; such as Gregory Cle∣ment, Henry Martin, Hugh Peters, &c. Be∣sides their Covetousness, which was so unmeasurably great, that some Wise Men have wondered the Kingdome could be able to pay so much Money as
hath been Collected from them in a year, and yet for all those immeasurable Taxes, the Souldiers, and Navy unpaid, that money going towards the Raising of their Poor Kindred, many of themselves, (if not the greatest part) before those Times, of so little Account and Esteem, that they could not Write Gentleman. Then that their Pride and Ambition was as great as their Covetousness, is easie to be discern'd; for after that Horrid Murther of his Sacred Majesty, How did those Cocks of the Game peck at one ano∣ther? Cromwell's Ambition never stinting un∣till such time he had attained the end of his De∣sires, Resolving to sit in the Seat of Soveraignty, although he waded to the same in Blood and Perjury; and thereupon turned out his Rebellious Masters, which he might the more easily do, their Horrid Actions having made them so notoriously odious to all sorts of People, who rejoyced at their Down∣fall. Now though Cromwel were so Bloody a Tyrant, that People might have prayed for his Life, with the same intent as the Sicilian Old Woman did for the Life of Dionisius, For fear that the Devil should come after, for no other could paral∣lel
him; Yet he being dead, we find other's Pride and Ambition as high as his, such striving amongst themselves to get into the Seat of Soveraignty, untill they thrust one another off of the Cushion, and by their Divisions made a ready way (next to the Providence of Almighty God) for the Restauration of his Sacred Majesty: So that we see what ever was pretended of Religion, Liberty, and such like fine Devices, the main End of their Designs, was, Pride, Envy, Covetousness and Ambition. Against those Wicked Persons and Practises, how many Gallant Men Opposed Themselves both in their Lives and Estates? The Chief of whom we have given you an Account of in this Book, which we have Divided into Three Centuries, or Cata∣logues; The First of which are those Loyal Mar∣tyrs, who suffered under a Formal kind of Justice, in which (as in the rest) we have observed the Or∣der of Time, and not of Dignity; Some perhaps may Object against Two or Three Persons therein mentioned; such as Duke Hamilton, Master Love, &c. as having the Presbyterian Interest inter-woven with the Royal Account, but certainly the main end of their Designs was Loyalty, as they manifested at the time of their deaths; and there∣fore may deservedly challenge a place in that Cata∣logue.
In the Second Place, You have an Account of the most Eminent Commanders and Officers who were Slain in the Kings Service, Sealing their Love to that Cause with their dearest Bloods, and Manfully Fighting, died in the Bed of Honour; If we have over-slipped any of Extraordinary Emi∣nency (for it is impossible to mention every one) We desire to be better Informed by their Friends or Acquaintance, and upon a Second Edition, we shall endeavour to do them Right according to their De∣serts. In the Third Ranke, We have placed the Royal Confessors, such as Suffered in the Kings Cause by Imprisonment, Sequestration, Banish∣ment, &c. Of which We have mentioned but only some few of the most Eminent, the Total Arising to such a Vast Number as would Pose Arithmetick to reckon them up. To These Worthies We have in the Second Place Adjoyned a Catalogue of the Unworthies, or Brief Characters of the most Notorious Regi∣cides, and Others of that Gang, who were the Chief Authours and Abetters of all Those Mi∣series and Calamities, which so long a Time Af∣flicted this Nation, that as the One may be an Encouragement to Virtue and Loyalty, so the Other may Deter Men from Vice and Villany;
This is the summ of our Design, which if it finde Kind Acceptance it shall Encourage me to a further Enlargement thereof; If otherwise, yet this shall be my Comfort, that I have Discharged my Duty, and shown my Self to be, A True Lover of His King and Country, W.W.
The Names of the Martyrs according as they are Figured in the Frontispiece; with the Page wherein to finde their several Histories. I. King Charles Page 16 II. E. of Strafford Page 1 III. E. of Derby Page 33 IV. Lord Capel Page 24 V. Sir Charles Lucas Page 13 VI. Sir George Lisle Page 14 VII. Col. Morris Page 27 VIII. Col. Penruddock Page 36 IX. Col. Grove Page ibid X. Col. Eus. Andrews Page 29 XI. Col▪ Gerard Page 34 XII. Col. Benbow Page ibid XIII. Cap. Burleigh Page 12 XIV. Col. Pitcher Page 14 XV. Col. Poyer Page 15 XVI. Sir T. Fetherstonh. Page 34 XVII. D. Hamilton Page 21 XVIII. E. of Holland Page 23 XIX. Cor. Blackburn Page 28 XX. Mr. Benson Page 30 XXI. Cap. Bushel Page 32 XXII. Col. Ashton Page 40 XXIII. Sir Hen. Slingsby Page 38 XXIV. Cap. Symkins Page 34 XXV. Arch B. Laud Page 9 XXVI. Dr. Hewyt Page 39 XXVII. Mr. Beaumont Page 27 XXVIII. Mr. Vowel Page 35 XXIX. Mr. Love Page 32 XXX. Dr. Levens Page 28 XXXI. Sir Hen. Hide Page 30 XXXII. Mr. Yeomans Page 5 XXXIII. Mr. Bowcher Page ibid XXXIV. Mr. Tomkins Page 7 XXXV. Mr. Challoner Page ibid XXXVI. Mr. Kniveton Page 9 XXXVII. Mr. Gibbons Page 32 XXXVIII. Mr. Kensy Page 37 XXXIX. Mr. Lucas Page ibid XL. Mr. Betly Page 40 XLI. Mr. Stacy, Page 41
The Loyal Martyrologie. OR, A Brief Historical Relation, and Cha∣racter of all those Persons that were Murther'd by Colour of any Sentence during the late Rebellion. I. THomas Wentworth, Earle of Strafford, and Lord Deputy of Ireland, a most Wise, Prudent, and Honourable States-Man; Descended from the Illustrious Family of the Wentworths in York∣shire, and Educated according to the Great∣ness of his Birth: He was at first a great stickler against the Prerogative, untill allu∣red by Court-Preferment he turned Royalist, being by King Charles the First, for his great Parts made Baron Wentworth of Raby, and employed in diverse Offices of Trust, which he discharged with great Honour and Faith∣fulnesse; So thus his Deserts soon mounted
him from one degree of Honour to another; till at last, he was made Lord Lievtenant of Ireland, in which Government he exceeded all that went before him, in the Careful Ma∣nagement of the Affairs of that Realm, Re∣claiming the Irish from many of their Barba∣rous Customes, and reducing them to the English civility, suppressing their Out-Lawes and Tories, and bringing them to perfect, entire Obedience to the Kings Authority and Laws. He much advanced the Protestant Religion, and setled a constant Revenue for the Clergy of that Kingdom, and made so good a procedure in what he undertook, that had not those Disloyal Times of Confusion fallen out, no doubt he had attained his Ends, and setled that Kingdom in a most flourish∣ing condition. The Scotch War (being the Prologue to all our late Troubles) breaking out, he was sent for out of Ireland, to Advise with the King about those Troubles, which so unpreparedly had surprized him; To which work he Con∣tributed his Head, Hands and Purse, advan∣cing by subscription Twenty Thousand Pound, as a Coppy for the rest of the Nobi∣lity to write after: In this Expedition he was made Lievtenant General, and was very
eager to Fight with the Scots; But the Eng∣lish being defeated at Newborn, and Petitions succeeding for an accommodation, a Cessa∣tion followed, and soon after that, a Parlia∣ment, which was Summoned by the Advise of this Earle, and the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury; where the very first thing of Con∣sequence that was done, was a Charge of High Treason Exhibited against this Earle by the House of Commons, consisting of Twenty Eight Articles, whereupon, he was Sequestred from sitting as a Peer, and soon after committed to the Usher of the Black Rod, and so to the Tower. His Tryal quick∣ly after ensued, which was done with great Solemnity in Westminster-Hall, the Earle of Arundal being Lord High Steward: The sub∣stance of his Articles were, That he had En∣deavoured to subvert the Fundamental Lawes and Governments of England and Ireland: That he had done ill Offices betwixt the King and the Scots, and betwixt the King and his Subjects of this Kingdom: That he had Advised the King to bring up the Army out of the North, and over-awe the Parliament: And that he had informed his Majesty that he had an Army of Ten Thousand Men in Ireland, ready to be Transported for the same Ser∣vice: His Accusers▪ were Pym, St. Johns,
Whitlock, Sir Walter Earles, Serjant Glyn, May∣nard, Stroud, Mr. Selden, Hambden, &c. But the Earle defended himself so Bravely and Learnedly, that the Lords, Conscious of his Innocency, would not find the Bill; Where∣fore the Commons seeing they could not speed that way, drew up a Bill of Attainder, and presented it to the Lords, declaring the matter of Fact to have been sufficiently pro∣ved, and that as to Law, he had incurred the Censure of Treason; But the Lords adjudged this a strange way of Proceeding, unsutable to their own Safety, and against Common Justice; Whereupon the Londoners came down in Tumults, stopped the Lords Coaches, menacing to post up the Names of those who favoured him under the Title of Straffor∣dians, and with an impetuous Cry of Ju∣stice, frighted many of the Peers to assent to the Bill; so hard a task had his Blood-thirsty Enemies to bereave him of his Life, which yet notwithstanding passed but by the plura∣lity of Seven Voices against him. But the hardest matter was to get the Kings assent, who very much declined it, and in a set Speech, cleared the Earle from any design of Treason, or consulting to any Ar∣bitrary Government; But being over-per∣swaded
by the dangers that were represent∣ed as inevitable consequents of his refusal; but principally being desired by the Earle himself to satisfie the Parliament, though with his own blood; His Majesty after Ad∣vise with the Bishops, signed that Fatal Bill, which afterwards proved the Axe against his own Life. Thus fell this Noble Earle, being one of the Chief Pillars and Basis of this Nation, without whose Ruine the Grandees of the Faction knew it a hard matter to Effect or Accomplish any thing; such an Absolute, Rare, Honest and Loyal Master-Piece of Rea∣son and Prudence, as this present Age▪ saw not, and well will it be for the next, if it may compare and parallel him. He was Beheaded May 12. 1641. being the Pro-to-Martyr of the Late Times. II, and III. MAster Robert Yeomans, and Master George Bowcher, two Worthy Loyal Citizens of Bristol, of good Esteem, Plentiful Estates and known Integrity; Master Yeomans was Sheriff of that City in the Year 1642. being but the year before his Execrable Murther.
Master George Bowcher was an Able, Pious, Loyal Gentleman, whom his very Enemies confest to be a Religious Man. These Two Loyal Persons, seeing the miserable condi∣tion of those Places where the Rebells Ruled; Entered into a Consultation with some others, how to deliver the City of Bristol in∣to Prince Ruperts hands; and thereupon it was resolved, that upon Munday, March 7. 1642. Prince Rupert with some Forces should draw down towards the City, whilst they within would Seize the Courts of Guard, and open the Gates, and by Ringing St. Johns, and St. Michaels Bells, give him notice thereof; Accordingly Prince Rupert came by Five of the Clock the same morning, expecting the Signal; but the Confederacy being disco∣vered, those Two Gallant Gentlemen, with some others were apprehended; and after Eleven Weeks hard Imprisonment, brought to their Tryal at a Council of War, where by Fiennes the Governour, and others of that Gang, they were Condemned to Dye; and soon after, notwithstanding the King, and his Generals Mandates, and Threats of Reta∣liation, having with great patience endured the Scorns, and Barbarous Insultations of the Enemy, who continually pursued them with
Threats and Revilings; they were on May 30. 1643. barbarously murthered; Master Yeo∣mans professing at his death, That if he had more lives, he would sacrifice them all to his Sove∣raign in that way. And Master Bowcher in his last Speech, exhorted all those who had set their hands to the Plow, (meaning the de∣fence of the Kings Cause) not to be terrified by their Sufferings, and therefore to with∣draw. Their bodies were afterwards de∣cently Enterred in the same City, whose Names shall be had in everlasting remem∣brance, whilst those who murthered them shall rot and perish in infamy. IV, and V. MAster Tomkins, and Master Chaloner, the one Clark of the Queens Council, the other a Linnen-Draper in Corn-hill, two persons of Eminent Loyalty and Integrity, who seeing the whole Kingdom running to ruine by the Seditious practises of the Rebels, procured a Commission from the King; the design whereof was, that they should Seize into their Custody the Kings Children, some Members of Parliament, the Lord Mayor, and Committee of the Militia, all the City
Out-works and Forts, the Tower of London, and all the Magazines; then to let in the Kings Army to Surpize the City, to destroy all Opposers; and this grounded upon refu∣sal of paying of Taxes imposed without Au∣thority. This Commission was brought to London by the Lady Aubigney, Wife to that Gallant Lord, who died of his wounds at Edge-Hill, and upon receipt thereof, several Meetings and Conferences were held in order to the promoting thereof, which was chiefly pro∣secuted by those two Loyal Persons, who made such progress therein, that the business was brought into some form; but so many being concern'd in it, through the Treachery of some, it came to the Parliaments eares; whereupon those two Gentlemen amongst others were Apprehended, and Arraigned before a Council of War at Guild-Hall, and there Sentenced to be Hanged for this Hay∣nous Crime of Loyalty, which accordingly was Executed near their own doors, July 5. 1643.
VI. MAster Daniel Kniveton, formerly a Ha∣berdasher in Fleetstreet, afterwards a Messenger to his late Sacred Majesty, by whom he was sent to London to signifie the King's Pleasure, That the Term of Michaelmas should be prorogued; which Message he delivered to the Judges at Westminster-Hall, and for per∣formance of his Duty, was by those who had quite forgotten all Allegiance and Duty, ap∣prehended for a Spy, and contrary to the Universal Custom, and Honourable Practise of all Nations, (which gives security, and free liberty of passage to all such Persons) Tryed before a Council of War, held at Essex House, where he was as unjustly Condemn∣ed to be Hanged, and according to that in∣humane Sentence, barbarously Murthered by those Bloody Rebels, Novem. 27. 1643. VII. WIlliam Laud, Lord Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, a Pious, Learned, Orthodox Prelate, of whom (as one observes) It would trouble Plutarch if he were alive to finde out a fit parallel with whom to match him. This Reve∣rend Bishop was born at Reading, extracted
from an Honest and well Reputed Parentage, his Father being a Wealthy Cloathier of that Town; from which place (having attained to Learning answerable thereto) he was Trans-planted to St. John's Colledge in Ox∣ford, where with great Credit and Estima∣tion he passed through all the Honourable Employments of his Colledge, so that his Worth came to be taken special Notice of, preferring him first to be Chaplain to the Earle of Devon-shire, and Proctor of the University. Soon after from Bachelour of Divinity he proceeded to Doctor, and be∣came Chaplain to Doctor Neal Bishop of Ro∣chester, afterwards Translated to York, who for his great Abilities preferr'd him to King James; so that now having cast Anchor at Court, the Haven of Hope, he was by that Bountifull King first made Prebend of Bugden and Westminster, next Dean of Glocester, and Arch-Deacon of Huntington, then President of his own Colledge, and not long after Bishop of St. Davids. King James dying, his Son King Charls took him into more especial Favour, bestowing on him the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells, made him Dean of his Chappel, and one of his Privy Council; then Bishop of London,
and Chancellor of Oxford, and last of all, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. As he grew thus High in the Kings Fa∣vour, so (as it is common with Princes Fa∣vourites) was he high in disgust with the People; for being a Prelate who stood stifly for the strict observation of the Rites of the Church of England, which then by the grow∣ing Power of Non-Conformists were every where termed Innovations; by this means Episcopacy was by many Traduced, and di∣verse Libells scattered up and down against that Sacred Function, wherein (as being most Eminent) he was sure to bear the greatest burthen, falsly reporting him inclining to Popery, notwithstanding his firmness in the Protestant Religion, witnessed, by that Book of his against Fisher the Jesuite, an unan∣swerable Work, which like a hammer hath beaten all the Romish Arguments into pieces, and of which they will never clear themselves, brag and vapour what they please. Yet notwithstanding this his great Learn∣ing, Prudence, Zeal, Humility, and other Graces wherewith he was stor'd, though he had done nothing worthy of Death, or Bonds, yet in the beginning of our Dissentions, when the
mad fury of blind zeal, like an impetuous torrent bore down all before it; This Reve∣rend Prelate was committed to the Black-Rod, and from thence to the Tower, where he re∣mained four years before any Charge was brought against him, afterwards he was se∣veral times brought to the Barr of the House of Commons, where notwithstanding his In∣nocency and Integrity appeared transparent, yet being parties Witnesses, and Judges too, they Voted him Guilty, and January 10. 1644. he was wickedly Murthered on Tower∣hill; In whom was verified that presage of King James, No Bishop, No King; Monarchy soon after falling in the death of that blessed Martyr King Charles. VIII. ANd Captain Burleigh, a Gentleman of the Isle of Wight, who after those wicked Votes of Non-Address, and that the King was a Prisoner in the said Island, he Beat a Drum, intending to gather a Force sufficient to Re∣scue him from his Imprisonment, but was quickly seized and supprest by Hamond, who sent him over to Winchester, where by a spe∣cial Commission of Oyer and Terminer, he was Arraigned and Tryed, and by a pact-Jury
brought in Guilty of High Treason, and accordingly barbarously Murthered, Feb. 10. 1647. IX, and X. SIr Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, those Gemini of Valour, Honour, and exact Loyalty, who gallantly Served the King du∣ring the time of Rebellion; being without any partiality of affection declared by those that knew them; one of them the best for Horse-Service, and the other for the Infan∣try that ever Commanded in their Quality in the Kings Armies. These two Gallant Hero's, when there was some hopes given of his Majesties Restitution by the Rising of several Counties, they likewise put to their helping hand, and joyned with them, main∣taining the City of Colchester for the space of Thirteen Weeks against a Potent Enemy sa∣tiated with Victories, and supplyed with fresh and continual Recruits; having in that time eaten up most of the Horses in the Town, together with the Dogs and Cats, and whatsoever else could afford them Nourish∣ment, though most reluctant to Nature; yet notwithstanding this Gallant Opposition, with the Miseries they endured, upon the
Surrender of the Town, the Enemy out of hatred to them for their signal Valour and Loyalty inhumanely butcher'd them in cold blood, August the 30. 1648. XI. MAjor Pitcher, a Valiant Loyal Gentle∣man who out of his sense of the King and Kingdomes Misery, and a deep appre∣hension of the sad Consequences thereof, Engaged in Armes for the Restitution of his Sacred Majesty, being one of those, who with so much Valour, and Magnanimity De∣fended Pembroke against Cromwell, and his Ar∣my of Janizaries for the space of three months; but no hopes of Relief appearing, after a most gallant Defence they Rendred themselves upon Articles, by which he was To depart the Kingdome for Three Years, and not to Return upon pain of Death: But he well hoping there might be further occasion of Service to his Majesty, by reason the strange Actions of the Men at Westminster had rendred them so odious to the generality of the People; He therefore (ac∣counting it base to Desert his Prince when so great help required,) stayed at London, in expectation, as I said, of some further Ser∣vice; but being betrayed by some ignomi∣nious
wretches, was Apprehended, and Con∣demned by a Council of War, who seldome quitted any whom they thought might be able to do them a mischief, and according to that wicked Sentence, he was as barbarously Murthered, being shot to death against St. Faith's door, December 29. 1648. XII. COlonel Poyer, who with Major General Langhorne, and Colonel Powel, took up Armes for the King in Wales, in detestation of those bloody Votes of Non-Addresses by the Faction at Westminster; But it pleased God not to succeed that Enterprize, being de∣feated at St. Fagons by Colonel Horton, where∣upon they Retreated with the broken re∣mains of their Army to the Town of Pem∣broke, which they Fortified, and Valiantly Defended for the space of Three Months, against Horton and Cromwell, who with a great Power was come in to their Recruit; But wanting Necessaries, and hopeless of Re∣lief, Valour was forced to condescend to what Barbarity should propound, which was to Render at Mercy; the effect whereof was, according to the Order of a Council of War, That the three Colonels should draw Lotts for their
Lives, which fell upon him, and thereupon he was shot to death in Covent Garden. XIII. CHarles the I. of Blessed Memory, the most Glorious Martyr of this late Age, the exact pattern of Piety, Patience and Pru∣dence, who in the manner of his Sufferings, came the nearest to our Saviour of any we have read or heard of; whose Christian Vir∣tues and Patience in Afflictions will be had in Everlasting Remembrance; Whose Histo∣ry being so exactly delivered by several Learned Pens, and his Divine Thoughts so Heavenly set forth in His  and other rare Pieces of his own Writing; we shall therefore take no further a prospect of Him, then from that barbarous and execrable Murther, which to the horrour and astonish∣ment of all good Men, and to the great shame of the Christian World, was most impiously committed on him, and that in as brief a me∣thod as we can. After that it had so pleased God for the sins of the Nation, that the Kings Armies were all Overthrown, and He Himself a Pri∣soner under their merciless hands, several Endeavours having been used for his Resto∣ration,
which also proved fruitless, Cromwel, Ireton, and divers others of that Antimonar∣chial Faction, who resolved to Enrich them∣selves, though with the Ruine of the King∣dome, and the loss of their own Souls; By a Violent, and Treasonable Force Seized up∣on divers Knights and Burgesses of the Par∣liament, such as they thought had any Cou∣rage or Honesty to Vote according to their Consciences, and neglect their wild Diabo∣lical proposals; leaving onely Fifty or Sixty Schismaticks of their own Engaged Party, such as had made a prey of the Common-Wealth to Enrich Themselves and their Fa∣ction. These Offalls of a Parliament quickly Voted down the Kingly Office, and House of Peers, and that the Supream Authority was in the People, and in the House of Com∣mons, as their Representative, and to bring the King to Capital Punishment before a new invented, Illegal, mixt Court (consist∣ing of Engaged Persons) Erected for that purpose, having Foundation neither by Pre∣scription nor Law: These proceedings though contrary to Law, Sense, and Religion, yet being back'd by an Army, they went on in their most wicked Design; and to shew that they were as devoy'd of Grace, as without,
shame, they kept a Mock-Fast, where Hugh Peters that Pulpit-Buffon Acted a Sermon before them, the subject whereof was, Moses leading the Israelites out of Aegypt; which he applyed to the Leaders of the Army, cover∣ing his eyes with his hands, and laying down his head on the Cushion, and such other an∣tick gestures, as moved the People unto laughter, so audaciously impudent were they as to delight in their abominable wickednes. Soon after was that accursed High Court of Justice Erected, before which Audacious Traytors, his Majesty was often brought, who refused to hear the King speak of Rea∣son, but contrary to all Law, Reason, Reli∣gion, Honesty, Oaths of Allegiance, and Su∣premacy, several Votes, Declarations, Re∣monstrances, Protestations, and Covenants, He was by the mouth of that Grand Mur∣thering Rebel, Bradshaw, Sentenced to be Be∣headed, the rest of those Miscreant Traytors by standing up, assenting to the same; and so not being admitted to reply, he was by their Guards hurried away; the Souldiers as he passed along (in imitation, or being set on by their Rebellious Masters, that they might not be much behind them in Villany) scof∣fing and reviling Him, casting the smoak of
their Tobacco (a thing odious to Him) in his face, and strewing the Pipes in his way, one more insolent then the rest, spitting in his face; the Souldiers all along as he passed, Crying out, Justice, Justice, Execution, Execu∣tion; to whom his Majesty onely said, Alas poor Souls, for a piece of Money, they would do so for their Commanders. From the time of that bloodly Sentence, to the time of his execrable Murther, how barbarously the Souldiers continued their in∣solencies to him, and how base and bruitish they were in their carriage, would almost exceed belief of a rational man, not suffer∣ing him to rest in his Chamber, but thrust∣ing in, smoaking their Tobacco, and disturb∣ing him in his Privacy, abusing those that seemed to shew any respect, or even compa∣sion to him: But through all those Tryalls, and Barbarous Affronts, he passed with such a calm, and even temper, that he let nothing fall unbeseeming his former Majesty, and Magnanimity, but despight of their malice proved himself a Glorious Conquerour. When that fatal day was come, which they had appointed for his Glorious Martyr∣dome, he was brought from his Palace of St. James's to White-Hall, marching on foot
through the Park, being Guarded by a Regi∣ment of Foot Souldiers, with their Colours flying and Drums beating, the Guards marching a slow pace, he bid them go faster, saying, That he now went before them to strive for a Heavenly Crown, with less solitude then he had often Encouraged his Souldiers to fight for an Earthly Diadem. After he had come to the Chamber appointed for him in White Hall, he spent that little remnant of time he had to live in Devotion, and received the blessed Sacrament from the hands of the Bishop of London, who was Licensed to attend on him, from which he received great Spiritual com∣fort; continuing at his Devotions till about Twelve a Clock, when he eat a bit of Bread, and drank a glass of Clarret, returning to his Devotions again, when about an hour after, he was brought on the Scaffold, at∣tended by the foresaid Bishop, where with a Christian Courage and Resolution He fi∣nished his Glorious Martyrdome, which at the falling of his Body, mounted his Soul to Heaven, in whose bliss-full Mansions he now sings Hallelujahs for ever. Thus this Noble Prince (sanctified by ma∣ny Afflictions) after he had escaped Pistol, Poyson, and Pestilent Air, (which means the
Regicides had design'd to take him away by, during his restraint) could not escape the more venomous tongues of Lawyers, and Petty-Foggers, Bradshaw, Cook, Dorislau, &c. We shall conclude our Discourse of Him with this Epitaph made by a Loyal Person. Within this Sacred Vault doth lye, The Quintessence of Majesty, Which being set, more Glorious Shines, The best of Kings, best of Divines; Brittains shame, and Brittains glory, Mirrour of Princes, compleat Story, Of Royalty; One so exact That th' Elixars of praise detract; These are fair shaddows, but t' endure He's drawn to th' life in's Pourtracture, If such another Piece you'ld see, Angels must Limn it out, or He. XIV. NOw next in order should we proceed to Duke Hamilton, Earle of Cambridge, who though of another Nation, yet being a Peer of this, and dying by Sentence of their Illegall High Court of Injustice, we cannot without injustice leave him out of this Ca∣talogue. It is indeed confest by most, that
the Kings Interest was but Collateral, and though his Actions and Promises at his Tryal in hopes of life, may seem evidently to con∣firm the same, yet in his last words (and words of dying men do carry great force with them) he did Evidence a real Love and Affection to that Cause. This Duke was General over the Scotch Forces that came into England when the King was a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, the cause of their com∣ing being contained in a Declaration which they brought along with them, consisting of five heads; 1. That the King be forthwith brought to London, to Treat in Person with the Two Houses of Parliament. 2. That all those who had a hand in, or contrived the carrying of the King away from Holmby, be condignly punished. 3. That the Army be Disbanded. 4. That Presbitery be set∣led. 5. That the Members of Parliament who were forcibly secluded from the Houses, may be re∣stored. But these Demands were answered with Fire and Bullet, the Duke and his great Army totally defeated by Cromwel, and Him∣self taken Prisoner by Colonel Wayte, and be∣ing now in their hands, they thought to make good use of him, to cajole and fish out what great Ones, Members of both Houses, the City, and Clergy had a hand in his Un∣dertaking;
It being more then suspected that he had such Invitation, to which pur∣pose he was exceedingly importuned by Cromwell, the Lord Grey of Grooby, Colonel Wayte, and Hugh Peters, who promised him they would not much obstruct his pretended Plea of Quarter from Lambert upon Articles; Nay Peters avouched Quarter so given, for which Hamilton gave him Thanks and Mony, and Peters in consideration thereof, prayed for him openly, as his Lord and Patron, still feeding him with hopes, If he would impeach their Opposites: but when they could not ex∣tort it from him, the Scene was soon altered, they which smiled on him before, then frowned; and being at his Tryal, asked what he could say for himself; he pleaded Quar∣ter, and vouch'd Peters Testimony; but that wretched Priest, with a brazen face renoun∣ced the same, saying, He now remembred no such matter, but that the Army scorned to give Quarter to Him, or any of his Nation: where∣upon he was Condemned to the Block, which Sentence was Executed upon him, March 9. 1648. XV. HEnry Earle of Holland, a special Favou∣rite of King Charles the I. in the be∣ginning
of his Reign, though afterwards when the long Parliament began to sit, that Religion became the Bone of Contention, he sided with them: But afterwards per∣ceiving that they made Religion only a cloak to cover their Rebellion, he deserted them, and took up Armes for the Royal Interest; together with the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Francis Villers's Brother, the Earle of Peterburgh, and some others: But they no sooner Rose, but were Encountered by the Parliaments more Numerous Forces, by whom they were Defeated, and the Earle (the next day) taken Prisoner, being after∣wards brought to his Tryal before those Law∣less Regicides; he was by them Condemned, together with my Lord Capel, and Duke Ha∣milton, and suffered on the same Scaffold, the aforesaid 9. of March, 1648. XVI. ARthur Lord Capel Baron of Hadham, a most Noble, Heroick, Gallant Peer, Eminently Famous for his Charity, and other Rare Endowments; whose Noble Virtues fill the Trumpet of Fame to all Posterity. This Noble Lord was Son and Heir to Sir Henry Capel of Hadham-Hall in Hartford-shire,
well known for his Bountiful House, and diffusive Charity to the Poor, which some, Eminous of good works in others, because they will practise none themselves, have be∣spattered with the Name of Popery; which as they set forth onely the speakers malice, so were they no hinderance to this Noble Lord when as he came to possess that Vast Estate, to tread in the same steps his Father, and Ho∣nourable Predecessors had done. His great Parts, and Deserts, Advanced him from the Degree of Knight-hood, (the antient Dignity of his Family) to Baron Ca∣pel of Hadham, (his Son being since by our Gracious Soveragn Created Earle of Essex,) a little before the time the Earle of Strafford received his Tryal, whose giving his Vote to that Bill, was in his conscientious Judgment of himself his Original Condemnation, in foro Caeli. During the time of Rebellion, and those unhappy Differences betwixt the King and Parliament, none more Constant and Loyal to his Majesty then He; Assisting him in all that he could both in Head, Hand, and Purse, and was by Him for his singular Wisdome, and Prudence appointed Councellour unto the Prince, whom he left not till the Dis∣banding
the Lord Hoptons Army in Cornwall, being then dismist with an Honourable Cha∣racter from that discerning Prince. But long had he not continued here at home, when some fresh hopes appearing of his Ma∣jesties Restauration to his former Authority, by the Rising of several Parties for the King, he resolved to set his helping hand thereto, and joyning with those Valiant Sons of Mars, Sir Charles Lucas, &c. was together with them Besieged in Colchester, which for Thirteen Weeks they Valiantly Defended, Enduring and Suffering almost all Extremities imagi∣nable; at last they were forced to yield, up∣on Articles of Quarter for Life, in which this Noble Lord was included; yet notwith∣standing all Articles, he was sent up Prisoner to London, and committed to the Tower, from whence he endeavoured an Escape, and had effected it, had he not been betray'd by one Jones a Waterman, a second Banister; soon after he was brought to their bloody Slaugh∣ter-house, nick-named by them a Court of Justice, whereby those Enemies of Honour and Loyalty, he was Condemned, and March 9. aforesaid, brought to the Scaffold, where he resolutely afferted his own Actions, his dead Masters Cause, and his present Sove∣raigns
Rights, recommending him to the People, as the great Example of True English Worth, and the only Hope of the distracted Kingdom; and so like a True Christian Hero suffered the pains of the Axe, sealing his Glo∣rious Cause with his last breath and blood. XVII. MAster Beaumont, a Reverend Divine, belonging to the Garrison of Pomfract, who for his Loyal Endeavours towards the Restoration of his Majesty, in holding Cor∣respondency in Cyphers with some Active Royalists, was by those Murdering Miscre∣ants, who spared none, either for their Age or Function, most barbarously murdered, Feb. 15. 1648. XVIII. COlonel John Morris, a Gentleman of an Undaunted Courage; and Resolution, bred up in the Earle of Straffords's House, where he was taught his Duty to God, and Obedience to his King, whom he Faithfully Served in that time of Rebellion; being that Gallant Person that Surprized Pomfract Ca∣stle, which he Valiantly Defended even to the very pinch of Extremity; and was for his
Valour and Loyalty (being suspected by them to be one of those that sent Rainsbrough's Ghost to trace the Infernal Shades) most in∣humanly butchered by those Scelerate Vil∣lanies, at the City of York, August 23. 1649. XIX. COronet Michael Blackburn, Emiently Fa∣mous for his Loyalty, and Faithfull Service to his Soveraign; being also taken at Pomfract Castle, and likewise suspected for Rainsbrough's death; he was therefore by those sworn Foes to true Valour, basely murdered at York, August 23. aforesaid. XX. DOctor Levens, Doctor of the Civil Law, a Gentleman well Descended, of an Antient Family in Oxfordshire, who at the first beginning of these Uncivil Wars, ex∣changed his Gown for a Sword, and Valiant∣ly Served his Majesty during that Rebellion, till the Surrender of Oxford, being one that was concluded in the Articles of that Capi∣tulation. After the death of that blessed Martyr, he Engaged for his Son, our present Soveraign, having Commission from Him for the Raising of Forces, and blank Com∣missions
for diverse Officers; but whiles he was in pursuance of the Design, he was dis∣cover'd, and being brought before them stoutly stood in his justification, Telling them he was no way ashamed of his Cause, but that he would justifie it with his Dearest Life; And though they gave him some fallacious hopes of Life, if he would reveal those Par∣ties Engaged with him, yet would not those offers prevail on his more Noble Spirit, wherefore he was by them condemned, and according to their bloody Sentence Executed over against the Exchange in Corn-hill, July 18. 1650. XXI. COlonel Eusebius Andrews, a Gentleman of a most sincere Life and Conversa∣tion, by Profession a Counsellor of Grays Inn, who out of his Duty to God, and the King; took part with his Majesty, constantly adhere∣ing to the Royal Cause, being Secretary to the Renowned Lord Capel, whose Worth and Excellency being envied by Cromwell, he was by his Emissaries brought into a Plott, as they called it, and then by them betrayed; the chief Agent therein being one Bernards, formerly his Major, who with one Pitts were
suborned by Bradshaw, and Sir Henry Mildmay to swear against him; So that notwithstand∣ing the Colonel notably defended himself, and by an accurate Legal Plea proved the Unlawfulness and Authority of their High Court of Justice, yet was he by those blood-sucking Canniballs Sentenced as a Traytor, having only the favour of altering the man∣ner of his Execution, which was the Axe on Tower-hill, where he died like other Martyrs before him, full of joy and blessed hope, Aug. 22. 1650. XXII. MAster Benson, formerly a Retainer to Sir John Gell, having a Command un∣der him during the time Sir John had the un∣happiness to serve the Parliament; but ha∣ving rectified his judgment, and desirous by some Eminent Service to his Majesty, to ballance his former mistakes, he was by the aforesaid Bernard Trapan'd in the same busi∣ness with Colonel Andrews, and suffer'd un∣der their merciless cruelty, October 7. 1650. XXIII. SIr Henry Hide, Brother to the Earle of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellour of
England now living; a Gentleman of Excel∣lent parts for Navigation, who being sent by his present Majesty an Internuncio to the Grand Signior in matters of concernment, for the good of his Merchant Subjects; The Rebells by their Agents so wrought upon the Vizier, that he basely and unworthily sent him into England, where having remained for some time in the Tower, he was brought before their monstrous High Court of Justice, where his Crimes were aggravated with im∣putations of his design of seizing those Mer∣chant Estates there, and affronting Sir Tho∣mas Bendish the old Resident there with his New Commission. To which although Sir Henry made a Learned Defence, yet was all in vain to those who resolved before-hand to dispatch him, and only Heard him in way of form; wherefore he was by their Blood-Thirsty Court Sentenced to be Beheaded, which death he suffered against the Old Ex∣change in Corn-hill, March 4. 1650. couragi∣ously asserting his Masters Cause, and so ren∣dring his Soul to God, is justly inscribed in∣to the Roll of Martyrs.
XXIV. CAptain Brown Bushel, an expert Sea-man, who was Captain of a Man of War, and had some kind of Command in Scarborough, which he delivered to Sir Hugh Chomley then revolted in the year 1643. from the Parlia∣ment, and being Prisoner at Hull for the same, had been Exchanged by Hotham (then winding about to his Allegiance.) This Captain Bushel was for the same committed to custody in 1648. and being detain'd Priso∣ner about Three Years, now their hand was in for shedding of blood, he was by those in∣humane Rebells murdered, April 29. 1651. XXV, and XXVI. MAster Love, and Master Gibbons, who though they dyed upon the Presbyte∣rian Account, which abated much the lustre of their Sufferings, yet dying in opposition to Tyranny, and upon the Account of his Majesties Restauration, deserve to be had in perpetual remembrance. They were char∣ged with High Treason against the State, for holding correspondency with the King and his Party, and supplyed them with money, contrary to an Act of Parliament in that case
provided; for which they were by those bloody Regicides condemned, and lost their heads on Tower-hill, August 20. 1651. XXVII. JAmes Earle of Derby, the flower of English Fidelity, a most Honourable, Heroick, Gallant Peer, whose Prudence and Valour were alwayes Assistant to his Royal Master; and whose Superlative Virtues of Liberality and Bounty made him Loved and Honoured of all sorts of People; He having ventured his Life and Large Estate in the continuall Service of his Royal Masters, from which he in the least never deviated. Upon his Ma∣jesties March out of Scotland, he Raised what Forces he could to his Assistance, but was first unfortunatly defeated at Wigan in Lancashire, from whence he fled to the King at Worcester; where also that Royal Army being overcome by Cromwells▪ Numerous Forces, he unfortu∣natly fell into their hands, and suffered under their inhumane, merciless, execrable Tyran∣ny, resigning up his Soul into the hands of his Maker, October 15. 1651.
XXVIII. CAptain Symkins, who for carrying the Kings Letter of Invitation to Sir Thomas Midleton, was by a Court-Marshal held at Chester, Condemned, and accordingly Exe∣cuted by those incorrigable Rebells, October 1651. XXIX. SIr Timothy Fetherston-haugh, a Valiant Gen∣tleman, who Engaging with the Noble Earle of Derby in the Service of his Sove∣raign, was defeated at Wigan in Lancashire, and suffered by those obdurate Rebells, Octo. 22. 1651. XXX. COlonel Benbow, who for his Loyalty and superlative Valour, was by those blood-thirsty Regicides, much about the same time shot to death at Shrewsbury. XXXI. COlonel John Gerard, a Gentleman of good Account, whose Family have been very Eminent for their Loyalty; upon a pretended Plot of Assassinating Cromwell, was
with divers others committed to Prison, and Tryed before their High Court of Injustice, where though there were little appearance of the Truth thereof, (but some few words extorted by fear, besides the confession of their own Agent;) yet was he by bloody Lisle the President, Condemned, and lost his head on Tower-hill, July 10. 1654. XXXII. MAster Peter Vowel, School-Master of the Free School at Islington, against whom they had suborned a blind Minister, whom this worthy Martyr had sustained and fed; they having received from him some words, that Master Vowel should say, as, That if the Tyrant were removed, or otherways laid aside, the Royal Interest would be gladly Embraced, and with∣out any difficulty Re-assumed to its Authority. These cursed Caiphases more enlarged; with addition of several circumstances; and though the said Minister at his Tryal denyed and disowned the said words, yet they ma∣king for their purpose (O impudence with∣out president!) he was by the mouth of Frontless Lisle condemn'd to death, and ac∣cording to that unjust Sentence, Executed at Charing-Cross, where with a Roman spirit▪
temper'd with Christian patience, he suffer'd Martyrdom, off, from a stool fetcht from their Guard, his innocency appearing so transpa∣rent that the adjacent Neighbours refused to lend any thing towards his death. These Two Gentlemen were the first that suffer'd under the Tyrannical Government of Oliver Cromwell, whose Five Years Usurpation was cemented all along with a sacrifice of Loyal blood, as the Walls of Babylon were said to be mortur'd. XXXIII, and XXXIV. COlonel Penruddock, and Colonel Groves, two Valiant Gentlemen who had con∣stantly and faithfully served his late Majesty, and now with several other Gentlemen of good Account, Joyned in an Assosiation to free the Land from the Slavery they endured under that Abominable Tyrant Cromwel, and to restore his Sacred Majesty. To this pur∣pose about some Two Hundred of them Rose in the West, and Entred the City of Salisbury, at such time as the Judges, Rolls and Nicholls were there in Circute, whose Horses they Seized, and Declared the Cause of this their Appearance; and having now Encreased their Numbers to Four Hundred, they march∣ed
thence to Blundeford, where Colonel Pen∣rudock himself Proclaimed the King in the Market-place; from thence they marched more Westward towards Devon-shire, and Corn-Wall, but their numbers decreasing, they were at last at South-Molton in Devon-shire, set upon by a strong party of Horse, under the Command of Captain Crook, where be∣ing over-powred, they submitted upon Ar∣ticles of quarter for life, which Crook afterwards basely denied when they were Tryed at Sa∣lisbury; by which Treachery these two gal∣lant Gentlemen were for their Loyal Under∣takings condemned, and wickedly murther∣ed May 16. 1655. XXXV. JOhn Lucas, a Mercer of very good Estate in Hungerford, who joyning with these gallant Royalists in their Attempts for Re∣storing the King, staying in the Town when he might have escaped, unluckily fell into their hands, by whom he was Sentenced, and lost his head. XXXVI. &c. MAster Kensey, Master Thorp, John Fryar, and John Lawrence, Persons of good
esteem and credit in the West-country, who likewise joyning with Colonel Penrudock, and those other gallant persons we formerly mentioned, were for this their Loyalty, bar∣barously murthered by those insolent Rebells at Salisbury; besides Eleven more (whose Names we cannot yet attain to) who upon the same account were by those Rebells mur∣dered at Exeter, May 1655. XXXVII. SIr Henry Slingsby, a Knight of good repute in York-shire, and who for his Loyalty was seldom out of trouble during all the time of Rebellion; having been a Prisoner in Hull off and on ever since that fatal Fight at Worcester, he being now weary of this long restraint, and perceived so to be by some of the Officers of that Garrison, they (viz.) Major Waterhouse, Captain Overton, and one Lievtenant Thompson, to hook him in, cast out some disgustal words against their Sultan Cromwell, mixing thereto some Overtures of their good will to the King, and the Rendi∣tion of the Place to him, if he could procure a Commission for them from his Majesty. The Loyal Gentleman gladly Embraced a proffer of such Concernment, and made use
of an Old Commission he had by him; But they having now brought him into their snare, sent him up a Prisoner to London, where at his Tryal they were Witnesses against him; for being brought to Cromwell's slaughter-house ecleaped a High Court of Ju∣stice, where bloody Lisle▪ sat President, he was by those monsters of Nature condemned, and wickedly murdered, June 8. 1658. XXXVIII. DOctor John Hewyt, a Reverend Divine of the Primitive stamp and temper, who taught the People both by Life and Doctrine, whose Excellent Parts, and known Loyalty, was two grand motives to the insa∣tiable thirst of Cromwell to desire to tast his blood. To this purpose a Plott must be in∣vented of Firing the City, and I know not what, whereof the Reverend Doctor was ac∣cused, and though his innocency appeared as transparent as the Sun in the most serene skie, yet being ignorant of the formalities of the Law, (though none more knowing in the Gospel) he was taken, or surprized for a mute, and by the mouth of that audacious and bloody Regicide, Frontless Lisle, con∣demned, and on the same Scaffold with Sir
Henry Slingsby Beheaded, rendring his Soul into the hands of his Creator; the aforesaid 8. of June, 1658. XXXIX. COlonel Edward Ashton, a Valiant Loyal Person, whom Cromwell, acting Nero's part who set Rome on fire, and then punish't the Christians for doing it; So this crafty blood-sucker having devized a Plott against their lives, laid to their charge, that they would fire the City; and having by Impri∣sonment, and other sinister ends prevail'd on some to accuse others, notwithstanding their innocency, were condemned; amongst others this gallant Colonel suffer'd by their barba∣rous inhumanity, July 2. 1648. XL. MAster John Betley, a young man of Ex∣cellent Parts, who being trappan'd by the Tyrants Emissaries about the aforesaid Plott, was by the bloody Sentence of their High Court of Injustice condemn'd to be han∣ged, and accordingly was Executed in Cheap∣side the aforesaid 2 of July, where he made a solemn protestation of his Innocency, at whose death hapned a thing something
strangely remarkable, for having hung al∣most a quarter of an hour, he pulled off his cap with his own hands, so loth was the Soul to depart from that gallant body, which had it not been thus snatcht away by this untime∣ly death, might have lived to have done his King and Country gallant service, and have been a special Ornament to the City where∣in he lived. XLI. MAster Edward Stacy, who for the same counterfeit Plott, was two dayes after murthered over against the Exchange in Corn-hill, being the last man that suffered under the bloody Tyranny of Cromwell,who had ta∣ken such large draughts of loyal blood, and who himself expired not long after. Thus have we given you a brief Narrative of those worthy Martyrs who suffered under colour of Sentence by Law during that time Rebellion was Rampant; many others might be added to this Catalogue, whose Names and Qualities we cannot yet attain unto, and who dying in opposition to Tyranny, and up∣on the account of Law and Loyalty, deserve to be had in everlasting remembrance; My
desire therefore will be to those of their Re∣lations concerned in it, such timely notice might be given of them before a Second Edition of this Book, that their memories might have the right belonging to them, to the encouragement of others in persisting in Loyalty, and to the dread and terrour of Traytors and Regicides, who shall dare to lift up their hand against the Lords annointed. We shall next add only a short account of some Loyal Persons murdered in Scotland by the same pretense of Law, to shew that the men of the Kirk, notwithstanding their great pretensions of Loyalty, were not much be∣hind the Independent gang, but drove the same trade, and exercised the utmost of their cruelty, upon the most stoutest asserters of the Kings Cause. I. COlonel Nathaniel Gordon, a Gentleman of exquisite valour, who accompanied the Noble Marquess of Montross, in all dan∣gers and difficulties; his constant Fidelity rendred him odious to the Covenanting-gang, who having him in their hands, most basely murther'd him at St. Johnstons, 1647.
II. SIr Robert Spotswood, whose Worth and Learning would have preserved him from the hands of his most barbarous Ene∣mies, but those of his own Nation; He was a Gentleman of most polite and deep learn∣ing, especially in the Oriental Languages; and was for his extraordinary parts, made the Kings Secretary of Scotland, in the place of the Earle of Lanerick; His great Endow∣ments and large Abilities for what he under∣took accelerated his end, dying with a Noble and Christian courage, breathing his last with these words, Jesu have mercy on me, and gather my soul with those that have run before me in this Race. III. MAster Andrew Guthrey, Son to the Bi∣shop of Murrory, a Loyal Gentleman, and therefore rendred the more obnoxious to the Kirk-men, those great pretenders of du∣tifull affection to the King; a strange riddle, to love the Master, and murther his Servants! this gallant person was by them barbarously murthered, the aforesaid year, 1647.
IV. MAster William Murrey, Brother to the Earle of Tullibardin, one whose hope∣full Spring promised a flourishing fruitfull Harvest; who in his Youth performed won∣ders, and gave undeniable proofs of what he would have proved afterwards, had he not been thus basely cut off in the prime of his strength, at Nineteen years of age. He most magnanimously, & couragiously encounter∣ed death, behaving himself with such a Chri∣stian carriage, and contempt of death, as he said, His End would prove the greatest Honour of his Family. These four Gentlemen all Sacrificed their lives in defence of their Soveraign, and dyed Royal Martyrs at St, Johnstons, the year of our Lord, 1647. aforesaid. V. THe Renowned, and ever Glorious Mar∣quess of Montross, the Honour of Che∣valry, & pattern of true Magnanimity; whose glorious exploits were such, and so great, as would pose Antiquity with all her feign'd Hero's to find his parallel; of whom we shall give you the more larger account, and shew
you how barbarously they used this gallant Worthy. He at first sided with the Covenanters against his Majesty; their specious pretenses carrying a fairer gloss then his green years could so soon look into; but reason quickly rectified his Judgment, and he perceived that those fair shews, were but painted cloaths on purpose to catch the simple; yet would he not so soon on the sudden decline, but endea∣voured in his Revolt to have done his Maje∣sty an Excellent Piece of Service, by bring∣ing that Army to him which was under his Command; but being disappointed, he en∣deavoured to display his Loyalty another way: The King having then few friends in Scotland, but such as were so over-aw'd by the Convenanters, they durst not shew them∣selves; the Noble Marquesse obtained a Commission from the King, to be Governour of Scotland, whither he went, attended onely by two, Master William Rollock, and Master Sib∣balds; and thorow many danger came at last to his Cousin Master Patrick Graham in the Sheriff-dome of Perth, where he stai'd but a while, but went into the High-Lands, the Earle of Antrim having promised to send him sufficient Supplies out of Ireland, as a
stock to begin with; which he performed though very defficient in the Number; some One Thousand One Hundred only coming over; however having some little addition under the Lord Kilpont, and the Earle of Perths Son, he resolved not to lye idle, but with a bold Courage to finde out the Army of the Cove∣nanters, then gathered together under the Earle of Tullyburn, and other Scotch Lords in Perth-shire, where at Tepper-Moor he set upon them, and though not equal to his Enemies in number, yet so exceeding them in Valour, that he obtained of them a Glorious Victory, which he might well ascribe to Providence, for his Souldiers wanting Ammunition, were supplyed by the stones which lay thick on the ground whereon they fought, to their very great advantage. Here he killed no lesse then Two Thousand of his Enemies, where∣upon the City of Perth opened her gates, and yielded to the Conquerour. This Victory obtained, he Marches into Argyles Country, one whose Actions hath since rendred him deservedly infamous; here he made a miserable havock, minding utter∣ly to break the spirits of that People who were so surely Engaged to Argyle's side. To withstand and represse this so dangerous an
Enemy, the Covenanters soon Raised ano∣ther Army, under the Earle of Seaforth, and the Marquess of Argyle, whose Forces being divided, he sets upon that Party under Argyle first, which he totally Routed, killing One Thousand Five Hundred on the Place; soon after he Defeated the other Army, being newly put under the Command of Colonel Hurry; then offers battel to Bayley, who declined to Fight without great advantage; whereupon he marches after Hurry, who was now Re∣cruited, and at Alderne sets upon him, dis∣comfits him, killing One Thousand Eight Hun∣dred, and dispersing the rest. Then next with his Victorious Army he goes to seek for Bayly, to whom was joyned the Earle of Lindsey, and joyning battel with them at Alesford-Hills, gives them a total Rout, but not without the losse of some of his own men, whereof the Lord Gourdon de∣serves to be had in everlasting remem∣brance; then with an uncontrollable march he goes to St. Johnstons, putting the Parlia∣ment (who there satt) into a great fright; from thence he goes into the Low-Lands, to Encounter with Bayly, who was again Re∣cruited with another Army by the Kirk. At Kilsith both Armies met, where betwixt
them was fought a very bloody Battel, which continued doubtfull for a good space; but Victory at length crowned the head of Mon∣tross, almost Six Thousand of his Enemies falling in that Fight; nor were the effects thereof lesse profitable to him then the Vi∣ctory it self; for hereupon almost all Places of Strength yielded to him, even as far as Edenburgh; the Nobility and Gentry every where readily Assisted him, and acknow∣ledged him for their Rightful Governour. But what Estate on Earth is long perma∣nent? How soon may a serene skie be sha∣dowed with clouds? Whiles Montross was now as he thought almost secure, most part of his Army returning home, he expecting Ayd from the King under the Lord Digby▪Leshly being called out of England by the Scot∣tish Estates, made such hast, that he fell up∣on Montross at Philips-haugh, almost before his Scouts could give him Intelligence, and there Routed him, he hardly escaping with his life, being forced to cut his way through his Enemies, and with a poor remainder of his Army fly into the High-Lands, where he began anew to Levy Forces; but the fortune of the King failing every where, he was the next year Ordered by the King (then in the
Scotts Custody) to Disband and Depart the Kingdome, which notwithstanding he knew it would be prejudicial to the Kings Proceed∣ings, yet least he should be guilty of disobe∣dience in himself, which he punished in o∣thers, he willingly condescend thereunto. From thence he betook himself to the Court of France, where he was proffered High Preferment, which he waved, his No∣ble Spirit more ayming at his own Princes Service, desiring nothing more then to re∣venge the blood of his murthered Master on the heads of those that had so perfidiously sold him; To this purpose, after some long delayes, (being stoutly opposed by Duke Ha∣milton, and the Earles of Lauderdale and Ca∣lendar) he at last obtained a Commission from the King for an adventure into Scotland; and in order to that Expedition, was furnish∣ed with four Ships from the Duke of Holstein; some supplies from the King of Denmark▪ and Fifteen Hundred Arms from the Queen of Sweden, with some few Horses under General King, and alittle neat Frigot for his owne Conveyance; some monies also were dis∣burst to him, which being Entrusted to Co∣lonel Ogelby, were by him basely Squandred away, to the great prejudice of the design.
With these small preparations did he preci∣pitate himself into inevitable Ruine, it being judged a desperate Action with so small a Force to attempt so mighty a business; but his cross fate hurrying him to destruction, fearing (as is supposed) he should have an ex∣press▪ command to desist from his purpose, the King and the Scots coming near to an Agreement; he therefore to prevent all such Commands, sends over two Ships with a third part of his men before, which by storm of weather in those dangerous Seas were lost, with all the Men and Arms, nothing saved; Yet nothing terrified with this Suc∣cess, he sends out a send Party, who making a more prosperous Voyage, landed at Orkney, and entered the Island without any resistance, he himself following not long after, attended with several persons of Note, whose valour had made them Eminently Famous in those Parts. From thence he soon Transports to Cath∣ness, which is the furthest land to the North-West of Scotland; but the People instead of coming in to him, fled away in heaps, many of them not stopping till they came to the Chief City of Edenburgh, where the Parlia∣ment were then sitting, who being Allarm'd
with this suddain Invasion, ordered Colonel Stranglan with a Choice Party to march a∣gainst him, Leshley and Holborn, with more Numerous Forces following after; The Marquess marched very slowly, but hearing of the Enemies approach, he endeavoured the gaining of a Pass of great Advantage, whereupon both Armies came to Engage, and after some short fight the Marquess was Defeated; Two Hundred of his Men Killed, and about One Thousand Two Hundred Taken, very few Escaping; amongst other things, was taken a Standard he had caused to be made of Excellent Work-man-ship, being the Portract of the late King beheaded, with this Motto, Judge and Revenge my Cause O Lord. He himself escaped from the Battel, and in a High-Landers habit kept himself from being discovered three or four dayes; but being destitute both of Meat and Drink, and no great probability of escaping, he at last dis∣covered himself to the Lord Aston, who had formerly been one of his Followers, hoping to finde friendship at his hands, but contrary to expectation was by him made a Prisoner, being greedy of the Reward, promised to his Apprehender by the Council of State. Be∣ing thus in the Custody of his mortal Ene∣mies,
from whom he could expect nothing but the worst of Cruelties, yet carried he himself with a singular constancy, and in a manner carelesse of his own condition; no object, though never so endeared to him, could alter his Resolution, or cause the least expression from him, which was not suitable to the greatness of his Spirit, and the fame of his former Actions. And that the World might see what Ju∣stice he was like to expect from them, before his coming to Edenburgh, this Sentence was drawn up against him. That he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross in Edenburgh until he died, his History and De∣claration being tyed about his neck, and to hang three hours in publick view of all the people; after which he should be Beheaded and Quartered; his head to be fixt upon the Prison-house of Eden∣burgh, and his Leggs and Armes over the Gates of the Citties of Sterling, Glascow, Perth, alias St. Johns-Town, and Aberdeen; And in case he repented (whereby the Sentence of Excommuni∣cation may be taken off by the Church) the bulk of his Body should be buried in the Gray-Fryars, if not, in the Borrow-Moor (a Place like Tyburn.)
Which Sentence was Executed upon him with as much shame and ignominy as they could possibly devise, not onely in the Sen∣tence it's self, but also in the preparatives unto it; for coming to Edenburgh, he was met by some Officers, and the Executioner in his Livery Coat, into whose hands he was delivered; there being prepared for his re∣ception a high seat in fashion of a Chariot, upon each side of which were holes, through which a cord being drawn, and crossing his breast and armes, bound him fast down in the Chair: This done, the Executioner (ac∣cording to command) took off the Mar∣quesses Hat, and put on him his own Bonnet, and then mounting his fore-horse in this ri∣diculous bravery began to drive towards the Toll-booth; the people all the way he went shedding abundance of tears to see so Noble and Magnanimious a spirit become the ob∣ject of his Enemies Triumph; But the im∣placable Ministry having him now at their mercy, could never be satisfied with his ca∣lamities, but reviled him with all the spite∣full ignominious words they could devise; and being asked why they could not be satis∣fied but by such base handling him? They replyed, They knew no other way to humble him, and bring him home to God.
May the 21 being come, the fatal day ap∣pointed for his Execution, he was brought to the Scaffold in a Scarlet Cloack, richly laced with Gold lace; He came along the Streets with as great State, and as much Majesty, as if he had been marching in the Head of an Army; insomuch that his very Enemies ac∣knowledged him to be the gallantest Person in the World; when he was come to the Gibbet, which was built of a prodigious height; he was by the Scotch Clergy (in re∣gard of his Excommunication) desired to pray apart, to whom he said, I have already poured out my soul before the Lord, who knows my heart, and into whose hands I have commended my Spirit, and he hath been pleased to return to me a full assurance of peace in Jesus Christ my Redeemer; and therefore if you will not joyn with me in prayer, my reiterating it again will be both scandalous to you and me. After which words he closed his eyes, and holding up his hands, stood a good while at his inward Devotions; afterwards he called for the Executioner and gave him money, and then preparing himself to re∣ceive the outward Ceremonies of Death; there was brought unto him his History and Declaration, hanging in a cord, which was put about his neck, which he chearfully re∣ceived,
saying, Though it had pleased his Sacred Majesty, that now is, to make him one of the Knights of the most Honourable Order of the Gar∣ter, yet he did not think himself more Honoured by the Garter, then by that Cord and Book, which he would embrace about his neck with as much joy and content, as ever he did the Garter, or a Chain of Gold; and therefore desired them to tye them about him as they pleased, telling them, That what they thought was for his Disgrace, he took to be his greatest Honour. This being done, and his Armes tyed, he asked the Officers, If they had any more Dis∣honour (as they conceived it) to put upon him, he was ready to accept it; and so with an undaunt∣ed Courage mounted the top of that prodi∣gious Gibbet, where having commended his soul to God, he patiently underwent the Ex∣ecution of their inveterate malice. Thus fell this Worthy Hero, by a most ma∣licious and barbarous sort of cruelty, his Head and Quarters being disposed of according to that wicked Sentence pronounced against him, though afterwards, (viz.) May 11. 1661. they found a more Honourable Bu∣rial, being taken down from the Gates of those four distant Cities, and with great State and Solemnity Interred with a Funeral
becoming his Family, and his own personal Renown and Glory. To conclude this Story, he was one of the Noblest, Gallantest Persons that age brought forth; a Captain whose unexampled Atchievments have Fa∣med a History, which were its Volumn ten times bigger, would yet be disproportioned to the due praises of this matchless Hero; the day of his Martyrdom was May the 21. 1650. To the Immortal Memory of those Worthy Martyrs who laid down their lives in Op∣position to Tyranny, and Defence of the Ancient Fundamental Laws of this Na∣tion. Hail Worthy Martyrs of the Royal Cause, Who stoutly stood up in Defence of Laws; And when the Land was sick of their own good, To cure the same offer'd their dearest blood; These were the Royal Martyrs of this age, Who 'gainst the Rebellion Rampant durst Engage; Whose Noble Virtues, and Illustrious Worth, Spight of their Foes base Cruelty brake forth; And with their Souls did unto Heaven aspire, Making the World their Virtues to admire;
Thus what their Foes by Barbarous Cruelty Sought to depress, was raised far more high; As Jems i'th' dark do cast a brighter ray, Then when obstructed by the rival day; So did the lustre of their worth appear, Brake thorow those clouds, and shines transparent clear: Thus did they pass by Rebells bloody hand Through the Red Sea, unto the promist Land, There with the Blessed Saints to be partaker, And Hallilujahs sing unto their Maker: There rest blest Souls amongst that happy Quire, Whilest we your Noble Virtues do admire; And that your Names with Sacred Veneration, Do live Renown'd for ever in this Nation. A Catalogue of the most Eminent Per∣sons Slain in his Majesties Service, in Opposition to Tyranny, and De∣fence of the Fundamental Laws. I. COrnet Porter, Son to Master Endimeon Porter of the Bed-Chamber, Slain at Newborn upon Tine, against the Scots, upon their Rebellious Invasion of England, August 27. 1639.
II. The Lord Aubigney, Father to the most Illustrious Charles Duke of Richmond, who so Valiantly behaved himself at the Battel of Edge-hill, where he was mortally wounded, of which wounds he died at Abington, and was buried at Christ-Church in Oxford. III. The Earle of Lyndsey General of the Field at Edge-hill, where he behaved Him∣self like a Valiant Souldier, and Expert Commander, was at the said Battel unfor∣tunately Slain, October 23. 1642. IV. Sir Edmond Varney, the Kings Stand∣ard-Bearer, at Edge-hill, who Valiantly Fighting was Slain under it; and the Stand∣ard being taken by one Chambers, Essex's Se∣cretary, was Rescured by Sir John Smith, whom the King after the Battel Knighted. V. Colonel Munro, a Scotch Man, a man of Eminent Valour, Slain also at the same Battel. VI. Spencer Earle of Northampton, a most Magnanimous Asserter of the Kings Cause, who Besieged Leichfield; Sir William Breerton, and Sir John Gell, with Three Thousand Men came to relieve it; against whom the Earle Opposed, obtaining of them a Glorious Vi∣ctory, though with the price of his own life; for Valiantly Fighting, whether by disad∣vantage
of the ground (being full of Conney-Burroughs) or born down by the Enemies, is uncertain, he was un-horst, and refusing Quarter, was killed by a private unlucky hand, March 19. 1642. VII. Earle of Denbigh, a Gentleman of much Worth and Excellency, unfortunate∣ly slain at the taking of Birmingham by Prince Rupert, April the 3. 1643. VIII. Sir Bevil Greenvil, a Gentleman whose Gallant Parts, and Active Service for his Royal Master, deserves to be had in ever∣lasting remembrance; He Engaging with Sir Ralph Hopton, and other Eminent Cava∣liers, against Sir William Waller, at a place cal∣led Landsdown, in his full Cariere of Victory was unfortunately killed, to the great loss of his Majesty, and unspeakable grief of all true Lovers of Heroick Valour. IX. Master Leak, Son to my Lord Dein∣court, now Earle of Scours-dale, Master Bar∣ker, Colonel Wall, Captain James, Captain Cholwel, and Master Busturd, all Valiant Per∣sons, who in the Service of his Majesty at the same Fight at Landsdown died in the bed of honour. X. Marquess de Vieu Ville, who in the Fight at Auborn-chase behaved himself most
Gallantly, and Valiantly Fighting was there slain, Septem. 1643. XI. Earle of Carnarvan, a Nobleman of as great Spirit and Affection to the Kings Service as any, who at Newbery Battel, Sept. 19. 1643. giving a desparate Charge to the Enemies Horse, under the Command of Sir Philip Stapleton, Routed them, and pursuing them to their Foot was unhappily shot in the Head of his Troops, whose loss was deser∣vedly lamented by all Valiant Spirits, and to whose memory more Publick memory is due, then a private Enterment in Jesus Col∣ledge in Oxford. XII. Earle of Sunderland, and Viscount Faulkland, persons of Superlative Worth and Honour, who in the just Defence of his Ma∣jesty, and the Laws, was slain at the foresaid Battel of Newbery, and that close by the Kings Person, whose Cause they had so stoutly maintained. XIII. Lord Viscount Faulkland, a Person whose Worth cannot be forgotten, and whose Excellent Parts speaks him better then any Elogy I can bestow upon him, to the great grief of Learned Men, slain at New∣bery, Septem. 17. 1643. XIV. Sir Henry Howard, and Sir
Savile, Men of Extraordinary Worth, and Merit, who at the Battel of Adderton-heath by their Valour gained the Victory, but lost their own Lives, and were Enterred toge∣ther in York Minster. XV. The Earle of Kingston, Father to the Marquess of Dorchester now living, who being unhappily surprized by some Forces of the Lord Willoughbies, about Gainsbrough, he being a Person of great Quality, and of much con∣cernment to the Kings Affairs; they resol∣ved to send him to Hull in a Pinnace; In the way thither, Colonel Cavendish, Brother to the Earle of Devonshire, with a Party, pur∣sued the Pinnace to a shallow, which she could not pass, demanding her, and the Earles Sur∣render, which being refused, a Drake was discharged, which unfortunately killed the said Earle and one of his Servants being placed on purpose on the Deck, to deter the Royalists from shooting; whereupon they presently struck sayle, and yielded; but with a just revenge, were all sacrificed to to the Ghost of that most Noble Loyal Peer. XVI. Colonel Charls Cavendish aforesaid, who quickly after the deserved death of those murthering Rebells, was set upon by a great Party under Colonel White a Lincoln∣shire
Gentleman, who with those Forces came to relieve the Boat, or recover it if taken: Whereupon a sharp Encounter en∣sued betwixt them, but the Royalists being over-pour'd, the Valiant Colonel was for∣ced to take the Trent with his Horse, which swam him safe to the other side, but there stuck in the Owze and Mud; but as soon as he could get a shore off his Horses back, the Enemy was come to him round by the Ford, and seeing him desparately wounded offer'd him Quarter, which he magnanimously re∣fusing, throwing his blood amongst them, which he wipé't off his face, was by them killed out-right upon the place. XVII. The Lord Grandison, who in the Service of his Majesty was wounded at Bri∣stol, of which wounds he shortly after died. XVIII. Sir Ingram Hopton, Sir George Bo∣lit, and Lievtenant Colonel Markham, men whose Names deserve to be recorded in the Book of Fame, who in a sharp and sore con∣flict against the Earle of Manchester's Forces, near Horn-Castle in Lincoln-shire, valiantly fighting were unfortunately slain. XIX. John Lord Stuart, second Brother to the Duke of Richmond, a most Gallant He∣roick Person, slain in the Battel between
Hopton and Waller, on Cheriton-Down Fight, March 29. 1644. XX. Sir John Smith, Colonel Sandys, and Colonel Scot, Persons of great Worth and Eminency, whose valourous minds scorned danger, and who hated no man so much as a Coward: These Gallant Sons of Mars, were slain at the foresaid Fight on Cheriton-Down, whose valiant Names succeeding Ages shall mention with honour. XXI. Colonel Manning, slain also at the foresaid Fight, a Gallant Person, onely un∣happy in this, in being Father to that Cap∣tain Manning, who betrayed the Kings Coun∣cil to Cromwel, while he resided at Colin, for which he was shot to death in the Duke of Newburghs Country. XXII. The Lord Cary, Sir Thomas Mo∣tham, and Sir William Lampton, who in that great Fight betwixt Prince Rupert, and the Parliamentarians at Maston Moor, July 2. 1644. wherein above Eight Thousand lost their Lives, and was indeed the Greatest of all the War; in this so memorable a Battel, those▪ Three Honoured Persons lost their Lives, sealing the love they bore to the Kings Side with their dearest bloods.
XXIII. Sir William Wentworth, Sir Charles Slingsby, Sir Francis Dane, who Engaging in Defence of his Majesties Cause, were slain in that great and unfortunate fight at Maston Moor. XXIV. Lievtenant Colonel Smith, and Captain Boteler, who at the Raising of Ban∣bury Siege, lost their lives to purchase to themselves an Honourable Name. XXV. Sir John Digby, whose very Fa∣mily carries Loyalty in the Name of it, wounded at Langport in the County of Somer∣set, of which wounds he shortly after died. XXVI. Colonel Myn, an Active Loyal Person, who Commanded a Regiment of English which he brought with him out of Ireland; who Engaging with Massey in Glo∣ster-shire, valiantly performed the Office of an Excellent Souldier, and Expert Com∣mander, both in Rallying his Men, bringing them up, and keeping them from the Rout; but being over-mastered in number, he was there slain, dying in the bed of Honour. XXVII. Colonel Sir William St. Leger, Lievtenant Colonel Topping, and Lievtenant Colonel Leake, who in the second Battlel at Newbery▪ valiantly fighting lost their lives, making good that ground in their death,
which in their life they had undertook to keep; accompanying those Souldiers in their deaths, whom in their lives they had Com∣manded with so much Gallantry. XXVIII. Colonel Gage, the flower of Chevialry, and pattern of true Magnani∣mity, who to hinder the daily Excursions of the Abington Forces under the Command of Major General Brown, resolv'd to build a Fort at Culham Bride, to repress the boldness of those Forces who were constantly out there∣abouts upon Designes; In the attempt there∣of, the Abington Forces under Colonel Brown Sally out, to obstruct so dangerous an obsta∣cle to their Erruption, Engaging with the Royalists, though with little hopes of pre∣vailing, till an unlucky shot wounded Colo∣nel Gage in the head, of which he dyed as soon as he came to Oxford, a great loss to the Royal Interest. XXIX. Colonel St. George, who at the storming of the City of Leicester in a Bravery and Gallantry of Courage, ventering upon the mouth of the Cannon, was slain with a great shot. XXX. Colonel Taylor, an Eminent Com∣mander under Prince Rupert, who at the Siege thereof by Sir Thomas Fairfax, was in its De∣fence mortally wounded.
XXXI. Sir Richard Crane, a great friend and familiar with Prince Rupert, who in a Sal∣ly upon the Enemies was unfortunately slain. XXXII. The thrice Noble Lord Bernard Stuart Earle of Leichfield, the last of the three Illustrious Brothers of the Duke of Richmond late deceased; who constantly adheiring to the King both in Weal and Woe, never left him for the greatest Danger or Extremity; for after the fatal fight at Naseby, the King with a flying Army intending for the relief of Chester, was set upon by General Poyntz at Routon-Heath, where happened a very sharp, sore fight, wherein this Noble Lord gallant∣ly fighting in Defence of his Royal Master, was unfortunely killed, Sept. 24. 1645. XXXIII. Sir Francis Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton, men of stout and magnani∣mous carriage, who feared not death in his nearest approaches, those two valiant Hero's were slain at Sherbon fight in Yorkshire, October 25. 1645. being in their march towards the Marquess of Montross. XXXIV. Major Cufaud, an Officer in Basing House, which so long and valiantly held out against the numerous assaults of a Potent Enemy, and who at last of all would hear of
no Terms of surrender; but being stormed, and with great loss of the assailants Entered, this valiant Major after a stout resistance, not dreading death, was by the hands of his Ene∣mies there slain. XXXV. Doctor Griffiths Daughter, who though a Female, yet of a Masculine spirit, and for her Loyalty deserving a large share amongst those Notable Hero's slain in the Kings service; this Amazonian Lady (whose praise cannot be sufficiently celebrated) in the foresaid storm at Basing House, was by the barbarity of the Enemies killed, and shame∣fully left naked; a trophy of their Baseness, and her own eternal Renown and Honour. XXXVI. Master Gerard, the Authour of that Elabourate Herbal which bears his Name, to whom succeeding Ages must con∣fess themselves indebted; this gallant Gen∣tleman Renowned for Arts and Armes, was likewise at the storming of that House unfor∣tunately slain; a great losse to succeeding Ages. XXXVII. Sir Thomas Dallison, and Sir Richard Cave, who in that unfortunate Battel at Naseby, sealed their Affection to the Kings Cause with their dearest bloods.
XXXVIII. Sir Nicholas Fortescu a Knight of Malta (see the justness of the Kings Cause, which invited Strangers from so far Coun∣tries to take his Part,) was slain in Lanca∣shire, in defence of the Royal Cause. XXXIX. Sir Troilus Turbervil, Captain Lievtenant of the Kings Life Guard, slain at his Majesties marching from Newark to Oxford. XL. Major Threave, and Captain Fry, two Persons of Eminent Valour under the Lord Hopton, who when King Charle's Moon began to waine, yet stoutly stood up in their Soveraigns Defence, and at Torington, va∣liantly fighting against the Fairfaxians, who came to storm the Town, were there slain, dying in the bed of honour. XLI. Colonel Stanhop, Governour of Shelford House, who being summoned to sur∣render the same by Major General Poynz, with a gallant resolution refused the same; whereupon the Enemy storming, and being over-power'd, he was slain, whilest he va∣liantly strived to make good that place he had undertaken to keep. XLII. Sir Nicholas Kemish, an Eminent Cavaleir, whose Worth and Gallantry can∣not be sufficiently mentioned; This Loyal
Knight, after such time the Juncto at West∣minster had made those Destructive Votes of No further Addresses to the King, and began to reject him in words, as they had done former∣ly in deeds; some hopes being given of Ayd for his Majesty, Langhorn, Poyer, and Powell, having an Army under them, to neer the number of Eight Thousand, declaring for the King: Sir John Owen also having Risen in North-Wales with a good Force; This gallant Knight put to his helping hand, and surpri∣zed Chepstow-Castle; but providence having decreed that deliverance should come to the English Nation by a more mild way then the Sword; those Forces under the Three Colo∣nels were utterly Routed; Sir John Owen supprest and taken Prisoner, and the Castle of Chepstow stormed and taken by Colonel Eure, where this Renowned Knight for his Gallant Loyalty, was by the barbarous Ene∣my slain in cold blood. XLIII. The Lord Francis Villers, Bro∣ther to the Duke of Buckingham, who with the said Duke, the Earle of Holland, and o∣ther Noble Personages, Rose in Armes for the Restauration of his Sacred Majesty at Kingston in Surry, but being set upon by Sir Michael Livesy, with other of the Parliament
Forces, this Active Spark of Valour, being too far Engaged by his Mettalsome Courage, was taken Prisoner, and refusing Quarter, was basely killed by a mean and rude hand, with whose fall fell the Courage of all the other, he being a person of Excellent Parts, and of Valour far above his years. XLIV. Sir  Compton, a Gen∣tleman of known Worth and Loyalty, who Engaging with those Noble Hero's, Sir Charles Lucas, Lord Capel, &c. for the Resto∣ring the King, and the Lawes to their Right, whose Authority was then trampled upon by the Juncto at Westminster; This Gallant Gen∣tleman upon a sally out against the Fairfax∣ians, that besieged the Town, valiantly fight∣ing, was by a bullet (which differenceth not a Loyal Person from a Rebel) shot, and wounded, whereof he died, July 1648. XLV. Sir William Vaughan, whose Va∣lour and Fidelity were often approved in his Majesties Service, he was slain at the siege of Dublin serving under the thrice Re∣nowned Marquess of Ormond. XLVI. Sir Arthur Aston, a Person whose Experience, Courage, and approved Fide∣lity rendred him worthy of the highest Trust and Command; This worthy Gentleman
was Governour of Drogheda when Cromwell with his Army of Janisaries besieged it; va∣liantly defending the Place committed to his Charge, giving Cromwell two notable Re∣pulses, and doubtless had given a good ac∣count of his Command, had not Colonel Wall's Regiment upon the unfortunate losse of their Colonel, in the third Assault been so unhappily dismay'd, as to listen, (before any need was) unto the Enemy offering them Quarter, and admitted them in upon those Terms; betraying thereby both themselves, and all their Fellow Souldiers, to the insati∣able Cruelty of that Monster of Nature, Cromwel, who gaining the Place, most inhu∣manely put them all to the sword. XLVII. Sir Edmond Varney▪ a Gentle∣man whose worth made him alike beloved and admired; his faithfull service being of∣ten approved in Defence of his Majesty, this gallant Gentleman, whose merits rendred him odious to Cromwel, was one of those who by that bloody Cut-throat was butchered at Drogheda. XLVIII. Col. Warren, Col. Fleming Col. Brin, Lievtenant Colonel Finglass, and Major Tempest, all Active Sparks of Valour, whose Heroick Acts had purchased to them a spread∣ing
Fame, and whose supereminent valour marked them out to slaughter from the hand of that wicked (though fortunate) General Oliver Cromwell, at Drogheda aforesaid. XLIX. Colonel Hamond a Kentish Gen∣tleman, and firm Royalist, who was a Colche∣sterian, and suffered for his Loyalty a sharp Imprisonment at Windsor; afterwards ser∣ving his Royal Master in Ireland, at the Ca∣stle of Garran, lost his life against Cromwel and his Conquering Army. L. Captain Goff, a person of eminent va∣lour, who under the Marquess of Clanrickard in the Royal Cause, valiantly fighting, was unfortunately killed. LI. Sir John Brown, a Major General of the Scots at such time as his present Majesty was amongst them, who with a Party of Scots Encountering with Lambert in Fife, was there wounded, of which he quickly after died. LII. The Lord Widrington, an Eminent, and Loyal Person, who after the Kings march to Worcester, together with that ever Re∣nowned Lord, the Earle of Derby, and other Eminent Hero's, gathered Forces together in Lancashire to oppose the Rebells Army, which like an impetuous torrent were flowing after
the Royal Party, and having gathered toge∣ther about Twelve Hundred Men, marched upon a design to fall upon Cromwells own Re∣giment then Quartering upon their march in Lancaster, when in the nick of time, in comes Lilburn with Ten Troops of Horse sent by the General from York upon that very Service, having with them Two Regiments of Cheshire Foot, and other additional Forces of Horse. Those gallant Royalists notwith∣standing chearfully resolved to fight with Lilburn, and accordingly charged him so fu∣riously, that they totally Routed their first Troop, and with a gallant bravery entered their Body so far, that they began to run; but fresh reserves coming in, they were for∣ced to retreat, being sorely annoyed with the Musquets; yet notwithstanding this repulse, they renewed their charge again, and were in great probability of obtaining a glorious Victory, when another supply resisted the torrent of their valour, and left deep impres∣sions thereof in the death of many gallant Royalists, amongst whom this Noble Hero was one, who there died in the bed of Ho∣nour, August 25. 1651. LIII. Major General Sir Thomas Tilsely, a Gentleman of such Heroick Parts, that envy
her self must commend him to be the pattern of true Chivalry and Mirrour of Loyalty; So Great and Excellent were his Endow∣ments, that had he lived in former Ages, his Valourous Atchievments, would have quite shaded many of those who then passed for il∣lustrious Hero's, he was also slain in that fatal defeat whereof we spake of last. LIV. Colonel Mathew Boynton, Sir Francis Gamul, Lievtenant Colonel Gallyard, and Ma∣jor Trollop, and Chester, Men of approved Worth and Loyalty, whose gallantry appear∣ed the more conspicuous, Engaging in such a time when there was almost a general de∣fection of Loyalty; These valiant Hero's Engaging with the foresaid Earle of Derby, being over-powered by Lilburn's numerous Forces, gallantly fighting, were slain at Wig∣gan, August 25. 1651. dying there in the bed of Honour, and leaving to posterity a Noble Character of their Worth and Virtues. LV. Duke Hamilton, unfortunately wounded in the Fight at Worcester, of which wounds he shortly after died. LVI. Colonel Morgan, a Gallant Gen∣tleman, who Engaged with Sir George Booth, for a Free Parliament, and to un-yoak the Nation from the slavery of those bloody
Canniballs at Westminster, who intended to have perpetuated themselves in their Tyran∣ny; This magnanimous Loyal Person, va∣liantly fighting against Lambert's numerous Forces, which like a violent Torrent over∣powered them; after a gallant defence, and defiance of his Enemies, was there mortally wounded, and soon after died, being the last man whose blood was shed in War against those wicked Tyrants; the Kings Restaura∣tion hapning quickly after. And in the next place we should come to speak of those who suffered in their Estate for their Loyalty; those gallant Confessors, to whom nothing was more common then Imprisonment and Sequestration; but should we reckon them all up, it would make a Vo∣lume as big as Foxes Martyrologie, and tyre the brain of the most sedulous Reader; not any one Rich Cavilier that scaped their clutches; a great Estate being enough to make them guilty of the most hainous Crimes, and how ever their Bodies sped, their Purses were sure to pay for it; Goldsmiths and Haber∣dashers Hall was their Exchequer, as the High Court of Justice was their Shambles; The Good Old Cause devoured more then Bell
and the Dragon, and it was their main Policy to be maintained by their Enemies Estates; Take therefore here a Brief Catalogue of the most Eminent Sufferers, reserving those of a lesser magnitude to be recorded by more voluminous Historians. A brief Catalogue of the most Eminent of those Loyal Confessors, who Suffered by Imprisonment, Banishment, or E∣state, for the Cause of his Sacred Ma∣jesty. And that no Occasion may be taken at this Catalogue for matter of Precedency, as nominating the most Eminent Sufferers in the first place, we will (as near as we can) observe the order of time, and begin first with: I. THe Lord Finch of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; a Person whose Abilities, and Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty rendred him obnoxious to the unruly rabble; and therefore upon their Arbitrary Proceed∣ings
against the Life of the most Noble Earle of Strafford, he wisely with-drew himself away in time, before Popular Fury had sei∣zed on him, against which Beast; Innocency would not then give Protection. He lived in Banishment and Exile from his Native Country for Sixteen years, and then returned with more Credit and Honour then he was forced from it, dying in the Love, and good Opinion of all Honest People; His Faithfull Service to his Soveraign being all the Charge and Accusation they had against him. II. Master Secretary Windebanck, a person of approved Worth and Loyalty, against whom the darts of Popular Fury were in those times of Distraction especially aymed at, which to avoid, he pursued the same course with the Lord Finch, and died in the time of his absence abroad. III. The Right Reverend Father in God, Mathew Lord Bishop of Ely, who with Eleven more of that Sacred Function, were commit∣ted to the Tower in the year of our Lord, 1641. The pretensions against them being the same with the Complices of Korah, Ye take too much upon you ye Sons of Levi, when their Adversaries intentions was, to take all; for though the grave Rabbies of that prevailing
Faction buzzed into the Peoples eares, that their Quarrel was against the Litturgy, a∣gainst Ceremonies and the like a yet their after-Actions made it plainly appear, that it was more against Bishops Lands; and that the Wealth of the Clergy was more in their ayme, then the Weal the Subjects; and the Riches of the Prelates more indifferent to those strict Disciplinaries, then a Reve∣rend decency in holy performances. Eigh∣teen years did this Reverend Father suffer Imprisonment in the Tower, having in all that time no Charge exhibited against him; but in the end of the year, 1659. he was re∣stored to his liberty by the means of the Re∣nowned Duke of Albemarle, and is since Re-established in his former Diocess, to the Honour and Support of this restored Church. IV. Religious Doctor Featly, one most Eminent for Learning and Piety, to whom this Church is much indebted for his grave accurate defences of its Doctrine and Dis∣cipline, a man of excellent Endowments, and surpassing Knowledge, being a Divine of the Primitive stamp and temper, when the Church by lowliness of spirit did flourish in high examples; yet could not this his sin∣gular Piety, eminent Learning; nor those
other extraordinary Gifts with which he was Endowed, privilege him from the protection of a Prison, being by an Order of Parliament committed to Peter-House, where he langui∣shed in much pain and misery about a year and a half; and was afterwards (sickness en∣creasing) through much importunity remo∣ved to Chelsey Colledge, as a more wholesome Aire; but he was so far spent by their bar∣barous misusage of him, that within three weeks after his coming thither, he died. V. Sir Robert Heath, Lord Chief Justice of England, a person much Honoured for his In∣tegrity and Moderation, and as conspicuous for his constant Loyalty, as the Sun in the Firmament in a serene day. His constant ap∣proved service to the King had rendered him so odious to the Rebells at Westminster, that he was by them excepted from mercy; where∣fore towards the expiration of the War, he abandoned his Country, and fled into France, where living in great greef and anxiety of mind to behold the Ruines of his King and Country, he fell into a Disease, and died thereof at Caen in Normandy, not long after the Kings death. VI. Judge Bartlet, whose innocency de∣fied their threats, and like a rock stood in op∣position
against that torrent of Rebellion; but yet was forced at last to yield to their Tyranny in his Body, though his Mind they could not conquer; He was the first of that Reverend Robe that was committed, against whom was brought a Charge, fuller of ma∣lice then truth, and which his integrity made them ashamed of a further prosecution: Thus we see (by the Imprisonment of this Reverend Judge, and others) that the pre∣tense of our Grand Reformers, was to put out the eyes of the Law, that the Subjects might see the clearer. VII. That heart of Oake, and Pillar of the Law, Judge Jenkins, one of his Majesties Justices in Wales, whose Annagram is, David Jenkins, Kains did Envy. He was for some misdemeanours of Loyalty, brought to the Bar in Chancery, where he denyed the Au∣thority of the Court, because their Seal was contrary to Law, as well as their Commis∣sioners; and so baffled those puny Judges, that instead of a further prosecution there, they committed him Prisoner to the Tower, where he gave further Demonstrations of his Loyalty, by publishing several Presidents and Statutes, wherein he proved them Re∣bells and Traytors, and owned the same a∣gain
at other Bars: So that he did more mischief to the Enemies of the Royal Cause with his Pen, then their best Regiment could do with their Swords. He used his utmost endeavour to set the Parliament and Army at ods, thereby to promote the Kings Cause, according to that well known maxime, Di∣vide and Conquer, defying them and their threats, and asserting the King and the Laws against their Usurpation. He was kept a close Prisoner a long time in the Tower, where wearied of him by his indefatigable industry in the Kings Cause, he was remo∣ved from thence to Windsor, where he con∣tinued in the same quality, and of the same mind, till without thanks to them he was permitted the liberty of the Town; and hath survived to see the Return of Majesty, the Restauration of the Laws, and the Li∣berty of the Subjects restored to them again in as ample a manner as it was before. VIII. That Valiant, Loyal Son of Mary, Sir Ralph, afterwards Lord Hopton, whose Courage and Prudence in the management of the Kings Affairs, (for whom he Com∣manded in the West) did gaine him the ap∣probation of an Expert Captain, and Gallant Commander, having his Endeavours
Crowned with many notable Successes. Af∣ter his Disbanding in Cornwall (Rebellion then flourishing with a high hand) he took shipping with the Prince, our now Gracious Soveraign, and with him Sailed into the Island of Scilly, and from thence into the Realm of France, following the Kings hard fortune in his Peregrinations, till death in the end put a period to his Travells, and af∣ter a Troublesome life, he found a quiet Grave at the City of Paris in France. IX. Master Secretary, Sir Edward Nicholas, who constantly and faithfully adhered to his Majesty from the beginning of his Troubles, being a great Prop to the Royal Cause, by his Prudent Counsells, and Great Abilities in the Management of the most Difficult Affairs; and afterwards continued the same Service and Office to our present Soveraign, in all his Troubles and Negotiations abroad, having with great Faithfulness and Pruden∣cy Managed that Employment all along, to the happy Effect of his Majesties Glorious Restitution. X. Sir Edward Hide, since the Right Ho∣nourable Earle of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellour to his present Majesty, of whose Worth and Abilities to speak, were to cry
out; the Sun shine; by whose Counsels the late King had in special Esteem, and there∣fore made him his bosome, Favourite, which caused such a hatred against him by the Fa∣ction at Westminster, as excluded him out of their Spurious Act of Mercy: But escaping their mercilesse cruelty by a timely avoid∣ance of the Land, through his prudent car∣riage of Affairs, together with the provi∣dencial mercy of God, he survived to see those Enemies of Monarchy, and Regal Go∣vernment brought to a Just Tryal, and him∣self advanced to such a pitch of Honour, as to see the Laws Administred in their right form, and the Subject to enjoy the just pri∣viledges of them. XI. The Lord Wilnot, afterwards by King Charles the Second made Earle of Rochester, being Raised thereunto by his superlative Deserts, not only by his Valour which shone transcendent clear at Round-way-down neer the Devizes; but also in his (prudent carriage in that grand Affair, concerning the Kingdoms happiness, in his Majesties Miraculous E∣scape from Worcester; He died a little before the Kings Restitution, not surviving to par∣ticipate of those Grandeurs, whereof his Abilities would have made him a deserved Sharer.
XII. The Right Reverend Doctor Shel∣den, whose Deserts and Sufferings advanced him upon the Restauration of his Majesty to be Lord Bishop of London, since by the death of Doctor Juxon, (as none more able to sup∣ply his place) to the Arch-Bishoprick of Can∣terbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all Eng∣land, of whose Abilities to speak, were to show the light of the Sun by a Candle; Let it suffice, that his very Name is enough to strike Envy dead, and to put to silence the most obstinate Heretick, and riged Schisma∣tick upon the face of the whole Earth. XIII. The Religiously Loyall Doctor Hammond, a constant assertor of our English Liturgy, and one whose Abilities rendred him dear to King Charles the Martyr; to whom Imprisonment was no stranger, du∣ring the time Rebellion was Rampant, ex∣pecting every day for his Loyalty to have been transported, yet would never yield nor deviate from those wayes wherein Con∣science ascertain'd him he was in the right, though not the predominate side. XIV. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, afterwards Lord Langdale, whose Abilities in Martiall Affairs, would in the time of Paganism have deified him the God of Battel, though in
our times his constant Loyalty had rendred him to a higher pitch of Honour, being de∣servedly accounted a Pylot for all Noble and Gallant Spirits whereby to direct and steer their Course. XV. Master Roger L' Strange, of whose Worth and Abilities to speak would to an Intelligible Reader appear superfluous, like the labours of him who writ a whole Vo∣lumn in the praise of Hercules whom no man dispraised. This Loyal Gentleman for his Endeavours of Reducing Linn to their Obe∣dience to his Majesty, suffer'd the utmost malice of a prevailing Faction, even to Con∣demnation, besides a long Imprisonment in Newgate; Yet could not their Tyranny so much depress his Spirits, but his Pen was still a constant Assertor of the Royal Cause; in which he continued his best endeavours, unto, and untill the happy Restauration of his Sacred Majesty, by whom he is looked upon as one of the Agents of his Restaura∣tion. XVI. The Right Honourable the Earle of Norwich, a Gentleman of such Worth and Abilities, that this mite will signifie nothing to those Rare and Excellent gifts both of Learning and▪ Wisdom, wherewith he was Adorned.
XVII. Sir John Stowel, a Somerset-shire Gentleman, whose Loyalty rendred him so sufficiently Famous, that Envy it's self can∣not but grant him a prime place with those Glorious Confessors who suffered under the Barbarous Tyrannies of the Rump, in the Cause of that Blessed Martyr, King Charles, who so constantly and vigourously adhered to the King during the War, untill the Sur∣render of Exeter, where was good Articles granted, upon which he came to London to make composition for his Vast Estate then under Sequestration; but contrary to the Capitulation agreed upon at Exeter, the Committee at Gold-Smiths-Hall (those Horse-leeches of the Nation) tendered him the Ne∣gative Oath before he could have any ad∣mission to Compound; to which unjust and perfidious dealing he pleaded the benefit of the said Articles, who (good Conscientious Men) committed him first to the Serjant at Armes, and from thence to Newgate, where having remained a long time, he was at last brought to their High Court of Injustice, where he very hardly escaped with life; his great Estate amounting to Seven or Eight Thousand pound per Annum, making him liable to any Treason those Incorrigible Traytors could
suggest against him; he was from thence remanded to the Tower, but hath since survi∣ved to enjoy again his own Estate, and to see many of those Hanged, who would have used their utmost spight for the Enjoyment of his great Estate. XVIII. Sir John Berkenhead, a Gentle∣man whose Worth and Deserts are too high for me to deliniate; He was a constant Asser∣tor of his Majesties Cause in its lowest Ex∣tremities, and suffered for the same several Imprisonments; I shall speak no more in his Commendation, whose own Pen hath so sufficiently display'd its self, that he who is ignorant thereof, must plead ignorance both to Wit and Learning. XIX. Doctor Barwick, a Reverend Or∣thodox Divine, who for his Loyalty was by an Order of the Long Parliament committed Prisoner to the Tower, where he lay untill such time he was neer famished, when Co∣lonel West the then Lievtenant of the Tower, permitted him his liberty on Parol to render himself at a prefixed time soon after, which he accordingly performed; after the Liev∣tenants death, his Wife gained him his Conge, and set him at perfect Freedome, there being nothing of Accusation against
him, for it was the method of those Tyrants to bury Men in their Prisons, untill their Estates and Healths were quite exhausted, if they had nothing against them which would presently reach their Lives. This Reverend Doctor survived to see the flourishing again of Episcopacy, and was by his Sacred Ma∣jesty made Dean of St. Pauls, in which place he continued till the month of October, 1664. when (like Abraham) he was gathered to his Fathers a good man, and full of dayes. XX. The Valiant Earle of Cleaveland, a person whose Worth and Honour cannot be forgotten so long as living Annals shall inform posterity of the miseries of our Civil Wars; This Loyal Earle, as he gave un∣doubted Testimonies all along the War, of his unfeigned Fidelity to the Royal Cause, so particularly at Worcester, where he was in Obedience to his Majesties commands; suf∣fering a tedious and cruel Imprisonment by those Barbarous Rebells, for the Testimonies of his Affection to his Royal Soveraign. XXI. The Lord Gerard, now Captain of his Majesties Life Guard, who all along the War bore a part in the calamities and mis∣fortunes of the Kings Adventures, never for∣saking the Royal Interest in its lowest ebb of
Fortune, which he hath survived to see it restored again to its former resplendant Ma∣jesty. XXII. Sir John Owen, that undaunted piece of Welsh Loyalty, whose endeavours for the King in that Country, were truly Honourable, though not crowned with that successe as such a Cause merrited. This Loyal Gentleman, was at their High Court of Injustice condemned to death, together with Duke Hamilton, Lord Capel, &c. but by the mercy of the Parliament, (rare and wonder∣full) he was Reprieved. XXIII. The Earle of Norwich, the Lord Loughborough, Sir Bernard Gascoigne, Colonel Far, &c. these Heroick Persons were all Engaged in the Design at Colchester, where having suffer'd a sharp and bitter Siege, after the rendition of the Town, they had by the barbarity of those Rebells all of them suffer∣ed death, had not some of them made their escapes, and the rest give in such Pleas as would have freed them out of the hands of the most bloody Cannibals in the world. XXIV. Should I next go about to enu∣merate all those Excellent Persons who were forced out of their Fellowships, and other Collegiate Emoluments in both Universi∣ties,
it would be a Task too large for so small a Volumne; —A work so great, Would make Olympus bearing Atlas sweat. Such barbarity being used towards them, as may make Posterity to tremble at the thought of it, I shall therefore pass over that sad story and beadroll, desiring to be ex∣cused, though I give not to every person a due Character for their Loyalty in Suffer∣ing. XXV. Should I next mention the cala∣mity of the Loyal and Orthodox Clergy, which they underwent in general, by that bloody and cruel Edict of Oliver, which by restriction of their Function, nay their par∣ticular abilities, permitting them not so much as to keep a School, taking thereby clearly away from them all hopes of susten∣tation and maintenance of life; this might better be expressed by sighs and tears, then by pen and paper. XXVI. Next I might make a record of that black Bill and List against several of the Nobility and Gentry, which passed against them for an Act of Parliament, by which their Estates were forfeited for Loyalty, and
appointed to be sold by Trustees of their No∣mination; thus though they could not come at to eat the bird, they would be sure to pluck off all his feathers. XXVII. In the next place, the Martyr∣ed City of Worcester, the scene of ruined Loyalty deserves to be had in everlasting remembrance, each Citizen whereof might be transcribed into this Register, as being all sufferers for the Royal Cause, to which they constantly adhered during all the time of the War, and would not yield at last without a particular Order from his Majesty; and with the same resolution of Loyalty did they Entertain King Charles the Second in fifty one, whom they proclaimed with great so∣lemnity, and in that Fatal Defeat suffered deeply with him being plundered by the in∣satiable covetousnesse of the Souldiers of what ever was worth the carrying away; yet in that desparate exigency (such was their love to the Royal Cause) that as if their own sufferings had been nothing, at the Re∣bels enterance, the streets resounded with the peoples cryes, Oh! save the King, save the King; amongst which number of Royal Sufferers; Master Soles, the honest Mayor deserves a particular remembrance, for
whom a Gallows was set up for him at his own door, and from which he as narrowly escaped. XXVIII. Next for the Honour of the City of London, we find Sir Abraham Reynold∣son, who so gallantly refused to Proclaim the Act for abolishing Kingly Government, and was for the same committed to the Tower; Sir John Gaire, Alderman Adams, Sir James Bunce, who suffered much in their Vast. E∣states, and Major General Brown, who endu∣red a sharp and tedious Imprisonment. XXIX. The Honourable Colonel John Russel, Brother to the Earle of Bedford, a per∣son of unfeigned Fidelity and Gallantry, who served his Majesty in his Armies during all the War, and was a constant sufferer for him all along afterwards in the Usurpers Prisons, being upon the least occasion of fear, sure to be one of the first that was secu∣red, and so continued tossed from one custo∣dy to another, till such time as his Majesties Happy Return. XXX. The Right Honourable the Lord Bellasis, who partaking in the same Cause, suffered in the very same predicament, be∣ing no where more resident or constant then in their custody, and so jealous were they
over him, that he could not go or travel any where, without a Pass, or safe Conduct from the next Officer to the place of his abode; which restriction continued for many years together, being besides continually in dan∣ger of being trappanned out of his Life, by the Wiles and Snares of his Treacherous Enemies. XXXI. Colonel John and William Ash∣burnham, those Gemini of Loyal Fidelity, the former so well known in our Annalls for the conveying the King away from Oxford; both signally famous for their endeavours in the Royal Cause, never free from trouble and molestation of the Regicides, whose guilty consciences (like Ismael) thought every mans hand to be against them. These Loyal Brothers were in conclusion sent by them to remote Castles and Islands, and there debarred of any intercourse or corres∣pondence with their Friends; so inhumane∣ly barbarous were those bloody Rebells; that when they could not by any shew of Justice deprive them of their lives, they would im∣mure them up in Walls of stone, and debar them of all means which should in the least make life comfortable unto them. XXXII. Air Humphry Bennet, an Emi∣nent
Royalist, formerly a Brigadier in the Kings Army, who at that time of Colonel Penruddocks Rising at Salisbury, being of that Country, was seized and secured as a Par∣taker and Confederate with him, and for the same committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, where he remained near Three years, and then was brought before their High Court of Justice, which was Erected for the Tryal of Sir Henry Slingsby, &c. but their Charge not taking as they would have had it, after some few dayes attendance, he was superseded from his Tryal, and remitted again to his confinement; but the return of Majesty put a period to his Troubles, and advanced him to be one of the Secretaries of State. XXXIII. The Right Honourable, John Lord Viscount Mordant, Brother to the Earle of Peterborough, an active Person against the Tyrannies of the Rump, and that Monster of Nature, Oliver Cromwel, being really Enga∣ged in several Designs against him, for which he hardly escaped with his life, being acquitted but by one saving voice; After the death of that Tyrant, he still laboured inde∣fatigably in the Kings business, being as busie against the Rump, as before against the Pro∣tector, for which he was by Proclamation
commanded to render himself by a prefixed time, or be reputed a Traytor, but was by providence preserved out of their hands, and hath since seen some of them suffer the same death designed for him; He is now Gover∣nour of Windsor Castle. XXXIV. Sir Thomas Woodcock, who En∣gaging in the same Design with my Lord Mordant, was by the Regicides intended for the slaughter; but he so wisely managed his Defence at their Bar of Injustice, that he es∣caped their clutches, being fairly acquitted by those bloody Justices. XXXV. Master Christopher Pitts, a Loyal Noble Gentleman, who was apprehended upon the same business of my Lord Mordant, and committed Prisoner to Newgate, where after Examination, having not found enough against him to take away his life, they would have made use of him as a Witness against his Associates, but his Noble Spirit scorning such baseness, refused so to do, whereupon after many vain threats and menaces, he was by their High Court condemned to perpe∣tual Imprisonment, and Fined One Thousand Pound, all which his gallant spirit willingly submitted to, rather then to be guilty of his Friends blood, though a kind of forcible
necessity would have seemed to some a suf∣ficient warrant for such an action. He con∣tinued after Oliver's death a Prisoner, (though with more freedom then was al∣lowed him by that Tyrannical Sentence) un∣till by the happy restauration of his Majesty, he commenced his Freedome with that of the Kingdomes. XXXVI. Master William Garrent, who for the same business was Tryed before that accursed High Court, who would have no doubt designed him for the slaughter, but that they failed in their Evidence, of which it was thought they relyed on Master Pitts, he was with much adoe acquitted, and soon after set at liberty. XXXVII. Henry Fryar, John Sumner, and Oliver Allen, who were all Three con∣demned at the aforesaid Court of Justice, the first of them being brought to suffer in West-Smithfield, where in the rounds a Gibbet was Erected, but being upon the Ladder, and ready to dye, a Reprieve was produced, and he carried back again to the Tower, from whence not long after he was dismist; the other two were likewise drawn on Hurdles, the one to Bishopsgate, and the other to Grace Church-street, the places appointed for their
Execution, but were both there reprieved, and soon after freed. XXXVIII. The most Noble Marquess of Winchester, Newcastle, and Worcester, Hero's, whose Deserts require a better Character then I am able to bestow upon them, and their Memories a more durable Register, then this Little Breviary, having indured all the discommodities of those wretched times amongst them (Viz.) Imprisonment, Ba∣nishment, Distress, Diprivation of Estates, and all those other Miseries an Insulting Enemy could lay upon them, for the Duty they owed to God and their King, and the preservation of a Good Conscience. XXXIX. The Right Honourable Earles of Oxford and Northampton, the Lord Her∣bert, &c. who suffered Imprisonment in the Tower, upon suspition of a Rising, from which afterwards for want of good; Proof they were released. XL. Sir George Booth, now Lord Delamere, who to free his Country from those Insult∣ing Tyrannies of the Rump, appeared in Armes against them in Cheshire, and was Pro∣claimed Traytor, together with Major Ge∣neral Egerton, Colonel Warden, and Sir Thomas Midleton, but being defeated by Lambert's
more numerous Forces, he fled in a disguise to Newport-Pagnel in Bedford-shire, where he was discovered, seized on, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, his Estate ordered to be sequestred and sold, and preparations made for his Tryal, which had it gone on, he would no doubt have paid for it with his Life; but as when Thieves fall out, true men speed the better, so the divisions be∣twixt that remaining scum at Westminster, and their Commander Lambert, thorow the Prudence and Loyalty of Noble General Monke, brought in the re-admission of the secluded Members, by whom he was resto∣red to his Liberty and Estate. XLI. Sir Thomas Middleton, a Gentle∣man who had attempted much to the Re∣stauration of his Majesty, being Engaged in the same business with Sir George Booth, after the Defeat he was forced to flee, being sure to have suffered deeply had he fallen into their hands; He left Chirk Castle, his stately Mansion to be defended by his Sonns, which soon after was rendered to Colonel Zanchy; but the happy Revolution aforesaid, restored his Estate again to him, and he to the free and peaceable possession thereof.
But should I go about to Ennumerate all those Persons that suffered by Sequestrati∣ons, Plunderings, and Rapines, my Task were infinite; I shall therefore refer every particular of those sufferers to that great and general day of Account, when their Ene∣mies shall receive the reward of their Fraud and Violence, and Themselves a just recom∣pence for all their Sufferings. The Names and Characters of those Per∣sons who Sat as Judges, and Sen∣tenced our late Dread Soveraign, Charles the First of Glorious Me∣mory, and how Gods Vengeance over∣took many of them for their Bloody, Barbarous Cruelty. I. JOhn Bradshaw, President of the most Noto∣rious Villany that was ever Acted on the Theatre of this World; a Cheshire Man born, but hatefull to his Country, that it should bee
the Production of so Vile a Viper, more hatefull to those of the Long Robe, Acting the Highest Wickedness, and most Selerate Parricide that ever was committed; more abominable to his Name, but most odious of all to the Nation; who two Terms before the perpetration of that horrid murther of the King, took the Solemn Oath of Allegi∣ance as a Serjant at Law, being Advanced to that Dignity from the Scolding and Rayling of Guild-Hall London, to Act the Highest piece of Impudence against his Pious and Graci∣ous Soveraign; which he performed with such dexterity, as shewed him to be a Grand Master-Piece in Villany: But afterwards grew conscious (as to the safety of his body) of his Fact, when Oliver taking upon him the Supream Power, the very Name of a Single Person frighting him above measures; But otherwise he was so canteriz'd as to the salvation of his Soul, that he remained, and so departed this Life in a most damnably dangerous obstinacy, and maintainance of that Horrid Fact, either presuming there was no High Court of Justice in Heaven, or else, in desperation, judging he was judged already. The rewards of this most unpara∣leld Parracide, which no doubt were the mo∣tives
to this Villany, was the Presidency of their Council of State; the Lord Cottington's Estate, and the Dutchy of Lancaster, with some advance money before hand (like his Predecessor Judas) for his undertaking. This Scelerate Villaine dyed in his bed, at such time as Lambert and his Committee of Safty were Acting the Jack Puddings on the En∣glish Theatre, which by the Impes and Abet∣ters of his Treason was Commented on with great Advantage; and indeed was by others taken as a note of admiration, that so blood-guilty a Person should descend the Grave so quietly, since according to the Poet; Few Traytors do unto their Graves descend, Without sierce slaughter, and a bloody end. But we must in this look upon the good Providence of God, who by removing this wicked Wretch, and other implacable Ene∣mies of our Soveraign, thereby made way by an Easie hand (which otherwise might have been dyed in blood) to the Restauration of him to his Kingdome, and his People to the Enjoyment of their Laws, Liberty, and Religion. He was Buried in Westminster Abbey, but that Ground being too Holy to re∣tain such a one as had been the Death of the
Father of the Church, he was removed from thence, and thrown under the Gallows, a re∣ceptacle more fit for such a Scelerate Vil∣laine. II. Oliver Cromwel, an English Monster, the Centre of Mischief, a shame to the Brit∣tish Chronicle, a blot to Gentility, a pattern for Tyranny, Murther and Hypocrisie, whose horrid Treasons will scarce gain credit of po∣sterity, and whose bloody Tyranny will quite drown the Names of Nero, Domitian, Cali∣gula, &c. This wicked Monster, was the main Engine of all their Diabolical Pro∣ceedings, the Primum mobile, by which those other Sons of Mischief moved, the weight which set all the wheeles of their bloody machinations a going: He was born at Hun∣tington, the year of our Lord, 1599. De∣scended from an Antient and Worshipfull Family, unhappy onely in this, that such a wicked Science should proceed from so good a Stock; His Grand-Father, Sir Henry Crom∣well, was a Gentleman highly Honour'd both in Coutt, and Country, and died with such love that he had many weeping eyes atten∣dant to his Grave, leaving behind him Five Sons, Oliver, Henry, Robert, Richard, and Phi∣lip; This Oliver was Son to the third Son
Robert, and received his Name from Sir Oli∣ver Cromwel his Uncle, at such time as he was received into the bosome of the Church by her Rites and Ceremonies, both which he afterwards most impiously and profanely rent and tore asunder, acting such horrid vallainies under the name of Providence, that Posterity may with some reason doubt how any one could commit such horrid Acts un∣der the notion of Religious Principles; He having at last attained to the height of his Ambition, (viz.) the Superiority over the Three Kingdomes, and for Five years space, wallowed in the blood of many Gallant and Heroick Persons, he at last descended (though unwillingly) to his Grave; but Divine ven∣giance (which would not suffer the blood, that so impiously and trayterously was spilt by his procurement) pursued this wicked Miscreant, and would not let him Enjoy the Priviledge of a Grave; He being digged out of the ground, where a sumptious Monu∣ment was Erected for him, and from thence (January 30. the day whereon they Erected that execrable Murther on our late dread So∣veraign) drawn in a Cart to the Red Lion in Holborn, and thence on a Sledge to Tyburn, where being pulled out off his Coffin, he
with Bradshaw and Ireton were hanged at the several Angles of that Triple Tree, which though to some it may seem preposterous to hang Cromwel thus without Examination, yet they must know withall, this was not done without a President. III. Henry Ireton, Commissary General of Horse; an Active Villaine against his Sa∣cred Majesty; Cromwell's second in all Mis∣chief, who Espoused his Daughter as well as his Lesigns, and whose Ambition and Ty∣ranny would if he had lived, no doubt have made him more Notoriously Eminent; He was a maine Instrument in the Barbarous Murther of Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle; a great fomenter of all our Troubles, and who gave as undenyable proofes of his blood-thirsty Tyranny as the best of them all. A Man of great Parts and Abilities, but na∣ture'd to Mischief, and the evil of those Times he was born to make worse, and most prodigiously infamous; no Man came suted with so great Capacity to the Over-throw of the Government, reckoning his Impiety, or rather vizzarded Piety unto his Endow∣ments. He died of the Plague at Limbrick in Ireland, November the 27. 1651. from whence his Carcass was conveyed into En∣gland,
and in great Pomp brought to London, where it lay for a time in great State at So∣merset-house, which was all hung with black, and a Scutchion over the Gate, with this Motto, Dulce est pro Patria Mori. How suita∣ble to him that Country-man best told, who Englished it in these words; It is good for his Country that he is dead. February 6. following, He was with Great Magnificence Interred in Henry the Seventh's Chappel at Westminster, but hath since found a more fitting and de∣served Sepulcher; his Carcass being with Cromwel's and Bradshaw's, as they were Trine in mischief, so buried under the Triple Tree Tyburn, Anno 1660. IV. Sir Hardress Waller, a Souldier of For∣tune, and in Charity judged not to be of such a premeditated malice as the rest, though by the current of Times drawn to Act with the highest in Mischief; He was at the first a Cavalier in Opinion, but with the more gainfuller times turn'd Presbyterian, then afterwards upon the new module, when Presbytery began to decline, he became a strong Independant; where finding the un∣controulable sweetness of Pay, and minding Profit more then Conscience, he still grew more hardned in his Lawless practises, find∣ing
more likeliness of greater spoiles in the destruction of Monarchy; He was one of those Committees to consider of the Time and Place for his Majesties Execution, and Acted all along with them in their Murther∣ous Counsels, having for his share in the price of blood, a Command afterwards in Ireland, where he continued till such time as the Happy Revolution of Affairs, brought Monarchy again to stand on its feet, when he surrendred himself, and upon his Tryal shewed much reluctancy and grief for his Crimes; He still lives by the Mercy of the King, a condemn'd man, Prisoner in the Isle of Wight. V. Colonel Valentine Walton of small Ex∣tract, or Remarque, till such time as made notoriously famous for Villany: He was by Marriage Cromwel's Brother in Law, who upon that account by his Authority and Command in the Parliament, preferred him to be Governour of Linn, and Bashaw of the Isle of Ely, which place he had stongly For∣tefied as a safe Retreat for Cromwel, if before he had compleated his damnable Designs, he should have been forced to have gone thi∣ther. Upon the Change of the Times, when Royalty began to grow splendid, he ran away
(the wicked fleeth when no man pursueth) and hath hitherto escaped the hands of Justice. VI. Colonel Thomas Harrison, the Son of a Butcher at Newcastle under line in Stafford∣shire, at first a Servant to one Master Hulker an Atturney; But finding the Law begun to be trode under foot, he betook himself to the Army, the more hopefuller way of pre∣ferment; where by his Preaching, and such like Sanctimonious wayes of proceeding, when the Army made a gain of Godliness, he came to be a Major, and being of a pragma∣ticall daring spirit, was by the influence of Cromwel preferred to be a Colonel; and the Custody of the Kings Person when taken from the Isle of Wight committed unto him, which he according to his Butchery Nature, most irreverently abused, by no less saucy behaviour then Treasonable Speeches of blacking the King, &c. He was afterwards the great Captain and Ring-leader of all the Schismatiques, especially Fifth-Monarchy-Men, and such as traded in Enthusiasmes, in whose Love and especial Opinion he dyed, being expectedly Executed at the place where once stood Charing-Cross, October 14. 1660. His Head was set upon a Pole on the top of the South-East end of Westminster-Hall,
and his Quarters Exposed to Publick View upon some of the City Gates. VII. Colonel Edward Whaley, Descend∣ed from a Family in Nottingham-shire, and bound Apprentice to a Woollen-Draper, which trade he followed for a while, but fal∣ling into decay, left the Ell and took up the Spear; and during all the time of our Trou∣bles was very industriously Active, rising by degrees till he came at last to be Comissiary General of the Horse; He was a Man of a daring Spirit, and resolute to perform what ever he undertook; Crafty withall, and Co∣vetous, having not where-withall otherwise to maintain his Ambition; to which we may add his Perfidiousness, betraying the King at Hampton-Court under pretense of Affection, the worst kind of perfidy; and having thus juggled him whither they would have him, he made no scruple to joyne with others in his horrid Murther; upon the turn of the Times he likewise fled to prevent the stroke of Justice worthily due to his Deserts. VIII. Colonel Thomas Pride, a Brewer; at first a Dray-man, but at the beginning of the Wars, contrary to David who left the Sword to take up the Sling, he forsooke the Sling and took up the Sword; and though an
Ignorant, Illiterate Fellow, scarce fit to carry gutts to a a Beare, (whose destruction he per∣formed at Paris Garden) yet being of a reso∣lute Courage, and the blind goddess Crown∣ing him with successe, he was thought fit to partake with Cromwel, and to venture on that prime and daring Act of Garbelling the Par∣liament for him; and having thus Acted that which carried a shew of Law and Justice, there was little thoughts he would fear to venture on the Highest of Treasons, being a prime Agent in the Murther of the King, Acting with as much Impudence and Bru∣tishness as any of them all: He died before his Majesties Return, escaping thereby a more shamefull and ignominious death. IX. Colonel Isaac Ewer, Descended from an Antient and Worshipfull Family in York∣shire, but the Patrimony thereof being in the wave, to recruit his Decaying Fortunes, he betook himself to the Wealthiest Side, and added much to the Ruine of Monarchy; ha∣ving gained a great proficency in their De∣structive Principles; so that he feared not to Act the Highest Villany, being cloaked un∣der a vail of Religion; He was thought fit (because of his Birth) to be the Kings Guar∣dian from the Isle of Wight, and afterwards
one of his Judges, where he gave his hand against his Sacred Soveraign, adding to his other Crimes that most Execrable sin of Murther: He likewise died before his Ma∣jesties Return, robbing thereby Squire Dun of his due. X. Thomas Lord Grey of Grooby, Son to the Earle of Stamford, who becoming a Colonel in the Army, grew infected with their De∣structive Principles, and contrary to Ho∣nour, Acted with them in their odious De∣signs, having his hand in the Murther of the King, the Fountain and Source of all Ho∣nour, from whence others are derived. In regard of the Honour of his Family, he es∣capes a Mention or Condemnation for this Crime, as well as for some others: He dyed before his Majesties Happy Restauration. XI. William Lord Mounson, a sordid Fel∣low, of Destructive Principles, and therefore a fit Companion to Act the Horridest Villa∣nies; being for Debt a long time a Prisoner, but by his Fellow Regicides fetcht out to Act with them in their Lawless Courses: After the Return of his Majesty, he was for his Treasonable Practises, together with Sir Henry Mildmay, and Master Robert Wallop brought to the Bar at the House of Com∣mons,
where their Estates were Declared Confiscate, and they degraged from all Ti∣tles and Armes of Gentility, and further Sen∣tenced to be drawn from the Tower through the City of London upon Sledges, with Hal∣ters about their Necks, and so back again to the Tower, there to suffer perpetual Impri∣sonment; which Sentence was accordingly Executed upon them, January 30. 1661. XII. Sir John Danvers Knight, Brother to that Loyal and Noble Peer the Earle of Danby, who for his Fidelity to his Soveraign, was by the Rebells Voted a Delinquent; the covetousness after which Estate, drew in this Knight to partake with them in their horrid Actions, swallowing thereby his Name and Honour in this Whirle-pool of Confusion and Royal Blood: He deceased before his Majesties Return. XIII. Sir Thomas Malverer, a York-shire Knight, whose Family had been raised to that Honour by the Two last Kings, which to a Noble Spirit should have been the more oblidging; but great Benefits cause Ingra∣titude, and Covetousness to have where∣withall to live answerable to his Title, wic∣kedly prompted him for the equalling of it, to consent to the Murther of him from
whence his Honour was Derived; He also died before his Majesties happy restauration. XIV. Sir John Bourcher, another Inde∣pendant York-shire Knight, who making a gain of Godliness, under the pretense there∣of Acted the most horrid Villanies, having God in their mouth, and the Devil in their heart; Like Water-men, looking one way, and rowing another; being sure alwayes when they had the fearest pretenses, they were then hatching the foulest Impieties. This Man that he might not be out of the way when occasion should serve, diligently dined at Hell; and to compleat his other wicked Actions, consented to the Murther of his Soveraign: He likewise dyed before his Majesties Return. XV. Isaac Pennington, a busie stickler of the Faction, and a Grand Agent in the per∣petration of all our late Troubles; He was by the Faction continued Lord Mayor of London for Two Years together, though con∣trary to the Kings Express Command from Oxford; by his Authority in the City he con∣tributed largely to the maintenance of Re∣bellion, and added much fuell to that fire of Desention betwixt the King and Parliament; and yet notwithstanding, he was a great
sharer in the spoyle of his Country; He broke twice, what being got over the De∣vil's back, being spent under his belly; and thinking to make good his broken Fortunes joyned with them in the Murther of his So∣veraign; After his Majesties Happy Restau∣ration, he surrendred himself according to Proclamation, and at his Tryal pleaded Ig∣norance, and no Malice, and that he signed not the Warrant; yet was it made apparent that his Crimes were of a crimson dye; but by the Kings Clemency his Execution was respited, and died a natural death in the Tower of London. XVI. Henry Martin, Son of Sir Henry Martin, Judge of the Prerogative Court; a most Wicked, Lewd, Vicious; and Infa∣mous Person, whose Actions have rendered him odious to all Posterity: He first spoke Treason against the King and his Family in the House of Commons, and was in Com∣plement Committed and Suspended for a while, proving afterwards a Grand Actor in the Highest of Treasons, being one of the Chief of the Caball in taking away the life of the King; ordering the Charge against him to go in the Name of The Commons in Parli∣ament Assembled, and the Good People of England:
After his Majesties Return, he surrendred himself according to Proclamation, using many dilatory evasions at his Tryal; after∣wards being brought to the Bar of the House of Lords to Answer why Judgement should not be Executed upon him, he replyed, That he understood the Proclamation extended to favour of life upon rendering himself; and withall ad∣ded, That he never obeyed any of his Majesties Proclamations before but this, and hoped that he should not be Hanged for taking the Kings Word now. XVII. William Purefoy, a Warwick-shire Gentleman, once Governour of Coventry, a busie Fellow in their Leger-de-main Jug∣glings, and a great Zealot against Crosses, as Superstitious, and Crowns as Superfluous; This his blind Zeal, together with his Cove∣tousness after Church, and Crown Lands, made him not scruple to embrue his hands in the blood of his Prince; but lived not to re∣ceive the just reward of such horrid Villany, dying before his Majesties Return. XVIII. Colonel John Berkstead, a Man at first of a despicable Fortune, keeping a sorry Goldsmiths Shop in the Strand; but having learned a little City-Souldiery, was made Captain of a Foot-Company under Colonel
Ven at Windsor; and being in Active Person, by Success of Rebellion was made Gover∣nour of Reading, and continued always a fast Friend to Oliver Cromwel in all his wicked Consultations and Purposes; joyning with him in that horrid Murther of the King, for which, and other his Services to him, he was by Oliver made Lievtenant of the Tower, where by Extortion and Cruelty he gained a great masse of Wealth; but when Loyalty began again to be Predominant, his guilty Conscience hurried him beyond Sea, lurk∣ing a good while in some parts of Germany under feigned Names; but divine vengance soon found him out, for He, Colonel Okey, and Miles Corbet, having resided for some time in the City of Hannow, about the begin∣ning of March they came to Delf in Holland, appointing their Wives to meet them there; but Sir George Downing his Majesties Resident at the Hague, having information thereof, they were luckily surprized, and sent into England; and having remained Prisoners some while in the Tower, were brought to the Kings Bench-Bar, and there demanded what they could say for themselves, why they should not dye according to Law, the Act of Attainder being then read unto them; to
which they Alleadged, they were not the same persons mentioned therein; but it be∣ing proved by Witnesses, Sentence of death was pronounced against them, and on Satur∣day, April 19. 1662. they were Executed at Tyburn; the Head of this Grand Regicide being set on a Pole on Traytors Gate in the Tower. XIX. John Blakeston, a Fellow who would not be idle when there was any thing to do, especially of Profit: He was at first a Shop-Keeper in Newcastle, when according to the time he was a Rigid Presbyterian, and while the Scots were there, chosen a Burgess for that Town; but the Market of Independen∣cy being up, he turned with the Tide, and (like Judas) for the lucre of money, consent∣ed to the Murther of his Royal Master; but enjoyed the gain of his Impiety not long, dying before the return of his Majesty, when (without the greater Clemency) he might have received a reward more agree∣able to his deserts. XX. Gilbert Millington, a Lawyer, who contrary to all Law sided with those bloody Regicides against his Lawfull Soveraign; He was a constant Chair-Man of the Committee for Plundered Ministers, by which Trade he
filled his Coffers, the sweets of which Em∣ployment set his teeth on edge, and sharpned him to that cruell attempt upon his Sove∣raigns Life: Upon the Kings return he sur∣rendred himself according to Proclamation, and at his Tryal confessed the Fact, and the guilt of it, and was favoured with an accep∣tance of it from the Court. XXI. Thomas Chaloner, one who had Tra∣velled far in the World, and returned home poysoned with that Jesuitical Doctrine of King-killing, which he here put in practise, being the great Speech-Maker against the King, his Family, and Government, and a great stickler for their New Utopian Com∣mon-Wealth, but upon his Majesties Re∣turn, fled the Land, his Actions being so bad as would not endure the Touch-Stone. XXII. Sir William Constable, a York-shire Knight, whose Prodigality brought him to sell his Patrimony in the beginning of the late Troubles, to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, which he afterwards regained for nothing, when that Lord was for his Loyalty Voted a Delinquent, and his Estate at the dispose of Rebells, who carved fat shares unto them∣selves: He had a principal hand in the Kings death, for which Parricide, and other his
Treasonable Practises, he was by the Saints of the new stamp, made Governour of Glo∣cester, and a great Commander in the North: He died before his Majesties return. XXIII. Edmond Ludlow, a Person much endeared to the Fanaticks, who by several gradations in the Parliament and Army, came at last to be a Lievtenant General, and one of the Chief Commissioners for Ireland: His Father before him uttered Treasonable words against the King in the House of Com∣mons, Anno 1643. no marvel then if the Fa∣ther were a Rebell, that the Son should prove a Traytor, since most commonly to what the Parents are affected, the Children prove addicted: Upon his Majesties return, fearing the reward of his deserts, he fled the Land, like his predecessor Caine, living a Vagabond from place to place, fearing every one that he meets should slay him. XXIV. Colonel John Hutchinson, who by Cromwell and his prevailing Faction was over-awed to Sign his Majesties Execution; but by a timely repentance, bewailing with tears the heinousnesse of his Offence, he obtained Pardon; being onely discharged the House of Commons, and all future Trusts, and Fi∣ned a years Profit of his Estate to the King.
XXV. Sir Michael Livesey, a Kentish Knight, whose plague he was, being Plun∣der-Master-General of that County for ma∣ny years, towards the repairing of his broken Estate: He was a very Active Person du∣ring the Progress of the whole War, and as nimbly ran away upon the Kings return, making good that Proverb, That one pair of leggs was worth two pair of hands. XXVI. Robert Titchburn, born in London, of good Extraction, by Trade a Linnen-Dra∣per, coming by degrees to be Mayor there∣of, whose Counsels he is said to betray to the Rump; Hope of Preferment, and want of Grace, drew him in to be one of the Infa∣mous Tryars of his Soveraign: At his Ma∣jesties return he surrendred himself accord∣ing to Proclamation, and at his Tryal shewed much penitency for his Offences, declaring with much candour his sin, and ignorance of the atrocity of the crime; protested his Ina∣bility of contrivance, his raw years, and un∣skilfulness in the Laws; Saying, He would ra∣ther have gone into a hot Oven, then into that bu∣siness if he had known the depth of it; instancing That Paul was a Persecutor, and found mercy, and hoped that he should find the like: He was with the other Regicides condemned, but by the
Kings Great Clemency, Execution of Justice was respited on him. XXVII. Owen Roe, formerly a Silkman in London, and being an Eminent Indepen∣dant, had a Command of the Militia confer∣red on him; by the Advice of the Devil and Cromwel, he came to have a hand in shedding the Kings blood; for which after his Maje∣sties return he was condemned; but plead∣ing his reluctancy to the Kings Sentence, and begging pardon for his Offence, which he affirmed was not of malice, he was by the Kings Favour Reprieved. XXVIII. Robert Lilburn, a great Ene∣my to Bishops, though come from the Bishop∣prick of Durham; He was Brother to John Lilburn the great Trouble-World, who was al∣wayes opposite to the Predominate Power; This Robert Lilburn to raise his Fortunes sided with Cromwell, who would never suffer them to want Preferment that were thorow-paced to his Interests; By him he was advanced to be a Colonel of Horse, a little before the Kings Murther; and therefore he thought he could do no less in civility then requite him with having a hand in it, and so ran fear∣lesly into the danger of it: He still lives by the Kings clemency a condemned man in the Tower of London.
XXIX. Adrian Scroop, a Colonel of Horse, a Person very Active against the Kings Par∣ties in 1648. and as violent in the taking a∣way his Majesties Life, and Honour in their pretended High Court of Justice; which he so little repented of, that after his Majesties re∣turn, in an accidental conferrence with Sir Richard Brown, he seemed rather to allow and approve of it, by saying, Many people did not think it such a heinous matter, or that, some be of one mind, and some be of another. He was up∣on a fair Tryal condemned to dye, and ac∣cordingly Executed on the Rayled place where Charing-Cross once stood, Octo. the 17. 1660. XXX. Richard Dean, a Fellow of meane Extraction, being at first a Hoymans Servant in Ipswich, and at the beginning of the Wars to raise his despicable fortunes betook him to the Army, and was a matross in the train of Artillery, from whence he rose to be a Captain, and was first Famous at the Siege of Exeter; and being a cross Fellow fit for any mischief, one who cared not to build his own hopes though on a general ruine, was thought fit to be one of Cromwel's Complices in the Murther of his Soveraign: He was af∣terwards made one of the Generals at Sea
against the Dutch, and was slain with a Can∣non Bullet, being shot almost off in the mi∣dle, as he stood close by General Monke, June 2. 1653. XXXI. Colonel John Okey, at first a Stoker in a Brew-House, then a Chandler neer Bishopsgate, where having lived a while, he betook himself to the Army, the Haven of Hope for all Aspiring Minds, where in a short space he passed thorow the several com∣mands to that of a Colonel; and being of a daring spirit, he was by the Artifice of Crom∣well bewitched into the patner-ship of that accursed Murther of his Majesty. Upon his Majesties return he fled the Land, but divine vengeance pursuing him, he was with Co∣lonel Barkstead, and Miles Corbet taken in Holland, and sent over into England, where at the Kings Bench Bar, they were Arraigned, and Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered, which was Executed on the o∣ther two, and their Quarters exposed on the City Gates; but his Majesty was graciously pleased out of regard to Colonel Okey's Chri∣stian, and Dutifull carriage, to return his Quarters to his Friends to be Interred. He dyed with more penitency, and greater re∣luctancy then those of his Fellow-Regicides,
who suffered in October 1660. acknowledg∣ing the Kings Power as of God, and exhort∣ing others to the like: He was a Person that for his Valour, and other good Qualities was pittied by all men, for his being so blinded, and ensnared in this crime to his destructi∣on. XXXII. John Hewson, who from a Cob∣ler rose by degrees to be a Colonel, and though a Person of no Parts either in Body or Mind, yet made by Cromwel one of his Pa∣geant Lords: He was a Fellow fit for any mischief, and capable of nothing else; a sor∣did lump of Ignorance and Impiety, and therefore the more fit to share in Cromwell's Designs, and to Act in that Horrid Murther of his Majesty: Upon the turn of the Times, he ran away for fear of Squire Dun, and (by report) is since dead, and buried at Amster∣dam. XXXIII. William Goffe, bound an Ap∣prentice to a Salter, but run away e're he had served out his time, and betook himself to the Army, where by his boldness and pre∣tended Piety, he came to be taken notice of by the Grandees in Rebellion, who liking his temper, preferred him to serve them∣selves in that Horrid Murther of his Sacred
Majesty: He likewise betook himself to his heeles at the restauration of our Soveraign, being of the opinion of Caine, That his Crimes was too great to be forgiven. XXXIV. Cornelius Holland, a Monster in Nature, once Servant to Sir Henry Vane, who preferred him to the Green-cloath in the Kings House-hold; of base conditions, as well as extraction; His Father was a poor man, and dyed a Prisoner in the Fleet, but he himself by his Ingatitude and Disloyalty made a ladder of mischief to climb up to Riches, and so thrived by Rebellion that he got a vast Estate, and (like Herostratus) grew very Eminent for Villanies, the chief of which was the Murther of the King, in which he had a principal hand, and ▪for which upon his Majesties return he fled the Land, fearing (belike) he should become a specta∣cle to men, hanging betwixt the Earth and Heaven. XXXV. John Carew, Brother to that Loyal Knight, Sir Alexander Carew, beheaded by the prevalency of Rebellion in An. 1644. This Person being a rank Fifth-Monarchist, was a great Enemy to all Earthly Govern∣ment and Power, expecting Christ to come Personally and Raign amongst them; and
therefore they would have no King, but King Jesus, which made him to joyn with those other Infamous Regicides in the Mur∣ther of his Soveraign, being deluded thus by the impulses of Satan for those of the spirit. At his Tryal he rambled into a wild dis∣course of the fear of God, and the Authority of the Parliament by which he Acted, that he declined it at first, but being put in the Act for Tryal, could not disobey the Lord, nor the Parliament: He was condemned to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered, which was accordingly Executed upon him October 15. 1660. His quarters should have been ex∣posed on the City Gates; but upon inter∣cession to his Majesty, his Body was ordered to be buried. XXXVI. Colonel John Jones, a Weltch Saint, who in the night of Rebellion, grew from a Mushromp to a Stately Cedar; He was at first a Serving-Man, but that kind of life not serving his turn, he set up the gain-fuller trade of a Committee-man, and thri∣ved exceedingly in that Barren Country; and being a person of known Abilities for the ruining a Kingdome, he was chosen a recruit for the Long Parliament, and inpro∣cess of time Married one of Cromwel's Sisters,
who (as one writes) had as many Females to bestow as a Cardinal; This alliance (being prone enough of himself otherwise) brought him in to have a hand in the Kings Murther; and in fine brought, him to the Gallows, be∣ing Executed October 17. 1660. XXXVII. Peregrine Pelham, a York-shire Tike, whose Abominable Treasons helped to verifie that Proverb, From the cold North, all ill comes forth. He was for a while a kind of Governour of Hull after Hotham, where be∣ing Endoctrinated in Machivillian Princi∣ples, he came to London to put them in Exe∣cution, being one of the Judges that Sat and Sentenced the late King, and died before his Majesties Restauration. XXXVIII. Thomas Wogan, a recruit like∣wise to the Long Parliament, who was as ac∣tive to contribute towards the ruine of the Kingdome as the chiefest of them all, and as forward as the rest to destoy the King, to be∣come himself one of the Princes in the Anar∣chy; but upon the change of the Times he betook him to his heeles, and (accompanied with a guilty, conscience) wander about to save a wretched Carcasse out of the Hang∣mans hands. XXXIX. Francis Allen, once a Gold-Smith
in Fleet-street, whose first Rice was from the Placket, and by Marrying his Mi∣stris, of her Servant became her Master; be∣ing thus leapt into a pretty Estate, he was chosen a recruit for the Long Parliament, where he improved, his time to the most gainfull advantage, getting to be one of the Treasurers at War, a Customer, and (as if that were not enough) had Crone House gi∣ven him, and held it in Capite Regis: These gifts made him not to stick to joyn with them in the Murther of the King, and after to enjoy a part of the profit of their Parri∣cide, being made one of the Committees for the Sale of his Majesties Lands; but li∣ved not long to possess the fruits of his wic∣kedness, dying before his Majesties Happy Restauration. XL. Daniel Blagrave, of a small but com∣petent Fortune, sufficient to have maintain∣ed him without being guilty of this great Offence; but he was resolved to get Riches, although he swam to them in blood▪ and being chosen a recruit to the Long Parlia∣ment for Reading in Bark-shire, in hopes to be partaker with them in the spoyl of the King∣dome; He joyned with them in the Mur∣ther of the King: But upon the turn of the
Times betook him to his heeles, the best refuge as he thought for one in his condi∣tion. XLI. John Moor, formerly Colonel of the Guards, and had the benefit of all passes from London, the profit whereof endeared him to their Side, and made him joyn with them in the Horrid Murther of his Sove∣raign; He dyed before his Majesties Re∣turn. XLII. William Say Esquire, a Member of the Long Robe, and a well practised, but ill councelled Lawyer, who being foysted in as one of the illegal recruites of the Long Par∣liament, exercised his Abilities to the greater mischief, having now power joyned to his will to Act what the Devil should prompt him to; and therefore feared not to become one of the Murtherers of his Majesty, and afterwards to joyn with the rest of those Re∣gicides to help forwards the ruine of the Kingdome; He was by them chosen their Speaker, when Lenthall for Ten dayes toge∣ther was sick of the Sullens upon the approach of General Monke: But upon the Return of the King, was, non est inventus, betaking him to his heeles, for fear he should have had a Habeas Corpus to have removed his body from Newgate to Tyburn.
XLIII. Francis Lascels, a York-shire Man, who being nominated one of the King's Judges, Sat once, but neither Sentenced nor Signed those Accursed Warrants for the Murther of the King; He was Fined a years Profit of his Estate to his Majesty, and dis∣charged the House of Commons, and all fu∣ture Trusts. XLIV. James Challoner Esquire, who for sitting in that pretended High Court of Justice, was with some others deprived of their E∣states by Act of Parliament, and ordered to be drawn to Tyburn in Sledges, with Ropes about their Necks, as Traytors are used, and so back again to the Tower, their to be Impri∣soned during their natural lives; but before the Execution of this Sentence he died in the Tower. XLV. Gregory Clement, a lustfull Goat, who being a monied Merchant, Purchased himself a place in Parliament, that he might the more freely, and with the greater Au∣thority exercise his notorious debaucheries, which were so vulgarly known, that his fel∣low Villaines could not but upon pretense of honesty discard him their company. He contributed largely to the destruction of his Soveraign; for he who fears not to Commit
Adultery, will not stick out to do Murther; He received afterwards the reward of his Treasons, being hang'd drawn aud quarter'd, Octob. 17. 1660. His Head set upon London-Bridge, and his Quarters on the Gates of the City. XLVI. Sir Gregory Norton, One whose means was not answerable to his Title, being one of the Pensioners to the King, who un∣gratefully for the lucre of money joyned also in the Kings murther, and had by his fellow Regicides for his Service, as good as given Richmond Manner and House: He died before his Majesties Return. XLVII.John Venn, A broken Silk-man in Cheap-side, who to recruit his Fortunes took part with the Strongest Side, carrying as great a pretense to Religion as the best, it being the Stalking Horse in those Times for them who meant to ride in the Chair of Pre∣ferment: He was at the beginning of the War made Governour of Windsor Castle, and had other Places of great Profit bestowed on him; this drew him on to Act in the Mur∣ther of his Sacred Majesty, though after∣wards stricken with the horrour thereof; He is said desparately to have hanged him∣self, certain it is, he died very strangely and
suddainly, though the certainty thereof was by his friends smoothered up as much as they could. XLVIII. Thomas Andrews, a Linnen-Draper in Cheap-side, but thinking the Trade of Rebellion more gainfull, he resolved not to stand out, having so fit an opportunity for him to come into Play, and so got to be a Treasurer for the Guild-Hall Plate, and a Re∣ceiver for the Army, whereby he got great summs of money to himself, which so En∣couraged him in Treason, that he feared not to Sit and Sentence his Soveraign, and after∣wards (Alderman Reynoldson, Lord Mayor of London refusing to Proclaim the Act for Abolishing Kingly Government) he being Elected Lord Mayor in his Place, Proclaim∣ed the said Act in Great State: He died just upon the Revolution of the Times, and very narrowly prevented Justice. XLIX. Anthony Stapley, a Sussex Gentleman, Colonel and Governour of Chichester, who by partaking with those Blood-Thirsty Re∣gicides, grew infected, and was strangely wrought into this Wicked Conspiracy: He likewise died before the Kings return. L. Thomas Horton, one of so mean and un∣known a Quality, that his Pedigree is not
to be found, unless we should derive it from Judas that Prince of Traytors: He so thri∣ved by the Wars, that he was chosen a re∣cruit to the Long Parliament, and was one of those that dipt his hands in his Royal Sove∣raigns blood: He also died before the Kings return. LI. John Lisle, Of a good Family in the Isle of Wight, whose Father died there du∣ring the Treaty, being possessed of a fair Pa∣trimony in the said Isle, this his ungracious degenerate Son, whom he bred up a Lawyer, taking part with those Bloody Regicides, proved in process of time as bad as the worst of them, and arrived to the very height of Cruelty and Impiety, for having once wash∣ed his hands in his Soveraigns blood, he fear∣ed not to Act any Murther whatsoever, be∣coming President to all the High Courts of Ju∣stice during the Usurpation, by whose San∣guinous violence fell many Gallant and He∣roick Spirits; for reward of which his cru∣elties, he was made one of the Commis∣sioners of the New Great Seal, and Master of Saint Crosses, a Place only fit for a Divine, worth Eight Hundred Pound per Annum: He fled upon the return of the King, but divine vegeance (which will not suffer the sin of
Murher to go unpunished) found him out, and at Genuah by Three disguised Irishmen he received the reward of his deserts, though not in so Legal a way as could be wished, they being forced to Kill whom they could not bring away, by reason of the strong Guards he had about him; a shame to those Places which professing Christianity, yet will give harbour to such wicked, abomi∣nable Villans. LII. John Dixwell, A recruit likewise of the Long Parliament for Dover, of which Castle he was Colonel and Governour; and therefore so far oblidged to them for his Pro∣motion, that in requital of their Favours, he joyned with them in the Murther of his Ma∣jesty; but fearing the reward of his Treache∣ry, upon the Kings return, he quitted the Land, which too long had groaned under the weight of so hatefull a Regicide. LIII. Miles Corbet, A stain to his Fami∣ly, of very good Reputation in Norfolk; He was one of the male-contented Members of the former Parliament▪ with Sir John Elliot, and Others, and being chosen a Burgess for Yarmouth in the Long Parliament; finding the Times fit for his purpose, he resolved to wreak his malice upon the King and was a
principal Instrument to help forward the en∣suing calamities; and having raised himself by others ruines, to retain what be had so wickedly got, and in hopes of greater Pre∣ferment, he joyned likewise in the murther of the King, for which he was rewarded with several great Places in England and Ireland, where he was in effect Lord Chancellor, but long enjoyed he not that Honour, for upon his Majesties return, he with Berkstead and Okey privately sneaked into Germany, where having remained a while, they returned to Delf in Holland, intending under feigned Names to visit their Wives there; but di∣vine vengeance which never sleepeth, found them out, and by the vigelance of Sir George Downing his Majesties Resident at the Hague, they were apprehended, which made Corbet to purge upwards and downwards in a very strange manner, being afterwards sent into England, they were at the Kings-Bench-Bar Arraigned and Condemned, and according to Sentence, Hanged, Drawn and Quarter∣ed, April 2. 1662. where now Corbets Head over-looks the Thames on London Bridge, and his Quarters exposed to the view of the be∣holders on the City Gates. LIV. Simon Meyne, a Buckingham-shire
Man, of a good Estate, but being of a cove∣tous disposition, he endeavour'd to enlarge it though by indirect means, getting two good Trades for that purpose (viz.) a Committee and a Sequestrator, to which we may add a third, being chosen an Illegal recruit in the Long Parliament, and now having his hand in, thought it no great matter to assist in ta∣king away the Kings Life: At his Maje∣sties return he surrendred himself according to Proclamation, and at his Tryal pleaded Ignorance and no Malice, but his crimes were found to be of so crimson a dye, that Sentence of death was passed on him, how∣ever Execution of that Sentence was respi∣ted, since which time he died a natural death in the Tower. LV. John Alured, A Souldier of Fortune▪ who to climb the higher on the blind God∣desses wheele, dipped his hands in the Kings blood, and was for his Villany promoted to be a Colonel: He died just defore his Maje∣sties restitution, or else it might have been his Fortune to have been preferred to the Gallows. LVI. Henry Smith, One who had a fair Estate in Leicester-shire, and was a kind of a Lawyer, but understood it so little, that
quite contrary to all Law, he joyned with those Regicides in condemning the King, and for reward of his Villany had a Six Clarks Place in Chancery bestowed on him: He was thought to be drawn into this busi∣ness by the Artifice of others, more then his own inclination; and therefore at his Ma∣jesties return he surrendred himself accord∣ing to Proclamation, and remaineth a Pri∣soner in the Tower. LVII. Humphry Edwards, A Member of the Long Parliament, which bred Monsters of more savage Natures then either Aegypt or Africa; This Fellow for being denied by the King a Preferment he was not worthy of, grew discontented, which ranckled and fe∣ster'd him into this malicious Parricide: He died before his Majesties return. LVIII. John Fry, A High-shooe blade in Dorset-shire, but being active in mischief, was made a Committee-man, and after∣wards chosen a recruit to the Long Parlia∣ment; You may judge of the Man by his Principles, being an Arrian in Print, who deny the Divinity of our Saviour Christ; No wonder then if he who wrot against the King of Heaven, would fear to act against his Earthly Prince; He lived not long after
the Horrid murther of his Majesty, the di∣vine vengeance cutting him off from acting any further mischief against the Royal Par∣ty. LIX. Edmond Harvey, One who was brought in to have a hand in that fatal busi∣ness of the Kings Murther: He rendred him∣self upon his Majesties Restitution according to Proclamation, and at his Tryal pleaded Ignorance and no Malice, for that he Signed not, though he was present at Sentence; then he proved by Witness his reluctancy of Conscience, his Endeavours with a few o∣thers to Adjourn the Court upon the Kings motion, and that he resolved to have no more to do with them, &c. He was with the other Regicides condemned, but Execution respited, and remaineth now a Prisoner in the Tower. LX. Thomas Scot, One who though he came not in play at first, yet plyed his busi∣ness so, that he was not behind hand, the for∣wardest in mischief; His Original was a Brewers Clark, then next a Country Attor∣ney, and by countenance of the Grandees, chosen a recruit for the Burrough of Wickam in Buckingham-shire: He was a thorow-paced Regicide, and so gloried that he had a hand
in the Murther of the King, that he desired it might be inscribed on his Tomb, Here lies Thomas Scot one of the Kings Judges; though it might more properly be written on the Gallows at Charing-Cross where he was Han∣ged, Here lies Thomas Scot one of the Kings Murtherers; His Gutts was said to make the Hang-man maw-sick, and that the stench of of his body when he was Quartered, far ex∣ceeded the stink of the most loathsome Car∣rion, to the great endangering of the Hang∣mans health. LXI. William Cawley, A Brewer of Chiche∣ster, and returned a recruit for the Long Par∣liament, whose Trade as it is maintained by the sins of the People, so he could not but for Trades-sake to concur with his Brethren in the Murther of the King, (viz.) Oliver Cromwel, Thomas Pride, Thomas Scot, &c. But fearing his Treason would cost him hot wa∣ter, upon return of the King he fled the Land, and lives disguised for to preserve his hated life. LXII. John Downs, A Citizen of London, a Colonel in the Army, and a recruit to the Long Parliament; He was by menaces and threats engaged in this fatal business of Try∣ing the King; and being checked in Con∣science
of the wickedness thereof, endea∣voured to have opposed the violence that carried it, saying in the Court, Have we hearts of stone, or are we men? And desired the King according to his request might be heard by the Parliament, but was over-born, his Al∣legiance and Conscience, by that wicked Machivillian Oliver Cromwel, and so contra∣ry to the dictates of his Conscience consent∣ed to that Execrable Murther: He surren∣dred himself, was condemned, and lives by the special Mercy of the King and Parlia∣ment. LXIII. Thomas Hammond, Born of a very Good Family, his Father was Phisitian to Prince Henry, his Brother Doctor Henry Ha∣mond, the beloved Chaplain of King Charles; This degenerate Son most Ungratefully and Disloyally was the Kings Jaylor in the Isle of Wight, and verified that sad Presage and Ora∣cle of the King, That there are but few steps be∣tween the Prisons and Graves of Princes. He died before his Majesties return. LXIV. Vincent Potter, A Mushroom Member of the Long Parliament, brought in by their Illegal recruits; His Pedigree, as well as his good Actions are very obscure and unknown; being onely Famous for the
Infamous Murther of the King: After his Majesties return he rendred himself, con∣fessed his Guilt, had Judgement, but by his Majesties clemency his Execution was re∣spited LXV. Augustine Garland, A recruit of the Long Parliament for the Burrough of Quin∣burough in Kent, as yare a blade as the worst of them all at the spoyle of the Kingdome, the notority of whose Crimes are so publick as not to be hid; He was at first a kind of Lawyer, which he horribly perverted, was Chair-man of the Committee that drew up the pretended Act for the Kings Tryal, and after Sat as one of his Judges, and Signed that bloody▪ Warrant for his Execution; He was shrewdly suspected to be the man that spit in the Kings Face at his Tryal, though after the Kings restitution when he came to be Tryed himself, he vehemently denyed it, wishing no favour from God if he was guilty of that inhumanity: He is still a Prisoner in the Tower, and lives by the clemency of the King and Parliament. LXVI. Colonel George Fleetwood, A Buck∣ingham-shire Gentleman, Son to Sir Miles Fleetwood Master of the Kings Court of Wards, and had two Brothers of very different con∣ditions
the one Sir William Fleetwood a very Loyal and Honest Gentleman, the other, Charles Fleetwood, a very Knave and Fool: He surrendred himself after the Kings re∣turn, and at his Tryal pleaded not guilty, but soon waved that Plea, and with many tears besought mercy: He is now a Prisoner in the Tower. LXVII. Colonel James Temple, A Sussex Man, not so much Famous for his Vallour as his Villany, being Remarkable for nothing but this horrible business of the Kings Mur∣ther, for which he came into the Pack to have a share in the spoyle; He is now a Pri∣soner, and lives by the Kings Favour and Clemency. LXVIII. Peter Temple, Another of the same Gang, Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity; He was at first a Linnen-Draper, Apprentice in Fryday-street, but his Elder Brother dying, he forsook his Trade, and was possest of an Estate of some Four Hundred Pounds a Year in Leicester-shire, and being a Person well affected to the Cause, was as a recruit chosen Burgess for that Country-Town, as Colleague to Sir Arther Hazelrig, that Furious Northern blast. He was made a Captain of a Troop of Horse, and besides
was a great Committee-man, yet was he a person of very weak parts, and easie to be led to Act any thing to which the hope of Profit called him, yet (as ill gotten goods ne∣ver prosper) so he thrived not, notwith∣standing his gainfull Trade, but was Fool'd by Oliver into the snare, as he often after∣wards confessed the same. LXIX. Thomas Wait, A Rutland-shire man, who from a very mean beginning came to be Governour of Burleigh, and was by the influence of the Army chosen a recruit to the Long Parliament, by which means he became ingaged to their Interests and De∣signs, joyning with them in the Murther of his Majesty: He is now a Prisoner under Sentence of death, which by the Kings cle∣mency is hitherto respited. Thus have you a Catalogue of Sixty Nine of those Notorious Regicides which Sat and Sentenced the King, a Crime of so High a Nature as will almost startle the belief of Posterity, that Men professing themselves to be Christians, should under a pretense of Religion and Justice, Murther so Good and Pious a Prince, one whom envy its self could not but confess to be beyond Parallel, and
whom Cook, one of his inveterate enemies, confessed to be a most Virtuous, most Inno∣cent, most Religious King, and every way most fit for the Government. The Reader may also consider, that though many other∣wise well meaning men were drawn in at first to further their Designs, yet the mean persons that were his Judges and Murther∣ers, were generally mean and desparate per∣sons, such as were lifted up by Ambition, Sa∣criledge, Covetousness, and Success, and had no other wayes to Rise but by others Ruines, in the Downfall of the King, Nobi∣lity and Gentry: But God would not suffer the Lamented and Barbarous Death of this Prince to pass unrevenged, nor his own Sa∣cred Name to be Blasphemed, many of those desparate Wretches making Him the Author and Maintainer of their Impiety, ar∣guing from the Success, the Goodness of their Cause, although they might plainly perceive that when God had made use of them as his Rod to correct his Children, he then threw it into the fire.
We shall next give you a Catalogue of some other Accessaries notoriously Guilty in this Horrid Murther, and how Divine Vengeance found them out, rewarding them according to the fruits of their Works. I. JOhn Cook, the Solicitor of that High Court of Injustice, a man of great Parts, had he not imployed them to foul purposes; He was a Grays-Inn Gentleman, but in a poor and wanting condition, before he undertook this most Scelerate piece of Service; His indi∣gency by some charitable opinions being the greatest motive that induced him unto it, and so did it not out of Malice, but Avarice, as he himself Alleadged at his Tryal; Thus we see what a narrow Fortune, and the streights of Debt, and the Devils wide World, and vast Preferments can tempt a man to: After this horrid Paricide, he was by his Fellow Regicides greatly Advanced, especially in Ireland, of which he was made
Lord Chancellour, and from whence after his Majesties return he was sent into En∣gland to be Tryed his for his Treasons, which was done accordingly at Justice-Hall in the Old-Baily, where he shewed very much re∣spect and reverence to the Court, behaving himself to the removal of that prejudice which the Generality had of him, as of a Monster. He was for his Horrid Treasons Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, which was accordingly Executed upon him, October 16. 1660. at the Place where Charing-Cross formerly stood; His Head was set on a Pole on the North-East end of Westminster-Hall, and his Quarters on the Gates of the City. II. Hugh Peters, An Antique in Religion, the shame of the Clergy, a Pulpit Buffoon, Oliver's Chaplain and Jester, to tell Stories, and make the People laugh; a most Sediti∣ous abominable Fellow, the Trumpet to this Pagantry High Court of Justice, and the most unparallel'd Ecclesiastick in all Stories and Times; Who like Doctor Shaw in the time of King Richard the Third (but more shame∣less) was employed to cry down the King, and to cry up the Protector; He was a prin∣cipal in the Cabal for the Murther of the
King, whose Death he contrived in five se∣veral places, (viz.) at Ware, Windsor, Cole∣man-street, the Painted-Chamber, and Bradshaws House, comparing the King in his Sermon to Barrabas, and in another, the Text where∣of was to Bind Kings in Chains, &c. He de∣clared that there was an Act of Gods own making, That they that spilt mans blood by man should their blood be spilt, and that out of that Law, neither the King, nor Prince, nor Prince Rupert, nor none of that Rabble were except∣ed. Upon the return of the King, being conscious of his own guilt, he hid his head, but his lurking place was found out, and he taken in the Burrough of Southwark, where at first he denied his Name, but being brought before Sir John Robinson then made Lievtenant of the Tower, he was known, and acknowledged himself, where he was kept Prisoner till such time as his Tryal, which was October 13. 1660. at which time it is very remarkable, that this Person, who by his Function as a Priest had most dishonour∣ed God in Preaching, and pressing this Par∣ticide, making use of his Holy Writ to this wicked purpose, had then nothing to say, but to cavil at the Witnesses, and that he was sorry to hear of his carriage towards the
King (we may believe him) but he had no malice towards him, but was meerly Enga∣ged in the Army; He was condemned to∣gether with Cook, and with him October 16. Drawn on Two Hurdles to Execution, where the miserable Wretch had not a word to say for himself, or to God, of whom he said he was abandoned: He that was so nim∣ble and quick in all projects in this nature before, was now like a Sot or a Fool, play∣ing and toying with the straw in the Sledge as he went to Execution, nay, so stupid was he, that the Hangman was forced to use more then ordinary strength to throw him off the Ladder; being almost hanged dead, he was cut down and Quarter'd, his Head set upon London-Bridge, and his Quarters exposed up∣on the tops of some of the City Gates. III. Daniel Axtell, who at first kept a Country Pedling-shop in Bedford-shire, and was double diligent in running after Sedi∣tious Persons, who then vented Treason in Pulpits; and believing their Doctrine for currant, obey'd the Call (as he called it) of those blind Guides, and went forth a small▪Officer to fight against the Mighty; His great Industry in their Service, brought him after many Traverses, to be a Lievtenant
Colonel; and employed by Cromwel out of Favour to him as he said (though the Devil could not have done him a greater Dis∣courtesie) to be Captain of the Guard at the Kings Tryal, where to show his Complacen∣cy to their Commands, he made his Janiza∣ries by blows and threats, to cry out Justice, and Execution; much more blood had he contracted to his guilt, (though none com∣parable to this) in Ireland, and had as the re∣ward of his Villanies, gotten a pretty foul Estate; but wickedness seldome prospers long, upon the Kings return, he was one of those Persons exempted by the Parliament out of the Act of Indempnity, and for his Treasons brought to a Tryal at Justice-Hall in the Old Baily, where notwithstanding, he pleaded for himself with more Art and Cun∣ningness then was imagined to be found in him, yet were his Crimes so Notorious as not to be covered with such Fig-leaves; He was therefore by the Jury found Guilty, and Sentenced to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, which was accordingly Execu∣ted on him at Tyburn, October the 19. 1660. His Head fixed on a Pole at the furthest end of Westminster-Hall, and his Quarters a spe∣ctacle on the City Gates.
IV. Doctor Dorislaus, A Dutch School-Master, who for some misdemeanours fled his Country, and here became Civillian, afterwards a professor in the University of Oxford, where being disappointed of his Am∣bitious Expectations, the War then on foot, he became the Parliaments Judge Advocate in their Army, by which he much better'd his broken Fortunes, and became a great Associate of Sir Henry Mildmay's, (who though raised by the King, was one of his greatest Enemies,) who promoted him to that business of drawing up a Charge against the King, the Horrid Nature thereof being such, that no Englishman durst find, or make a way to such an Illegal, and unprecedented business. After the perpetration of that hor∣rid Murther, he was lookt upon by the Regi∣cides for his Abilities, as a fit person to be sent over as an Envoy to his Country-men, to prosecute the Designes of the Faction, which would carry the better face, being managed by one of their own Subjects: He Arrived there in May, with great Pomp and Attendance, in his Coach with Six Horses before, and Vengeance behind; for the first night, as he was at Supper there, one Co∣lonel Whitford a Scotch-man, with some
Twelve other Caveliers, disdaining the King should be affronted by the impudent boldness of such an Audacious Traytor,) enter'd his Lodging, and with a broad Sword cleft his Head and killed him, having by a mistake wounded another Dutch-Man for him at their first coming in; and having done the deed, they quietly departed, it not being known (but privately) for a long time after who did it. To this we may adjoyn that of Aschams, another great confident of the Regicides, who being sent their Envoy to Spain, some little while after, was served in the same manner at his Arrival at Madrid, in his Inn, by one Sparks, and some other English Roy∣alists upon the same score; Sparks having done the deed, fled to the Venetian Ambassa∣dours for shelter, but judging that not se∣cure enough, he betook himself to San∣ctuary, from whence he was by the cunning Don, to curry Favour with the English Regi∣cides, then dreadfull to his Plate-Trade, ta∣ken thence, and with great pitty, and dis∣dain, at the meanness of the Spaniard, was Executed for the same. V. Daniel Broughton, A Clark bred up a∣mongst the Committees of War, where he
became so Principled, as he was judged fit, and preferred to be Chief Scribe to this Pha∣rasaicall Murtherous Crue of the High Court of Justice; for which Guilt, upon his Maje∣sties Return, immagining his Crime too great to be forgiven, he ran away, and in Forreign Countries disguised hides his hated head. VI. Edward Dendy, Serjant at Armes to the said cursed Court, who had before outed his Father from the Employment of the Mace; no marvel then, that such a Rebel to his Father, should prove a Parricide to his Prince; He likewise fled the Land upon his Majesties Return, to preserve his forfeited life from the Hangman. VII, and VIII. Sir Henry Mildmay, and Master Robert Wallop, who had Sat as Judges in that High Court of Iustice, although not Sen∣tenced nor Signed to the Warrant for his Execution; The first of these was one who had been raised by his Majesty, though most ungratefully (the worst of Vices) he Acted with a high hand against him; but divine Vengeance at last overtook him, and the Iron hand of Justice delivered him to the pu∣nishment (though not so great as his deserts) due to that grand Impiety, Ianuary 30. 1661.
They were on Sledges drawn from the Tower of London, through the City, with Halters about their necks to Tyburn, where having threaded that triple Tree, they re∣turned in the same Equipage back to the Tower, there to suffer perpetual Imprison∣ment, their Estates Confiscated, and they Degraded from all Titles and Armes of Gen∣tility. Sir James Harrington was to have suffered the like punishment, but he having his Li∣berty upon Bail from the Serjant at Armes, gave them the slip, and most unworthily left his Bail in the lurch. Phelps also one of the Clarks of that Court, was marked out for this Punishment, but not Senten∣ced. IX. Master Thomas Hoyle, an Alderman, and Burgess of York, a great Rumper, and Enemy to Regal Government, who the same day Twelve Month that the King was Beheaded, and as near as possibly could be judged about the very same hour of the day▪ hanged himself; Which day the Regicides Celebrated in most Solemn manner, in com∣memoration of their lately recovered Li∣berty, from the Laws, by the Murther of the King: But this was such a signal re∣mark
mark of the Just Judgement and Vengeance of God upon that detestable Fact, and their no less abominable mockery of him as the Authour thereof in this their Irreligious ob∣servation of that Fatal Providence, as they razed this Festival out of their Calen∣dar, which was attended with so ill an O∣men. X. One Lockier, an Active Agitator and Leveller in the Army, who had a principal hand in Seizing and Bringing the King to his Death; He was afterwards by them of his own Gang (the Divine Vengeance so ordering it) condemned for a Mutiny in Bishopsgate-Street, a shot to death in St. Pauls▪Church-Yard, being buried by some of his own Party with great Solemnity in the New Church-Yard, London. XI. Sir Thomas Martin, A Knight of Cam∣bridge-shire, a great stickler for the Times, and a sworn Enemy of the Royalists; who having been a Hunting in Holmby-Park, at the opening of a Deer he was desired (to∣gether with some other Gentlemen) to wash his hands in the Deeres blood, No (said he) I had rather wash my hands in the blood of the Young King of Scots; but observe the pu∣nishment that attended this Impious wish,
as he was riding home the same Evening, his Horse threw him, in which fall he pitcht on his head, mortally brake his Scull and Shoulder, and died shortly after of those wounds. XII. Sir Henry Holcroft, A grand Pillar of the Independant Faction, a Committee Gentleman, and one who Acted very stre∣nuously for the Rump, hoping to be a great sharer in the spoyle of the Kingdome; but Man proposes, and God disposes, for it plea∣sed the Lord that he fell into a sore Disease, bleeding abundantly at the nose and mouth, and at last fell to a strong vomitting up of gobbetts of blood at his mouth, and such abundance of blood flowed with mighty violence at his nose, that in a most sad man∣ner he departed this life, in one of the ex∣tream-fits thereof. XIII. To these we may add Colonel Rainsbrough, a prime stickler for the Power at Westminster, and a desparate Enemy against the King, who though he was killed before the Horrid Murther of his Majesty, yet the manner of his Death being so remarkable, is not to be passed over in silence. He be∣ing turned out of the Navy by the Sea-men, went with a strong Party to the Reducing
of Pontefract, then Besieged by Sir Edward Rhodes, and the County Forces, and took up his Quarters at an Inn in Doncaster, where having his Souldiers about him, and in as great security (as he though) as might be, some Caveliers from Pontefract under a pre∣tense of delivering him a Letter from Crom∣well, entered his Inn, and would have onely taken him Prisoner, and carried him into their Leaguer, but he refusing, they pistolled him in his Chamber, and returned back a∣gain untouched, a very strange, yet gallant Adventure. XIV. One Marston, a great Leveller and Agitator in the Army, a sort of People suspected many of them, and that rationally for Jesuites, who were as good at wicked Plots and Contrivances, as either Cromwell, or Ireton, or the chief of those Catalines and as accomplisht for Execution, having such Lawless, yet most Powerfull Indempnity not only to protect them, but to shroud their other Conspiracies for themselves either against Church or State. He was one of those that had a principal hand in Burford business, and being thought to be discon∣tented against their New Fangled Govern∣ment, was by the Regicides Ordered to be
taken into Custody; But those Messengers sent for him, found it a matter of more dif∣ficulty then they were aware of, for coming to his Lodging in Aldersgate-Street, and send∣ing him word to come down to them, he re∣solving not to be taken, with a Stilletto kil∣led two of them out-right, and sorely wounding the third, escaped; but after∣wards was re-taken, being terribly wounded in his endeavouring to escape; when he was Arraigned at the Sessions-House in the Old Baily, and Condemned to be Hanged, which was accordingly Executed on him, pre∣venting thereby another more milder kind of Death, which must necessarily have ensued not long after by reason of his wounds. XV. Sir Henry Vane, the Proteus of the Times, a meer hodge-podge of Religion, one composed onely of Treason and Ingra∣titude, whose Offences were of so crimson a die, that he was excepted out of the Act of Indempnity, and having remained a Pri∣soner for a good space, first in the Tower of London, and afterwards in the Isle of Scilly; He was at last for his manifold Treasons Ar∣raigned at the Kings Bench-Bar before the Lord Chief Justice, Foster, for Immagining,
and Compassing the Kings Death, and for Taking upon him, and Usurping the Go∣vernment; To which he Pleaded the Au∣thority of the Parliament, Justified it, and put the Court to a great deal of needlesse trouble, and impertinent repetitions, but disowned his medling or making with the Kings Death; but the notority of his crimes were so apparent, and obvious to the whole World, that he was Condemned to be Han∣ged, Drawn and Quartered; but through the intercession of some of his Friends who had deserved well in the Kings Service, his Sentence was mittigated to a Beheading on∣ly, which was Executed on him June the 14. 1662. on the Scaffold at Tower-Hill, (where the Earle of Strafford first bled by his, and his Fathers Treachery;) At the time of his Ex∣ecution he ran out into Treasonable Dis∣courses, but was stopt in his carreir, and af∣ter two or three fruitless warnings, his Notes endeavoured to be taken from him, which to prevent, he tore them in pieces, and in great passion not to be suffered to proceed in that Traytorous way, he submitted his Neck unto the Block.
Come we in the next place to speak of those who were Executed for commit∣ting of Treason after his Majesties Happy Restauration, and Setlement in his Throne again; where we shall find Traytors of so Desparate and Sanguine a disposition, as scarcely to be paralleld in former Ages; Men who though of different Tenets, and and who like Hydra's heads seemed to look several wayes, yet cemented together in the tayle, wherein lies the sting, being Enemies to all Civil Go∣vernment, and whatsoever was de∣cent, either in Church or State. And first of that bloody Attempt of Ven∣ner and his Mirmidons, which strange and unparalleld Action will afford the Truest Light and Judgement of that Fanatique, and desparate opinion of Chilianisme, and make after Ages to admire, that a handfull
of wild-brain'd People should dare to un∣dertake such an Attempt against Metro∣polis of the Kingdome, which a well Go∣verned Potent Army would not without good advice be driven unto. This Venner, a Wine-Cooper by Trade, with several others of his Gang, who were strongly perswaded that now was the Time come for Christ Personally to Raign upon Earth; having had several Meetings at Bell-Alley in Coleman-Street, where it was agreed amongst them, that the Powers of the Earth were to be Destroyed, and King Jesus alone to be set Up; Venner Preaching to them to this purpose (alluding to that of the Psal∣mist) That one of them should chace a Hundred, and a Hundred put Ten Thousand to flight; Assu∣ring them also, That no Weapons formed against them should prosper, nor hair of their head be touched. January 6. 1660. They took Armes, and in the dusk of the Evening came to St. Pauls Church-Yard, where they mustered their small Party, and placed Centinals for the time, where an Innocent Person coming by accidentally, being by them asked whom he was for, and he answering according to the usuall mode, For God, and King Charles, they immediately shot him, which Action
soon Allarum'd the City, and some Parties of the Trained Bands marched against them, but their strength being too great for those few Files, they without controule marched along to Aldersgate, where the Constable being but weakly attended, was forced to let them out again; Here they Declared themselves for King Jesus, and those of their Friends whose Quarters were upon the Gates: From thence they proceeded to Beech-lane, where a Head-borough opposing them, they shot and killed him, and so with all hast marched to Cane-Wood, where for a while they remained; But the City having Intelligence thereof, sent out a Party of Horse and Foot, which took about Thirty of them, and brought them before the Ge∣neral, who sent them Prisoners to the Gate-House. January the 9. after some Encouragement and Assurance of Victory from their Chief∣tain Venner, they again assumed their first En∣terprize, and no sooner were the Watches and Guards removed, but they made their appearance at Bishopsgate, which they passed, and came into the City without opposition as far as Threadneedle-street, with such a confident resoluteness, that a Party of the
Trained Bands designed to Watch that day, being sent out to follow them, were forced to Retreat to their Main-Guard, when the whole Body advancing towards them, they retreated into Bishopsgate-street, where some of them took into an Ale-House at the signe of the Helmet, where they maintained a sharp Dispute, two of them being Killed, and two Taken, and as many Killed and Wounded of the Trained Bands. The next News of them was at Colledge-Hill, from whence they marched up into Cheap-side, and so into Wood-street, as far as the Counter, where Venner who Headed them, being Ar∣med with a Murrion on his head, and a Hal∣bert in his hand, commanded the Prisoners to be let out, or else he told them they were but dead men; But before he could accom∣plish his designs, they were charged by the Life-Guard, whom they put to the Retreat, but they being seconded by two Companies of the Trained Bands, the Dispute was very sharp and desparate, untill at last Venner be∣ing knockt down, and Tuffnel and Crag two of their prime Teachers fled, they began to give ground, and betook themselves to flight by several wayes, the greatest part of them went down Wood-street, and so to Criple∣gate,
firing in the Rear at a Trained Band of Yellow who closely pursued them; at last they took in at the Blew Anchor Ale-House by the Postern, which House they main∣tained with much desparate courage, and would not hear of any Termes of Yielding; soon after came Lievtenant Colonel Cox with his Company and surrounded all places about it, and then some of the Souldiers got up upon the Tilings of the next House, which they cast down, and fired into the uppermost Room where the Rebells were, yet were they so desparately bent in their wickedness, that even then they refused Quarter, untill a File of Musqueteers got up the Stairs, and having shot down the door, entered upon them, six of them being killed, and an∣other wounded, yet one of them still refu∣sed Quarter, who being knockt down with the But end of a Musquet, was afterwards shot; the rest yielded, who being demand∣ed, why they craved not Quarter before, Answered, They durst not for fear their owne Fellows should shoot them, of such a desparate resolution was the temper of their Spi∣rits. In this Rebellious Insurrection were slain alike of both sides, Twenty Two of the Kings
Leige People, and Twenty Two of the Tray∣tors. Twenty One more besides were taken, whose Names were as followeth, (viz.) Thomas Venner, their Chief Ring-leader, the Captain of this Rebellious Rout; The Se∣cond to Venner were one Tuffnel a Car∣penter living in Grays-Inn-lane, a desparate Fellow, who after He and his Party were forced over the Houses through More-lane, they fled into the Fields, and he having four or five Pistolls about him, discharged them all before he could be got down; but at last he was so mortally wounded, that they brought him in a Chair to Newgate, and so they sent him to Christ-Church Hospital, where after three dayes space he dyed of his wounds, and was carried into Christ-Church-Yard, for to be viewed, to see if any body would own him; but a hole being digged the Blew Coat Boyes covered him with the Earth, and he was never further lookt after. The next was Roger Hodgkins, a Button-Sellor in St. Clements Lane neer Lumbard street; Giles Pritcherd, a Cow-keeper, Leonard Gowler, Jonas Allen, John Pym, William Orsingham, Wil∣liam Ashton, Stephen Fall, John Smith, William Corbet, John Dod, Iohn Elestone, Thomas Harris, Iohn Gardener, Robert Bradley, Richard Marten,
Iohn Patshall, Robert Hopkins, and Iohn Wells. These Twenty and One were all brought to the Bar together, Tuffnel excepted; (their Tryal succeeding soon after their Desparate En∣gagement) where the wounded Men had Chairs allowed them to sit down in, and af∣ter the Indictment was read, which was laid both to Treason and Murther; Thomas Venner was first called, who being asked Guilty or not Guilty, ran out into a wild Discourse about his Conversation in New-England, and concerning the Fifth Monar∣chy, and the Testimony within him above these Twenty years. He confessed, He was in the late Rising, but was not Guilty of Treason, intending not to Leavy War against the King; and again ran out into impertinent Stories and Discourses as before; but being pressed by the Court to Answer to his Indictment, he pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Tryal put himself upon God and the Country. In the like manner all the rest used many rambling diversions from the business, but at last pleaded to their Indictments: Whereupon the Witnesses were sworn, who made it ap∣pear, that Venner, Tuffnel, and Crag, (the two last being killed in the business) Did several times perswade their Congregation to take up Arms
for King Iesus, against the Powers of the Earth, (which were his Majesty, the Duke of York, the General, &c.) That they were to Kill all that opposed them: That they had been Praying and Preaching, but not Acting for God: That they Armed themselves at their Meeting-House in Coleman-street, with Blunder-busses, Musquets, &c. Marten, Hopkins, Wells, and Patshall, the Witnesses being not so clear against them, were acquitted by the Jury, the other Six∣teen were found Guilty, and being brought to the Bar, were demanded to shew cause why Sentence of Death should not pass upon them? which they not doing, they were all Sixteen Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. The Lord Chief Justice Foster charging Venner with the blood of his Complices, by his Seduction and Leading of them, he Answered, He did not; to which the Witnesses being produced again, he blasphemously evaded it with this quible, and said, It was not He, but Iesus that Led Them. According to the Sentence pronounced on them Ianuary 19. 1661. Venner and Hodg∣kings (both desparately wounded in the Re∣bellion, and as yet uncured) were Drawn on Sledges from Newgate through Cheap-side,
over against their Meeting House in Swan-Alley in Coleman-street, where they were Ex∣ecuted according to the Sentence pronoun∣ced against them. Venner (according to the nature of most desparate Traytors) vindica∣ting Himself and his Fact, being confident he said, That the time was at hand when other judge∣ment would be, reflecting much upon the Govern∣ment: But if the one was mad, the other raved, Hodgkins in way of Praying, Calling down Vengeance from Heaven upon the King, the Iudges, and the City of London; nor would he leave, until the Hangman by the Sheriff's or∣der turn'd him off the Ladder; so that as they lived in a mad Religion, they died as madly in the same: Their Quarters were set upon the Four Gates of the City, by the late Ex∣ecuted Regicides, whose quarrel and re∣venge they undertook, in this desparate at∣tempt, and their Heads upon Poles as loving∣ly by some of them on London-Bridge. The same day Giles Pritchard, a Cow-keeper, and another of them were Executed in Cheap-side, and on the Munday following, be∣ing the 21. of Ian. Nine more of them were Executed at five several places, (viz.) Two at the West end of St. Pauls, Two at the Bull and Mouth in St. Martins, Two at Beech-lane,
Two at the Royal Exchange, and One a notable Fellow named Leonard Gowler at Bishopsgate. They all (especially the last) obstinately per∣sisted in their Errour, only a young man who was Hanged in Redcross-street, did relent and repent of his sin, and the blood he had spilt, but yet could not be perswaded out of his opinion of Chilianisme. Thus this desparate attempt ended in a halter, and their Declaration called A door of Hope opened, proved to be a trap door, to draw silly souls to destruction. I shall here add those Verses made under Venners picture, as being pertinent to this purpose, and so take my leave of them. His Helmet was a Crown by Revelation, His Halbert was a Scepter for the Nation; So the Fifth Monarchy anew is grac'd, King Venner next to John a Leydon plac'd. To these we may add one John James, a Small-cole-man by Trade, a rank Fifth Mo∣narchist, and one who had been engaged in Venners busines, but was absent, or had saved himself the last day they broke out; yet not∣withstanding that fair warning, departed not from his malice, but continued his Meetings
and Conventicles with others of his despa∣rate Crue, amongst whom he was a principal Rabby or Teacher. This man, as Venner had done before him, and as was couched in their Declaration, flew out into several Traytor∣ous Speeches and Invectives against the Kings Person, Government, and Family, which being over-heard by some Neigh∣bours living near, James was seized upon, and carried before a Justice, who committed him to Newgate, and the next Terme was brought to a Tryal at the Kings Bench-Bar, where the words were proved against him, and he convicted and condemned as a Tray∣tor. November 27. 1661. He was drawn on a Sledge from Newgate to Tyburn, some of his Sect throwing themselves into the same Sledge, and embracing him, so highly opi∣nionated were they of this their silly though bold Seducer. At the Gallows he denied the words, but owned and avowed his Chilia∣nisme, and the Personal Reign of Christ, and with the usuall confidence of his Party resolutely died. His Quarters were disposed of by his Majesties Orders, and his Head fix∣ed upon a Pole in White-Chappel, neer to their Meeting House, for an Example to his Fel∣lows.
Yet could not the ill success of these dis∣courage others from Plots against his Maje∣sty, but still new Treasons was hatched by the Rebellious Spirits of one Captain Baker, a New-England man, and great acquaintance of Hugh Peters, who preferred him to be one of Olivers Pensioners; with him was enga∣ged one George Phillips a Serjant in the Co∣lonels Company of the White Regiment, Thomas Tongue a distiller of Strong Waters, Francis Stubbs a Cheese-monger, James Hide Gunner, John Selly Compass-maker, and Na∣thaniel Gibbs Felt-maker. Their Plot was against the Sacred Life of the King, the Duke of York, General Monk, and Sir Richard Brown, and generally the Bishops, the Nobi∣lity, Gentry and Commonalty, that were not of their opinion, and assisted them not: Their Commander in Chief was to be Lud∣low, and one Colonel Danvers, Master Nye, Master Lockyer, Lievtenant Strange; the Cap∣tains, Spencer and Taverner were favourable to the Design; Their Councils was carried on by Six, who never sat twice in a Place, nor could be known to any two; Deal Castle in Kent, and Windsor was promised to be theirs. This Treasonable Plot was by one Hill (who was endeavoured to be drawn into
it by Captain Baker) discovered to Sir Richard Brown, with the Names of the Conspirators, who were for the same apprehended, and December 11. 1662. brought to a Tryal, where being by plain Evidence convicted, they were condemned, and December 22. Four of them, (viz.) Phillips, Tongue, Gibbs and Stubbs were Executed, and their Heads set upon several Poles, two on each Tower-Hill, the nearest place to the Tower. After∣wards February the 20. one Gibbs, Brother of the aforesaid Nathaniel, who fled, and was re-taken, was sent to the Sessions House in the Old Baily, and with the said Captain Ba∣ker condemned for the former Treason, and both of them Executed at Tyburn. To these might be added the Intended Re∣bellion in York-shire, and some other of the Northern Counties, by some desparate Fa∣naticks, for which divers of them were Ex∣ecuted at York, and else-where; but we shall wave our Discourse of them, and conclude with the Execution of some Notorious Scotch Traytors. And first of the Marquess of Argyle, one who was a desparate Enemy to the Old King all along, a chief Contriver and Fo∣menter of that Destructive Covenant, the
Ignis Fatuus of that Nation, which the Scots believed (as the Trojans did by their Image of Pallas) came from Heaven; a greater Sider with Cromwel, and one who had carried himself very undutifully and irreverently to his Majesty, at what time he was amongst them in Scotland; yet notwithstanding all these insolencies, upon the Kings Restitution with great confidence he came up to London, hoping to have obtained his pardon for all those base Treasons he had so covertly Acted in that Kingdome, and that his Majesty ac∣cording to his Gracious Inclination would have past by all his Offences; But such was the general hatred and detestation of that People towards him, especially of the Nobi∣lity, that by the Kings Order he was com∣mitted to the Tower, and from thence, not long after in order to his Tryal conveyed to Edenburgh in Scotland, where he was brought to account for all his abominable Treasons, and notwithstanding he cunningly defended himself, and pleaded the Kings Pardon, and the Treaties in 1650. and 1651. yet was there such Crimes of a later date, (besides the never to be forgotten Treachery of Sel∣ling King Charles the First to the English) as justly condemned him, whereupon June the
1. 1661. He was accordingly Beheaded with the Maiden, for so is the Axe called in Scotland; At his death he very much justi∣fied the Covenant, that Scottish Witch, which consisted of 666 words, the number of the Beast in the Revelation, and which cost almost as many Thousand Mens lives as there were words contained in the same. Neer unto the same time, Master James Guthery, a prime Remonstrator, and a violent Adversary to the King in his Lievtenant the Marquess of Montross, together with one Captain Giffan a Runnegado to Cromwel, were by Sentence and Decree of Parliament han∣ged at Edenburgh; so far (to use the words of an Elegant Authour writing upon these Affairs) the Laws, and a suffering sense of the Miseries and Reproaches that Nation lay under by these Men, and their Partisans Guilt, did now prevail against the Domi∣nion of the Kirk, which had Enslaved and Enchanted the whole Masse of that Peo∣ple. We shall conclude all with the Lord Warreston, a wicked Knave, a Committee of Safety Man, notoriously Infamous for his Treason in Scotland, and a fugitive there; who being Proclaimed a Rebel and Traytor,
was taken and secured in France, and sent over hither, where having remained some time in the Tower, he was conveyed into Scotland, and there Tryed, Condemned, and Executed according to Law, 1662. Ecclesiastes, 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for a bird in the Air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.
The Contents. The Loyal Martyrs Murdered in Scotland. 1 COl. Nathan. Gordon 42 2 Sr. Robert Spotswood 43 3 Mr. Andrew Guthrey ib. 4 Mr. Will. Murrey. 44 5 Marquesse of Montross idem The Loyal Persons slain in his Majesties Service. 1 COronet Porter 57 2 Lord Aubigney 58 3 Earle of Lindsey idem 4 Sir Edw. Varney idem 5 Col. Munro idem 6 Earle of Northampton idem 7 Earle of Denbigh 59 8 Sir Bevill Greenvil idem 9 Mr. Leake idem 10 Mar. de Vieu Ville idem 11 Earle of Carnarvan 60 12 Earle of Sunderland idem 13 Lord Fauckland idem 14 Sir Hen. Howard idem 15 Earle of Kingston 61 16 Col. Cavendish idem 17 Lord Grandison 62 18 Sr. Ingram Hopton idem 19 Lord Stuart idem 20 Sir John Smith 63 21 Col. Manning idem 22 Lord Carey idem 23 Sr. W. Wentworth 64 24 L. Col. Smith idem 25 Sr. John Digby idem 26 Col. Myn idem 27 Sr. W. St. Leger idem 28 Col. Gage 65 29 Col. St. George idem 30 Col. Taylor idem 31 Sr. Rich. Crane 66 32 Earle of Leichfield idem 33 Sr. Fr. Carnaby idem 34 Major Cufaud idem 35 Mrs Griffith 67 36 Mr. Gerard idem 37 St. Tho. Dalison idem 38 Sr. N. Fortescu 68 39 Sr. T. Turbervil idem 40 Major Threave idem 41 Col. Stanhop idem 42 Sr. N. Kemish idem 43 Lord Villers 69 44 Sr. Compton 70 45 Sr. W. Vaughan idem 46 Sr. Art. Aston idem 47 Sr. Edw. Varney 71 48 Col. Warren idem 49 Col. Hammond 72 50 Cap. Goffe idem
51 Sr. John Brown idem 52 Lord Widrington idem 53 Sr. Tho. Tilsely 73 54 Col. Boynton 74 55 Duke Hamilton idem 56 Col. Morgan idem The Loyal Confessors. 1 LOrd Finch 76 2 Secret. Windebanck 77 3 Bishop of Ely idem 4 Dr. Featly 78 5 Sr. Robert Heath 79 6 Judge Bartlet idem 7 Judge Jenkins 80 8 Lord Hopton 81 9 Sr. Ed. Nicholas 82 10 Earle of Clarendon idem 11 Lord Wilmot 83 12 Dr. Sheldon 84 13 Dr. Hammond idem 14 Sir Marm. Landale idem 15 Mr. Ro. Le Strange 85 16 Earle of Norwich idem 17 Sir John Stowell 86 18 Sir John Berkinhead 87 19 Dr. Barwick idem 20 Earle of Cleaveland 88 21 Lord Gerard idem 22 Sir John Owen 89 23 L. Loughborough idem 28 Sir A. Reynoldson 92 29 Col. Russel idem 30 Lord Bellacis idem 31 Col. Ashbornhan 93 32 Sir Hum. Bennet idem 33 L. Mordant 94 34 Sir Tho. Woodcock 95 35 Mr. Chr. Pits idem 36 Mr. W. Garrant 96 37 Henry Fryar idem 38 Marq. Winchester 97 39 Earle of Oxford idem 40 Sir Geo. Booth idem 41 Sir Tho. Midleton 98 The Kings Iudges. 1 JOhn Bradshaw 99 2 Oliver Cromwell 102 3 Henry Ireton 104 4 Har. Waller 105 5 Col. Walton 106 6 Thomas Harrison 107 7 Col. Ed. Whaley 108 8 Col Tho. Pride idem 9 Col. Isaac Ewer 109 10 The Lord Grey 110 11 Lord Munson idem 12 Sir I. Danvers 111 13 Sir Tho. Maleverer idem 14 Sir Io. Bourcher 112 15 Isaac Pennington idem 16 Henry Martin 113 17 Will. Purefoy 114 18 Col. Berkstead idem 19 Iohn Blakeston 116 20 Gilbert Millington idem
21 Tho. Chaloner 117 22 Sir W. Constable idem 23 Edmond Ludlow 118 24 Col. Hutchinson idem 25 Sir Micha. Lieusie 119 26 Robert Titchburn idem 27 Owen Rowe 120 28 Robert Lilburn idem 29 Adrian Scroop 112 30 Richard Dean idem 31 Col. Okey 122 32 Iohn Hewson 123 33 William Goffe idem 34 Cornel. Holland 124 35 Iohn Carew idem 36 John Jones 125 37 Per. Pelham 126 38 Thomas Wogan idem 39 Fran. Allen idem 40 Dan. Blagrave 127 41 John Moor 128 42 Will. Say idem 43 Franc. Lascels 129 44 Ja. Chaloner idem 45 Gregory Clement idem 46 Sir G▪ Norton 130 47 John Ven idem 48 Thom. Andrews 131 49  Stapely idem 50 Tho. Horton idem 51 John Lisle 132 52 John Dixwell 133 53 Miles Corbet idem 54 Simon Meyne 134 55 John Allured 135 56 Henry Smith idem 57 Humphry Edwards 136 58 John Fry idem 59 Ed. Harvey 137 60 Tho. Scot idem 61 William Cawley 138 62 John Downs idem 63 Thomas Hammond 139 64 Vincent Porter idem 65 Augustine Garland 140 66 George Fleetwood idem 67 James Temple 141 68 Peter Temple idem 69 Thomas Wait. 14 Accessary Regicides. 1 John Cook 144 2 Hugh Peters 145 3 Daniel Axtel 147 4 Dr. Daurislaws 149 5 Da. Broughton 150 6 Edw. Dendy 151 7 Sr. Hen. Mildmay idem 8 Robert Wallop idem 9 Tho. Hoyle 152 10 Lockier 153 11 Sir Tho. Martin id. 12 Sir Hen. Holcroft 154 13 Col. Rainsbrough idem 14  Marston 155 15 Sir Hen. Vane 156 Traytors Executed since his Majesties return. 1 Tho. Venner &c. 158 2 John James 167 3 Cap. Baker, &c. 169 4 The Rebels in Yorkshire 170 5 Marq. of Argyle idem 6 James Guthery 172 7 Lord Warreston idem FINIS.
