W348 99830816 35270
The Substance of a SERMON, Being an Incouragement for PROTESTANTS, or a Happy Prospect of Glorious Success: With Exhortations to be Va∣liant against our Enemies, in opposing the Bloody Prin∣ciples of PAPISTS, and Errors of Popery, &c. Occasionally on the Protestants Victory over the FRENCH and IRISH Papists BEFORE London-Derry, In Raising that Desperate SIEGE. By Mr. WALKER Minister, and Governor of the City. London, Printed by A. Milbourn in  Green-Arbour-Court in the Little-Old-Baily. 1689.
Licensed, June the 5th. 1689. Entred according to Order▪
A Glorious Prospect of the Pro∣testants Happiness, &c. Judges VII. 20. The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. WE may through all the Course of Holy Scripture, plainly behold that when the Almighty design∣ed to work out a Deliverance to his People, he made them sensible that it was not so much the Arms of Flesh, as his immediate power that saved them. The Israelites at the time that God raised up Gideon the Son of Joash to be an Instrument in his Hand of saving them, were oppressed by the Midianites & Amalakites, a cruel and wastful People that spared no means that force or fraud could invent to vex them, and lay their Country desolate, to draw them away to Idolatry, and the Worship of strange Gods, which their Fathers had not known; and least they should seem to attribute the Victory to Multitudes, and not give the sole Glory to the God of Battles; this great Cap∣tain had an express Command, to try first their Courage and Resolution, and after that proving too many, they were selected at the Water-Brook, where three hundred only were chosen, and with that small number, the mighty Army was overthrown, destroyed, broken, and confoun∣ded at first onset by the breaking of Pitchers, & sounding of
Trumpets, and crying, The Sword of the Lord, and of Gi∣deon, Judges 7. 20. Let but the Lord arise, (says Holy Da∣vid) and his Enemies shall be scattered: (And again) God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble: There∣fore will we not fear though the earth be moved, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; though the Waters thereof roar, and be troubled, Psal. 46. 1, 2, 3. we find that when Samaria was Besieged, and even Famine raged in the City to a degree, that a Woman was forced to eat the Fruits of her Womb, when all visible means failed, and an Insulting Enemy every day expected to enter the City, and bring it to final Desolation; that only a noise being heard in the Hills and Mountains, raised the Siege, and gave a∣bundance of plenty to the besieged, according as the Pro∣phet had foretold. And Senacharibs Hoast trusting in the Arm of the Flesh, and the multitude of Horses and Chari∣ots, found themselves insensibly defeated by the Revenging Sword of the Destroying Angel, falling dead, by the mighty stroak of an Invisible power, whose force they felt, but knew no way to resist, or fly from, till 80000 of them were fetter'd in the Chains of Death. And upon conside∣ration of these, and the like Deliverances, Holy David says to comfort himself, and his people, viz. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge; come, behold the Work of the Lord, what desolation he hath made in the earth, he maketh Wars to cease unto the end of the earth, he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, and burneth the Cha∣riot with fire: Be still, and know that I am God, I will be exalt∣ed amongst the Heathen, I will be exalted in the earth. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, Psal. 46. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. For although God makes Man for the most part the instrument in his hand, the more visibly to bring about his purposes; yet without the Operation of Almigh∣ty power and Wisdom, Mens Devices are brought to nought, for here we find, that when Gideon came to behold the Camp of the enemy, The Midianites, and Amalakites, and all the Children of the Host ay along in the Valley like Grashoppers for
multitude, and their Camels were without number, as the Sand of the Sea, Judges 7. 12. Yet this great Army that had so long been the wastful terrour of the Country, was put into such a fear at the cry of the Sword of the Lord, and Gideon, that they were utterly confounded, and knew not what they did; for as we find it in ver. 21, 22. of the foregoing Chap∣ter, viz. And they stood every man in his place round about the Camp, and all the Hoast ran, and cryed, and fled, and the three hundred blew the Trumpets, and the Lord set every mans Sword against his fellow even throughout all the Hoast, and the Host fled, &c. By this we may see, it was more through fear and distraction they were broken, than through any slaughter the three hundred Israelites were capable of making amongst so great a company of men. David incouraged by God, pursued the Amalakites that burnt Ziklag, and with four hundred Men fell upon those that had taken the spoil, and with four hundred Men defeated their great Army, re∣covering what ever had been taken away. Barach and De∣borah defeated Jabn's great Hoast, destroying it together with Cissea its Captain, who fell in Jael's Tent. Sampson with hs single Arm, routed at sundry times, the Powers of the Philists; so that we see that God confounds strength with weakness, for when men presume too much on the Arm of Flesh, they frequently deceive themselves; and in the midst of their security are overthrown: Therefore let a good Christian consider that his strength is in the Lord, and if God be on his side, he need not be afraid, though dan∣ger best him round about; but be comforted, and made valiant by the words of the Kingly Prophet, viz. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear; the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid: When the wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell: Though an Hoast should en∣camp against me, my heart shall not fear, though War shall arise against me, in this will I be confident, Psal. 27. 1, 2, 3. This ought to be the confidence, and courageous resolution of every Christian, especially Soldiers, who carry their
Lives in their hands, and are said to live on the brink of the Grave. Above all in a good Cause, and the defence of the Sacred Truth, when their Religion is in danger, and the enemy seeks not to gain a Dominion over their bodys, but over their souls to obscure the light of the Gospel, and cloud a Kingdom in darkness and ignorance: Let them take example by the valiant Maccabees, who when they beheld their Holy things prophaned an I trampled under foot by an Idolatrous people, their Altar polluted, and their San∣ctuarys in danger to be defiled; they took up the Sword of Gideon, and stood more for their Religion than for their Lives▪ nor was the Sword of the Lord wanting to give them success over their Enemes, and to redeem their bleeding Country from the distraction and desolation it, groaned un∣der; nor may we spare to come nearer home, and find in∣numerable instances of God's raising up Gideons to save these Kingdoms, not only from Barbarous Nations, who in ear∣ly times have invaded them but from a Papal Tyranny from Plots, and Conspiracys that have laboured to make their glory set in blood and ruine. Henry the Eight was raised up to scatter the Midiantes, and Amalakites of Rome, whose Idolatries and Superstitions had infected our Israel, and whose Pride and Luxury had laid waste her pleasant places, and destroyed the good things of the Land: This, I say, was the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, for God made this Prnce an Instrument in his hand: This was the Lord's doings and it is marvelous in our Eyes, and in the next place he raised up a good Josia in the person of Edward the Sixth, and under him gave us the purity and light of the Gopel in is primitive lustre, brighter than the Morning-Sta▪ and though ater the death of this good Prince, he his Sword, and suffered us to be crushed under the hands of our enemies; yet the Bloody Reign of O Mary once over, wherein our Adversaries displayed them∣selves in their true Colours, feasting Flames with Martyrs precious Blood, at such a Riotous profuseness, as no Bar∣brous Nation had equalled, he heard the Groans of his
suffering people, and sent us a deliverance, The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, was again on our side, as appeared in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who was valliant for the truth, and in spite of all the Conspiracies to raise a Rebel∣lion, or bring her to an untimely end, by Poison, Daggers, and many pernicious Devices; she stood the Gideon, or De∣borah of our Land, and though Spain fill'd the Seas with fleating Castles to destroy this flourishing Kingdom, yet the Almighty by a small number manifestly bared his Arm to save us, and raine those that were too confident in the Arm of Flesh, not only destroying that huge Armado, but routing such Forces, as the Spaniards sent into Ireland, to as∣sist the Bloody Irish Papists, in Rebellion against their lawful Soveraign, committing such Cruelties as are too tedi∣ous here to mention, and although in the frustration of their Plots and Devices they might well have perceived the immediate hand of Heaven, protecting this great and pro∣sperous Queen; yet so far were they infatuated, or tran∣sported with inseperable Malice and Revenge, that though their Attempts cost many of them their lives, yet no sooner was the wise Protestnt Prince King James the First advanced to the Throne, but they went to exalt him in a blast to the Skies, had not their Powder Plot been discover∣ed by the Divne Hand of Providence, who blasted it; all which well considered, may make us confess with the Royal Prophe, viz. We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple, according to thy Name, O God, so is thy praise vnto the ends of the earth; thy right hand is full of righteousness: Let Mount Sion rejoyce, let the Daughter of Jud be glad, because of thy judgment, Psal. 49. verse 9, 10, 11. And now without tears of compassion, we cannot reflect on the Popish Cruelty in the poor Kingdom of Ireland; in the Reign of King Charles the First, Anno 1641. when with∣out any provocation, Armed with Hellish Rage, and the natul Cruelty of a Papist, they by inhumane Torments,
Massacred no less than 200000 English Protestants, of all Ages and Sex; insomuch that the Dead Bodies not being suffered by the Priests to be buried; Created a Contageon, and in some measure took revenge on the Murtherers; and what can we think? but at this day a Papist is a Papist still, where even the Principle of Religion instills a kind of Fierceness and Barbarity into their Nature: Nay, if we reflect what in a few Months they have done, what better can be expected, if we consider the Spoil, Plunder, Ravagements, and Desolations the French and Irish in Arms have made, regarding neither Oaths, Promises, nor nearness of Relation; with a desire utterly to Root the the English out of the Kingdom, with a further design of carrying on their Mischevious Enterprizes against the Pro∣testant Religion; In general, it is time for Protestants to become Valiant for the Truth, and bold as Lyons, not only for their Religion, but temporal intrest; the preserva∣tion of their Wives and Children, from Murthers, Rapes, and Deflowrings, and all manner of Violence and Wick∣edness: to stand as Bulwarks against the Rapid Inundati∣on of Antichristan Tyrany. Let us consider that the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Forrest, stand in the defence of their own lives, and the lives of their young Ones, with such Weapons as Nature has afforded them: And shall not men in such a case pluck up their Spirits, and redouble their Courage, since the Almighty has of late been so favourable in giving us, even by Miracle, a Protestant King and Queen to sit upon the Throne, and so great a Prospect of a through deliverance; we are here Members of the Church Militant: Let us not be ashamed or afraid of our profession, when maintaining our Christi∣an Wfre in a good conscience, and a just cause, we make our way to the Church, which is Triumphant, where God shall wipe away all tears from our Eyes, And there shall be no more Death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pin, for the former things pass away. Rev. 21, 4. Though never so many Storms and Tempests
threaten; yet a good Christian ought not to be dismayed, though in a time, even when danger does beset them: yet it is required, they should Humble themselve; before their Maker, and Rely on him, who is able to save to the utmost, all that trust in him: For indeed, Sin is that which provokes him to with-hold his mercy, and bring calamities on Nations, and Kingdoms; it was always well with the seed of Jacob, when they cleave fast to the Rock of their Salvation; but when they grew Regardless, he gave them up to the oppressing Nations, who grieved his chosen Heritage, for as 'tis said Psal. 18. ver. 25, 26. 27. viz. With the Merciful, thou wilt shew thy self Merci∣ful; and with an upright man, thou wilt shew thy self upright; with the pure, thou wilt shew thy self pure; with the fro∣ward, thou wilt shew thy self froward: For thou wilt save the afflicted people, but will bring down high looks. Niniveh humbling her self in Sackcloath and Ashes before the Lord, was saved from impendent Wrath, when Stubborn Sodom, and Impenitent Gomorrah sunk in Sulpherous fire; let us turn then to the Lord with our whole hearts, and sing praise unto our deliverer, that our Enemies, and all those that seek to hurt us, may fall before us: 'Tis a good consceience, and an assurance in gods mercy's that makes men valiant; Abraham on this score persued the Kings, and Rescued his Brother Lot, &c. out of their hands: David in this assurance undauntedly marched against the mighty Champion of the Philistims; and with inconsiderable Weapons, as knowing God saves neither by Spear nor Shield, no more than by weak means, when he resolves to manifest his power; or intends to save, he overcame the man that had so long desied the Armies of Israel: For when the great Jehovah was design∣ed to show his last Judgment upon Pharoh; and his pur∣suing Host in the Red Sea, and Israel cryed out for fear, they were only commanded to stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, and they even without contributing any help of their own, found themselves not only secured from the
danger they feared, and a little before had threatned them, but saw their desire upon their Enemies; the Element heard the voice of its Creator▪ and returned with violence to let the stubborn monarch know, that the highest Rules in the Kingdoms of men, in whose hands are all the King∣doms of the Earth, and all the breath of life. There is a Sword of the Lord, and a Sword of Man; against the first there is no prevailing, but the latter is weak, if the first be want∣ing: God if he pleases can arm all the Elements to sight for his Servants, as he did the Hail in the time of Joshua, by which there fell more than by the Swords of the Israelites; or inclose his people with Fiery Camps of Armed Angels, as he did Elisha, when his life was sought for by the Assyrians. Trust in the Lord, and he will be to his Servants a Wall of defence, and a strong Tower, a Buckler, a Shield, and a mighty Deliverer; who has power to do what he pleases: In Heaven, and Earth, whose Will is Fate, and whose De∣crees are irresistable, and Irreversable: Let us but call up∣on him sincerely, with a true heart and unfeigned lips, and he will hear us, and deliver us out of all our trouble: Let us not then be afraid of their terrour that seek to harm us, but assuredly rest secure in his protection, whose mercys are over all the Works of his Creation, and he will keep us from the Arrows that fly by Night, and the Shafts, though go abroad by day the Adversary shall have no advantage o∣ver us: Therefore let us acquit our selves like men, and not faint, or grow weary: Let fear fly our Breasts, and let us arm our selves with Courage in a good Cause; and con∣sider that the God of Battles, the Lord of Hosts is the di∣sposer of all things, and if the Lord be with us, who shall be against us, and prosper, for there is a Sword of the Lord, and a Sword of Gideon. Thus by extraordinary means does the Almighty save, when he bares his Arm to make his power known to the Sons of Men; then happy are all they that trust in him, for they shall never be confounded, their Enemies shall come
out one way, but flee seven; the Lord shall draw a Sword after them, and they shall be scattered, even from Heaven shall they be discomfited, and scattered o'er the face of the earth, as in Judges 3. 2. They fought from Heaven, the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. If Heaven be on our side, in vain is the Combination of man, for who is able to stand before that mighty God, whose very looks drieth up the deep, and whose wrath maketh the Mountains to melt, before whose Majesty Job confesseth himself to fail and tremble, like one in a stormy Tempest, and that his fear was so great that he was not able to bear it; nor can his hand be shortened, that he will not save those that stand for his truth, such as are valiant for the promotion of God's Honour, are said to fight the Lord's Battle; that is, he owns them to be his Soldiers, and he puts power and strength into their hands, as he did into his Servant Joshu∣ah's when he made the Heavenly bodies contrary to the course of nature, obey a Mortal Voice, the Sun and Moon stood still till his people had accomplished their desire upon their Enemies, as we find it in Joshua, 10. 13. and when Moses held but up his hand the Israelites prevailed, for there is nothing too hard for the Lord, when he designs to bring about his purposes: I called on the Lord in my distress (says Holy David) the Lord answered me, and set me in a large place; the Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me: The Lord taketh my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me; it is bet∣ter to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, all Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them, Psal. 118. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Thus we may be∣hold, how a good cause puts life into the Soul, and makes the Spirit rise to the extreamest height of valour, banishing the image of fear by a confident assurance of success▪ makes men bold as Lyons, and unwary in their undertakings. This made Nehemiah courageous for the House of God, and for his Sanctuary, when he caused the very Work-men to arm at their labour, having their Swords in their hands,
even whilst they were building, and repairing the City of Jerusalem, to prevent and repel their treacherous Enemies who sought always to surprize and bring them to destru∣ction: Let us take Courage then, and faint not but acquit your selves like men. A Protestant Prayer for our Deliverance from Popish Enemies, and for future Success. O Lord God, Holy and Glorious, in whose hands are all the ends of the earth, thou God of Battles on whom all Success and Victory depends; look down upon us thy poor afflicted Servants, pardon our Sins, and pass by the multi∣tude of our Transgressions; save us, save us, O Lord, from the Malice and Hatred of our Implacable Enemys, defeat their Plots and confound their Devices, and let them know, neither Policy, nor the Arm of Flesh can do any thing against those thou art pleased to take into thy especial care and protection; give us Cou∣rage to be valiant for thy revealed truth in the Gospel of thy dear Son our ever blessed Lord and Saviour, and ever defend us from the Clouds and Mists of Popery and Errour; give us hearts to fear, and Reverence thy Holy Name, that all our Astions and Vndertakings may redound to thy Honour and Glory through Jesus Christ: To whom with thee and thy Holy Spirit, be all Power, Praise, and Dominion, World without end. Amen. FINIS.
