W367 12621205 64519
A TRVE RELATION Of the chiefe passages betweene Mr. Anthony Wotton, and Mr. George Walker, in the yeare of our Lord 1611. and in the yeares next following untill 1615. Written by George Walker, out of his owne papers which he hath yet to shew; for the vindicating of himselfe from some imputations laid on him by Mr. Thomas Gataker, in his de∣fence of Mr. Wotton. Printed at London for William Branch, and are to be sold in St. Olaves Churchyard upon Breadstreete hill. 1642.
A true relation of the chiefe passa∣ges betweene Mr. Anthony Wotton, and Mr. George Walker, in the yeare of our Lord, 1611. THe foule brand which Mr. Gataker hath laboured to set upon mee in his preface, to wit, breach of pie∣ty and charity, and defect of hu∣manity and common honesty, is so scandalous to the person and calling of a living Minister and Pastor in Gods Church, that Mr. Gataker in going about to set it on me, doth manifestly appeare to have printed it deepely in his owne fore∣head. The words of truth spoken of a dead man, in the defence of a divine and saving truth, and in confuting of a dangerous error can bee no such breach of piety or charity, as the unjust scandall and slander laid on a man living and labouring in the worke of the Lord: For this tends to bring his Ministry and the word of God by him preached into contempt; to disgrace his person most uncharitably, and to adde affliction to him who hath suffered persecution and bonds for the truths sake, by wounding him deepely in his reputation, which is contrary to humanity and common honesty. Mr. Wotton in his papers which he dispersed in this
Citie, and which he acknowledged to be his owne when I brought them to his face before Mr. Gataker and eight other grave Ministers, doth deny the imputation of the whole obedience of Christ, to the Law of God; both ac∣tive and passive, both joyntly and severally. He affirmes that there is no end or use whatsoever of the imputation of Christ his righteousnesse for justification. He renoun∣ceth the law in whole and part, performed by our selves, or any other in our stead for our justification. In stead of mans owne workes of righteousnesse, performed to the law in his owne person which was the condition of ju∣stification, and life in the first covenant, and instead of Christs fulfillng of the law for us which is the conditi∣on of justification and life to beleevers in the covenant of grace, he sets up faith, even the Act of beleeving for righ∣teousnesse, affirmes that it is said to be imputed in a pro∣per sense without a trope, and serves for all purposes in our justification under the Gospell, as perfect righteous∣nesse of workes performed to the whole law did for mans justification in the first covenant. Hee denieth the punishment of our sinnes in Christ, and the satisfaction wch. in him our head & surety was made to Gods justice for purchase of our pardon. For (saith he) I see no place left for pardon, if we in Christ be said to have satisfied Gods justice, & to have suffered in him the punishments due to sin; for pardon and punishment are contrary. Thus he overthrowes our redemption by Christ, and that Christ is our ransome, as Socinus did, (though hee hold the words of Scripture with Socinus in an improper sense; to wit, Redeemer, Ransome, Propitiation, and the rest.) For no man can dreame of any other way by which Christ is said in Scripture to redeeme us, and to be a ransome for sinne, but onely by being made under the Law, and a perfect fulfiller of it in our stead. If faith serves for all purposes to justification, as a mans perfect righteousnesse of workes performed to the full in his owne person would have done in the first Covenant; then
it serves to this purpose to be our formall righteousnesse; yea our owne inherent righteousnesse by which we are justified. Which is most contrary to the truth of the Gospell, and contradictory to his owne words in other places. These and such like speeches I condemned for Socinian Heresie and blasphemy, as Beza, Paraeus, and Lu∣bertus had done before me, and for this Mr. Gataker did deride me, when I gave in my charge against Mr. Wotton 27. yeares agoe, and now blames it in mee as falshood and dishonesty. I desire no better defence of my inno∣cency but Mr. Wottons owne confession in his Expositions which Mr. Gataker hath published for his defence. For in his answer to the first proposition, he confesseth that the denying of the imputation of Christs righteousnesse as a meritorious cause of justification is both hereticall and blasphemous. And this he himselfe doth in the words which are cited out of his owne papers, to prove him guilty of the first error, as you may see in the 12 page of Mr. Gatakers defence, where they are thus laid downe and translated out of Mr. Wottons Latin Theses. No necessary use or end can he assigned of the imputation of the obedience of Christ to the justification of a sinner. And in an English Manuscript of his, which I also shewed, and he acknow∣ledged for his owne, he useth more peremptory words, saying, I dare not admit of Christs righteousnesse imputed to any end whatsoever. I find no testimony or proofe of it in any part of Gods word, no signification in any Sacrament of the Gospell, no necessary use or end thereof. Which words if we take them as Mr. Gataker hath related them, prove him to be an He∣retike and blasphemer by his owne confession. Unlesse Mr. Gataker can perswade us, that to be imputed as a me∣ritorious cause, is to be imputed for no end or use what∣soever. But before I proceede to my narration, I will first lay downe the occasion, by which I have provoked Mr. Gataker to proclame so bitterly against me, and to brand me with breach of piety, charity, and defect of humani∣ty
and common honesty. In my discovery and confutati∣on of Socinianisme I perceived that Mr. Goodwins disciples did admire and extoll him as a deepe searcher out and discoverer of divine truth, which none could ever find out before him; To convince them of folly and ignorance I rehearsed the names of severall persons who had publi∣shed and taught the same things before Mr. Goodwin, and for them and other errors and Heresies which are therein necessarily included, have beene condemned in former a∣ges; as Peter Abailard, Servetus, Socinus, Arminius, and Mr. Wotton, out of whose booke De Reconciliatione, Mr. Goodwin stole his opinions. My words are these, The fifth perverse publisher of this heresie, who first openly professed it in England, and in manuscript Pamphlets, and printed bookes dispersed it in London, and from thence into severall places of the Countrie, about twenty eight yeares agoe, was Anthony Wotton. I would gladly know what just offence can be ta∣ken at any of these words. That Mr. Wotton was the per∣verse publisher of this heresie, and the first that openly professed it in England, is a manifest truth; as my parallell of him with Socinus published by Mr. Gataker now in print, proveth most fully. If he be offended, because I call this errour an heresie, though he and his fellow Subscribers to Mr. Wottons ex∣position, out of their great love to Mr. Wottons person, and upon his promise of reformation, did thinke it not fit to call any thing in his exposition of his speeches, by the name of heresie or blasphemie: I answer, first, that his speeches which I cited in my parallell are manifestly blasphemous and hereticall by his owne confession; and of them and his opinion in them published, doe I speake and call it heresie. Secondly, though I rather assent to Beza, Paraeus, Lubertus, and other most learned and or∣thodox Divines, who condemne some things in Mr. Wottons expositions for heresie, & blasphemie, rather then to Mr. Gataker and his fellowes, who were pleased to thinke otherwise; I hope I give therein no offence, especi∣ally
seeing I have Gods Word for my warrant, and have such cleare knowledge and full perswasion of the blas∣phemie of some of his speeches, That I did (as Master. Downham, Dr. Gouge and others present at our meeting did heare and see, and if their memories faile them not, will confesse) challenge Mr. Wotton and Mr. Gataker al∣so, if he would take his part to defend some passages in those expositions, and promised that I would aske Mr. Wotton forgivenesse on my knees, if I did not by convin∣cing arguments in strict syllogismes prove them to be he∣reticall: which they cowardly then refused with shew of scornfull disdaine. But if Mr. Gataker be so highly offended, because I call Mr. Wotton by the bare name of Anthony Wotton; I must answer that therein I did him a favour. For under that obscure title, his person might have beene hid, and not made knowne to any, but those who were acquain∣ted with all the passages betweene him and me. But Mr. Gataker by discovering him more plainly, and blazoning his armes, hath exposed his person to much shame, and stained the name and memorie of him long agoe dead and buried in the dust with the brand of Heresie, & hath made all the world see, that he was the man who first sowed these Socinian tares in the faire field of the Church of England. As for my selfe, I am assured, that the good∣nesse of my cause, which is the cause of God & his truth, will beare me out, & justifie me against all his misreports. And if any man be forestalled with prejudice and a sini∣ster opinion of my proceedings against Mr. Wotton, let him read this my relation, which I can justifie both by living witnesses, and by my papers, which I have in my custody untill this day. When Mr. Wottons opinions were first made knowne to me upon the occasion mentioned in my letter to Mr. Wotton, which hereafter followeth; I by meanes of my late reading of the controversies betweene Junius & Ar∣minius, Lubertus, Bertius, Gomarus, and others of the Re∣monstrants,
did easily discerne them to be of the same stampe with the heresies of Servetus, and Socinus, newly revived and set on foote in Holland by Vorstius, Arminius, and those of that faction. I shewed Mr. Wottons papers to Mr. Alexander Richardson a most learned and judicious Di∣vine, to whom for his singular learning in Divinity, and all other learned Arts, and excellent knowledge in the originall tongues of holy Scripture, divers studious young men did resort from Cambridge to his dwelling in the parish of Barking in Essex, to be directed in their stu∣dy of Divinity, and other arts: among which these pro∣ved men of good note in our Church, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Chauncey, Mr. Yates, Mr. John Barlow, Mr. Perry, with o∣thers. Mr. Richardson approved my censure of them, and so detested them that he could not read one passage with∣out sighing. He also sent to Mr. Wotton, to meete him in a conference before some judicious hearers, which Mr. Wotton promised, but did not performe. I also sent and desired that he would admit me, to come to him and con∣ferre with him; but as he was afraid to meete Mr. Rich∣ardson, so he disdained my youth and yeares, and refer∣red me to one Spencer a tradesman, a factious Disciple of his, as I have objected to him in my letter: upon this I preached two sermons in the Church of which I am now Pastor, in the one I laid open breifly, the true received doctrine of justification; in the other I discovered Mr. Wottons opinions to be Socinian heresie, and shewed the danger of them. The next day some of Mr. Wottons friends being startled came to me, and intreated me to goe with them to him, and promised that he should purge himselfe from those errors, and give me good satisfaction: I yeel∣ded to their desire, and went along with two of them to Mr. Wottons house, who welcomed me coldly in words, though his heart seemed by his countenance to be hot with indignation and disdaine. At my first entrance in∣to his Studie he told me very abruptly, that I had un∣truly affirmed that the whole streame of learned Ortho∣dox
Divines did hold the same doctrine which I had taught concerning justification by Christs righteousnesse imputed to beleevers. And withall he shewed a place out of Luther upon the Galatians, in which Luther denyed justification by our owne workes and righteousnesse of the law: but in the words which next followed upon the top of of the next page, (which Mr. Wotton covered with his fingers as he held the booke in his hand) Luther in plain words affirmed that Christs fulfilling of the law for us is our righteousnes; & in the same page also saith, that faith is not sufficient for righteousnes without Gods im∣putation of Christs righteousnesse. I snatched the booke out of his fingers, read the words, which were directly a∣gainst himselfe, blamed him before the two witnesses for his dealing dlo malo, and going about purposely to de∣lude us, and with great compassion and teares in mine eyes professed my griefe to see him, a man of great esteeme (whom I had never seene before, but had much reverenced for the reports which I had heard of his great learning) to play the prancke of a deceiver and jugling Sophister. After many words which passed betweene us, but in no strict forme of disputation, which I desired and M. Wotton refused; he confessed that my doctrine, which I taught concerning imputation of Christs righteousnesse, was sound and saving truth, able to save beleevers, though they went no further: but he had dived more deepely in∣to the poynts of justification, and did goe further, but not a contrarie way; But I protested against his opinion and told him it was as contrarie to my doctrine and faith, as darknesse is to light. Mr. Standish one of the witnesses who went along with me, desired me to rest sa∣tisfied and to breake off; to which I yeelded, and tooke my leave. And no sooner were we entred into the streete, but the said Mr. Standish brake out into speeches of dislike against Mr. Wottons fraudulent dealing, protested that he would never hearken to his opinion and doctrine in these points any more, and that he was much comforted
and confirmed by that acknowledgment of the truth which I at length did wring from Mr. Wottons owne mouth. The second day after this I went to Cambridge & returned not to London till three months after; in which time what lyes were dispersed in London concerning my apostasie to Mr. Wottons errors, my letter to him sheweth. The next yeare after I came to be setled in my pastorall charge, and because I found some in my parish much in∣clining to Mr. Wottons opinion out of respect to his per∣son more then any knowledge, being not able to give a∣ny reason for it at all, I spent many Sabbaths in preach∣ing the doctrine of justification out of the fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; and in discovering and con∣futing all errors contrarie to the truth professed in the reformed Churches, and amongst the rest the errors of Socinus: What affronts were offered me in the Church & what clamours raised against me in the citie, my letter to Mr. Wotton will tell you in part. I could rehearse many passages which would move laughter and discover the absurditie and ridiculous folly of divers people who were factiously addicted to admire all things in Mr. Wot∣ton, good or bad; I will Instance in one example onely. It was this. I was requested to preach at Black-friers on a Wednesday in the absence of Mr. Gouge, some weekes af∣ter I had finished my text concerning Justification. In that assemblie, there were many ancient professors of Religi∣on, who knew me not by face, and who were so taken with my Sermon, that they were verie inquisitive to know my name, and hearing that I was Pastor of Saint John Evangelists, and my name Walker, they were so pos∣sessed with an evill opinion of me by the slaunders and railings of Mr. Wotton, and his disciples, that they cryed, Hang him, he will be hanged before he come to preach such a godly Sermon as this is, we will never beleeve that this is that Walker which hath preached against that man of God, Mr. Wotton, and belyed him in the pulpit. My Clerke being well acquainted with them, and over∣hearing,
did affirme to them that I was the man, and told them that they themselves might easily come to be hang∣ed in hell, if they did not repent of their wicked railings against me so unjustly: By this you see what wrong I suffe∣red, and what hut shamelesse slaunders of wicked hypo∣crites, may doe to the good name of the most innocent, even among them that are religious. These & such injuries and reproaches heaped on me together with a ridiculous booke written against me by one Spencer a disciple of Mr. Wotton, forced me to write a challenge in my letter to Mr. Wotton, by which I at length brought him to the confe∣rence, which is the subject of M. Gatakers invective against me. This letter, because it containes a just complaint and a rehearsall of the ill behaviour of M. Wotton and his Dis∣ciples towards me, I have thought good here to insert, that the world may see the intolerable provocations, wherewith I was provoked to call M. Wotton to account, before some brethren in the Ministery equally chosen by both parties. Anthonio Wottono, Georgius Walker resipiscentiam & sanam mentem precatur. SIr, my hearty desire, and prayer to God for you is, that you may repent and be saved. And as I doe, and by the grace of God will continually pray to God for you, so long as there is any hope: So now also I will not spare to exhort you, and in the bowels of Jesus Christ beseech you, (yea if neede require) by thunderings and threatnings of Gods heavy judgements, proceed and goe forward to puty ou in feare, that if it be possible you may repent, and recant, and that the errors and thoughts of your heart may be forgiven; for I perceive that you are in the gall of bitternesse and in the bonds of iniquitie. You will perhaps say, A sharpe and a fierce onset, who can beare it? To remove and prevent all prejudice I an∣swer, if it be sharpe, it is as it ought to be, for a deepe and
festered wound hath neede of a sharpe corrasive, but such I am perswaded in my soule, that yours is; and upon my conscience, and before God I speake it, whom I know to be the searcher of all hearts. Wherefore though an heart settled in error, and over-runne with perverse affection cannot brooke any sharpe reproofe, but will hate the re∣proover, according to that saying of the wise man, Re∣proove a scorner and he will hate thee: yet I will against hope beleeve under hope, though my experience would per∣swade me the contrarie, and will hope better things of you; yea I will thus say to my heart, Feare not, neither be affraid of his countenance, though it be as hard as brasse, for if he be ordained to life, and be within the compasse of Gods electi∣on, though he be troubled, and frett at the first, yet spare not to rebuke, for by this meanes thou shalt find more favour in the end. I am not ignorant that by my former both writing and preaching against your errors, and by my fervency and vehemency of words I have troubled, and vexed you, nei∣ther would I have you thinke, that I have thus dealt with you upon any distempered affection or such like infirmi∣ty: I professe ingenuously that I have done it upon good deliberation and of set purpose, because I have judged, & doe yet still deeme that course to be the best for divers reasons. First, because I knew that the errors and opini∣ons which you maintaine, and wherewith you have in∣fected divers, are of all that ever were sowne by the ene∣mie of God and men among Christian people the most peilent and dangerous, being nothing else but the here∣sies of Serveus and Socinus, those most damnable and cur∣sed heretickes, the greatest monsters that ever were borne within the borders of Christs Church, as I can plainly shew by your owne writings and theirs compared toge∣ther, and would have already shewed, if you had not re∣fused to joyne with me in a Christian conference before eight learned and godly Ministers. Now being perswa∣ded, yea knowing that your opinions are so dangerous, & penicious; do you not thinke that I am bound before
God to lay them open, and to inveigh against them, af∣ter the manner of Gods Prophets, whose fashion hath ever beene to brand lesse sinnes then these, and lesse dan∣gerous errors, with the name of abomination, blasphemy sorcery, witch-craft, and such like? The second reason of my fervency is godly jealousie, be∣cause I see that you labour by all meanes to draw mens hearts from the love of the truth of my God generally professed unto your errours, and that many who are grounded in knowledge of good things, are so over∣come with a conceit of you, and affection to your per∣son, that rather then they will forsake you, they will forgoe the truth; this being (as you know) the ground upon which all heresies have beene builded, and the spe∣ciall meanes by which they have beene dispersed, and have gotten head, and made factions in the world, in all ages heretofore. Can you blame me, whom God hath called to be a watchman over his flocke, if I be jealous over you, and if for love to my God and his truth, and the salvation of his people, I doe bring you, to the ut∣most of my power, into just disgrace with them, by uncovering your shame, so farre as may stand with equi∣ty, and conscience, and by painting out your errours in most ugly manner, for the terrifying of Gods peo∣ple from medling with them? The third reason, and indeed the greatest of all, is your obstinacy, arrogancy, pride, perversenesse, fraud; and dissimulation, the speciall markes of willfull here∣tickes; all which I have good reason to suspect in you, yea, (if we may know a man by his fruites and workes) I know and have tryed to be deeply rooted in you. And that you may know I speake upon judgement, not in affection, I will name some particulars. First, when I first heard of your errors by one of your near disciples, I observed in him such forwardnesse to before me, being to him a stranger, such in urging and maintaining them, with
no other arguments then your authority, whom he so odiously compared with all learned and godly Divines, chiefe pillars of our Church, as Calvin, Beza, Whitakers, Perkins, and others; that he was not ashamed to call them foolish boyes in comparison of you; not worthy to carry your bookes; whereupon I conceived present suspicion, that these grosse and stinking sins did proceed from some secret sparkes of hellish fire, either by you sug∣gested, or by him foolishly conceived, and that such a malicious and rayling spirit was not free from grosse errour. And therefore for mine owne better informa∣tion, I desired to conferre with you, and to learne from you the substance of your opinion, and according to my small ability, to reason and dispute the question with you, if so be you held as he affirmed; the message he wil∣lingly tooke upon him, and promised to bring me to you, to conferre in a kinde and friendly manner, (for that was my desire, for the reverence I did beare to your person, being then, by report of others onely, knowne to me:) But I found your answer farre differing from that which I expected, I looked for the spirit of meek∣nesse, humility, love, gentlenesse, and had good hope to be admitted into familiarity, and acquaintance with you; And you in scorne sent me to one Spencer, a fel∣low of ill report among all honest men; who all with one voyce, when I inquired after him, told me, he was a vaine idle giddy-headed fellow, and so I now finde in∣deed, and his owne hand-writing shall testifie unto the world. If this be not an infallible token of your pride and scornefulnesse, let the world judge, thus to send a Minister of the Gospell in contempt to one of your dis∣ciples, to learne of him, as if you thought your selfe too high, and all others too base to be admitted to your presence. This your doing, when I complained to you of it, face to face, you excused, as done out of ignorance of mine intent and desire. Afterwards, you for shame ut∣terly
denyed it, and sent about your disciples to disprove my report of it. And now lastly, you have againe so justifyed it, that you are not ashamed to say, you did me no wrong, in affirming that Spencer understands the Doctrine of Justification better then I; And that your pride, obstinacy, and perversnesse, might shew it selfe to the full; you still goe on from worse to worse, and now you have set Spencer to confute me, and to make a challenge; whose writing will (I hope) be the utter ruine either of your errours, or of your selves. All ju∣dicious men to whom I shew it, are ready to stop their noses at the first sight and smell of the stinking folly, blindnesse, and ignorance, wherewith almost every line is stuffed, so miserably doth he beate himselfe, and eate the flesh of his owne arme, saying, and unsaying, lying and mistaking every point: These courses, and procee∣dings, whether they argue and convince you of pride, obstinacy, and perversenesse, I leave to the judgement of others. Secondly, when (after my first Preaching against your errours for the satisfaction of some who were wavering and doubting) one of your disciples brought me unto you, did not I then shew all patience, love, and good af∣fection towards you? Did not I beseech you with teares to be silent in these points, till you had further sifted them, and throughly disputed them with others? Did not you use me scornefully, and goe about to wrest a place in Luthers Commentary on the Galations, and out of it to prove that Luther denyed the imputation of Christs Righteousnesse to us; and this against your owne conscience? For by a marke of your owne making in the same page, I was directed to words in the same page, in which he plainely disproved you, and this you would have smothered by covering the place with your fingers, till I plucked the booke from you. Did not I patiently put up this, though it wounded my soule? and did not this your dealing dolo malo, shew your fraud, and
forgery, and that you are , which sin∣neth being damned of himselfe? If you deny this, God is my witnesse and mine owne conscience▪ Your booke also, and the marke in the marg against you; and besides, I have another witnesse,  godly Chri∣stian who was there present. Thirdly, after my departing for a time into the Coun∣try, your disciples thinking I had quite left the City, did most falsely and abominably report abroad, that you did so put me downe by arguments, that I with teares acknowledged mine errour, and vowed to live and dye in your opinion. How wicked and false this was, you, and I, and they who were present, know; I am sure that never did the Papists and Jesuites more falsly slander Cal∣vin and Beza, then they did me in this report. If these be not the arts of the devill, the Father of lyers, let all Christians judge. Fourthly, after my returne out of the Country, when they saw their lyes discovered by my open profession, and constancy in the truth which I had Preached; they and you were so farre from shame and amendment, that you made me amends with all rayling, and reviling speeches, insomuch that in many mens mouthes, I heare your out∣rageous exclamations, in which you call me in asse, a sot, a boy, an impudent and brazen-faced fellow; yea, your disciples have not beene afraid to make mowes at me, Preaching in the Pulpit, as mine eyes, and the eyes of divers others did often see and can testifie, and often∣times have they cryed out in the Church, and derided me, and scoffed at the word of God, by me delivered, and that so loud, that all round about have heard, and been offended. And yet all this I have endured, though the Law was in my hand, to make them be apprehended, brought before the Magistrate, and punished; and for all this, there is no remorse nor amendment. Shall I, nay, can I (thinke you) in this case judge any better of them, then as of wilfull heretickes, and blasphemers, and
of your Doctrine, which leades them into this excesse, then as of devillish heresie? For the Doctrine which I delivered and they derided, did not in one sentence differ from the doctrine of Calvin, and all learned Divines, as by my papers and notes shall appeare. Lastly, for I will not repeate all particulars, (which were an endlesse worke) you still goe on in your opini∣ons, and send out pamphlet after pamphlet, full of con∣tradictions, and falsifications, as I can shew you to your face. You will neither conferre before any of our lear∣ned Brethren, godly Ministers privately; nor publique∣ly before the Reverend Bishop of London. You dare not commit yourselfe to him, because he is a wicked Judge, and will respect persons in Judgement, my friends are too potent with him: these are your excuses; and I know them all to be false. For so cunningly did you dis∣semble with that good Bishop, and hide your errours, that he rather blamed me, than you, (as I heare.) Can you therefore in conscience blame me, if I, for these, and such like reasons, thinke hardly of you, as of an Heretique, and though my zeale doe burne against you like a fire, though I cannot without griefe looke upon you? May not a Christian Minister; nay, is he not bound in conscience being thus perswaded, to cry out against you, and to lift his voyce like a trumpet, and make men know your abominations? yea, to threaten hell, destru∣ction, and all curses against you, except you repent? Surely my conscience doth not accuse me of any thing which I have done in this cause; I have the examples of the Prophets to warrant and encourage me, and to justifie my doings. If you will stop my mouth, you must either by words or deeds perswade me to thinke o∣therwise; and I promise you I will; yea, I desire to be otherwise perswaded, if you will but purge your selfe from the crimes whereof you are openly convicted. Wherefore I will once againe intreate you, and earnest∣ly request you, yea, charge you in the name of Iesus
Christ, that if you desire the peace of the Church, and can abide to have the truth tryed, you will cast off those carnall and corrupt, yea hellish affections of pride and disdaine, or at least this show of them which appeareth in you; and meete me as a Christian before eight godly and learned Ministers, chosen equally by both, that they be witnesse betweene you and me; and that it may be seene whether I doe justly charge you with heresie and blasphemy or no; and whether your writings doe not shew you to be a Socinian. The foure Ministers which I will chuse for my part, shall be Mr. Stocke, Mr. Down∣ham, Mr Westfield, and Mr. Gouge. I professe, and take God to witnesse, that I desire your conversion, not your confusion. It is my love and zeale for truth, more then hatred or indignation against you, which makes me so hot and earnest against your errours. The first offence that ever you gave me, was the injurie which you have done to the obedience, righteousnesse and blood of our Saviour Iesus Christ, whom you de∣nye to be so made mine, that his obedience is imputed to me for righteousnesse, and his blood for the satisfa∣ction of Gods justice. For this (if you obstinately persist in it) I must hate you with a perfect hatred, as if you were mine enemie, neither shall there ever be peace so long as your errors are so great, and pernicious. God himselfe I am assured, will trouble you, And quickely confound you, except you repent. O consider therefore from whence you are fallen, and suspect your selfe. Can∣not that faith be sufficient for you, which hath saved so many Saints of God, and for the which so many godly and noble Martyrs have heretofore shed their blood, even in this place, and in this Kingdome? Me thinks that the name of Servetus, and Socinus should terrifie your conscience, if it were so tender as you have heretofore professed. Can you hope for any good or pure water, from such foule and polluted Cisternes, full of all heresie and blasphemie?
O that you would but lay these things to your heart, and be moved! My heart, I assure you, is open to imbrace you with all love, if you would truly repent; God forbid that I should hate you any otherwise, then as you are the enemy of Christ. And God forbid, that I should give you one , or God save you, if you persist in this he∣resie, which is so contrarie to the wholsome doctrine of salvation. Wherefore, if now you will shew but one signe of amendment by yeelding to my request, and appoin∣ting a time and place where we may meete, I will much relent from my Iealousie over you, and I hope that God will give good successe. But if I finde you so incurable, that you will not admit of the least meanes, which tends to the cure of your soule, but will still upon no grounds at all persist in your novelties, and publish them for the seducing of others, to the overthrow of Gods ttuth, and the disturbance of the Church: I doe thinke my selfe bound in conscience to forbeare no longer, but to pub∣lish your errours to the world, that all may see those many errours, blasphemies and contradictions, which I have faithfully gathered out of your owne words and writings. And because you doe goe about by your di∣sciple Spencer to challenge me, and to debase my calling and Ministery, by laying false imputations upon me, as ignorance, slander, and the like: I have resolved to draw articles against you, and to collect your errours, and misdemeanours into one supplication, and to pre∣sent it to the Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury his Grace, and to the High Commission, that there and before them it may be tryed and seene, whether you doe not jumpe with Socinus in his heresie. I know and have traced you in all your Socinian and Arminian trickes, and distincti∣ons, and if you trust to them you are deceived. If you compell me to take this last, and most desperate course with you, and if it turne to the subversion and ruine of your whole estate, and of your selfe and your disciples: blame your selfe, and not me. For you see I admonish
you first, and it is in your owne hand to prevent it. I am loath to be a meanes of your open shame and confu∣sion; but if no better will be, Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas. Our Saviour Christ (you know) gave this commandement, that when you will not be privately admonished, then we must tell the Church, Sure I am, that if you be once brought in publicke, and persist in your errours; you shall perish, and your blood shall be on your owne head: But on them that put away shame from Israel, and are instruments to roote out heresie from the Church, and on their seed, and on their house shall be peace for ever from the Lord. The God of power and strength give you an heart to feare his judgements, and to hearken to them that admonish you in his name; And if it be his will I pray that you may be converted in his good time, that the truth may flourish, and the peace of our Church may be surely established unto the end of the world. Thus you see I have opened my minde free∣ly unto you. If I be deceived in you, it is error amoris, non amor erroris, I will so soone as I perceive it, change my stile, and mine affection towards you. I pray you let me have your answer as shortly as you can; if you send not quickly, I will take it for granted that you scorne to hearken to me, and despise my Christian admoniti∣ons, as heretofore you seeme to have done; and I will proceed in my resolution against you. God is my wit∣nesse, I desire your good, and the good of his Church. If I were not carefull of your safety, I would not steale this time from my nights rest and sleepe, this Sabbath day at night, after my body is wearyed with reading, Preaching, and administring the Lords Supper. From my study this second of May, past one a clocke in the morning, Anno Dom. 1614. Yours, if you be Christs, George Walker.
VPon the receipt and reading of this Letter, Mr. Wot∣ton sent me a Letter of defiance, and therein profes∣sed his scorne and disdaine of my threatnings: but the next day he sent me another, wherein he promised to yeild to my motion. And yet to prevent our meeting, he used meanes by Mr. Mason, the Bishop of Londons Chaplaine, an Arminian, to make it knowne to the Bi∣shop, in hope that he would forbid our meeting: Not∣withstanding the Bishop gave way, and we did meete up∣on a day appointed, before the eight Ministers named in Mr. Gatakers defence. I brought for me, Mr. Stocke, Mr. Downham, Mr. Westfield, and Mr. Gouge, now Doctors. He brought for him, Mr. Balmeford, Mr. Randall, Mr. Gataker, and Mr. Hickes, the last of which appeared to be already of Mr. Wottons minde in all points. And both Mr. Gataker and be, bare themselves towards me, as to∣wards an adversary, and as advocates for Mr. Wotton. Dr. Westfield being the onely man with whom I then had any great familiarity, did perceive a generall inclinati∣on in them all, to favour Mr. Wotton as much as they could, being all his old familiar friends, and I a stranger of two yeares residence in the City; after our first meeting, refused to meete any more, fearing what followed, and I chose Dr. Baylie in his place. I being the Plaintiffe and procurer of the meeting, did first shew what I desired, namely, that I might have Mr. Wottons writings, which were come to my hands, viewed; and by Mr. Wotton acknowledged; which he could not deny, but did confesse them to be his owne handy∣worke. And that I having rehearsed Mr. Wottons words out of his bookes and writings, which I had in my Ser∣mon confuted, under the name of Socinian heresies, and having paralleled them in writing, with the words of Socinus, and made them appeare to be the same, by shew∣ing and comparing the bookes and writing; They would give me their hands to my parallell, and subscribe
that I had not either charged Mr. Wotton with any opi∣nions or words but his owne, or confuted under the name of Socinianisme any words of his, but onely those wherein he did concurre with Socinus. If I had either mis-related his words, or confuted under the name of Socinianisme, any point wherein he did not jumpe with Socinus, I desired them to censure me. The Para∣llels being read and examined, appeared to some of them so cleare, and my charge so just, that the same day at Mr. Randall Wetwoods table, where Dr. Baylie and Mr. Downham dined with me, the Doctor did protest that I had discovered Mr. Wotton to be as damned an hereticke as ever did tread on English ground: Mr. Downham, Mr. Wetwood, Mr. Taylor, and Mr. Hopkins were eare-witnesses of this, and all yet living, as well as my selfe. Mr. Wetwood asked why they did not justifie me and cen∣sure him without more adoe, seeing that was the pur∣pose of our meeting, that they should judge of things accordingly as they were proved. They pretended that they desired to convert, not to confound Mr. Wotton, that they perceived him to be afraid of shame like to fall on him, and that if I would yeeld to let him expound himselfe, he would by a wrested exposition gaine-say, and contradict his former words and opinions and run from them, which being gotten from him under his hand, they would either hold him to it, or shame him for ever, if he did fall backe againe. This course being Mr. Gatakers device, I refused to yeeld unto, because I had never opposed him, but onely in opinions former∣ly published, and not in future expositions, and because I had fully proved my charge, I desired their verdict and just judgement. But after much importunity I yeelded, and so lost my cause, and was drawne into a new busi∣nesse that was to contend with Mr. Wotton, not about his former opinions, which I had formerly confuted; but about new expositions, which he would make in answer to my parallells. At another day appointed
he brought his expositions, which when they had read in my hearing, I did except against divers passages in them, and some contradictions, which I desired to ar∣gue against, with Mr. Wotton face to face, in strict syl∣logismes; but he refused to answer me, and our Judges refused to heare me, or to suffer me to have a coppy of his expositions, as he had of my parallels. Whereupon I protested against their unequall dealing, and departed, threatning to bring him and them before higher Judges. After that they had read the expositions which Mr. Gataker did plead for most hotly, Mr. Wot∣ton promised to make and publish a large declaration, wherein he would free himselfe from all Socinian errors. In the meane time he begg'd this favour, that they would subscribe to his expositions, that they found no heresie or blasphemy in them. Upon this promise and intrea∣ty, they did subscribe as followeth. Howsoever, we whose names are underwritten, doe differ from Mr. Wotton in some points of the former do∣ctrine of Justification, contained in these his expositi∣ons: yet we hold not the difference to be so great and weighty, as that they are to be justly condemned of he∣resie and blasphemy. Lewes Baylie, James Balmeford, John Randall, Richard Stocke, John Downham, Thomas Gataker, William Gouge, William Hickes. THE Expositions thus subscribed, were commtited to Doctor Baylie, with charge that he should keepe them close, and not suffer me or any other man to see, or read them, untill Mr. Wotton had made a larger Ex∣position, and fully purged himselfe from Socinianisme. By which it appeared, that they durst not openly justifie their subscription, nor suffer it to come into my hands. And that it was a thing with much importunity wrung
from them which the better part of them would never have yeelded unto, but upon promise of a better and larger exposition, and in hope to draw Mr. Wotton whol∣ly from his errors; some of which he had allready con∣tradicted, and acknowledged to be hereticall and blas∣phemous, to wit, his denying of Christs Righteousnesse imputed for any use or end whatsoever. Dr. Bayly the first of the Subscribers had (upon the first reading of those speeches of Mr. Wotton which I shewed out of his owne writings, and did parallell them with Socinus) condemned Mr. Wotton for an heretike, and his errors for blasphemie. Mr. Downham heard his censure uttered at Mr. Wetwoods table, and by silence assented to it. Mr. Randall did argue verie hotly a∣gainst Mr. Wottons opinions that same day that they subscribed, and told him before as all, that he had pro∣tested against them often in private, and had disswaded him from them; and that he for his part abhorred them. Dr. Gouge hath publikely confuted them, and in the pul∣pit condemned them under the name of Socianisme. Mr. Stocke did ever abhorre them, as he often told me in private. And one time, I by a prettie Stratageme brought him before other witnesse, to condemne them for heresie and blasphemie. Mr. Wetwood mine host in whose house I then lodged, having by much importuni∣ty obtained of Dr. Bayly the sight of Mr. Wottons expo∣sitions subscribed, as you heard before, and committed to his custodie, did lend them to me for the space of two houres, till I had copied out both them, and the sub∣scription word for word with the mens names, which copie I have yet to shew. And one Sunday at night being invited to supper by Mr. Thomas Goodyeare, my parishoner, I brought it with me to shew it to Mr. Goodyeare, who was verie desirous to see and read it. Mr. Stocke and his wife being at the same time invited came in while we were reading it together And seeing me  in my hand, asked what
it was. I answered that it was a paper of new and strange opinions, which when he desired to heare, I did read to him that passage in Mr. Wottons Expositions, where he saith; This I say, that in this proposition (Faith is counted for Righteousnes,) the word (Faith) is to be taken properly, not tropically; and I asked him what he thought of it: He not knowing that it was Mr. Wottons Exposition, out of which I read it, did answer that it was Popery, or worse. I asked him whether he did not thinke it to be the heresie and blasphemy of Socinus: he answered, yes verily. I asked him then what hee thought of certaine learned Divines, who had subscribed to this, and other such speeches, that they were neither heresie nor blasphemy: He said he thought none but mad men would doe it, and asked who they were. I present∣ly read the subscription and among the rest his owne name, and withall shewed him the copy. Mr. Goodyeare laughed heartily, and said to Mr. Stocke, O Master, our Parson is too cunning for you, I never saw any man so finely taken in a snare, as hee hath taken you in your owne snare. I have ever told you, that in this controver∣sie you were too partiall for your old friend and fa∣miliar Mr. Wotton. Mr. Stocke could plead nothing but this, That Mr. Wotton had promised them to silence himselfe and his disciples in these points, and to write a large declaration; whereby he would purge himselfe fully from Socinianisme. In hope whereof they did gra∣tifie him with this subscription, for the suppressing of clamours, till he had further cleared himselfe. But Mr. Wotton had broken his promise, and boasted of that which made nothing for him in the maine cause, but onely up∣on the by; and had requited their favour towards him, with disgrace to them, and danger to himselfe; and that it had beene better he had never beene borne, then to trouble the Church of God with his false opinions. By this you see how dangerous a thing it is, even for god∣ly men, to be judges in a cause of controversie betweene a
familiar friend (as Mr. Wotton was to these men) and a stranger, as I at that time was to the most of them. As for the other three, to wit, Mr. Balmeford, Mr. Ga∣taker, and Mr. Hickes, they were Mr. Wottons advocates, rather then equall Judges: Mr. Balmeford was Mr. Wottons silenced brother; Mr. Hickes was Mr. Wottons disciple, one who would jurare in verba Magistri; Mr. Gataker did more angrily and peevishly speake against me, and snarle at me then my adversary Mr. Wotton himselfe, so that I was forced to challenge him as well as Mr. Wotton, and to offer to dispute against them both. What Mr. Wottons intent was in begging such a beg∣gerly subscription, and Mr. Gatakers in procuring it from the rest, the event hath shewed. For Mr. Wotton and his disciples did presently report through London, that I could prove nothing against him, nor bring any thing out of his bookes, or writings to convince him of Socinianisme, and that the eight learned Ministers had justified him, and condemned me for a false accuser. And upon this he grew more bold, and wrote certaine Essaies concerning Justification, a copy whereof I have to shew, wherein he denies the true, reall, and spiritu∣all union of the faithfull with Christ, and Chrits me∣riting of justification, and salvation for them; he affirmes that when they are said to be one with Christ, the speech is Metaphoricall, and that there is no mention of Christs merits in all the Scripture. By which his vio∣lent breaking out, and going on from evill to worse, I was forced to write my Antithesis Wottonismi, & Chri∣stianismi; wherein I discovered more of his errors, and his sactious and Schismaticall behaviour: This I pre∣sented to the then Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, who com∣mitted it to Doctor Nidd his Chaplaine, who being himselfe a favourer of Arminians, neglected to make re∣port of it to his Lord. And indeed I never called upon him, because Mr. Wotton having intelligence of it, silen∣ced himselfe and all his disciples, being admonished by
his friends of the danger in which he was, unlesse hee and they did forbeare to justifie and maintaine his errors, and further to provoke me by their false reports and ca∣lumnies. Thus was the fire quenched, and no man opened his mouth to defend Mr. Wottons opinions; though I with many others, did often (as occasion was offered by the Scriptures which we expounded) confute and condemne them: In the meane time Mr. Wotton wrote his booke De Reconciliatione in Latine, wherein he seemed to recant and to contradict divers of his former writings; but yet he vented so much poyson in it; that when it was sent over to Leiden to be Printed, the Professors there rejected it, as being full of Socinian errours; and (as I have beene informed) did also send to Amsterdam to stop the Printing of it, which was there attempted also; So that Mr. Wottons disciples were forced to Print it at their owne charge by stealth, in some further place be∣yond the Seas, and to disperse the copies here in Eng∣land. Upon one of which Mr. Goodwin, a lover of no∣velties, and strange doctrines unhappily stumbled; and thence stole his opinions, which his foolish followers receive, and admire, as new revelations from heaven, never heard of before. Thus have I briefly related the chiefe passages betweene Mr. Wotton and my selfe. I have heard of others also, who did privately oppose Mr. Wotton, especially Master Woodcocke, a grave Preacher, Parson or Vicar of Chessam, who did in writing confute Mr. Wotton, and admonish∣ed him to forsake his errours. One thing I cannot omit, which was a strong motive to move divers godly people in London, to abhorre Mr. Wottons opinions; that was the sharpe censure which that holy man of God, Master Alexander Richardson gave against them on his death bed, and which Mr. John Barlow an eare-witnesse thereof, did report to divers from his mouth. Mr. Richardson being ready to leave this world, Mr. Barlow who had often
before resorted to him for direction in his study, and resolution of doubts, in many points of Divinity, was at that time present with him, and told him that hee had heard me the Sabbath before, propounding the Do∣ctrine of Justification, to be laid open out of the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and to be main∣tained against Papists, Socinians, and other Heretiques, some of which were of late revived in the City, and withall desired to know his judgement concerning Mr. Wottons opinion, who denyed Christs fulfilling of the Law for justification of beleevers, and the imputation of his Righteousnesse; and held faith to be imputed in a proper sense without a trope: Mr. Richardson answered and said, Take these words of me a dying man. I have read and well weighed Mr. Wottons papers, and opini∣ons, and I know them to be so pestilent and dangerous, that whosoever liveth and dyeth in the beleefe of them, shall never enter into the Kingdome of heaven. Com∣mend me to Mr. Walker, and desire him from me, (as being my last request to him) to be couragious in the cause of God, and for that saving truth which he hath undertaken to maintaine against those dangerous and deadly errours, lately set on foote by Mr. Wotton. This message being delivered unto me before diverse witnesses, some of which are alive to testifie it, did much encou∣rage me, and made me more bold to lay open the abo∣mination of Mr. Wottons opinions publickely in my Ser∣mons, without feare or regard of the slanders and re∣vilings of his factious and furious disciples. This was in the yeare 1613. And I praise God, I am constant in the same minde, and doe pray and hope that God will give me grace to persevere in this beleefe to the end. As for Mr. Gatakers invective against me in Mr. Wottons de∣fence, I doe as little regard it, as Mr. Goodwins rayling Libell, which (some say) Mr. Gataker counselled him to write against me. If it were not vaine expence of precious time, I could
produce Socinianisme out of Mr. Gatakers Printed workes, and prove him a party. I could prove him to be Thomas of all sides. Sometimes holding that the e∣lect and faithfull are cloathed with the garment of Christs Righteousnesse, and againe, disputing against their communion and imputation of Christs Righteous∣nesse. But I pray God to give him a more setled judge∣ment in the truth, and a more charitable heart to his laborious neighbours, who spend their time in better studies then writing of Treatises for unlawfull gaming and card-playing, and bedawbing Margents with ma∣ny quotations to small purpose, but onely for ostentati∣on of much reading. Yet give me leave to aske Mr. Gataker a few questions, which if he cannot answer with any credit, let him for shame hold his peace, and blush to thinke of his defence of Master Wotton, to the accusing and defaming of him∣selfe. 1. Question, Whether is it truth and honesty, to say that all the eight Ministers, with unanimous consent, generally resolved and pronounced, that there appeared not to them either heresie or blasphemy, in ought that Mr. Wotton was by me convinced to have delivered or maintained? When their subscription shewes, that they medled onely with his Expositions, and not with his he∣reticall and blasphemous speeches, in which I paralleled him with Socinus the Hereticke. 2 Quest. Whether Mr. Gataker doth thinke that Mr. Wotton renouncing the Law of God, and the righteous∣nesse thereof performed by Christ in our stead for our ju∣stification, doth not in so doing deny Christ his ransome paid, and satisfaction made to Gods just Law, for our re∣demption and for remission of our sins? 3 Quest. Whether mans perfect fulfilling of the Law in his owne person, under the covenant of workes, was not formall inherent righteousnesse, and would have made man worthy of life: And if so, how he can excuse
Mr. Wotton, from making faith the formall inherent righteousnesse of beleevers, in the covenant of the Gospel, by which they are worthy of justification, and eternall life, seeing he saith that faith under the Gospell serves to all purposes, for obtaining eternall life, as mans per∣fect fullfilling of the Law did in the covenant of workes? 4 Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton professing his dissent from Socinus in those things which are Orthodox and true, to wit, That faith is obedience to Christs Com∣mandements, who commands us to beleeve and repent; That repentance which commeth not but by faith, is the meanes to obtaine forgivenesse of sins which Christ hath brought, that is to get the sense and assurance of forgivenesse; And that faith is a beleeving of that which Christ taught, and an assurance of obtaining that he pro∣mised upon our repentance and obedience: can therefore be justified from the heresies of Socinus, in the point of justification, when he holds other things which are con∣demned in Socinus for heresie, as that faith used in a pro∣per sense, not tropically, is said to be imputed for righte∣ousnesse to justification, and not the righteousnesse of Christ, apprehended and applied by faith; And that Christ hath not redeemed us, and satisfied for our sinnes, and procured our pardon and justification, by fulfilling the Law in our stead; And that faith, though not for the merit, worth and vertue of it, yet by the place and office which the Lord of his mercy hath assigned, is the con∣dition upon which God doth justifie and adopt us, and is accepted of God and counted for righteousnesse? 5 Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton doth not deny the free covenant of Grace, when he holds that God doth not co∣venant to justifie and give life, but upon a condition, per∣formed on our part, equivalent for all purposes, to a mans perfect fulfilling of the Law in his owne person under the covenant of workes? 6 Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton affirming that if we be
freely pardoned, then our sinnes were not punished in Christ our head and surety, doth not deny Christs sa∣tisfaction for sinne? 7. Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton be not guilty of hereticall tergiversation, and grosse contradiction in these passages. First, when he saith, that there is no end or use of the imputation of Christs Righteousnesse, pag. 12. of Mr. Gatakers defence. And againe, pag. 21. That it is here∣ticall and blasphemous, to say that Christs Righteous∣nesse is not imputed as the meritorious cause of Justifica∣tion. And againe, in his Essayes saith, that there is no mention of the merit of Christ in all the Scriptures. Secondly, when he saith, That Faith doth not justifie us, per se, by it selfe, and yet is said properly, and not tropically, to be imputed to us for Righteousnesse, pag. 27. of the Defence; and is the onely condition which God requires on our part for Justification, pag. 13. Also, when he saith, That Faith doth not justifie us, but onely as it apprehendeth and applyeth Christ and his Righte∣ousnesse, pag. 27. And yet denyeth that Christs Righ∣teousnesse is so apprehended and applyed by Faith, that God counts it our Righteousnesse to Justification, pag. 12. Thirdly, when he renounceth the Law of God, per∣formed by our selves or any other in our stead, for the justifying of us before God, pag. 12. And denyeth that we are punished for our sinnes, in Christ our head and surety, for the satisfying of Gods just wrath, pag. 29. And yet pag. 34. saith, I acknowledge and professe that Christ hath made satisfaction for us, by paying a true price to God his Father. Is not this the same tergiver∣sation, which the Hereticke Socinus useth? Who in some places confesseth in the Scripture phrases, that Christ is our Redeemer, our Ransome, and the propitiation for our sinnes: And in other places denyeth Christs satis∣fying and paying of a ransome to God for our Redem∣ption and justification.
Fourthly, when he saith, that we are not accounted to be formally righteous, by fulfilling the Law, and sa∣tisfying the Justice of God in Christ, and yet saith, that we are accepted of God as Righteous for Christs obedi∣ence no lesse then if wee had indeed performed those things, pag. 32. and pag. 26. For ought I hold of Faith, Christs Righteousnesse may be even the formall cause of our Justification. But pag. 22. He confesseth that he de∣nyeth Christs Righteousnesse to be imputed as the for∣mall cause whereby we are made formally Righteous; which is a flat contradiction of the Apostles words, Rom. 5. 19. By the obedience of one many shall be made righteous, that is, constituted and made formally righteous, for so the Greeke word  doth signifie. 8. Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton can with a good con∣science by Mr. Gataker be justified and proclaimed free from heresie, when he wil fully and perversely denyeth the very forme, essence, and being of Justification, to wit, the imputation of Christs Righteousnesse, which he first simply rejecteth, as being of no use, and afterwards as the formall cause of justification, seeing he (the said Mr. Gataker) hath publickely extolled, and commended for Orthodox, the like Treatise of Mr. William Bradshaw, wherein he makes imputation of Christs Righteousnesse the forme of Justification, and inveighed against some, (meaning me, who had opposed some errours and con∣tradictions which are in that Booke) in his funerall Sermon, Preached at Mr. Bradshawes buryall? 9. Quest. Whether the faithfull being by one spirit united to Christ, and made one spirituall body, and partakers of his righteousnesse, and whole obedience to the Law of God, and thereby constituted righteous be∣fore God, can without hereticall perversenesse be deny∣ed againe and againe to be formally, that is, truely and really righteous, by that Righteousnesse, though not inherent in every beleever, but onely spiritually commu∣nicated from the head to every member of the body?
10. Quest. Whether Mr. Wotton might not justly be judged to be possessed with the spirit of Socinian blind∣nesse, and giddinesse, when he derides Orthodox Di∣vines, For making every beleever justifyed by imputa∣tion of Christs satisfactory obedience, a Redeemer and Saviour, and satisfyer for all the elect and faithfull (for thus he argues. If Christs Righteousnesse and satisfacti∣on, be imputed to every beleever, then must every be∣leever be counted a Redeemer, Justifyer, & Satisfyer, for all the Elect: But this is absurd, Ergo the Antecedent is false. In one of his written pamphlets) though they doe not hold that Gods imputing of Christs obedience and satisfaction, is an accounting of it to be perfor∣med by them in their owne persons, or imputed as a meritorious efficient cause; but onely his accounting it theirs by communion from Christ the head to every member so farre as to make him formally righteous. And yet he himselfe contradicting his former absolute denyall of imputation, pag. 12. doth hold imputation of Christs Righteousnesse, as a meritorious, and efficient cause of Justification, pag. 21. Which is a manifest falling into that absurdity, which he would pin upon others. For if it be counted ours, as a meritorious efficient cause, then are we all counted justifyers, who doe justifie the E∣lect, and merit their justification. I could propound divers other Questions, but when Mr. Gataker sees himselfe seriously to answer these, I hope he shall perceive (if he hath ever an eye left to see) that his defence of Mr. Wotton, is worse then standing at his backe, till his head be broken, even a breaking of his head, and a defaming of him by going about to defame me unjustly in this pretended Defence, the issue whereof is, That by publishing in Print, those damnable hereti∣call speeches, which I in private objected against Mr. Wotton, out of his owne writings (not one word where∣of he could deny) he hath made Mr. Wottons name to
stinke, like the issue of a running Cancer in a most foule body, and like those Sepulchres dogges, which scratch rotten carkasses out of their graves, hee hath raked up Mr. Wottons rotten body of errours out of his grave; (as some godly Divines have said, upon the reading of his defence.) For what true Christian, when he reades those desperate speeches which I objected in my parallel, now Printed by Mr. Gataker, (viz. That there is no end or use whatsoever of the imputation of Christs obedi∣ence, active or passive, for the justification of sinners; That Faith, taken in a proper sense, is by God coun∣ted for Righteousnesse: And is for all purposes, as suf∣ficient to justification under the Gospell, as the fulfilling of the Law by a man in his owne person, was in the co∣venant of workes; that he renounceth the fulfilling of the Law by Christ for our Justification: And that our sinnes are not punished in Christ, nor Gods wrath sa∣tisfyed thereby) is not so offended with the ill savour of those rotten heresies, that he is forced to stoppe his nose at the reading of them, as passengers doe, when they passe by the valley of Hamon Gog? Ezech. 29. 11. If Mr. Gataker be so profuse and prodigall of his Re∣putation, as to subscribe to them, that there is no here∣sie or blasphemy in them; when Beza, Paraeus, Lubertus and others, our betters, have, before me, so proclaymed them to be: Yet he hath with breach of piety and cha∣rity, and with greater virulency and defect of humanity, and common honesty than he hath proved to be in me; most falsely fathered on those dead Saints, Mr. Randall, and Mr. Stocke, and on those living pious men, Doctor Gouge, and Master Downham, a subscription to those er∣rours; that they saw no heresie, or blasphemy in them. Whereas, indeed and in truth, I have to shew in wri∣ting, that their subscription was not to all or any thing, which I produced out of his writings against him; but onely to his Expositions, wherein he denyed many of his errours, and set a false glosse on the rest.
Indeed some things in those Expositions, I did then shew to be already condemned for heresie and blasphe∣my, by the learned before named; and thereupon I did blame their subscription, and protested against it, and desired to dispute with Mr. Wotton, and prove those points heresie; but Mr. Gataker interposed and prevai∣led so with the rest, that I could not be heard, neither could I by any intreaty obtaine a copy of those Expo∣sitions; but they were committed to Doctor Baylie to be kept; till Mr. Wotton had more fully in writing pur∣ged himselfe, and the Doctor durst never suffer me once to read them, fearing lest I should write a publike con∣futation of them. Howbeit I wrote a confutation of so much as I could remember, by hearing them once read, at the time when they were subscribed, and on Wednes∣day, being the second day after, did shew it to Doctor Gouge, and Mr. Downham after the Sermon at Blackfry∣ers. And a long time after, I with much adoe, by Mr. Wetwoods meanes, obtained the sight of them, for two houres, in which space I copyed them out, as is before related; so farre was I from pressing Doctor Baylie to conceale them, (as Mr. Gataker would intimate, pag. 37) that I never laboured for any thing more earnestly, then to have them published for the freeing of my selfe from the crimes which Mr. Wotton then, and now Mr. Gataker by false reports would lay and fasten on me, pag. 39. of his Defence. As for that testification rehearsed, pag. 38. and sub∣scribed by John Downham, and William Gouge, it was got∣ten by Mr. Wotton seven yeares after, when the businesse was almost forgotten: And (as Mr. Downham told me) it was upon this occasion. Mr. Wotton having written his Booke de Reconciliatione, came to him and told him, that now he had fully purged himselfe from Socinianisme, (as he promised) in a Booke which Mr. Mason the Bi∣shops Chaplaine would licence for the Presse, if two or more of them who heard the Controversie, betweene
him and me, would testifie that I did not convince him of heresie before them; and that they all had so subscri∣bed. And upon this suggestion, which was false, they two onely gave that attestation, which Mr. Stocke, and Dr. Baylie, abhorred to doe, repenting of what favour they had shewed him at the first. If this be not so, let Mr. Downham, and Dr. Gouge, speake for themselves: As for the rest of Mr. Gatakers defence, it is so frivolous, that a short answer will serve. His maine charge against me is, that I make Mr. Wotton to hold the same things which have formerly been condem∣ned for heresie in Abailard, Servetus, and Socinus; for this he accuseth me of iniquity, but the iniquity returnes up∣on his owne head. First, for Peter Abailard, he held that our sins are not punished in Christ, and that it had beene injustice in God to punish one for another, and to impute the obedience of one to others: And against him Saint Bernard disputes Epist. 190. in these words, It was man who was indebted, and man satisfyed. If one dyed for all, then all dyed in him, that the satisfaction of one may be imputed to all; for he who offended and forfeited was not one, and he who satisfyed, another; the head and the body are one Christ. And a little after. I call my selfe righteous, but by his Righteousnesse. Which is that? Christ, the end of the Law for Righteousnesse to every beleever. And a∣gaine, Man is mercifully redeemed, or delivered, yet so as that there Justice executed even in the deliverance. If the heresie of Abailard, thus confuted by Bernard, be not the same which I proved to be held by Mr. Wotton, let the Reader judge. If Abailard did deny in plaine words the eternall Deity of Christ, and after him Ser∣vetus and Socinus also: so also did Mr. Wotton in effect, though in words he professed the contrary. For he held that Christs obedience did serve onely to justifie himselfe, and to bring him into high favour with God, so that God justifies us by him as by a favourite, onely upon con∣dition
of our trusting in him. Now where is the infi value of his Deity, if he needed justification and favour for himselfe? Secondly, that Servetus and Socinus were in the same er∣rour, and that Mr. Wotton in the points of justification holds with them, I have proved out of his owne words. It is a poore defence for Mr. Gataker, to excuse him by naming other heresies of theirs which he professed not; neither did I charge him with them; And to plead, that because they were condemned for other heresies, more then this; therefore this was no heresie. I know it to be heresie and blasphemie, and with the learned before na∣med do proclame it to be so. Yea Mr. Wottons owne con∣science told him that his opinions were condemned for heresie and blasphemy, and for feare of shame, denyed them at sometimes; and most frequently contradicted himselfe, saying and unsaying, as Socinus his Master often did. I am loath to spend more time, to answer to this last part of Mr. Gatakers defence, which one short breath is sufficient to blow away. If he be forward to breake out into a further defence of these errors, and of Mr. Wotton, (who in his first paper speaking of the Doctrine of justi∣fication, as it is held and maintained by all Orthodox Divines of the reformed Church, did not blush to say, I am enforced to dissent from them all; what spirit enfor∣ced him, I cannot conceive unlesse it was the spirit of Abailard, who is condemned by Saint Bernard for saying, Omnes doctores nostri post Apostolos in hoc conveniunt, &c All our Doctors or teachers since the Apostles agree in this point; but I am of another opinion: sic omnes, non sie ego, all other thinke so, but I doe not think so) I shall by Gods grace be as ready to resist him still. And I doubt not but the hand of all Orthodox Divines wilbe against him who takes part with one against all; yea against the holy Scriptures, and the holy Pen-men of them. My faith, by which I beleeve that I shall be saved, is a firme beleife that
Christ is my head and surety, who fulfilled the whole Law for me, that he might thereby, redeeme, reconcile, and justifie me, and that my sins were punnished in him, and his righteousnesse, is my righteousnesse, in which I stand righteous before God. I know whom I have belee∣ved. I feare not what any man can say against me. If God be with me, I care not who be against me. If he justifie me, who can condemne? I will therefore rest on that promise of the Lord, Esay 54. 17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that riseth up against thee in judgement thou shalt condemne. This is the he∣ritage of the servants of the Lord; and their righteousnesse is of me, saith the Lord. FINIS.
