Y184A 99832645 37119
A serious and pathetical Description OF HEAVEN AND HELL, According to the Pencil of the HOLY GHOST, and the best Expositors: sufficient (with the blessing of GOD) to make the worst of men hate Sin, and love Holiness. Being five Chapters taken out of a Book entituled, The whole Duty of a Christian: Composed by R. YOUNGE, late of Roxwell in Essex, Florilegus. CHAP. XIX. Section I. Tus as the Unbeliever and Disobedient is cur∣sed in every thing, and where-ever he goes, and in whatsoever he does: Cursed in the City, and cursed also in the held; cursed in the fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his ground, and in the fruit of his cattel: Cursed when he cometh in, and cursed also when he goeth out; cur∣sed in this life, and cursed in the life to come; as is at large ex∣prest, Deut. 28. So the Believer that obeys the voice of the Lord, shall be blessed in every thing he does, wherever he goes, and in whatsoever befals him, as God promiseth in the former part of the same Chapter, & as I have proved in the eleven foregoing Sections. Yea, God will bless all that belong unto him, for his children and posterity, yea, many generati∣ons
after him, shall fare the better for his sake Exod. 20. 6. Gen. 30. 27. Isai. 54. 15. and 65. 8. Rom. 11. 28. Gen. 18. 26. 29, 31, 32. and 26. 24. and 39. 5. 1 Kings 11. 12, 32, 34. and 15. 4. 2 Kings 8. 19. and 19. 34. Isai. 37. 35. & 45. 4. Mat. 24. 22. yea, the very place where he dwells, perhaps the whole Kingdom he lives in, Gen. 39. to 48. chap. Whereas many, yea multitudes, Num. 25. 18. Deut. 1. 37. & 3. 26. Psal. 106. 32. even a whole Army, Josh. 7. 4, to 14. yea, his childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation, fare the worse for a wicked man, and an un∣believer, Exod. 20. 5. Besides his prayers shall profit many; for he is more prevalent with God, to take away a judgment from a people or a Nation, than a thousand others, Ex. 17. 11, 12, 13. And he counts it a sin to cease praying for his greatest and most malicious enemies, 1 Sam. 12. 23. though they, like fools, would (if they durst, or were permitted) cut him off, and all the race of Gods people, Ps. 83. 4. Esth. 3. 6. 9, 13. Which is as if one with a hatchet should cut off the bough of a tree upon which he standeth. For they are beholding to Believers for their very lives: yea, it is for their sakes, and because the number of Christs Church is not yet accomplisht, that they are out of Hell. But to go on, as all things (viz.) poverty, impri∣sonment, slander, persecution, sickness, death, temporal judg∣ments, spiritual desertions; yea, even Sin and Satan himself, shall turn together for the best unto those that love God, as you have seen: So all things shall turn together for the worst unto those that hate God, as all unbelievers do, Rom. 1. 30. Joh. 15. 18. even the mercy of God, and the means of Grace, shall prove their bane, and enhaunce their damnation: yea, Christ himself that only summum bonum, who is a Saviour to all Be∣lievers, shall be a just revenger to all unbelievers; and bid the one, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41, 46. Which shall be an everlasting departure, not for a day, nor for years of days, nor for millions of years, but for eternity, into such pains as can neither be ex∣pressed nor conceived, Iude 6. 7. Rev. 20. 10. Mat. 3. 12. Heb. 6. 2 Sect. 2. Wickedness hath but a time, a short time, a moment of time; but the punishment of wickedness is beyond all time: There shall be no end of plagues to the wicked man, Prov.
24. 20. Their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quench∣ed, Isai. 30. 33. & 66. 24. Mat. 25. 41. Mark 9. 44. And therefore it is said, The smoak of their torment doth ascend for ever and ever, Rev. 4. 12. and 20. 10. So that if all the men that ever have or shall be created, were Briareus-like, hundred-handed, and should at once take pens in their hundred hands, and do no∣thing else for ten hundred thousand millions of years, but sum up in figures as many hundred thousand millions as they could; yet never could they reduce to a total, or confine within number, this trissyllable word [Eternal] or that word of four syllables [Everlasting]. Now let such as forget God, but seriously consider this: it will not be an imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, but du∣ring the King of Kings pleasure: It is not a captivity of seven∣ty years, like that of the children of Israel in Babylon; for that had an end: nor like a captivity of seventy millions of genera∣tions; for that also would in time be expired: but even for ever. The wicked shall live as long in Hell, as there shall be a just God in Heaven. Here we measure time by days, months, years; but for Eter∣nity, there is no Arithmetician can number it, no Geometrician can measure it: For suppose the whole world were turned in∣to a Mountain of sand, and that a little Wren should come e∣very thousandth year, and carry away from that heap but one grain of the sand, what an infinite number of years would be spent and expired, before the whole heap would be fetcht a∣way? But admit a man should stay in torments so long, and then have an end of his wo, it were some comfort to think that an end will come: But alas! when she hath finished this task a thousand times over, he shall be as far from an end of his anguish, as ever he was the first hour he entred into it. Now, Suppose thou shouldst lie but one night grievously afflicted with a raging fit of the stone, strangury, tooth-ach, pangs of travel, or the like; though thou hadst to help and ease thee, a soft bed to lie on, Friends about to comfort thee, Physicians to cure thee, all cordial and comfortable things to asswage thy pain; yet how tedious and painful would that one night seem unto thee? How wouldst thou toss and tumble, and turn from
one side to another? Counting the Clock, esteeming every minute a month, and thy present misery unsupportable. What then will it be to lie in flames of fire? (To which our fire is but air in comparison) fire and brimstone kept in the highest flame by the unquenchable wrath of God, world without end; where thou shalt have nothing about thee but dark∣ness and horrour, wailing and wringing of hands, desperate yellings and gnashing of teeth: thy old Companions in vanity and sin, to ban and curse thee; the Devils insulting over thee with cruelty and scorn; the never dying worm of conscience, to feed upon thy soul and flesh for ever and ever. O everlasting eter∣nity! a never-dying life, an ever-living death! Which yet is but just with God; for if thou mightest have lived for ever, thou wouldst have sinned for ever. If God would everlastingly have spared thee, thou wouldst have everlast∣ingly hated and provoked him. What then can be more e∣qual, then that thou shouldst suffer everlastingly? O then bethink thy self of this word eternal and everlast∣ing, and ponder upon it: yea, do but indeed believe it, and it will be enough to break thine hard heart, and make it relent and repent, and thereby prevent the wrath to come. It will put thee to a demur, What have I done? What am I now a∣about? Whether will this course tend? How will it end? What will become of me if I go on, in chambering and wan∣tonness surfeiting and drunkenness, strife and envying, swearing, prophaneness, earthly-mindedness, and the like? For indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, shall be upon the soul of e∣very one that doth evil, and continueth therein, as the Apostle witnesseth, Rom. 2. 8, 9. O then, break off thy sins without de∣lay, and let there be an healing of thy errours. Sect. 3. Neither is the extremity of pain inferiour to the per∣petuity of it; it is a place full of horrour and amazedness, where is no remission of sin, no dismission of pain, no intermission of sense, no permission of comfort: its torments are both intole∣rable, and interminable, and can neither be endured nor a∣voided, when entred into, Rev. 19. 20. and 20. 14. and 18. 6. Mat. 25. 30. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Heb. 10. 27. Jude 6. The pangs of the first death are pleasant, compared with
those of the second: For mountains of sand were lighter, and millions of years shorter, than a tithe of those torments, Rev. 20. 10. Jude 7. It is a death which hath no death; it hath a beginning, it hath no ending, Mat. 3. 12. Isa. 66. 24. The pain of the body, is but the body of pain, the anguish of the soul, is the soul of anguish: For should we first burn off one hand, then another, after that each arm, and so all the parts of the body, it would be deemed intolerable, and no man would endure it for all the profits and pleasures this world can afford; and yet it is nothing to the burning of body and soul in hell. Should we endure ten thousand years torment in hell, it were grievous, but nothing to eternity: Should we suf∣fer one pain, it were miserable enough; but if ever we come there, our pains shall be for number and kinds, infinitely vari∣ous, as our pleasures have been here; every sense and member, each power and faculty, both of soul and body, shall have their several objects of wretchedness, and that without intermissi∣on, or end, or ease, or patience to endure it, Luke 12. 5. and 16. 23. Mat. 3. 12. and 5. 22. and 22. 23. The Schools affirm, that the least torture in hell, exceeds the greatest that can be devised by all the men on earth; even as the least ioy in heaven, surpasseth the greatest comfort here on earth. There is scarce any pain here on earth, but there is ever some hope of ease, mitigation, or intermission; of some re∣lief or deliverance: but in Hell, their torments are easeless, endless, and remediless; unsufferable, and yet inevitable, and themselves left hopeless, helpless, pitiless. It were misery enough to have the head-ach, tooth-ach, col∣lick, gout, burning in the fire; or if there be any thing more grievous: Yea, should all these and many more meet together in one man, at one instant, they would come infinitely short of the pains of hell. Yea, they would all be but as the stinging of Ants, to the lashes of those Scorpions; but as drops, to those Vi∣als of wrath; as sparks to that flame, as Chrysostome speaks. The Furnace of Babel, was but a flea-biting to this tormenting To∣phet, prepared of old, Isai. 30. He hath made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone doth kindle it, ver. 32. So that it were happy
for reprobate spirits, if they were in no worse condition, than so many Toads or Serpents. As consider, If a dark dungeon here be so loathsom, what is that dungeon of eternal, of utter dark∣ness? If material fire be so terrible, what is Hell-fire? Here we cry out of a burning fever, or, if a very coal from the hearth do but light on our flesh, O how it grieves us! we cannot hold our finger for one minute in scalding lead, but there both bo∣dy and soul shall fry in everlasting flames, and be continually tormented by infernal fiends, whose society alone would be sufficiently frightful. Sect. 4. Now consider, Is one hours twitche of the worm of conscience here? Yea, is one minutes twitch of a tooth pulling out so unsufferable? What is a thousand years? What is eter∣nity of hell torments? If the Glutton being in hell, in part on∣ly (viz. in soul) yet cryed out, that he was horribly tormented in that flame; what think we shall that torment be, when body and soul come to be united in torment? since the pains of Hell are more exquisite than all the united torments that the Earth can invent. Yea, the pains and sufferings of the damned, are ten thousand times more than can be imagined by any heart under heaven, and can rather (through necessity) be en∣dured, than expressed. It is a death never to be painted to the life; no pen, nor pencil, nor art, nor heart, can comprehend it, Mat. 18. 89, 10. and 25. 30. Luke 16. 23, 24. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Isai. 5. 14. and 30. 33. Prov. 15. 11. Yea, were all the Land paper, and all the water ink, every plant a pen, and every other creature a ready Writer, yet they could not set down the least piece of the great pains of Hell-fire. Now add eternity to extremity, and then consider Hell to be Hell indeed. For if the Ague of a year, or the Collick of a month, or the Rack of a day, or the burning of an hour be so bitter here; how will it break the hearts of the wicked, to feel all these beyond all measure, beyond all time? So that it is an evil and bitter thing to depart from the living God. We poor mortals (until God does bring us from under  power of Satan unto himself) do live in the world as if  were not so hot, nor the Devil so black as indeed they are: in Hell and Heaven were the one not worth the avoiding, the
other not worth the enjoying: but the heat of fire was never painted, and the Devil is more deformed than represented on the wall. There are unexpressible torments in Hell, as well as unspeakable joys in Heaven. Nor will this be their case alone that are desperately wicked; cursing and blaspheming Drunkards, and shedders of blood, but of all, impenitent persons. As for instance, they who have lived in the fire of lust here, must not think much to be scorched in the flames of hell hereafter, Heb. 13. 4. Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15. The detractor is a devil above ground; his tongue is already set on fire from hell, Jam. 3 6. Rev. 16. 10, 11. which does sadly presage, what will be his portion for ever, unless repen∣tance quench those flames; and so of the like offenders, Ps. 9. 17. Rev. 22. 12. As what says the Apostle? Neither fornica∣tors, nor thieves, nor murtherers, nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor raylers, nor lyars, nor covetous persons, nor unbelievers, nor no unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, but shall have their part and portion in that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Rev. 21. 8. which did they well consider, they durst not con∣tinue in the practice of these sins without fear or remorse, or care of amendment. Sect. 5. Now what heart would not bleed, to see men run headlong into those tortures that are thus intolerable? Dance hoodwinkt into this perdition? O that it were allowed to the desperate ruffians of our days, that swear and curse, drink and drab, rob, shed blood, &c. (as if Heaven were blind and deaf to what they do) to have but a sight of this Hell! how would it charm their mouths, appall their spirits, strike fear and astonish∣ment into their hearts? Yea, if a sinner could see but one glimpse of hell, or be suffered to look one moment into that fiery Lake, he would rather chuse to die ten thousand deaths, than wilfully & premeditately commit one sin. Nor can I think they would do as they do, if they did but either see or foresee what they shall one day (without serious and unfeigned repentance)  And indeed, therefore are we dissolute, because we do not think what a judgment there is after our dissolution: because we make it the least, and last thing we think on; yea, it is death,
we think, to think upon death: and we cannot endure that doleful hell which summons us to judgment, Lam. 1. 9. Deut. 32. 29. Oh that men would believe and consider this truth, and do accordingly. Oh that thou wouldst remember, that there is a day of ac∣count, a day of death, a day of judgment coming, Heb. 9. 27. Mat. 25. wherein the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, to render vengeance un∣to them which obey not his Gospel; and to punish them with e∣verlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8, 9. Jude 15. Isa. 33. 14. Mat. 25. 46. As consider seriously, I beseech you, whether it will not be worth the while, so to foresee the torments of hell, that you may prevent them: Or if otherwise, will you not one day wish you had, when death comes and arrests you to appear before the great and terrible Iudge of all the world? Luke 16. 23. to 32. Mat. 13. 30, 38. at which time an Assizes or Quarter-Sessions shall be held within thee, where Reason shall sit as Judge, and Satan shall put in a Bill of Indictment, as long as that Book in Zachary; chap. 5. 2. Ezek. 2. 9, 10. wherein shall be alledged all the evil deeds that ever thou hast committed, and all the good deeds that ever thou hast omitted, with their several circum∣stances that may aggravate them, Eccles. 11. 9. and 12. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 10. and all the curses and judgments that are due to e∣very sin. Thine own conscience shall accuse thee, and thy memo∣ry shall give bitter evidence against thee; and thou shalt con∣demn thy self, before the just condemnation of thy Judge, who knows all thy misdeeds better than thy self, John 3. 20. Which sins of thine will not then leave thee, but cry unto thee, We are thy works, and we will follow thee, Rev. 14. 13. And then who can sufficiently express what thy grief and anguish will be, when the summons both of the first and second  do overtake thee at once? Prov. 1. 27. And when at once thou shalt think of thy sins past, the present misery, and the  of thy torments to come; and how thou hast made earth  Paradise, thy belly thy God, and lust thy Law; so sowing  and reaping misery, and finding, that as in thy prosperi∣ty
thou neglectedst to serve God, so now in thy adversity God refuseth to save thee, Prov. 1. 24. to 32. Ezek. 23. 35. When thou shalt call to mind the many warnings thou hast had of this doleful day, from Christs faithful Ambassadors, and how thou then madest but a mock or jeer at it, Prov. 1. 25. and think how for the short sinful pleasures thou hast enjoyed, thou must endure eternal pains, Luke 16. 24, 25. and Rev. 6. 12. to 18. Which yet thou shalt think most just and equal, say∣ing, As I have deserved, so I am served: for I was oft enough offered mercy, yea, intreated to accept thereof; but I preferred the pleasing of my senses, before the saving of my soul, and more regarded the words of wicked men, and the allurements of Satan, than the word of God, or the motions of his holy Spi∣rit, Prov. 1. 24. &c. Mark 16. 16. And (which I would have thee think upon) Hell-fire is made more hot, by neglecting so great salvation, Heb. 2. 3. This is the condemnation (saith our Savi∣our, none like this) that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil, John 3. 29. Now salvation is freely offered, but men reject it; hereafter they would accept of salvation, but God will reject them. Yea, then a whole world (if thou hadst it) for one hours delay, or respite, that thou mightest have space to repent, and sue unto God for mercy: but it cannot be, because thy body, which joyned with thy soul in thy sinful actions, is now al∣together unfit to joyn with her in the exercise of repentance; and repentance must be of the whole man. Besides, death will take no pity; the devil knows no mercy, and the God of mercy will have utterly forsaken thee. Then wilt thou say, O that I had been more wise, or that I were now to begin my life a∣gain; then would I contemn the world with all its vanities? yea, if Satan should then offer me all the treasures, pleasures, and promotions of this world, he should never entice me to forget the terrors of this dreadful hour, and those worse which are to follow, Luke 16. 24. &c. and 13. 28. But, oh wretched Caitiff that I am; how hath the Devil and my own deceitful and devilish heart deluded me? An how am I served accordingly? For now is my case more m¦serable than the most despised Toad or Serpent, that peris
when it dieth; in that I must go to answer at the great Judg∣ment Seat for all my sins, that am not able to answer for one of the least of them, Eccles. 12. 14. Mat. 18. 34. that I who here∣tofore gloried in my lawless liberty, am now to be enclosed in the very claws of Satan, as the trembling Partridge with∣in the griping tallons of the ravening and devouring Falcon. Oh, cursed be the day when I was born, and the time when my mother conceived me, &c. Job 3. Sect. 6. And so death having given thee thy fatal stroke, the Devil shall seize upon or snatch away thy soul, so soon as it leaves thy body, Luke 12. 20. and hale thee hence into the bot∣tomless Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone; where she is to be kept in chains of darkness, until the general judgment of the great day, Jude 6, 7. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Rev. 21. 8. Thy body in the mean time being cast into the earth, expecting a fearful Resur∣rection, when it shall be re-united to thy soul; that as they sin∣ned together, so they may be everlastingly tormented together, Heb. 10. 27. At which general Judgment, Christ sitting upon his Throne, John 5. 22. shall rip up all the benefits he hath bestow∣ed on thee and the miseries he hath suffered for thee; and all the ungodly deeds that thou hast committed, and all the hard speeches which thou hast spoken against him, and his holy ones, Jude 15. Eccles. 12. 14. and 11. 9. Within thee shall be thine own conscience, more than a thousand witnesses to accuse thee; the Devils, who tempted thee to all thy lewdness, shall on the one side testifie with thy conscience against thee, and on the o∣ther side shall stand the holy Saints and Angels approving Christs Justice, and detesting so filthy a creature: behind thee an hideous noise of innumerable fellow-damned Reprobates, tarrying for thy company: before thee all the world burning with flaming fire; above thee an ireful Judge of deserved ven∣geance, ready to pronounce his heavy Sentence upon thee: be∣neath thee the fiery and sulphureous mouth of the bottomless pit, gaping to receive thee, Isa. 5. 11. 14. And in this woful and doleful condition, thou must stand forth to receive, with other Reprobates, this thy Sentence, Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10 [Depart from me] there is a separation from all joy and happiness, [ye cursed] there is a black and direful excommunication, [into
fire] there is the extremity of pain, [everlasting,] there is the perpetuity of punishment, [prepared for the devil and his an∣gels,] there are thy infernal tormenting and tormented com∣panions, Mat. 25. 41. O terrible sentence! from which there is no escaping, withstanding, excepting, or appealing. Then, O then shall thy mind be tormented to think, how, for the love of a∣bortive pleasures, which even perished before they budded; thou hast so foolishly lost heavens joys, and incurred hellish pains, which last to all eternity, Luke 16. 24, 25. Thy conscience shall ever sting thee like an Adder, when thou callest to mind, how often Christ by his Ministers offered thee remission of sins, and the Kingdom of heaven freely, if thou wouldst but believe and repent, and how easily thou mightest have obtained mercy in those days. How near thou wast many times to have re∣pented, and yet didst suffer the devil and the world to keep thee still in impenitency; and how the day of mercy is now past, and will never dawn again. Thy understanding shall be racked to consider, how for momentany riches thou hast lost e∣ternal treasure, and exchanged heavens felicity for hells misery: where every part and faculty, both of body and soul, shall be continually and alike tormented, without intermission or dis∣mission of pain, or from it: and be for ever deprived of the bea∣tifical sight of God, wherein consists the soveraign good and life of the soul. Thou shalt never see light, nor the least sight of joy; but lye in a perpetual prison of utter darkness, where shall be no order but horrour, no voice but howling and blaspheming; no noise but screeching and gnashing of teeth; no society but of the devil and his angels, who being tormented themselves, shall have no other ease, but to wreak their fury in tormenting thee, Mat. 13. 42. & 25. 36. &c. Where shall be punishment with∣out any pity, misery without any mercy, sorrow without succour, crying without comfort, malice without measure, torment with∣out ease, Rev. 14. 10, 11. where the wrath of God shall seize upon thy soul & body, as the flame of fire does on the lump of pitch, or brimstone, Dan. 7. 10. in which flame thou shalt ever be burn∣ing, and never consumed; ever dying, and never dead; ever roaring in the pangs of death, and never rid of those pangs, nor expecting end of thy pains. So that after thou hast endured
them so many thousand years as there are blades of grass on the earth, or sands in the Sea, hairs on the heads of all the sons of Adam, from the first to the last born; as there have been creatures in heaven and earth; thou shalt be no nearer an end of thy torments, than thou wast the very first day that thou wast cast into them: yea, so far are they from ending, that they are ever beginning. For if after a thousand times so many thousand years, thy damned soul could but conceive some hope, that those torments should have an end: this would be some comfort, to think that at length an end will come; but as often as thy mind shall think of this word never (and thou shalt ever be thinking of it) it will rend thy heart in pieces with rage and hideous lamentation: as giving still new life to those unsufferable sorrows, which exceed all expres∣sion, or imagination. It will be another hell in the midst of hell. Wherefore, consider seriously what I say, and that while the compassionate arms of Jesus Christ lye open to receive you; and do thereafter, Prov. 1. 24. &c. take warning by Pharaoh's example. We in the rich mans scalding torments, have a Dis∣cite à me, Learn of me, Luke 16. 23. &c. For he can testifie out of woful experience, that if we will not take warning by the word (that gentle warner) the next shall be harder, the third and fourth harder than that; yea, as all the ten plagues did exceed one another, so the eleventh single exceeds them alto∣gether. Innumerable are the curses of God against sinners, Deut. 28. but the last is the worst, comprehending and trans∣cending all the rest. The fearfullest plagues God still reserves for the upshot: all the former do but make way for the last. Hell in Scripture is called a Lake, that burneth with fire and brimstone; and, than the torment of the former, what more a∣cute? than the smell of the latter, what more noysome? CHAP. XX. Sect. 1. THus, I say, shall they be bid Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, &c. while on the contrary the same Christ shall say unto the other, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from before the foundati∣on of the world, Mat. 25. 34. Which Kingdom is a place where
are such joys as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. 9. A place where there shall be no evil present, nor good ab∣sent, Heb. 9. 12. Mat. 6. 20. In comparison whereof, all the Thrones and Kingdoms upon earth, are less than the drop of a bucket, Deut. 10. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. Isai. 66. 1. Heaven in Scripture is compared to a Kingdom for Sove∣raignty, to a Throne for preheminency, to a Crown for state and majesty, to an Inheritance for perpetuity, to a Marriage-feast for plenty, pleasure, and delicacy, and to whatsoever else may set forth its excellency; though indeed in these comparisons, there is little or no comparison, as I might shew you in many particulars, if I would be large: for instances in this case would be endless. There death shall have no more dominion over us, Rom. 6. 9. The Sun shall not burn us by day, nor the Moon by night, Ps. 121. 6. There all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, Rev. 7. 17. There shall be no sorrow, nor pain, nor complaint, there is no malice to rise up against us; no misery to afflict us; no hunger, thirst, wearisomness, temptation, to disquiet us, Mat. 6. 19, 20. Heb. 9. 12. There is no death nor dearth, no pining nor re∣pining, no fraud, sorrow, nor sadness, neither tears nor fears, defect nor loathing, Rev. 7. 16, 17. and 21. 4. Heb. 9. 12. There, O there, one day is better than a thousand; there is rest from our labours, peace from our enemies, freedom from our sins, &c. John 3. 17. Heb. 4. 3. 9, 10, 11. Rev. 14. 13. Heb. 9. 12, 15. Sect. 2. Unto which Negative Priviledges, there are also added Positive of all sorts, as I might plentifully prove, but I study brevity. Do we delight in good company? What pleasure shall we take in the company of Saints and Angels? In whom there is nothing but amiable, comfortable, delecta∣ble? Nothing in us that may cool the fervour of our love and affection to them. And so of all other enjoyments. As, Dost thou desire beauty, riches, honour, pleasure, long life, or whatever else can be named? No place so glorious by Creation, so beautiful with delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for habitation, nor so durable for lasting, Heb. 12. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Rom. 9. 3. and 8. 18.
There are no Estates but Inheritances, no Inheritances but Kingdoms, no Houses but Palaces, no Meals but Feasts, no Noise but Musick, no Rods but Scepters, no Garments but Robes, no Seats but Thrones, no Coverings for the Head but Crowns, Rom. 8. 17. Tit. 3. 7. Heb. 9. 15. Mat. 25. 31. 34. 2 Tim. 4. 8. Gal. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 9, 10. Mar. 10. 23, 24, 25. Rev. 7. 13, 14, 15. & 6. 11. There we shall see the blessed face of God, which is the glory of all sights, the sight of all glory. Yea, we our selves shall out-shine the Sun in brightness, Mat. 13. 43. For if the brightness of the body shall match the Sun, what will the glo∣ry and splendour of the soul be? And yet such honour shall all the Saints have. For when Christ, which is our head and life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. And he shall change our vile and mortal body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, Col. 3. 4. Phil. 3. 21. Briefly, Our joy shall there be full, and none shall be able to take it from us, or diminish it, John 15. 11. and 16. 22. There is fulness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psal. 26. Joys and plea∣sures never ebbing, but ever flowing to all contentment. There we shall rejoyce; for the pleasantness of the place we possess, for the glory of our souls and bodies, which we have put on; for the world which we have overcome; for hell which we have escaped; for the joys of heaven which we have attained to. We shall have joy above us, by the beatifical vision and sight of God; joy within us, by the peace of conscience, even the joy of the holy Ghost; and joy round about us, by the blessed company and fellowship of our associates, the holy Saints and Angels. Sect. 3. And in reason, if a Christian-soul in this Tabernacle of the body, wherein we see but as in a glass, be so delighted to see the face of God manifested in Jesus Christ: If it so glads a Child of God, when he can but in the least measure master his corruptions, or hath occasion to manifest the sincerity of his affectionate love to his Maker and Redeemer, and to serve his brethren in love; How joyful will he be, when these graces shall be perfected, and he freed from all grievances inward & outward? Yea, if the communion and enjoyment of Gods Spirit, and Christ in his Gospel and Ordinances, be so sweet
here, that one day with us, is better than a thousand with the ungodly, Psal. 84. 10. What will it be to enjoy the immediate presence, and glory of God our Father? Christ our Redeemer and Elder-brother? The holy Ghost our Comforter? The Angels and Saints our Comforts and Companions? Our condition there will be so joyful, that look we outward∣ly, there is joy in the society, Heb. 12. 22. if inward, there is joy in our own felicity, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Look we forward, there is joy in the eternity, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Mark 10. 30. So that on every side we shall be even swallowed up of joy, Isai. 35. 10. and 51. 11. Mat. 25. 23. and 18. 10. Heb. 12. 2, 22. Psal. 16. 11. As, oh the multitude and fulness of these joys! so many, that only God can number them; so great, that he only can estimate them; of such rarity and perfection, that this world hath nothing comparable to them, 2 Cor. 12. 24. As, oh the transcendency of that Paradise of pleasure! where is joy without heaviness or interruption; peace without perturbation; blessedness without misery; light without darkness; health without sick∣ness; beauty without blemish; abundance without want; ease without labour; satiety without loathing; liberty without restraint; security without fear; glory without ignominy; knowledge without ignorance; eyes without tears; hearts without sorrow; souls without sin: where shall be no evil heard of to affright us, nor good wanting to chear us: for we shall have what we can desire, and we shall desire nothing but what is good, Deut. 10. 14. Isai. 66. 1. 1 Kings 8. 27. Mark 10. 21. Luke 18. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 10. John 4. 36, and 10. 28. Mat. 25. 46. Sect. 4. While we are here, how many clouds of discontent have we to darken the Sunshine of our Joy? When even com∣plaint of evils past, sense of present, and fear of future, have in a manner shared our lives among them. Here we love and loath in an instant (like Amnon to his Sister Tamar) in heaven there is no Object unlovely, nothing which is not exceeding amia∣ble and attractive: and not attractive only, but retentive also; for there we shall not be subject to passion, nor can we possibly there misplace our affection. Here we have knowledg mixed with ignorance, faith with doubting, peace with trouble, yea, trouble of conscience. Or in case we have peace of conscience,
alas, how often is it interrupted with anguish of spirit? Now rejoyce we with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. but alas, anon it falls out that we need to pray with David, Re∣store unto us the joy of thy salvation, Psal. 51. 12. but there is peace, even full without want, pure without mixture, and perpetual without all fear of foregoing, Dan. 2. 44. There shall be no concupiscence to tempt, no flesh to lust a∣gainst the spirit, no law in our members to rebel against the law of our minds. Now abideth Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three now abide: but in heaven, Vision succeeds in the place of Faith: attainment in the place of Hope, and perfect fruition and delectation in the room of Charity. There Promises shall end in performances, Faith in sight and clear vision, Hope in fruition and possession: yea, time it self shall be swallowed up in Eternity: these are the Souls dowries in heaven, where God shall be all in all to us! Now he is but as it were something single; as righteousness in Abraham, temperance in Joseph, strength in Sampson, meekness in Moses, wisdom in Solomon, patience in Job (for it is rare to find all these graces compleatly to meet in any one subject) but then and there he shall be omnia in omnibus; all these in every of his servants! God shall be all in all, even the fulness of him that filleth all in all things, as the Apostle speaks, Eph. 1. 23. The only knowledge of God, shall fill up our understandings; and the alone love of God, shall possess our Affections. God shall be all in all to us; he will fill up our rational part with the light of wisdom; our concupiscible part or appetite, with a spring of righteousness; and the irascible part with perfect peace and tranquillity, as Bernard expresseth it. That is a blessed state perpetual and unchangeable. There is eternal security, and secure Eternity, as Bernard speaks: or as Austin hath it, There is blessed Eternity, and everlasting Blessedness. Let the end of our life then be, to come to a life whereof there is no end; unto which the Lord in his good time bring us, that we who now sow in tears, may then reap in joy, the which he will be sure to do, if we but for a short time serve him here in righteousness and sincerity. But otherwise, look we not for eternal happiness, but for everlasting misery: For it is
an everlasting Rule, No grace, no holiness here; no glory, no hap∣piness hereafter. To sum up all in a word; there is no joy here comparable to that in Heaven: all our mirth here to that is but pensiveness: all our pleasure here to that, but heaviness: all our sweetness here to that is but bitterness. Even Solomon in all his glory and royalty, to that, was but as a spark in the chimney, to the Sun in the firmament. Absaloms beauty, to that, is but deformity. Samp∣sons strength, to that, is but infirmity. Methuselahs age, to theirs, is but minority and mortality. Asahels speed, and swiftness, but a snails pace to their celerity. Yea, how little, how nothing, are the poor and temporary enjoyments of this life, to those we shall enjoy in the next? 1 Cor 2. 9. Yea, Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, was but a wilderness, compared with this Paradise. And indeed, if the gates of the City be of Pearl, and the streets of Gold; what then are the inner rooms, the dining and lodging chambers? the presence chamber of the great Monarch of Heaven and Earth? what then may we think of the maker and builder thereof? In fine (that I might darkly shadow it out, sith the lively representation thereof is meerly impossible) this life everlast∣ing is the perfection of all good things. For fulness is the per∣fection of measure; and everlastingness the perfection of Time; and infiniteness the perfection of number; and immutability the perfection of State; and Immensity the perfection of Place, and Immortality the perfection of Life, and God the perfection of All, who shall be All in All to us, meat to our taste, beauty to our eyes, perfumes to our smell, musick to our ears. And what shall I say more? but as the Psalmist saith, Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou city of God, Psalm 87. 3. See Rev. 4. 2, 3. and 21. 10. to the end. Sect. 5. The glory of Heaven, cannot be comprehended here; only God hath vouchsafed to give us some small glimpses in he Scripture, whereby we may frame a conjecture, considera∣ble enough to make us sell all we have to purchase that Pearl of rice. It hath pleased God, out of his fatherly condescension, to oop to our capacity, in representing Heavenly things under arthly types: shadowing out the joys thereof, by whatsoever
is precious and desirable in this life; as Cities, Kingdoms, Crowns, Pearls, Jewels, Marriages, Feasts, &c. which supereminent and superabundant felicity, St. Paul, that had been an only witness, when he had been caught up in the third Heaven, not able to describe, much less to amplifie, sums up all in these words; A sure, most excellent, exceeding and eternal weight of transcend∣ent glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and 12. 2. But alas, such is mans pra∣vity, that he is as far from comprehending it, as his arms are from compassing it, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Heaven shall receive us, we cannot conceive Heaven. Do you ask what Heaven is? faith one: When I meet you there I will tell you; For could this ear hear it, or this tongue utter it, or this heart conceive it, it must needs follow, that they were translated already thither, 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. Yea, who can utter the sweetness of that peace of Conscience, and spiritual rejoycing in God, which himself hath tasted? If then the beginning and first fruits of it be so sweet, what shall the fulness of that beatifical Vision of God be? If the earnest penny be so precious and promising here; What shall the principal, and full crop and harvest of happiness in Heaven be? So that a man may as well with a coal paint out the Sun in all his splendor, as with his pen, or tongue express, or with his heart (were it as deep as the Sea conceive the fulness of those Joys, and sweetness of those Pleasures, which the Saints shall enjoy at Gods right hand for evermore, Psal. 16. 11. In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. For quality, they are pleasures; for quan∣tity, fulness; for dignity, at Gods right hand; for Eternity, for evermore. And millions of years multiplyed by millions, make not up one minute to this Eternity, 2 Cor. 4. 18. John 10. 28. The Eye sees much, the Ear hears more, the Heart conceives most; yet all short of apprehension, much more of comprehen∣sion of those pleasures. Therefore it is said, Enter thou into thy Masters joy; for it is too great to enter into thee, Mat. 25. 23. Neither will I any further exercise my self in things too high for me, Psal. 131. 1. For as St. Paul tells us, The heart of man is not able to conceive those joyes; which being so, How should I be able to express them in words? And yet though we cannot comprehend this glory, this far
most excellent, exceeding, and eternal weight of transcendent glo∣ry; yet may and ought we to admire the never enough to be admired bounty and goodness of God and our Redeemer, in crying out, O the depth, &c. O the sweetness of his love, how unsearchable are his thoughts, and intendments to man-ward? (once miserably forlorn, lost and undone) and his ways past finding out, Rom. 11. 33. CHAP. XXI. Sect. 1. BUt for the better confirming of this so important a truth, in these Atheistical times, see some reasons to confirm it. As, First, If the Sun, which is but a Creature, be so bright and glorious, that no mortal eye can look upon the brightness of it, how glorious then is the Creator himself? Or that light from whence it receives its light? if the frame of the heavens and globe of the earth be so glorious, which is but the lower house, or rather the foot-stool of the Almighty, as the holy Ghost phraseth it, Isa. 66. 1. Mat. 5. 35. Acts 7. 49. How glorious and wonderful is the Maker thereof, and the City where he keeps his Court? Or if sinners, even the worst of wicked men, and Gods enemies, have here in this earthly Pilgrimage, such vari∣ety of enjoyments to please their very senses, as who can ex∣press the pleasurable variety of Objects for the sight; of meats and drinks to satisfie and delight the taste, of voyces and melo∣dious sounds, to recreate the hearing; of scents and perfumes, provided to accommodate our very smellings, of recreations and sports, to bewitch the whole man: And the like of honour and profit, which are Idols that carnal men do mightily dote upon, and take pleasure in: (though these earthly and bodily joyes are but the body, or rather the dregs of true joy) what think we must be the soul thereof, viz. those delights and pleasures, that are reserved for the glorified Saints, and Gods dearest darlings in heaven? Again, Secondly, If natural men find such pleasure and sweetness in secular wisdom, lip-learning, and brain-knowledge; For even mundane knowledge hath such a shew of excellency in it, that
it is highly affected both by the good and bad; As, O the plea∣sure that rational men take therein! It being so fair a Virgin that every clear eye is in love with her; so rich a Pearl, that none but Swine do despise it: yea, among all the Trees in the Garden, none so takes with rational men as the Tree of Know∣ledge (as Satan well knew, when he set upon our first Parents) insomuch that Plato thinks, in case wisdom could but repre∣sent it self unto the eyes, it would set the heart on fire with the love of it. And others affirm, That there is no less dif∣ference between the Learned and the Ignorant, than there is between the living and the dead, or between men and beasts. And yet the pleasure which natural and moral men take in secular and mundane knowledge and learning, is nothing com∣parable to that pleasure, that an experimental Christian finds in the Divine and Supernatural knowledge of Gods Word: Which makes David and Solomon prefer it before the hony and the hony-comb for sweetness: and to value it above thousands of gold and silver; yea, before pearls and all precious stones for worth. How sweet then shall our knowledge in heaven be? For here we see but darkly, and as it were in a glass, or by moon-light; but there we shall know, even as we are known, and see God and Christ in the face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Thirdly, If meer Naturians have been so taken with the love of Vertue, that they thought if a vertuous soul could but be seen with temporal eyes, it would ravish all men with love and admiration thereof; yea, if the very worst of men, drunkards, blasphemers, and the like; though they most spight∣fully scoff at, and back-bite the people of God; yet when they know a man sincere, upright, and honest, cannot choose but love, commend, and honour him in their hearts; as it fared with Herod touching John, and King Agrippa touching Paul. Sect. 2. Or rather if Gods own people are so ravished with the graces and priviledges which they enjoy upon earth, as the assurance of the pardon of sin, the peace of a good conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost; which is but glorification begun: What will they be, when they shall enjoy the perfection of glory in heaven? As see but some instances of their present enjoyments here below. First, if we were never to receive any reward for
those small labours of love, and duties we do to the glory of God, and profit of others, we might think our selves suffici∣ently recompensed in this life, with the calm and quietness of a good conscience, the honesty of a vertuous and holy life; That we can do and suffer something for the love of Christ, who hath done and suffered so much to save us; That by our works the Majesty of God is magnified, to whom all homage is due, and all service too little. For godliness in every sickness is a Physician, in every contention an Advocate, in every doubt a Schoolman, in all heaviness a Preacher, and a Comforter unto whatsoever estate it comes, making the whole life as it were a perpetual Hallelujah. Yea, God so sheds his love abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, that we are in heaven before we come thither. Insomuch, that as the fire flieth to his sphere, the stone hastens to the center, the river to the sea, as to their end and rest, and are violently detained in all other places; so are the hearts of Gods people, without their Maker and Redeemer, their last end and eternal rest and quietness, never at rest: like the Needle touched with the Loadstone, which ever stands quivering and trembling until it enjoys the full and direct aspect of the Northern Pole. But more particularly: How doth the assurance of the pardon of sin alone, clear and calm all storms of the mind, making any condition com∣fortable, and the worst and greatest misery to be no misery? To be delivered of a child, is no small joy to the mother: but to be delivered from sin, is a far greater joy to the soul. But to this we may add the joy of the holy Ghost, and the peace of con∣science, otherwise called the peace of God which passeth all un∣derstanding. These are priviledges that make Paul happier in his chain of iron, than Agrippa in his chain of gold: And Peter more merry under stripes, than Caiaphas upon the Judgment∣seat; and Stephen the like under that shower of stones. Pleasures are ours, if we be Christs: whence those expressions of the holy Ghost, The Lord hath done great things for us, wherefore we re∣joyce. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoyce ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Let all that put their trust in thee rejoyce, let them even shout for joy. Rejoyce evermore; and again I say, rejoyce. Rejoyce with joy unspeakable, and full of glo∣ry.
Our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience. Your heart shall rejoyce, and your joy shall no man take from you, &c. So that it is a shame for the faithful, not to be joyful; and they sin if they rejoyce not, what∣soever their condition be. The Eunuch no sooner felt the pardon of sin, upon his being baptized into the Faith of Christ, but he went on his way rejoycing, Acts 8. 39. He then found more solid Joy, than ever he had done in his riches, honours, and great places under Candace, Queen of the Aethiopians. At the same time when the Disciples were persecuted, they are said to be filled with joy, and with the holy Ghost, Acts 13. 52. And as their afflictions do abound, so their consolations do abound also, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For these are comforts that will support and refresh a child of God in the very midst of the flames, as the Martyrs found: for maugre all their persecutors could do, their peace and joy did exceed their pain; as ma∣ny of them manifested to all that saw them suffer. Sect. 3. Where observe, before we go any further, what Sots they are, that cry out, It is in vain to serve God, and unprofitable to keep his Commandments, as it is in Malachy 3. 14. For had these Fools but tast∣ed the sweet comforts that are in the very works of piety, and that Heaven upon Earth, the Feast of a good Conscience, and joy of the inward man, they could not so speak. Yea, then would they say, There is no life to the life of a Christian. For as the Priests of Mercury, when they are their Figs and Hony, cryed out, Oh how sweet is truth! So if the worst of a Believers life in this world be so sweet, how sweet shall his life be in that heavenly Jerusalem and holy City, where God himself dwelleth, and where we shall reign with Christ our Bridegroom, and be the Lambs wife? Which City is of pure gold, like unto clear glass; the walls of Jasper, having twelve foundations garnished with all manner of precious stones; the first foundation being Jasper, the second Saphir, the third a Calcedony, the fourth an Emerald, the fifth a Sardonyx, the sixth a Sardius, the seventh a Chrysolite, the eighth a Beryl, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a Jacynth, the twelfth an Amethyst: Having twelve gates of twelve pearls, the streets thereof of pure gold, as it were transparent glass: In the midst of which City, is a pure River of the water of life, clear as Chrystal, and of either side the Tree of Life; which bears twelve manner of fruits, yielding her fruit every moneth; the leaves whereof serve to heal the Nations: Where is the Throne of God and of the Lamb; whom we his servants shall for ever serve, and see his face, and have his Name written in our Foreheads. And there shall be no night, neither is there need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Into which nothing that defileth shall enter; but they alone which are written in the Lambs Book of life; As is exprest, Rev. 21. and 22. Chap. The holy Ghost speaking after the manner of men, and according to our slender capacity, for other∣wise no words can in any measure express the transcendency of that place of pleasure. Only here we have a taste, or earnest-penny, one drop of those divine dainties, of those spiritual, supernatural, and di∣vine pleasures, reserved for the Citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem;
some small smack whereof we have even in the barren desert of this perillous peregrination. God letting out as it were, a certain kind of Man∣na, which in some sort refresheth his thirsty people, in this Wilderness, as with most sweet hony, or water distilled from out of the Rock. As what else are those Jubilees of the heart; those secret and inward joys which proceed from a good conscience, grounded upon a confident hope of fu∣ture salvation? As what else do these great clusters of grapes signifie, but the fertility of the future Land of Promise. Sect. 4. True it is, none can know the spiritual joy and comfort of a Christian, but he that lives the life of a Christian, John 7. 17. As none could learn the Virgins Song, but them that sang it, Rev. 14. 3. No man can know the peace of a good Conscience, but he that keeps a good Conscience. No man knows the hid Manna, and white Stone, with a new name written in it, but they that receive the same, Rev. 2. 17. The world can see a Christians outside, but the raptures of his Soul, the ravishing delights of the inward man, and joy of the Spirit for the remission of his sins, and the infusion of grace, with such like spiritual Priviledges more glorious than the States of Kingdoms; are as a covered mess to men of the World. But I may appeal to any mans conscience, that hath been softned with the unction of grace, and truly tasted the powers of the World to come; To him that hath the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the holy Ghost; in whose Soul the light of grace shines, whether his whole life be not a perpetual Hallelujah, in comparison of his natural condition? Whether he finds not his joy to be like to the joy of harvest? or as men rejoyce when they divide a spoil? Isa. 9. 3. Whether he finds not more joy in goodness, than worldlings can do, when their wheat, wine, and oyl aboundeth, Psalm 4. 7. and 53. 17. Yea, he can speak it out of experience, that as in pro∣phane joy, even in laughter the heart is sorrowful: so in godly sorrow, even in weeping, the heart is light and chearful. The face may be pale, yet the heart may be calm and quiet. So St. Paul, as sorrowing, yet always rejoycing, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Our cheeks may run down with tears, and yet our mouth sing forth praises. And so on the contrary, Where (O God) there wants thy grace, Mirth is only in the Face, 2 Cor. 5. 12. Well may a careless worldling laugh more, as what will sooner make a man laugh than a witty jest, but to hear of an Inheritance of an hundred pounds a year, that is faln to a man, will make him more solidly mer∣ry within. Light is sown to the righteous, and joy for the upright, Psal. 97. 11. My servant, saith God, shall sing and rejoyce: but they shall weep, &c. Isai. 65. 14. Indeed we are not merry enough, because we are not Christians e∣nough, because sin is a cooler of our joy, as water is of fire. And like the worm of Jonah his gourd, bites the very root of our joy, and makes it wither: Yea, sin like a damp, puts out all the lights of our pleasure, and deprives us of the light of Gods countenance, as it did David, Psalm 51. 12. and 4. 6. So that the fault is either; First, in the too much
sensuality of a Christian, that will not forego the pleasures of sin, or the more muddy joyes and pleasures of this world, which are poysons to the soul, and drown our joyes, as Bees are drowned in honey, but live in vine∣gar. Men would have spiritual joy, but withal they would not part with their carnal joy: Yet this is an infallible Conclusion, There is no enjoying a worldly Paradise here, and another hereafter. Or secondly, The fault is in the taste, not in the meat; in the folly of the judgment, not in the Pearl, when a Grain of Corn is preferred before it. To taste spiritual joyes, a man must be spiritual; for the Spirit re∣lisheth the things of the spirit; and like loveth his like. Between a spi∣ritual man, and spiritual joyes, there is as mighty an appetite and enjoy∣ing, as between fleshly meat, and a carnal stomack. Therefore the want of this taste and apprehension condemneth the world to be carnal, but mag∣nifies the joyes spiritual, as being above her carnal apprehension. Or, Thirdly, Herein lies the fault; few feel these joyes in this life; be∣cause they will not crack the shell, to get the kernel: they will not pare the fruit, to eat the pulp? nor till the ground, to reap the Harvest. They fly the Wars, and thereby lose the glory of the Victory▪ They will not dig the craggy Mountain to find the Mine of Gold: nor prune the Vine, therefore enjoy not the fruit. They fly Mortification, and therefore at∣tain not the sweet spiritual Consolation, which ever attends the same. And so much for the Reasons. The Use may be manifold. CHAP. XXII. Sect. 1. FIrst, Is it so, that the torments of Hell are so exquisite? even worse than the pangs of death, or child-birth, scalding lead, drinks of gall and wormwood, griping of chest-worms, fits of the stone, gout, strangury, flames of fire and brimstone? Yea, are all these, and all other pains that can be named put together, but shadows and flea∣bitings to it? And are they to be endured everlastingly? And are all Fornicators, Idolaters, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Swearers, Raylers, Fearful and Unbelieving persons, Murtherers, Sorcerers, Lyars, and all Un∣righteous persons to have their part and portion in that Lake? And withal lose their part and portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Word of God expresly tells us? Rev. 21. 7, 8. and 22. 14, 15. How is it that we are not more affected therewith? The only reason is, most men are so far from believing the Word of God in this point, that they do not believe there is a God. The Fool, says David, hath said in his heart there is no God, Psalm 53. 1. They, meaning the wicked, think always there is no God, Psalm 10. 4. to 14. And the reason follows, His ways always prosper, Psalm 73. 3. to 21. And hence it is, that they live like beasts, because they think they shall die like beasts, without any answer for what they have either acted or left undone; and accordingly resolve, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die, as the Holy Ghost hath acquainted us with their inmost thoughts, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Whereas if men did believe either Hea∣ven or Hell, they could never so carelesly hazard the losing of the one,
or the procuring of the other. As, oh the madness of these men! that cannot be hired to hold their finger for one minute in the weak flame of a farthing candle, and yet for trifles will plunge themselves body and soul into those endless and infinitely scorching flames of Hell-fire. If a King but threatens a Malefactor to the Dungeon, to the Rack, to the Wheel, his bones tremble, a terrible palsie runs through all his joynts: but let God threaten the unsufferable Torments of burning Tophet, we stand unmoved, undaunted. And what makes the difference? the one we believe as present, the other is, as they think, uncertain and long before it comes, if ever it do come. Otherwise it could not be, since the soul of all sufferings are the sufferings of the soul; since as painted fire is to material, such is material to Hell-fire. Men may say, they believe there is an Hell, and a Heaven, but surely they would never speak as they speak, think as they think, do as they do, if they thought that their thoughts, words, and actions should ever come to Judgment. If men believed that Heaven were so sweet, and Hell so intolerable as the Word makes them, they would be more o∣bedient upon Earth. The Voluptuous and Covetous would not say, Take you Heaven, let us have Mony, Pleasure, &c. Sect. 2. True, there are none so confirmed in Atheism, but some great danger will make them fly to the aid of a Divine Power, as Plato speaks, Extremity of Distress, will send the prophanest to God: as the drowning Man stretcheth out his hand to that Bough, which he comtem∣ned whiles he stood safe on shore. Even Sardanapalus, for all his bold denying of a God, at every hearing of a thunder, was wont to hide his head in a hole. Yea, in their greatest jollity, even the most secure heart in the world, hath some flashes of fear, that seize on them like an Arrest of Treason. At least on their Death-beds, had they as many Provinces as Ahashuerosh had, they would give an hundred six and twenty of them, to be sure there were no Hell, though all their life they supposed it but a fable. And this makes them fearful to die, and to die fearfully. Yea, how oft do those Russians that deny God at the Tap-house, preach him at the Gallows? and confess that in sincerity of heart, which they oppugned in wantonness? And certainly, if they did not at one time or other believe a God, a day of Judgment, a Heaven and an Hell, they should be in a worse conditi∣on than Felix or Belshazzar; yea, than the Devils themselves; for they believe them, yea, quake and tremble to think of them, as being still in a fearful expectation of further degrees of actual torments, Matth. 8. 29. However, admit their lethargized consciences be not awakened, until they come into Hell, as God not seldom leaves them, to be confuted with fire and brimstone, because nothing else will do it, yet in Hell they shall know, there is a righteous Judge that will reward every man according to his deeds; and confess that what they once vainly imagined was but ima∣gined. There may be Atheists on earth, there are none in hell. Vengeance shall make them wise, whom sin hath made and left foolish.
A Pope of Rome being upon his Death-bed, said to those about him, Now come three things to tryal, which all my life I made doubt of; Whether there be a God, a Devil, and whether the Soul be immortal. 'Twas not long ere he was fully resolved with a vengeance: and so shall you, O ye fools, when that hour comes, though you flatter your selves for the present. When you feel it, you will confess it; and when it is too late, you will like a Fool say, Alas I had not thought. For this is the difference between a Fool and a Wise man, A wise man, (saith Solomon) foreseeth the evil (the evil of Hell, says Bernard) and preventeth it; but fools go on and are punished, Prov. 22. 3. Acknowledge thy self a Fool then, or bethink thy self now, and do thereafter, without delaying one minute: For there is no Re∣demption from Hell, if once thou comest there. And there thou mayest be (for ought thou knowest) this very day; yea, before thou canst swal∣low thy spittle: Thy Pulse may leave beating, before thou canst fetch thy breath. Sect. 3. But to speak this to the Sensualists, is labour in vain: For their consciences are so blinded, that they (as they think) do believe an heaven and an hell, yea, in God, and in Christ, as well as the precisest, Joh. 4. 38, 39, 46, 47. For it is hard for men to believe their own unbelief in this case. They that are most dangerously sick, are least sensible of their being sick. A very likely matter thou believest in Christ, and hopest to be saved by him, when thou wilt neither imitate his actions, nor follow his precepts. How does this hang together? Let me ask thee a question or two, that may convince thee of thy unbelief: If a Physician should say to his Patient, Here stands a Cordial, which if you take, will cure you; but touch not this other Vial, for that is deadly poyson; and he wittingly refuseth the Cor∣dial to take the Poyson, will not every one conclude, That either he be∣lieved not his Physician, or preferred Death before Life. If Lots Sons in law had believed their Father, when he told them the City should sud∣denly be destroyed with fire and brimstone, and that by flying they might escape it, they would have obeyed his counsel. If the Old World had be∣lieved that God would indeed, and in good earnest, bring such a flood upon them as he threatned, they would have entred the Ark, and not have scoft at Noah for building it. So if you did firmly believe what God in the Scriptures speaks of Hell, you would need no entreaties to avoid the same. Sect. 4. But alas, men of thy condition are so far from believing what God threatens in his word against their sins, that they bless themselves in their hearts, saying, We shall have peace although we walk according to the stubbornness of our own will; so adding drunkenness to thirst, Deut. 29. 19. Yea, they prefer their condition before others, who are so abstemious, and make conscience of their ways, thinking that they delude themselves with needless fears and scruples, 2 Kings 18. 22, 30, 33, 35. Alas, if they did in good earnest believe, that there is either God or Devil, Heaven or Hell, or that they have immortal souls, which shall everlastingly live in bliss or woe, and receive according to what they have
done in their bodies, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10. They could not but live thereafter, and make it their principal care how to be saved. But alas, they believe that they see and feel, and know they believe the Laws of the Land, and know that there are Stocks and Bridewels, and Goals, and Dungeons, and Racks, and Gibbets, for Malefactors; and this makes them abstain from murther, felony, and the like; but they believe not things invisible and to come: For if they did, they would as well, yea much more fear him that hath power to cast both body and soul into hell, as they do the temporal Magistrate, that hath only power to kill the body; they would think it a very hard bargain, to win the whole world, and lose heaven, and their own souls, Luke 9. 25. Men fear a Gaol, more than they fear Hell; and stand more upon their silver or sides smarting, than upon their souls; and regard more the blasts of mens breath, than the fire of Gods wrath; and tremble more at the thought of a Sergeant or Bayliff, than of Satan and everlasting perdition: Else they would not be hired with all the worlds wealth, multiplyed as many times as there be sands on the Seashoar, to hazard, in the least, the loss of those everlasting Joys before spoken of, or to purchase and plunge themselves into those easless and everlasting flames of fire and brim∣stone in Hell, there to fry body and soul, where shall be an innumera∣ble company of Devils and damned Spirits to affright and torment them, but not one to comfort or pity them. Confident I am, thou wouldst not endure hereto hold thy hand in a fiery crucible the space of a day, or an hour, for all the worlds wealth and splendour: How then (if thou bethinkest thy self) wilt thou hereafter endure that, and ten thousand thousand time more for millions of millions of ages? Look Rev. 20. 10. and bethink thy self, how thou wilt brook to be cast into a doleful disconsolate dungeon, to lie in utter darkness in eternal chains of darkness, in a little ease, at no ease for ever and ever. Canst thou endure to dwell with the devouring fire, with the everlasting burning. Sect. 5. Wherefore let me, my Brethren, beseech you not to be such A∣theists and Fools as to fall into Hell before you will fear it, when by fear∣ing it, you may avoid it, and by neglecting it, you cannot but fall into it. What though it be usual with men, to have no sense of their souls till they must leave their bodies? yet do not you therefore leap into Hell to keep them company, but be perswaded to bethink your selves now, rather than when it will be too late, when the Draw-bridge will be taken up, and when it will vex every vein of your hearts, that you had no more care of your souls. Yet there is grace offered, if we will not shut our hearts and wills a∣gainst it, and refuse our own mercy: but how long God will yet wait thy leisure, or how soon he will, in his so long provoked Justice, pro∣nounce thy irrevocable sentence, thou knowest not; nor canst thou pro∣mise thy self one minutes time. Oh that men would believe the God of truth (that cannot lye) touch∣ing spiritual and eternal things, but as they do these temporary and transitory? Oh that thou who art the sacred Monarch of this mighty Frame, wouldst give them hearts to believe at least thus much, That
things themselves are in the invisible World, in the World visible, but their shadows only! And that whatsoever wicked men enjoy here, it is but as in a dream; their plenty is but like a drop of pleasure, before a River of sorrow and displeasure: And whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery before a River of mercy and glory. That though Thou, the great and just Judge of all the World, comest slowly to Judgment, yet Thou wilt come surely. As the Clock comes slowly and by minutes to the stroak, yet it strikes at last. That those are only true Riches, which being once had, can never be lost. That Heaven is a Treasure worthy our hearts, a Purchase worthy our lives: That when all is done, how to be saved is the best plot. That there is no mention of one in the whole Bible that ever sinned without repentance, but he was punished without mercy. For then there would not be a Fornicator, or prophane person, as Esau, who for a portion of meat sold his inheritance, Heb. 12. 16. Then they would not be of the number of those, that so doted upon Purchases, and Farms, and Oxen, that they made light of going to the Lords Supper, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. Nor of the Gadarens mind, who preferred their Hogs be∣fore Christ. Then would they know it better to want all things, than that one needful thing; whereas now they desire all other things, and neg∣lect that one thing which is so needful. They would hold it far better, and in good sadness to be saved with a few, as Noah was in the Ark than in good fellowship, with the multitude, to be drowned in sin, and damned for company. Nor would they think it any disparagement to their wisdoms, to change their minds, and be of another judgment to what they are. CHAP. XXIII. Sect. 2. SEcondly, Are the Joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious? How then should we admire the love and bounty of God, and bless his Name, who for the performance of so small a work, hath propo∣sed so great a Reward? And for the obtaining of such an happy state, hath imposed such an easie Task. Yea more, is Heaven so unspeakably sweet and delectable, is Hell so unutterably doleful? Then let nothing be thought too much that we can either do or suffer for Christ, who hath freed us from the one, and purchased for us the other. Though indeed, no∣thing that we are able to do or suffer here, can be compared with those woes we have deserved in Hell, or those joys we are reserved to in Hea∣ven. And indeed, that we are now out of Hell, there to fry in flames of fire and brimstone, never to be freed; that we have the free offer of Grace here, and everlasting glory hereafter in Heaven, we are only behold∣ing to him. We are all by nature, as Traytors, condemned to suffer eternal torments in Hell-fire, being only reprieved for a time: But from this ex∣tremity, and eternity of torment, Jesus hath freed and delivered us. O think then! yea, be ever thinking of it, how rich the mercy of our Redeemer was in freeing us; and that by laying down his own life to redeem us. Yea, how can we be thankful enough for so great a blessing? It was a mercy bestowed, and a way found out, that may a∣stonish all the sons of men on Earth, and Angels in Heaven. Which be∣ing
so, let us study to be as thankful as we can. Hath Christ done so much for us, and shall we deny him any thing he requireth of us? Nor can any one in common reason meditate so unbottomed a love, and not study and strive for an answerable and thankful demeanour. If a Friend had given us but a thousandth part of what God and Christ hath, we should heartily love him all our lives, and think no thanks sufficient: What price then should we set upon Jesus Christ, who is the Life of our lives, and the Soul of our Souls? Do we then for Christs sake, what we would do for a Friends sake. Yea, let us abhor our selves for our former un∣thankfulness, and our wonderful provoking of him. Hearken we unto Christs voice, in all that he saith unto us, without being swayed one way or another, as the most are? Let us whom Christ hath redeemed, express our thankfulness, by obeying all that he saith unto us, whatever it costs us, since nothing can be too much to endure for those pleasures which shall endure for ever. As, Who would not obtain Heaven at any rate, at any cost or trouble whatsoever? In Heaven is a Crown laid up for all such as suffer for Righteousness, even a Crown without cares, without rivals, without envy, without end; And is not this reward enough for all that Men or Devils can do against us? Who would not serve a short Apprenticeship in Gods service here, to be made for ever free in glory? Yea, who would not be a Philpot for a month, or a Lazarus for a day, or a Stephen for an hour, that he might be in Abrahams bosome for ever? Nothing can be too much to en∣dure, for those pleasures that endure for ever. Yea, what pain can we think too much to suffer? What little enough to do, to obtain eter∣nity? For this incorruptible Crown of Glory in Heaven? 1 Pet. 5. 4. where we shall have all tears wiped from our eyes; where we shall cease to sorrow, cease to suffer, cease to sin, where God shall turn all the wa∣ter of our afflictions, into the pure wine of endless and unexpressible comfort. You shall sometimes see an hired servant, venture his life for his new Master, that will scarce pay him his wages at the years end; and can we suffer too much for our Lord and Master, who giveth every one that ser∣veth him, not Fields and Vineyards, as Saul pretended, 1 Sam. 22. 7. &c. nor Towns and Cities, as Cicero is pleased to boast of Caesar, but even an hundred-fold more than we part withal here in this life, and eternal Man∣sions in Heaven hereafter, John 14. 2. St. Paul saith, Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causeth us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Where note the incomparable and infinite difference, between the Work and the Wages; light affliction, receiving a weight of Glory; and momen∣tany affliction eternal glory. Suitable to the reward of the wicked, whose empty delights live and die in a moment; but their unsufferable punishment is interminable and endless. Their pleasure is short, their pain everlasting; our Pain is short, our Joy eternal. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for when he is tryed, he shall receive the Crown of life, James 1. 12.
folly is it then, or rather madness, for the small pleasure of some base lust, some paltry profit, or fleeting vanity (which passeth away in the very act, at the taste of a pleasant drink dieth so soon as it is down) to bring upon our selves in another world, torments without end, and beyond all compass of con∣ceit? Fourthly, Is it so? that God hath set before us life and death, heaven and hell, as a reward of good and evil; leaving us as it were to our choice, Whether we will be compleatly and everlastingly happy or miserable: with what resolution and zeal should we strive, to make our calling and ele∣ction sure? not making our greatest business, our least and last care. I know well, thou hadst rather when thou diest, go to reign with Christ in his Kingdom for evermore, than be confined to a perpetual prison or Furnace of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented with the Devil and his An∣gels: If so, provoke not the Lord, who is great and terrible, of most glori∣ous Majesty, and of infinite purity: and who hath equally promised sal∣vation unto those which keep his Commandments, and threatned eternal death and destuction to those who break them. For as he is to all repentant sinners a most merciful God, Exod. 34. 6. so to all wilful and impenitent sin∣ners, he is a consuming fire, and a jeaious God, Heb. 12. 29. Deut. 4. 24. There was a King, who having no Issue to succeed him, espied one day a well favoured and towardly Youth, he took him to the Court, and com∣mitted him to Tutors to instruct him, providing by his Will, that if he proved sit for Government, he should be Crowned King; if not, he should be kept in Chains, and he made a Galley slave. The Youth was misled, and neglected both his Tutors good Counsel, and his Book, so as his Master corre∣cted him, and said, O that thou knewest what honour is prepared for thee! and what thou art like to lose by this thy idle and loose carriage! Well, thou wilt afterwards, When 'tis too late, sorely rue this. And when he grew to years, the King died, whose Council and Executors perceiving him to be utterly unfit for State Government, called him before them, and decla∣red the Kings will and pleasure, which was accordingly performed; for they caused him to be fettered, and committed to the Galleys, there to toil, and tug at the Oar perpetually, where he was whipt and lasht, if he remitted his stroke never so little; where he had leisure to consider with himself, that now he was chained, who might have walked at li∣berty; now he was a slave, who might, if he would, have been a King; now he was over-ruied by Turks, who might have ruled over Christians. The thought whereof could not but double his misery, and make him bewail his sorrow with tears of blood. Now this hereafter will be the case of all careless persons, save that this comes as short of that, as Earth comes short of Heaven, and temporary misery of eternal. Wherefore if thou wouldst have this this to become thy very case, go on in thy wilful and perverse impenitency; but if not, bethink thy self, and do there∣after, and that without delaying one minute: For there is no redemption from Hell, if once thou comest there: And there thou mayst be (for ought thou knowest) this very day, yea before thou canst swallow thy spittle, if thou diest this day in thy natural condition.
Many men take liberty to sin, and continue in a trade of sin, because God is merciful: but they will one day find that he is just as well as merciful. There is mercy with God (saith the Psalmist) that he may be feared, not that he may be despised, blasphemed, &c. Psalm 130. 4. Yea, know this, and write it in the Table book of thy memory, and upon the ta∣ble of thy heart. That if Gods bountifulness and long suffering towards thee; does not lead thee to repentance, it will double thy doom, and encrease the pile of thy torments. And that every day which does not abate of thy reckon∣ing, will encrease it: And that thou by thy hardness and impenitency, shalt but treasure up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and the De∣claration of the just judgment of God, Rom. 2. 4, 5, 6. Now this Judge hath told us, that we must give an account for every idle word we speak, Mat. 12. 36. much more then for our wicked acti∣ons; therefore beware what thou dost against him. Men may dream of too much strictness in holy courses, but they do not consider the power, the purity, and strictness of the Judge. He who brings even idle words to judgment, and forgets not a thought of diso∣bedience, how will he spare our gross negligence and presumption? how our formality and irreverence in his service, much more our flagi∣tious wickedness, Heb. 12. 29. Sect. 3. Wherefore, as you ever expect or hope for Heaven and Salva∣tion, as you would escape the tormenting flames of Hell-fire, cease to do e∣vil, learn to do well. For Sanctification is the way to Glorification, Ho∣liness to eternal happiness. If we would have God to glorifie our bodies in Heaven, we also must glorifie God in our bodies here on Earth. And now for conclusion: Are the Joys of Heaven so unspeakable and glorious? the torments of Hell so woful and dolorous? Then it behoves all Parents and Governours of Families, to see to their Childrens and Ser∣vants souls, and that they miscarry not through their neglect. As tell me, Will not their blood be required at your hands, if they perish through your neglect? Will it not be sad to have Children and Servants rise up in judgment against you, and to bring in Evidence at the great Tribu∣nal of Christ? saying, Lord, my Father never minded me, my Master never regarded me; I might sin, he never reproved me; I might go to Hell, it was all one to him. Will not this be sad? Secondly, If it be so, let Children and Servants consider, that 'tis bet∣ter to have lust restrained, than satisfied: 'tis better to be held in, and re∣strained from sin, than to have a wicked liberty. Be not angry with those who will not see you damn your souls, and let you alone: they are your best Friends. Fear the strokes of Gods anger, be they spiritual or eternal, more than the strokes of men. What's a Fetter to a Dungeon? a Gallows to Hell-fire? Give not way to imaginary, speculative, heart-sins: Murther in the heart, uncleanness in the eye, and thoughts given way to, will come to actu∣al murther, and bodily uncleanness at last. Keep Satan at a Distance; if he get but in, he will be too hard for you. And let so much serve to have been soken of Heaven and Hell.
Upon the one I have stood the longer, that so I might, if God so please, be a means to save some with fear, plucking them out of the fire of Gods wrath, under which, without repentance, they must lye everlastingly. And for the other, I have, like the Searchers of Canaan, brought you a cluster of Grapes, to give the Reader a taste thereby, of the plentiful vintage we may expect, and look for in the heavenly Canaan. Now if any would truly know themselves, and how it ill fare with them in the end, let them read the whole Book, out of which this is taken, viz. The whole duty of a Christian. Which Book is Licensed by John Dewname and Thomas Gataker. FINIS. LONDON, Printed at the Charge of Christs-Hospital, according to the Will of the Donor, 1677.
