Y97 09456479 43165
The Young Bastards Wish, A SONG To the Tune of the Old Mans Wish I. IF I live to be King, as the world knows I hope, I'll hang up the Bishops, L'Estrange, and the Pope; My Father and Uncle, shall be the first Prey, That I'll Murder upon my great Coronation Day. I'll Govern three Kingdoms with absolute sway, Grant Lisence for Whoring each Q. Bess— day, Ambition and Faction shall never decay, shall never decay. II. Then e'ry Buffoon that the Rout can afford, I'll quickly create him a Knight or a Lord: Then court them with Congys, & smile on my Train▪ And swear by my Maker I ever shall Reign. I'll Govern, &c. III. I'll give them Commissions their States to possess, Of e'ry Lord, Duke, Great Peer and Marquess: The Bishops and Clergy, I'll hang up in Chains, Till none but the Saints of my Party Remains. I'll Govern, &c. IV. And when thus Establish'd all things to my Ends, I'll hang up the Chief of my created Friends: When three parts o'th' Nation, is fall'n in my power, 'll burn down the City, Demolish the Tower. I'll Govern, &c. V. And each Corporation that strength can afford, Shall yield me Allegience, or dye by the Sword; As Nero did Rome the Nation I'll burn, Till each City dreads that the next is her turn. I'll Govern, &c. VI. All this by the power of the Rout I'll perform, And those that opposes I'll hang up in scorn; And Laugh at their Nonsense that sat me on Throne Till no Man dare say that his Life is his own. I'll Govern, &c. VII. Then next I'll Debauch the sweet Wife of my Friend, And ravish ten Sisters where none dare contend: Each Night a true Virgin shall come to my Bed If false, the next Morning I'll cut off her Head., I'll Govern, &c. VIII. The Daughters of those that I hang'd for my Father, Shall all be my Misses and Brood that comes after; Their Lives may be 'lustrious in process of time, As Pious and Powerful as this Life of mine. I'll Govern, &c. IX. Danvers, I'll make him my Master of Horse, And Argile in Scotland Command all my Force; And Grey the Lieutenant of Ireland I'll send, And my Palace in Kent-street in Southwark shall stand. I'll Govern, X. No Parliament Rumps for fear of some Trick, Lest they hang me, or serve me like Olivers Dick; But as many Wenches the best I can Choose; As will fill up VVestminster, VVhite-Hall and the Muse. I'll Govern three Kingdoms with absolute sway, Grant Lisence for Whoring each Q. Bess— day, Ambition and Faction shall never decay, shall never decay. London Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-Street near Newport-House in Leicester-fields, 1685
