G645 12603380 64227
THE K. of France. The k. of Eng.
Good and bad Newes FROM JRELAND: In a Letter of Credit from YOUGHALL, Not forged, as are most of Pamphlets lately Published. The Particulars are these The good Newes. The Relieving of Youghall, by Sir Charles Vavasor. The Defeate of 800. Rebels at Bandonbridge, by my Lord of Kilmeakell. The Reliefe of Corke by my Lord President of Munster. The Bad Newes. The Revolt of Waterford and Lymericke, and the losse of the Castle of Piltowne, which Castle put Sir Charles Vavasor to a hard taske to relieve Youghall. London, Printed for Nath: Butter, at Saint Austens Gate in Pauls Church-yard, at the Signe of the Pide Bull. March 14. 1641.
Good and Bad Newes, FROM IRELAND: In a Letter of Credit from YOVGHALL not forged as are most of Pamphlets lately Published. SIR, IT is no small joy unto us here, that Sir Charles Vavisor is well arrived with his Regi∣ment, which putteth us in heart againe; wher∣as otherwise, wee could not have held the Towne much longer: For amongst other our wants, the want of fuell was none of the least, for wee had no coale came a long time out of Wales, and the River was so commanded all downe from Capperquin by the Rebels, that no wood could come downe. They have taken
the Castle of Piltowne, and come in multitudes every day, to the Ferry Banke, which is within Musket-shot of the Towne, on the otherside of the water; and since the revolt of Water-ford they have gotten three Peeces of Ordnance, which they have planted on Piltowne land, to blocke up the harbour, so as Sir Charles Vavisor got in with much adoe. The losse of Waterford is a great losse unto us; for besides that it is a strong Maritine Towne, it had in it 56. Peeces of Ar∣tillery; besides, as the rumour goeth, they were well stored with powder, and all other necessa∣ries; but I hope Waterford or Rosse shall doe us little hurt, so long as the Fort of Dunrannon hol∣deth out, where wee heare that Captaine Thomas Aston, and Captaine William Welden are arrived with two hundred men, which is a good supply for that place. My Lord of Kilmeakell at Ban∣donbridge hath played the part of a brave Gen∣tleman; for when neere eight hundred of the Rebels drew neere the Towne in a bravado, hee sallied out of the Town with one hundred and fif-foot, and about eighty horse, and gave them a charge, in wch he routed them, put them to flight, killed about an hundred, and tooke the Armes of about three hundred of them. Wee heare for certaine, that Limmericke is revolted, which is a strong Towne, and very rich, so as when our Army commeth over againe to retake it, there will be brave booty. My Lord of Mountgarret, in the county of Kilkenny, and Baron Loghman, in the county of
Tippary, are very strong, and imperious, and wee feared daily their approach, untill our new sup∣ply put life in us againe, which I hope will deterre them from assayling of us. My Lord President of Munster, hath with seven hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, made his retreat into Corke, which I feare not, but that hee will make good, untill such supplyes come, that hee be able to keepe the field, and the Fort at one end of the Towne, and Barriscourt, (which is a Castle of good strength) at the other end; it will being well manned, I beleeve will defend the Suburbs; but as for the Towne it selfe standing in an Iland, and well walled with navigable Rivers on each side, will hold a long siege without treachery, of the Papists in the Towne, which is feared, as it is our feare here, untill wee quit our selves of many of them, which also quitted our feare. My Lord of Dungarnon, and Sergeant Major Aplegard have beene very vigilant here, or else we had beene betrayed long long since: And had not my Lord of Corke nobly of his owne Te∣nants, on his owne charge have drawne downe two hundred men from Tallogh, and other parts to re-enforce our Garrison, so that by that meanes wee were a shelter to all the English Protestants that fled hither, to whom wee afford what reliefe wee are able, and furnish them with shipping for England. Wee shall now againe draw downe some Peeces of Ordnance to the little new Fort on the
Key; which was abandoned only for want of men to man it, and we hope when my Lord of Kery shall get a Regiment, hee will be appointed this way, where his experience of the countrey will leade him to doe the best service. If I knew any thing more in these parts for newes, I would certifie you of it, but having no∣thing else at present, but my best respects unto you, and duty to my Vncle Payne, my love to Cozens all, I take leave and rest. Youghall the 28. of February. 1641. Your obliged friend, and servant, Ia. Gibbes. FINIS.
