p2137a 99829859 34305
A PROPER LOOKING GLASSE FOR THE DAVGHTERS OF SION OR St. AVGVSTINES LIFE ABBRIDGED, AND reduced into points of Meditation. VVITH MEDITATIONS for a spirituall exercise at Cloth∣ings and Professions. By THOMAS CARRE their Confessour. POST NVB FT AT PARIS, M.DC.LXV.
THE 1. MEDITATION. HOVV HE VVANDERED from his heauenly Fathers hovvse, and by vvhat degrees. I. POINT. CONSIDER how their was a tyme when this great Saint (him∣selfe confessing it) being transported by the heate of youth, wandered out of his Fathers house euen into a land of extreame disproportion, and that by no other stepps or degrees,
but first by idlenes the sourse of all euills: heare his owne words: vvhen I grevv idle at home vvith my parents, the brambles of vn∣chaste desires grevv euen ouer my heade. (Waigh in particu∣lar the euils you may haue fallen into by it) secondly by ill compaignie vvhich moues vs, saith he, often to doe that vvhich vve should neuer doe alone, but vvhensoeuer it is said, let vs goe, and let vs doe this or that, vve are ashamed, and blush, if vve doe not shevv our selues to be past shame. AFFECTION. âh! how true it is, ô friendshippe, that we experience thee, often tymes, too too vnfriendly, nay euen a cruell seducer of our soules, for that which the Diuell by
himselfe cannot, by the mea∣nes of a friend he is able to effect. That deare name of louing and being beloued carries vs quite away to perdi∣tion. And idlenesse serues for nothing but onely to in∣uent, and suggest fewell to this consuming fire. Say my soule, is it no so indeed? RESOLVTION. Neuer will I more then intertayne such or such a thing for euer. I renounce you ô vaine and fruitelesse thoughts! I abiure you ô friuolous and detesta∣ble remembrances: I forsake you for ouer vnfaithfull and disloy all frindships, misera∣ble and lost seruices, mispent gratifications, displeasing and indeed paynefull pleasures. II. POINT. Consider that
the third steppe to Augustines ruine, was his neglect of his Mothers counsell, which see∣med to him but like old wiues fables, which, as he faith, he was ashamed to follow. Pon∣der how it is euen thus that all our miseries doe increase and ripen. we first waxe tepide and idle in Gods seruice; we spend tyme in imbraceing a masse of vaine thoughts and extraua∣gances; we then meete with a cōpanion of the same mould, whose equall follie doth fee∣de, and increase our fancie, and by litle and litle we are hurried on to a precipice of mischeife: Parents and friēds counsells are imployed to preuent our future woe, but are reiected: we are gone for euer, vnlesse Gods speciall
grace doe recalle vs! AFFECTION. Yes it is euen thus, ô my soule, that we run to ruine. the fancies of idle houres doe truly feede and increase our miseries: and what doth the communica∣tion of such fancies to others, but still more and more im∣poyson and ripen the desease of our mynds? and euen con∣firme our harts against that soueraigne remedie, the good Counsell of superiours and friends. RESOLVTION. Against idlenes, I will still haue in memorie, that vpon the good or bad vse of the moments of tyme which we now haue, a happie or accursed eternitie doth depend: and that a tyme will come that a moment of
tyme shall not be left to re∣pent in. Against bad compa∣nie, I will remember, that he vvho toucheth pitch shall be defyled vvith it: and that vvith the good vve shall be good; and vvith the peruerse vve shall be peruerted. Against the neglect of good counsell (which is a thing of so dan∣gerous a consequence, that the prouerbe assures (past coun∣sell past grace) I will haue these sacred lessons deeply imprin∣ted in my mynd. Want and ignominie shall be his share vvho forsakes discipline: but glorie to him vvho giues eare to one vvho doth counsell and correct. Prouerbs c. 13. and Prou. 29. Soudaine distruction shall ouertake, or fall vpon that man vvho vvith a stiffe necke
contemnes him vvho doth re∣prehend him. And these of S. Augustine. I thought it vvas onely she vvho spoke (meaning Saint Monica) but her vvords vvere indeed thyne (ô God) and in her person, thou vvast contem∣ned by me. I being old, and a Bishop, am readie to be taught by a child. Petition, Say with Salomon. Giue me ô Lord a Docile hart, a hart myld and supple, and readie to take the good tincture of wholsome counsell.
THE II. MEDITATION. Whither he vvādred, and vvhat miseries he mett vvithall in his vvandering pilgrimage. I. POINT. COnsider that he follo∣wed the stepps of the prodigall child, and with him arriued in a foraine Land, whither sin ledd him, and putt him into so great a dis∣tance from Gods helping hand, that he fell into the hands of theeues: my ene∣myes, saith he, did with me what euer they pleased; they beate me, they stript me naked, they defyled, cor∣rupted;
wounded, and euen killed me, and all this, becau∣se I departed from thee, and because I became a verie nothing without thee. AFFECTION and RESOLVT. Woe be to that audacious soule, who by leauing thee (ô Deare Lord) dares presume to hope to find out any thing els in heauen or in Earth not onely better then thee, or like to thee, but euen any thing tolerable without thee! Thou hast made vs to, and for thy selfe; thou hast endowed our soules with a capaciousnes capable of thy selfe, and our harts must needs be vnquiete, till they returne to thee, and repose in thee. Be they for∣saken for euer ô Lord, who forsake thee, may their names
be written vpon the grownd, that they haue abandoned thee, the veyne of liueing water. II. POINT. Consider that those enemyes of our good, hauing maymed vs, leaue vs not so; but obseruing that none comes in, to our succour they vilifie and contemne vs, they make their vvay ouer our bellies; they treade vs vnder feete, and with the filth of sinne defile Gods holy Temple, and leaue vs gasping vpon the ground, full of desolation, and worne out with sorrow. AFFEC. and RESOL. This sad truth Blessed Augustine fea∣red not to publish in the eares of all the world; and wee frequently fayle not to
experience in owne particu∣lars, if we make reflection, and yet alas, we endeuour not in good earnest to flie from the face of so cruell a foe, but euen without witt or feare, we trudge after them, being blind and naked and loaden with the chaynes of our sinns. They vvounded me and I gree∣ued not: they haled and trayled me after them, and I vvas not sensible of it! III. POINT. Consider that Augustins and our miseries find yet no periode; but growe vp to a higher excesse. We doe not onely by our flight from God fall into the power of our deadely foes, are stript, and wounded by them, (while yet we follow them without feare, and grow sen∣silesse)
but we euen fall in loue with our miserie, misfor∣tune, and seruitude. I vvas slaue and yet loued my slauerie: blind and yet desired my blind∣nes. In a word, to me bitter seemed svveet, and svveet bitter. AFFEC. and RESOLVT. A pittifull case! and yet this is the most comon and dange∣rous desease, of the banished sons of Eue. For who knowes not the eye which scandali∣seth, and inticeth vs to sinne, and yet who hath the cou∣rage to pull it out: Who sees not the hand which leads vs to iniquitie, and yet who re∣solues to cutt it off indeed, I meane the companions and occasions of euil; nay we im∣brace and hugge them, and seeme to haue our hart sliced
in peeces if we be deuided from them. O how strangly peruerse, and senselesly mad is the hart of man? Make a firme Resolution of a contrarie proceeding. THE III. MEDITATION A CONTINVATION OF the same subiect. 1. POINT. COnsider that we are not senselesse of our euil onely, and fall in loue with our miserie, but from the per∣uersenes of the same loue grovves lust; by often yealding to lust vve make a custome; and by not opposing to this
custome (which is a certaine law of sinne) vve grovv subiect to a kind of necessitie, vvherby the mynd of man (euen not vvilling) is dravvne and held as in chaynes, in bitter serui∣tude. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Thus farre was our Augusti∣ne gone, being carried downe by those stepps, euen to the verie bottome of Hell. And hither doe we also but too often finde our selues borne downe by the force of the streame. But oh what a labour had he, and haue we, to row backe againe? how did he turne and wind himselfe to breake his chaynes, and yet was still deteyned, and was suspended betwixt a dying to death, and a liuing to life:
whilst he so feared least he should be deliuered from all impediments, as he ought to haue feared the being hind∣red by them: whilst begging for chastitie, he was astrayd to be heard, least he should haue bene instantly deliuered from the desease of concu∣piscence. Whilst the violent custome of sinne shooke the garment of his soule made of flesh and blood, and spoke softly to him in this sort. Is it possible that thou canst thus dismisse vs? And from this instant shall we neuer more be with thee? And from this instant shall it neuer more be lawfull for thee, to doe this, or that, any more for euer? II. POINT. Consider that
while the violence of bad custome kept him captiue in sins Gaole, he mett with no∣thing but extreame miserie want, and famine. His noble and vaste vnderstanding was afforded nothing but huskes of swine to feed vpon, (and yet was barred to be satis∣fied euen with such trash) thas is idle perswasions of God and godly things, emptie fancies, glorious fic∣tions, which were serued vp deuoyde of that truth which alone is able to saciate it. AFFECTION and RESOR. Alas how often doe we hope to feed and fill our selues with such like trash, in lieu of solide and saciating truth, and we are therby onely puffed vp and swelled with
the wind and smoke of vani∣tie: which happens as often as we desire rather to appeare knowing then well doing; or aspire to high things aboue vs, with the neglect of the more profitable knowledge of our selues. Let me know thee, ô thou, who knowest me, let me know thee, and know my selfe and let all other knowledges which lead not to these, vanish like smoke. III. POINT. Consider that as his vnderstanding dis∣couered no true light while he liued amidst that seruile darkenes, but was ouer∣wrought with the inquirie of Truth without attayning to the knowledge therof, so did his will racke it selfe to meet
with and inioye Good, and yet could onely light on vnrest and disquiete. My soule hath turned and tossed it selfe vp and downe, vpon the backe, vpon the sides, and vpon the breast, and it hath found all things hard. For when I grew to obteyne my vnchaste desires, in the midst of my iollitie, I was tyed by miserable chaynes, that so I might be beaten with the burning rodds of iealousies, suspicions, feares, angers, brawles, &c. AFFECTION and RESOLV. And ô God how good thou wert to him, and how good thou art to vs in so doing, while being mercifully cruell, thou sprinklest all our vnlaw∣full pleasures with extreame
disgusts, (that so we may be drawne to the desire of see∣king true pleasures which haue no mixture of disgusts) so that we can find no perma∣nent rest euen in the most prosperous delights the world can boast. What meane we then still to trauaile and trudge on through these hard and paynefull wayes, where by one torment we purchace another: for we see and feele that the burden of sinne doth certainely and heauily op∣presse vs. We will therfore returne into our owne harts, and be reconciled and vnited to him that made vs; we will stand with him that we may stand fast; and repose in him, that we may be truly at rest.
THE IV. MEDITATION. Hovv he returned to his heauen∣ly Fathers house, and by vvhat stepps. I. POINT. COnsider that if Idlenes, bad compagnie, and ne∣glect of good counsell, did vn∣fortunately lead our B. Saint from his Fathers house; he returned as happily backe againe by the quite contrarie stepps. Run but ouer in your mynd the innumerable Trea∣tises and volumes which he wrote, and you will be so farr from cōceiuing he could be idle, that you will much
wonder when he could find tyme (the actions necessarie to his function, as preaching praying, &c. and the tyme spent in accōmodating neigh bour-iarrs being considered) euen, in a manner, to write them ouer, if you did not vn∣derstand by himselfe, that he was forced to steale it from his rest. I droue two workes at once, saith he, the one by day, the other by night tyme, when other imploy∣ments crouding in vpon me on all sides, did euen permitt me so to doe. AFFECTION, &c. See my soule, see, how now no mo∣ment is mispent, but contra∣rily by the good imployment of tyme, he redeemes lost tyme. The day is not enough
to pay the malice of his lost dayes, but the night must contribute to it too. He takes the busines of the whole world vpon his shoulders. He espouseth the solicitude of all the Churches with Saint Paule. and all his tyme is spent in putting a helping hand to their aggreeuances. II. POINT. Consider that as he imployed an admira∣ble good husbanding of tyme to recouer tyme lost, so doth hefly to good companie and counsell for a remedie against the infection of the badd companie, and the neglect of good counsell which he had vsed. To Saint Ambrofe first, who plentifully dispen∣sed antidores or counterpoy∣sons against the infections of
bad companie and counsell. or rather starued him with emptie huskes: Saint Ambro∣se fedd and filled him with the flovver of Gods vvheate which doth fatten: Wheras that made him stubborne and stiff necked: S. Ambrose brought him to be supple and tractable, vvith the smoothnes of Gods oyle. Wher∣as that, with vennimous cupps did intoxicate him. Saint Ambrose with the sober delight of Gods wine beget∣teing virgins, doth ingage his hart and regayne him. Next to Simplicianus, Saint Ambrose his Father, and to Potitianus, who recounting to him Saint Anthonies life which did so touch him at the hart, that he forceably
cryed out. The vnlearned men of the world doe teare heauen out of our hands, and we with our great knowledge, without braynes or courrage, are still content to wallow in flesh and bloud. AFFECTION. And why doe not we, my soule, obseruing in our selues the same errours, make vse of the same reme∣dies? why doe we not fly the occasions of euill, and spee∣dily lay hold vpon the occa∣sions of good compagnie, and good counsell? If in the one we meete with a moment of false delight, experience assures vs it is payd with houres, and dayes and yeares of discomfort and remorse of conscience, wheras in that
other we might euen here below haue some participa∣tion of heauen, and be left with our thoughts full of a solide and permanent de∣light, MEDITATION V. WHAT BEFELL HIM soone after his perfect conuersion to God. To vvitt a change vvrought by the hand of the highest. I. POINT. COnsider a soudaine and strange change of the hand of the highest, which happens to all who absolut∣ly
conuert themselues to God. It became sweete to me, saith he, to be depriued of the sweetnes of wordly toyes. What formerly I feared to loose, I now de∣parted from with ioy: For thou didst cast them from me, thou ô Lord, who art my true and prime sweetnes. Thou threwest them out, I say, and in lieu of them didst thy selfe enter, who art sweeter then all delightes (though not to fleshe and bloode) more sublime and high then all honour, but not to those who are high in their owne conceipt. AFFECTION. Take cour∣rage then, ô my soule, take courrage, God is not Au∣gustins God alone, but ours
also: the bowells of his fatherly mercy lyes open euen to vs too. His loue is not lessened, his arme is not shortened, Lets but in good earnest conuert our selues vnto him, and his goodnes cannot auert himselfe from vs. Be conuerted to me, and I vvill be conuerted to you saith our Lord. Let's but ab∣solutely dispossesse our selues of the world and worldly toyes, and he will in∣falliby inhabite our harts, possesse them of heauenly ioyes, and make vs expe∣rience a deare and delightfull change. II. POINT. Consider se∣condly, that he was restored to the libertie which by the slauerie of sinne he had lost.
Now, saith he, was my mynd freed from the biting cares, both of honor and riches, as also from procuring to welter in carnall sins, and prouoking the heate of lust. AFFECTION and RESOL. Oh what a change is this from that wherin he formerly found himselfe ingaged, when he said, now all the arguments which I was wonte to bring, were sol∣ued, and their remayned onely a speachles trem∣bling: and it (his soule) feared euen as death it selfe, to be restrayned from the course and fluxe it had longe taken towards sinne, wherby it was dayly pining away, and growing neerer to destruction. And againe I
turned and winded my selfe in my chayne, till such tyme as that litle which helde me, might be broken; but still it helde me. I was saying I would doe it, and euen almost did it, yet indeed I did it not, but remayned breathing neere the place, where I should haue bene. We often my soule find the same wrastling with flesh and blood, but lets be faithfull to Gods inspirations, and we shall also be restored to the same libertie. III. POINT. Consider thirdly, that as he is more and more remoued from the troubles and cares of the world, he approcheth neerer and neerer to the deare de∣lights of heauen, and inioying
the true libertie of the sons of God, I conuersed, saith he, in a familiar and tender manner, with thee, who art my beautie, my riches, my saluation, my Lord and my God. AFF. and RESOL. Marke ô my soule the delightfull de∣grees of this heauenly chan∣ge We are first touched and excited by grace being fal∣len; we are carried on by delight being risen; accom∣payned by delight we are lead to libertie, which affords vs wings of holy desire to flye vp and repose in the bosome of our dearely beloued, and shelter and solace our selues betwixt those sacred breastes of consolation, to which I will cling and nothing shall
be able to separate me. THE VI. MEDITATION Hovv absolutely he betooke him∣selfe to a good life. I. POINT. COnsider that no sooner was he restored to this blessed libertie; and had he receaued the Sacraments at Saint Ambrose his hands, but he began to lay the funda∣tion of a holy life, by bidding a most absolute Adieu, from the verie bo¦tom of his hart, (as saith Possidius) to all worldly pre∣tentions, nether now de∣sireing a wife nor sons of
his body, nor riches, nor worldly honors; but made a firme purpose to giue himselfe wholy to Gods ser∣uice, fasting, prayer and good workes, meditating day and night in the law of our Lord. saith Possidius. AFFECTIONS and RESOL. O my soule lets vs take the same resolution, and humbly confidently and perseuerant∣ly make vse of the same meanes, and we shall not fayle happily to be restored to Gods fauour. He who made vs without vs, will not saue vs without our consent and cooperation. we must worke then, not we alone, but Gods grace with vs. II. POINT. Consider that this resolution being taken
in generall, he found no bet∣ter way to sett vpon it in par∣ticular, then by selling what he had, and giuing it to the poore to follow Christe: take his owne word for it. I (saith he Epis. 89.) Who write these things, did vehe∣mently loue that perfection, wherof our Lord spoke when he said to the rich young man in the Gospell. Goe &c. and I imbraced it, not by myne owne strength, but by the assistance of his grace. AFFECTION and RESOL. Behold ô my soule how thy holy Patron springs on in the wayes of Gods counsells. Their is now no more cold cras crases to morow and to morow heard, but fourth with
he setts vpon it. No more halfe wills wherof the one serues to destroye the other but he resolutely, and vehe∣menly loues it. No more irre∣solution, as fearing into what hands he might putt him∣selfe, or that he might loose by the bargaine, but he sells and giues all that he hath. If we find our selues thus affec∣ted, how good reason haue we to reioyce in our Lord, but if contrarily, we be de∣laying, cold, irresolute, in what we haue vndertaken, how good reason haue we to spurre our selues on by his example. I will therfore &c. III. POINT. Consider that he did not build woode, haye, or stubble, that is ter∣reane preferments or respects
of flesh and blood vpon these holy fundations, but euen gold, siluer, and pre∣tious stones, (saith Possidius) that is, the most choyce christian vertues: to witt a feruent loue of God, intima∣ted by gold; the loue of the neighbour signified by siluer, and all the rest of the ver∣tues, imported by pretious stones. AFF. and RESOL. This is the paterne which our holy Patron left vs, let's examine how well we take it out. Is it thus indeed ô my soule that we build? Or rather doe we not heape negligences, tepi∣dities, vanities, and impuri∣ties of intention vpon the good fundation we haue layd? Are we not in verie
deed cold and slowe in the loue of God, and ther vpon, as carelesse of our neighbour, as though the care of him, had not at all bene com∣mended to vs? Let vs ther∣for in imitation of our good Patron say with him. Giue me, ô Lord, to loue thee, as much as I desire, and as much as I ought: and my neighbour for thee and in thee, &c.
THE VII. MEDITATION. Hovv he behaued himselfe in Faith. I. POINT. COnsider that he putt down with Saint Paule, whose best scholler he was, that Faith is the substance of things to be hoped for, an argument of things not appearing. or, as he saith in another place, it is the fun∣dation of all good things, the verie begining of mans saluation. It is an illustra∣tion of the mynd, by which it is illuminated by the Pri∣me
Light, to discerne spi∣rituall things. AFFECTION and RESOL. Doe we ô my soule, ayme at the true knowledge of spiri∣tuall things? doe we desire our saluation, or hope we for those eternall waights of glo∣rie, those ineffable things which appeare not to the eye; sound not to the eare, nor enter into the hart of man, which God hath pre∣pared for those that loue him? know then that it is by the benefit of the hea∣uenly light of Faith. That is the illumination, that, the fundation, that, the very substance and somme of all. II. POINT. Consider that he putt downe for his seconde ground, with the same
Apostle, that without Faith it is impossible to please God. I saith he, none shall be admitted into the number of the sons of God without it, None without it shall obtayne iustifying grace in this world, nor possesse eter∣nall life in the next, which is giuen to the loue of God alone. Nor can any loue, whom he knowes not, nor doth any know God, but he to whom it is reuealed by the Father, through faith in his onely son Christ Iesus. AFFECTION and RESOL. If without Faith we know not, without knowledge we loue not, without loue we remayne in the iawes of death; if in death there be no grace, nor without grace any hope of
glorie: If we haue no right to the denomination of sons, nor consequently iust Title, of Heyres. Oh of what con∣consideration ought faith to be with vs, how constantly ought we to imbrace it, how carefully to conserue it? For alas, if we misse to be num∣bered amongst the sons of God, we shall not misse to be counted amongst the slaues of the Diuell. III. POINT. Consider fur∣ther with him, that the be∣gining of our faith is from Christ, from vvhom, by vvhom and in vvhom are all things. It is not bought by our ri∣ches; procured by our in∣dustries, or giuen to our merits; but is a pure and free gift of Gods mercy to
which he is nether necessita∣ted, nor induced, saue onely by the abundance of his owne vncompelled goodnes. AFF. and RES. Blessed be thy goodnes for euer, ô my Lord God, who daynedst me with this great gift, whilst I nether deserued, nor desired, nor euen thought of it. Farre be it from me to extolle my selfe, to arrogate it to my self, as though I had had it of my selfe. Nay contrarily vpon the thought of that singular goodnes, I fall downe prostrate before thy Maiestie pronunceing in all humilitie, that he vvho doth glorie should glorie in our Lord.
THE VIII. MEDITAT. A CONTINVATION OF the same subiect. I. POINT. COnsider that though the begining of our faith be from God purely, and cannot be merited by vs, yet is the increase of it, (Gods grace being alwayes presupposed) left in our hands to be procured, by care and cultiuating, and by conti∣nually accompaigning it with good workes. We are not, to be as it were secure in faith, but we are to accompaignie a right faith with a right
life. The Apostles, saith he, had not left all, contem∣ning the hopes of the world, had they not had some faith: nor would they haue said, Increase our faith, had it alreadie bene perfect. AFFECTION and RESOL. Blessed be our good God, who doth not onely preuent vs with his benedictions, be∣fore we deserue, or yet thinke of them; but also gi∣ues vs power by concurring with his grace, to multiplie his good gifts, yea he hath euen charged vs to negotiate vpon them till he come. Lets vs not therfore be wan∣ting to our selues, since the increase is left in our owne hands. II. POINT. Consider that
though it be our part to make good vse of the good Talent which Gods grace freely bestowed vpon vs, and by that good vse to multi∣plie it, yet are we to know with our Saint, that as no man is sufficient of himselfe to be∣gin or perfect any good vvorke; so is none of himselfe able to begin or perfect faith. But the increase and perfection of it ought to be procured by our feruent and frequent prayers to the good Giuer, saying. AFFBCION and RESOLV. I beeseech thee, and in a most suppliant manner I im∣plore thy mercy (ô God who are the fountaine and sourse of all good things, the giuer and conseruer of all vertues) increase in me holy, right,
and immaculate Faith. And make me performe workes sutable to it, least a good faith may be defiled by vn∣cleane workes, and least I may deny thee, by a bad life, whom I confesse by a good beleife. I beleeue, ô Lord, Yet helpe my increadu∣litie. III. POINT. Consider fur∣ther with your holy Fa. that for want of good workes and feruent and frequent prayers, our Faith, in lieu of increa∣sing, falls into a deficiencie; it sleeps, waxes weeke and sicklie, yea dyes. Iesus some tymes sleeps in vs, (as he slept in the shippe) that is, our faith which is from Iesus sleeps in vs, and then the winds and waues of
temptation tosse vs too and fro. We must therfore awake Iesus, and the tempest shall be allayed, that is, we must recollect our faith, and call it to practlse. AFFECTION and RESOL. vve perish ô Lord vve perish, haue mercy vpon vs. For alas why doth our faith sleepe, but for want of being exci∣ted and stirred vp by feruent prayers? whence is it weeke and sickly, but for want of the nourishement of good workes? whence is it dead but that it is not quickned by charitie? We wil therfore Pray, worke, endeuour to loue God aboue all things, and our neighbour as our selfe, &c. and when all is done, we will ascribe all, not
to our owne strength, but to Gods grace. THE IX. MEDITATION. With vvhat modestie and hu∣militie he looked vpon mat∣ters of Faith. And hovv high a rate he putts vpon it. I. POINT. COnsider that he aduen∣tures not to diue into the knowledge of high mi∣steries with hereticall pride and presumption, as though witt were able to make way to all; but by a truly Catholike submission and modestie, vpon many occasions, he
makes open profession of his ignorance; acknowledges the difficultie to be great; knocks hard to haue helpe from heauen; putts downe for a caueat, to all, that it is better to be ignorant with safetie, then knowing with danger; And, that vnlesse we beleeue humbly, we shall not see clearely. AFFECTION and RESOL. Let vs beware, my soule, of bearing our heads too high, and of being proudely wise let vs be wise with so brietie, it is to the simple and hum∣ble litle ones that God giues grace, and reueales misteries shutt vp from the wise of the world, who vanish in their owne sense, and reputing themselues wise, are indeed
fooles. It is the simplicitie of beleeuing, not the viua∣citie of vnderstanding, which saues the troupes of Christians. Low layd then, ô Lord, in my poore nothing, humbly will I expect from thee, the knowledge of such truthes, as thy wisdome may see necessarie for thy glorie, and my eternall good. This is all I need, and all I desire. II. POINT. Consider the excellences and fruites of Faith, wherof the first is, that it makes the humble and simple man, see the most hidden misteries, though with an obscure light, perfectly and infallibly, without dis∣putation hesitation or doubt at all, Faith hath indeed eyes, saith he, yea eyes both
greater, stronger, and more powerfull: eyes which ne∣uer deceaued any; eyes which are alwayes fixed vpon our Lord: eyes finally which in some sort sees that to be true which as yet she sees not: and wherby she most certainly sees, that she doth not yet see what she beleeues. AFFECTION and RESOL. Who are not content with these eyes, haue, deseruedly, eyes, and see not, yea with open eyes run to their des∣truction, and descend into Hell aliue, because they would preferre their witt be∣fore the infallible guidance of Faith, which was the pro∣per guide giuen vs by God to direct our stepps in Chris∣tianitie.
O most blessed light, who art not seene, saue onely by most purifyed eyes, puri∣fie thes eyes of myne, that flying vanitie, they may dwel vpon VERITIE, and in thy light see light indeed. III. POINT. Consider that a seconde excellence of faith is, that it is the iust mans foode, or his iustice: be∣cause if he beleeues, he vseth precaution; if he vse precaution, he also begins to vse endeuour: and God knowes his endeuour, and lookes into his will, and ob∣serues his combat with the flesh: exhorts him to fight, helps him to ouercome, ex∣pects him strugling, sup∣ports him falling, crownes him ouercoming. O how
excellent a fruite of Faith is this! AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. Grant, ô Lord, that this Faith, which is the iust mans foode and life, may alwayes be found in me so vigourous and liuely, that by a wise precaution or fore-sight, I may looke ouer temporall, and fixe vpon eternall things. For those, vse my best en∣deuours; vpon the purchace of those, to spend my subs∣tance, for the attayning of those, to fight lawfully in his sight, who, after that good combat, and conseruation of faith, will bestow vpon me that crowne of iustice which (the same faith assuring) is layd vp for me, and such as loue his coming.
THE X. MEDITATION. A continuation of the fruites and excellencies of Faith. I. POINT. COnsider, as a third ex∣cellencie of Faith, that their are no greater riches, no greater treasures, no ho∣nors no substance of this world greater then the Ca∣tholike faith, which saues sinners, inlightēs the blind, cures the infirme, baptiseth the Cathecumenes, iustifies the faithfull, repaires the penitent, increaseth the iust, crownes Martirs, con∣serueth
Virgins, widowes, wiues in puritie, orders clarkes, consecrates Priests, prepars vs to the Kingdome of heauen, and makes vs partake with the Angells in that eternall inheritance. AFFECTION and RESOLV. See then my soule, how when we thinke to haue left all, we possesse all: nay while we thinke to haue lost all by persequution we inioy all more happily, while our Faith, which is the greatest riches, honor, substance of this world, is not impaired but increased by it. They may robbe vs of our riches, yet while our faith is firme they touch not that aurum optimum, which is Charitie; They may depriue vs of
wordly honors, but not of that noble title of being the sons of God; They may order our substance to new Masters, but they cannot quelle our expectation, and hope of a better and permanent subs∣tance. II. POINT. Consider yet further that it is Christian faith, which doth rayse our thoughts, and conduct vs to the verie highth or topp of WISDOME AND TRVTH, the fruition vvherof is no other thing, then blessed life or BEATITVDE vvhich is neuer found saue onely in the discipline of our Catholike Mother. AFFECTION and RESOL. If Beatitude be that which all men incessantly seeke for,
and not finding can neuer rest; if it can neuer be found saue by the benefit of Faith alone, and faith can noe way be procured but by Gods free gift. What millions of prayses doe we owe to that infinite Goodnes, who freely bestowed this incomparable great gift of Faith vpon vs, which inables vs to see all good things? O how many hovv many vvould haue vvis∣hed to haue seene vvhat vve haue seene, and haue not seene it, &c. Benedicam Domino in omni tempore semper laus eius in ore meo. III. POINT. Consider for the last fruite or excel∣lencie, that though this Ca∣tholike faith Eagle-like is able to flie right vp and fixe
those stronge and vndazeled eyes of hers vpon the sun it selfe, and euen gaze vpon Maiestie; without being op∣pressed by glorie, yet doth she graciously accommo∣date her selfe to euery ca∣pacitie, be they litle, be they great, be they weake be they stronge, she hath foode wherwith to nourish them, to saciate them. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Yes heauenly father, because so it was pleasing in thy sight. These things thou didst hide from the prudent and wise of the world, and hast reuealed them to the litle ones, to those litle ones who seeke thee in simplicitie and humilitie of hart. The wisest (if they be wise indeed, and
walke not in wonders aboue them selues, and so vanish in their owne presumption) must be forced to make their reason stoope in obedience to Faith, humbly pronoun∣cing Credo, I beleeue what I am not able by witt to dis∣couer. And the least and simplest of the children of God, doth no lesse. ô diuine faith how excellent a Mistrisse thou art who in a moment canst persuade vs more whol∣some truthes then all the Aristotles in an Age.
THE XI. MEDITATION. Hovv he behaued himselfe in Hope, and vvhat motiues he had to imbrace it. I. POINT. COnsider with Saint Au∣gustine, that Faith in∣deed shewes vs faire things, and such as are worthy of all labour to obteyne them; Yet had we no Hope at all, whereby we might be inabled, as well to obteyne them, as to know them, we should ether not att all, or at least, verie weake∣ly loue the things, which by faith we discouer to be so beautifull. His faith was ther∣fore
accōpaigned with hope, vvhich is no other thing, then that, vvherby a man is encour∣raged to arriue at that vvhich he beleeues. AFFECT. and RESOLVT. Blessed be our good God, who doth not alone freely and without obligation or debt bestowe a power vpon vs, by Faith to see all good things a farre off, but by Hope maketh them in a man∣ner present, and as certaine as though alreadie possessed. Thou dost not onely giue vs a sight, and by that sight begetst in vs an appetite of a most excellent GOOD, but dost possesse vs also with a certaine expectation, of that future BEATITVDE, grounded vpon thy grace,
and our owne merits by the ayde there of. II. POINT. Consider with the same saint how our Hope is to be grounded and confir∣med in vs, and you will find that it is to be done by a good conscience. Let him, saith he, vvho hopes for the King∣dome of heauen, haue a good conscience, and to haue a good conscience, let him beleeue and vvorke. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Let vs not then, ô my soule, remayne secure in the cer∣taine knowledge we haue of God by Faith; nor in the strong confidence we haue to obtayne it by the helpe of Hope; but let vs, further, in good earnest, putt our hand to the worke, least a
good Faith and Hope, turne our aduersaries and confound vs, while we produce no ac∣tions proportionable to the infallible light, and certaine expectation which we had, by Gods gifts, which were not to be buried. III. POINT. Consider whervpon we are to fixe our Hope, and he will tell vs, that it is not to be placed, in present things, for they post on to passe by; nor in aduersitie, a kind of death; nor in prosperitie, for that is deceiptfully fawning; not in the whole earth, since we see that is turned topsie turuey, and is in a perpe∣tuall agitation; not in man, nor consequently in ones selfe, since we are but men.
Where then, Transcende thy selfe, and put thy selfe in his hands who made thee. AFFEC. and RESOL. Alas no, our hopes are not fixed, but tossed while they are placed vpon sublunarie and transi∣torie things, which are sub∣iect to a perpetuall vicissi∣tude and change, and ther∣fore that which is placed vpon them, must needs be subiect to the same motion and alteration. Where are the de∣lights vpon which yesterday we placed our Hopes? I say not where will they be when the world is past with its concupiscence; but where are they euen now, one moment after the possession? Where are they? Yesterday is turned
out of dores by this day pre∣sent; this present moment is pushed away by a succeeding one, and with it, that is snach from vs wheron our dearest hopes were fixed, wherwith we thought to haue fedd, but indeed famished, our decei∣ued hart. In thee therfore, ô Lord, from henceforth, will I repose my whole con∣sidence, and I will not be confounded for euer; Thou art that vnchangeable Good which is aboundantly satis∣factorie and yet art subiect to no change. Thou art that Truth, which can nether de∣ceiue nor be deceiued.
THE XII. MEDITATION What Christians are to hope for in this vvorld. 1. POINT. COnsider that if we be true Christians indeed, we ought to expect for no∣thing in this world but pres∣sures and persequutions wi∣thout hope of better tymes, being assured, by the Gos∣pell, that in the latter dayes many euils, scandalls, pres∣sures, and iniquities shall abounde. This is the condi∣tion of our present state and vocation, that therby being wayned from the loue of this
world, our hopes might be wholy sett vpon a better. AFF. and RESI.. What we suffer then, is no surprise made vpon vs, how strangly soeuer we looke vpon it. It is but the ignorance, or not reflection, of what we are, or ought to be, which makes vs impatient of our present condition. We are Christians, my soule, we were admitted vpon no other condition▪ then to be followers of Christ. If they persequuted him they will persequute vs too. The seruant is not greater then the Master. Truth deceaued vs not when he foretold vs, and willed vs to remember that he had foretold vs so▪ that for his sake, the world should hate vs, that for his
name we should be lead be∣fore Kings, &c. Nor can he deceaue vs when he saith. Blessed be they that suffer per∣sequution, &c. because theirs is the Kingdome of Heauen. II. POINT. Consider that if in the midst of thes tribu∣lations and pressures we lodge our confidence in the bosome of Gods prouidence, or in  the wounds of our Sauiours side, not man nor diuell will be able to hurt vs; Ne∣ther the one nor the other doth any thing but what God permitts them; nor doth he permitt them to attempt any thing against vs but for our aduantage. AFFECTION and RESOL. In thee, ô Lord, will I hope, and I will not be confounded
for euer. I will logde, as in an impregnable Castle, in the sacred holes of thy side, there will I repose without feare, there will I securely sleepe. If the wicked make warre against me, in this I hope. If the flesh make head against me, to this will I flie: If the Diuell barke and bale before my hart, by these holes will I haue recourse to the hart of my Sauiour; he will be with vs in the midst of our tribulations, because we call vpon him, he will de∣liuer vs and glorifie vs, re∣plenish vs with the length of dayes, and shew vs his sal∣uation. III. POINT. Hence lets consider, and euen putt downe. and print in a Chris∣tian
hart for a prime and infallible truth, that we Christians were not made for the world; nor for the goods of the tyme present, nor for that bewitching fe∣licitie which makes men forgett God: but for a cer∣taine happines, which God promiseth for the present, but man is not now capable of: because of it is said. Nether eye hath seene &c. AFFECTION and RESOL. Alas no my hart, nether are these momentarie Goods which we see our true Goods: nor these euils which we suffer our euils indeede. No: for of these goods we see the wicked most plenti∣fully possessed: with these euils we see the iust most
powerfully oppressed. Our Good indeed is the cheife Good, that onely, we are to hope for, that to loue alone: and our euil too is the sou∣ueraigne euil, that alone we are to feare and flie. Whence we are warned not to feare them that can onely kill the bodie, and can reach no fur∣ther, but to feare him, vvho can caste both body and soule into eternall fire.
THE XIII. MEDITAT. What motiues he tooke to confirme Hope. I. POINT. COnsider that the first motiue of our Hope, yea euen the sourse of all our motiues, is the infinite goodnes and Charitie of God, wherby he was moued to conuerse amongst vs. We ought not to be without Hope, but rather to presume in Christ with a great confidence; because if through charitie he is with vs in earth, by the same charitie we are with him in heauen, according
to that of the Apostle, Your life is hidden vvith Christ in God. Therfore he is yet below: we are alreadie aboue: He below by the compassion of Charitie; we aboue by the hope of Cha∣ritie. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Had we Christians yet reason to doubt with Salomon, vvhe∣ther God did dvvell amongst men, we might also fall into that deficiencie of Truth, that he vvalkes about the Poles of Heauen, and considers not our things: but being assured by Faith, that he left heauen to take vp his de∣lights amongst the sons of men, we cannot feare but he is full of goodnes for vs, through that goodnes loues
vs, and for that loues-sake would haue vs to loue him againe, and to be confident in him. I will therfore with the holy Patriarche hope euen against hope; and with the good Iob, hope in him Though he should kill me: because sure I am, what euer sense may seeme to suggest, he doth not loue and forsake. II. POINT. Consider that his seconde motiue was, not that he conuersed with vs onely, but euen became one of vs. What hath man to doe for whom God became man taking our humane na∣ture vpon him? This is my whole Hope and entire con∣fidence; for by this sacred vnion, euery one of vs hath a part or portion in Iesus
Christ, to witt flesh and bloode. AFFECTIONS and RESOL. Let vs then say with your holy Father, where a part of me raignes, their will I apprehend I raigne; where my flesh is glorified their I know I am glorious Though I am a sinner, I cannot be diffident in this communion of grace; for what my sinns prohibite, my substance exacts. He cannot forgett man which he beares a bout with him, and for our loue tooke vpon him. In him, we haue alreadie ascended the heauens; in him we are sett at the right hand of his heauenly father. O comfor∣table, and admirable, and ineffable motiue of mans
hope, and confidence in so sweete à Sauiour! II. POINT. Consider that his third moriue of hope, was, not so much that he conuer∣sed among vs, or was one of vs, as that he daigned to dye for our Loue. Be confident thou shalt attayne to his life, of glorie, vvho hast his death for a pledge of it. AFFECTION and RESOL. Let then the Diuell rage; the flesh reuoult; the world waxe madd against me. Let me heare nothing from them, but vvhere is novv thy God? as though I were quite for∣saken by him: yet wil I liue and dye in this confidence, that since he delightes to be vvith the sonnes of man, he cannot delight to abandonne
him to the rage of his enemye▪ any further then he discouers it for his aduantage. That since for the loue of man, he became man, he loues no man so litle as to loose him. That finally since he dyed for him, while he was yet an enemye, he will not now, sith he endeuours to be a seruant and a friend, leaue him a praye to his enemye. In ha spe dormiam & requiescam.
THE XIV. MEDITAT. Hovv he behaued him selfe in Charitie shevving first that vvithout Charitie all serues for nothing. I. POINT. COnsider that though Faith shew vs the good things, which nether eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, &c. and Hope giues vs a comfortable confidence that we shall attayne vnto them; yet shall we neuer walke home indeede, vnlesse Charitie giue vs feete. Thy Charitie is thy feete; with that thou art carried, where
so euer thou art carried: Thy two feete are the two pre∣cepts, of the loue of God and thy neighbour. Run to God with these feete, draw close to him: for he him∣selfe exhorts thee to run, and to that end enlightened thee with Faith, incourra∣ged thee by Hope &c. AFF. and RESOL. I playne∣ly see what euer Faith shewes me, and Hope assures me of, it is loue alone can make me happie. Without that, like the sicke man of the passie, I lye vncomfortably, vnpro∣fitably, I aduance not at all: vnlesse thy loue make me walke I stirre not. Grant me therfore to loue thee, as much as I desire, and as much as I ought. Let me be wholy in∣flamed
with the fire of thy Charitie, that I may loue thee with all my hart, yea with the verie marrow of my hart strings; that thou maist alwayes, and in all places, be in my hart, in my mouth, and before my eyes, till at length I may see thee for euer, face to face, in thy heauenly Sion. II. POINT. Consider that without true Charitie, all our workes are of no value, seeme they neuer so specious in the eye of the world. Charitie makes the distinctiō betwixt the sons of God and the sons of the Diuell. Let them signe themselues with the signe of the Crosse: Let them all answere, Amen: Let them all singe Allēluya.
Let them all be baptised. Let them all enter into the Church; and build vp the walls of the Church; by Charitie onely are the sons of God discerned from the sons of the Diuell. AFFECTION and RESOL. Let vs not deceaue our sel∣ues with the faire out-sides of things. All that is without loue, is without life. Whe∣ther we beleeue, or we hope, what the Catholike Church beleeueth and hopeth; and liue within the walls of the same Church, and with ioy say Amen to all that is said to it. Whether we watch, or fast, or preach or pray, it will not all auayle vs to eternall life, vnlesse all be both com∣manded and ordered by cha∣ritie.
Without this one neces∣sarie thing all the rest are lost. Diligam te Domine fortitudo mea, & refugium meum, & liberator meus, &c. III. POINT. Consider that as hauing Faith, and Hope, to∣gether with all the specious vvorkes imaginable, without Charitie wee haue nothing: so hauing Charitie, we want nothing. Where Charitie is what can be wanting, saith he, and where it is not, what can profit vs? The Diuell beleeues, and yet loues not: but none loues but he be∣leeues. One who loues not, may, though without effect, hope for pardon: but none that loues can despaire. where loue is therefor, Faith and Hope also necessarily
are. Let vs then keepe this precept of our Lord, and let vs but loue one another, and we shall not fayle to per∣forme what euer he com∣mands besids. For in this we haue what euer other thing there is. AFF. and RESOL. O God how true it was that Salomon said, when he professed, that together with wisdome all good things came vnto him: for what is wisdome, but a sauourie knowledge, a true relish of heauenly things, which is noe other thing then Charitie? This makes vs be∣leeue as we ought, hope as we ought, worke as we ought. This is one and all; vpon the purchace of which if a man imploye all his substance, he
shall repute it all, as nothing at all. Vpon this then will I settle my whole intentions vpon this spend all my medi∣tation, and thoughts, &c. THE XV. MEDITAT. VVHAT CHARITIE IS. I. POINT. COnsider what Charitie is, and you will receaue from Saint Augustine, that it is a loue of the cheife Good! or, Charitie is a vertue wher∣by we desire to see God, and to inioye him. Or yet more fully, Charitie is a mo∣tion of the soule to inioye God for his owne sake, and
ones selfe and his neigh∣bour for God. So that Cha∣ritie is a loue which lookes onely vpon God, or for God. AFFECTION and RESOL. Good God how sublime and noble an obiect! How worthy of a mans whole thoughts! Nay rather how farre is it aboue man, and who did im∣bolden him to take so high a flight? Ah! It was euen the same souueraigne Good which would haue it so. O Lord, what art thou to me, or what am I to thee, that thou shouldst commande me to loue thee? Yea and be angrie, and threaten to lay huge punishments vpon me if I loue the not? Ah! is it not of it selfe a great, and
euen the worst of miseries, if I loue thee not? II. POINT. Consider that as Faith and Hope are not fruites of this base soyle, so nor Charitie as by our en∣deuours, and substāces we are not able to purchace them, so nor this; but it is sent dovvne from heauen as the most excellēt of Gods gifts, saith he, (accor∣ding to that of the Apostle, Charitie is diffused in our harts by the holy Ghost vvhich is giuen to vs.) To wayne our harts from earth, and carrie them vp to heauen with her. AFFECTION and RESOL. O diuine and heauenly Cha∣ritie! Thy extraction is from Heauen; thy whole ayme or obiect is Heauen; thy whole imployment in earth is to
rayse our harts to Heauen; and, of earthly which we are, to make vs become hea∣uenly. O my soule let vs not loue our selues so litle, as not to imploy our selues wholy vpon this sacred loue. O loue which alwayes bur∣nest, and art neuer extin∣guished, ô Charitie which art my God, let me be wholy burnt with thy fire, that I may loue thee with all my hart, with all my soule, with all my strength; with all my aymes and in∣tentions, &c. III. POINT. Consider that though holy charitie, be a fruite originally of Paradi∣ce, yet being planted in our harts, by the singer of the holy Ghost, we are to husbād,
water, and increase it. For, saith S. August. is Charitie intirely perfect as soone as it is produced? No, but it is produced that it may be perfected. To witt, being produced it is nourished, by nourishment strengthened, by strength perfected. AFF. and RESOL. O let vs carefully watch this holy fire, that wee may neuer be so vnhappie as haue it dye out for want of the oyle of our workes: let all our thoughts be imployed vpon the hus∣bandrie of this feede of Hea∣uen: let it be watered with the plentifull teares of a con∣trite and humble hart. Deare God smite my hart with the dart of thy loue, that my soule may say to thee, I am
wounded with thy charitie, and out of that Loue-sore, a floode of teares may streame day and night. THE XVI. MEDITAT. Hovv Charitie is increased. I. POINT. COnsider how admirable Charities commerce is, which quite contrarie to wordly riches, increaseth by being imparted, and besto∣wed vpon our neighbours. Bestowe your charitie boun∣tifully and it increaseth abun∣dantly communicate not this sacred fire to your neighbour, and it decreases; languisheth,
and dyeth out. Money, saith he, and Charitie are not bestowed alike: that by being bestowed is diminis∣hed; this, is increased. Yea more, it increaseth in his hands who renders it, and by how much more amply he repays it, by so much more plentifully he retay∣nes it. It increaseth in his hands. AFFECTION and RESOL. O blessed tradinge! easie, and wishfull and gaynefull traf∣fike! By giuing away apace, we speedily waxe rich. By en∣deuouring to make others happie, we fayle not our selues to become happie indeed. We will therfor di∣late the bowells of charitie, and striue to doe good to all.
One we will helpe with counsell, another with com∣fort; or what other wayes we may be able to assiste him in. II. POINT. Consider how exceeding easie, our good God hath made the increase of charitie: It is not necessa∣rie that we haue ether a great power, a great purse, or vse any great industrie. For is there any thing more comon, or more within euerie mans power then a cupp of cold water? giue that onely for Gods sake, and charitie is increased, and a reward is promised. Who, saith he, is able to bring any excuse, sith God promiseth a revvard, euen for a cupp of cold vvater. And againe, such is the nature of holy loue and true charitie,
that by imparting it increaseth. AFFECTION and RESOL. O God how good thou art, who, while we haue nothing but by thy free gift, enables vs by the good vse of what thou hast formely giuen, to increase holy loue, and ther∣by draw a number of new blissings vpon vs. Ther is nothing lesse then a cupp of cold water, nothing greater then loue; and yet euen by that, this is increased. III. POINT. Consider fur∣ther with your holy father, that it is not onely by your purse, power, or by the gift of a cupp of cold water, that charitie is increased, but euen by a good looke, a good wishe, a myld answere. Despise no suppliant, if
thou beest able to giue, giue. If not, shew thy affa∣bilitie. God crownes our good wishes, where he finds no wealth. Let none ther∣fore say, I had not wher∣withall, charitie comes not out of our coffers onely. He who hath a hart full of charitie, neuer wants what to giue. AFFECTION and RESOL. O deare God how exceeding easie thou hast made this Queene of vertues, which is indeed alone better then all the rest together! Let vs neuer be so wanting to our selues, as to send any away without an Almes, since a good word, a looke, a wishe is able to doe it, and by so doing our loue is increased,
and our title to the King∣dome of heauen inlarged. THE XVII. MEDTAT. THE EXCELLENCIES of Charitie. I. POINT. COnsider with him, that there is nothing better, more pretious, more profitable, more lightsome, more stronge, more secure then charitie. AFFECTION and RESOL. What is it we looke for? or whether is it, that with paynes we run to seeke it? Nothing can possibly be found better then the best, nor more pre∣tious, then what is most pre∣tious,
&c. and all that, we may possesse in charitie a∣lone. Nothing can better en∣lighten our blindnes, streng∣then our weaknes, or secure vs against the manifold dan∣gers of this malignant world. II. POINT. Consider that Charitie possesseth vs of the presence and sight of God, so that we need not run out into the streetes to looke whom our hart loueth, since the eyes of Faith discouers alreadie in our owne hart whom we loue. Why doe we send him who hath cha∣ritie a farr of to see God. Let him obserue his owne conscience, and there he sees God: for if Charitie inhabites there, there also inhabits God. Would we
happily see him in heauen? Lets haue charitie, and he is in our hart as in Heauen. AFFECTION and RESOL. O the blisse, and glorie, and Maiestie of a louing hart! O humane hart, not so much now a hart, as a Heauen or Paradice, since thou art made a Mansion for the God of glorie. Doe not, doe not my hart gadd abrode, and by a degenerous conuersation for∣gett with whose presence thou art honored, thou hast by loue gott Deus tuus & om∣nia. Contemne for his loue all other thinges saying. Di∣lectus meus mihi & ego illi. III. POINT. Consider, whether a greater commen∣dations could be putt vpon Charitie then by saying God
is Charitie. A short prayse, and yet a great prayse. Short in speech, great in vnder∣standing. Yes, it is quickly said, God is charitie; but good God; whether are our thoughtes carried by that word? God is Charitie? By pos∣sessing Charitie then wee pos∣sesse God, but God is all good things, therfore by possessing Charitie, we possesse all that good is in Heauen and in Earth. AFFECTION and RESOL. O short and great commen∣dation indeed. sith so great, as nothing can be added. Since greater or better then God nothing can be imagined by men or Angells. Nor is it a hu∣mane persuasion we haue for it, but an assurance of faith,
that God is Charitie, and vvho remaynes in Charitie remaynes in God, and God in him. O my soule what an honor and com∣fort is this amidst all the ca∣lumnies and afflictions of the world, that by loue thou art able to become Gods Man∣sion, and he thyne! And if thy beloued be thyne! and thou his▪ what can be wanting to a well borne hart? THE XVIII. MEDITAT. A continuation of the excellen∣ces of Charitie. I. POINT. COnsider that Charitie alone is not vexed at
anothers felicitie, because she knowes no emulation. She alone is not transported with her owne felicitie, be∣cause she swells not with pride. She onely is not stung with a bad conscience; be∣cause she wrongs no body, Amidst contumelies she is secure: amongst hatreds friendly: amongst braules pleasant: amidst deceipts, innocent: lamenting at iniquities, and resuming hart vpon the discouerie of Truth. AFFECTION and RESOLVT. Who is then so happie as one inioying Charitie? What hath the world which can giue so solide and sure a content? Yea what hath it that is not brim∣me full of discontent? Wher∣as
the charitable man meets with no vexation, no emula∣tion, no swelling; but contra∣rily, ioy, peace, patience vn∣der the shelter of a good cons∣cience, are that happie mans share. O diuine Charitie how thou fillest the harts which thou dost possesse, with de∣light, sweetnes and tranquili∣tie! Ah! they seeme euen to enter into the ioy of their Lord. II. POINT. Consider that it is Charitie which makes all the good Angells, and all Gods seruants compagnions in the bonde of sanctitie, and it ioynes vs and them toge∣ther amongst our selues, and subiects vs to him. AFFECTION and RESOLV. See how it leagues heauen
and earth together, and putts vs in mynd what title we haue to it, makes Angells and men fellow seruants, and euen in a manner equall in honor, and chaynes them together in lin∣kes of holy loue, which is true sanctitie, ô wishfull and deare bonds! See what a sweete or∣der it establisheth betwixt man and man making each one loue and honor, and de∣ferre to an other, without for∣getting their due subiection to God, to whom incompara∣bly aboue all, loue honor and glorie is due. III. POINT. Consider vvhat a huge great good, Cha∣ritie is, vvhich vvithout our labour, makes vvhat is good in others our ovvne. Hence it was that the Psalmist holily glo∣ries,
that he is made partaker of all that loue God, and keepe his commandements. AFFEDTION and RESOLV. Ah my soule if thou hast but charitie, alls thyne owne. There is no good worke done in heauē or in earth but thou hast a share of it. Heauen and earth makes but one great Christiā comon wealth, wher∣of Charitie is the Queene, and lodgeth in thy hart What euer prayers, fastings, austeri∣ties, almes-deeds sufferances are exercised within the com∣pase of the Catholike Church are partly thyne, while thou art rooted in Charitie.
THE XIX. MEDITAT. OF SOME MOTIVES of the loue of God. I. POINT. COnsider that S. Augu∣stins first motiue of the loue of God was that he first loued him. The loue wherby God loues vs cannot be comprehended nor chan∣ged, for he loued vs not onely since the tyme we were reconciled to him by the blood of his son, but he euen loued vs before the world was made, that we together with his onely be∣gotten son, might be his
sons, before we were yet any thing at all. AFFECT. and RESOLVT. While I yet was not, and so was nothing, my infinitly good God had thoughts of goodnes for me, to rayse me out of that abisse of nothing; and make me that something which now I am; being made, he fell in loue with his owne worke, meerely out of the abundance of his owne good∣nes, without any neede he had of it at all; and made vs sons, sons and heirs of the heauen∣ly Kingdome we had no title too. Ah my soule, if we will not begin to loue, at least being thus graciously preuen∣ted, let vs not sticke to pay loue for loue. The hart is too hard, which, (though it will
not freely giue) will not a least render what it owes! II. POINT. Consider that his second motiue was, the ex∣cessiue greatnes of Gods loue to vs, such as we were, which went so farre that he spared not his owne onely son, but deliuered him to death, and the death of the Crosse for all of vs, vs, who where wicked sinners. Remember how much he loued, that we may not despaire; whom, or what kind of creatures he loued, that we waxe not proude. A son for a seruant, an that a most wicked one: deliuered vp to death, and that à most ignominious one AFFECTION and RESOLV. O God I cannot looke vpon that great price, that infinitly
great price, the pretious blood of a son spent for the redemption of a seruant; but of a son, who was a first be∣gotten, an onely begotten, and an onely beloued one, one to thyne owne hart, in whom thou wert intirely plea∣sed, one, in a word, in euery thing equall to thy selfe. I cannot, I say, looke vpon it, but with much loue and con∣sidence: Nor can I reflect vpon the seruant, the poore miserable and sinfull seruant vpon which it was spent, but with much confusion. O God what is man that thou shouldst so putt thy hart vpon him: but ô man what is God to thee? And yet thy hart departs so easily from him? III. POINT. Consider that
his third motiue was not tha he loued vs first, and most, bu euē prepared no other reward for our loue then himselfe What then, saith he, shal our worshipe of God haue noe reward? Ah yes, but noe other then the verie God himselfe whom we worshipe Seeke nothing of him, wi∣thout him, he himselfe wil suffice thee. AFFECTION and RESOL. Ah! that hart is conuinced to be intolerably greedie and vnsatiable, whom God suffi∣ceth not: At least Augustin noble hart finds all plentie, meere want to him, which is not his verie God: And ther∣fore he petitions for nothing els. Render me thy selfe? giue me thy selfe: for thee I vvish,
thee I seeke, thee I hope for; to thee hath my hart said, I haue sought thy countenance ô Lord! And therfore, what euer my Lord God is disposed to bestowe on me, let him take it all away, and let him giue me himselfe. THE XX. MEDITAT. In vvhat manner and measure God is to be loued. I. POINT. COnsider that the best, manner of louing God, is to loue him chastly, that is, with puritie of intention; with as litle of our owne respects and interest as may be, but
because he is God, that is, in∣finitlie good, or infinite good∣nes. Let vs loue him so a that we loue no other thing besides himselfe. I, that we may be made worthy of his heauenly imbracemets let vs discharge our selues of the care of all earthly things, and lets adheare to him alone gratis. AFFECTION and RESOL. Too litle he loues thee, ô Lord, who loues any thing, besids thee, yea euen with thee, which he loues not for thee: for alas the innocent lambe who was slaughtered for vs, is worthy to receaue glorie, and honor, and bene∣diction: not that, in respect of his good gifts onely, but euen because in himselfe, he
is infinitly wise, infinitly powerfull, infinitly beauti∣full, infinitly good, contay∣ning in him selfe, in a most eminent manner; all the res∣pects of good by which a rea∣sonable man can be drawen to loue. Let vs loue him ther∣fore, let vs loue him euen for his selfe sake, and for no o∣ther reason, as farre as we are able. II. POINT. Consider that the best measure of louing God, is, to imitate his loue to vs, and loue him without mea∣sure: for sith the obiect of our loue is infinite, should not our loue also, if it were possi∣ble, be infinite? Thou art im∣mense, ô Lord, and vvithout measure ought thou to be loued and praysed by those vvhom
thou hast redeemed vvith thyne ovvne pretious blood. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Come lets loue him, lets loue him, he deserues all loue, yea more then all; for he hath loued vs to make vs, he hath loued vs being made: he hath loued vs first and most: he loued vs so farre as to giue his son, and to be readie to giue himselfe, if we loue againe. Ah! let vs blush and be as ha∣med, if after all this, we find our selues slowe to loue.
MEDITATIONS FOR SEAVEN DAYES. TO BE VSED BY THE Canonesses Regulars of the Order of Sainte Au∣gustine, in the Monasterie of SION. Established at Paris. A. 1634. As well before their clothings and Professions os otherwise. I vvill leade her into the vvildernesse: and I vvill speake to her harte. Osee 2. AT PARIS, By GABRIEL TARGA, M. DC. LXV.
THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIRST DAY. The preparatorie prayer shall be the Hymne Veni Creator, with the prayer Deus quicorda. THE FIRST POINTE. Of Gods Benefits to man in his Creation. CONISDER that God who is infinitly gre∣at, and infinitly, and evernally happy in himselfe, seeinge thinges
which are not, as thinges that are, out of his meere Good∣nesse, without any neede of vs, beinge neither preuented by any merits of ours, not prouoked by hopes of retur∣nes, raysed vs out of nothinge to his owne likenesse; presen∣ted vs with the whole world; made vs absolute Lords ouer it, and ouer all the great va∣rietie of thinges comprised in it, for our vse. Finally he en∣dowed vs with a reasonable soule; capable of himselfe, to enioy him for euer. AFFECTION. Where were wee, where were wee (soe∣longe, or soe longe agoe) my soule? where were wee, and all that wee glory in, while wee yet were not? Ah while wee slept in our nothinge, he
who watches ouer Israël slept not. But loued vs vvith a per∣petuall loue. he made a world for vs; not vs for the world: he made vs Lords ouer it, not slaues to it. He gaue vs all thinges to vse, not to inioy: to solace our pilgrimage, not to stay vs from our contry. Heauen, my soule, is our con∣try: the Kinge of Heauen our possession, which we are made to inioy. Be it farre from vs to loue the benefits, more then the bountiful be∣nefactor: or to glory in our selues; or any thinge; while we and they are Equally his free gifts:
THE SECONDE POINTE. Of mans regeneration. Consider that though the benefit of creation be great, yet that of regeneration farre exceeds it, whereby we are borne to a new and better life; life euerlastinge. By that, we were made, and called men: by this, wee were made, and called by Christ his owne name, Christians, or men of Christ. By that, he gaue vs power to liue and raigne ouer all the creatures: by this, to be little lesse then the An∣gells, yea to be like to our creator in iustice, and sancti∣ty. We were borne dead, but by pure grace, we were reui∣ued
in baptisme, made do∣mestikes of his house the Catholike Church, strengthe∣ned by confirmation, fedd and fatned by his holy word, and euen his owne pretious body and bloud. Whereby wee are not onely called his seruants, but are indeede his freinds, nor his freinds onely, but his sonns, nor his sonns alone but his spouses. AFFECTION. If all, my soule, that we are, be due to God for our creation, by which we are all, that wee either are, or haue in the or∣der of nature, what will be due for our better beeinge by our regeneration, which makes vs citizens of the Saintes, and Gods owne do∣mestikes, his friends his sonns,
his spouses? O what hart is able to conceaue the highth of the dignity, to be made, by grace, of sonns of the earth, the sonns of God: of disloyall subiects, he spouses of Christ? and yet, my soule, such wee are which was not granted to all; such wee are by his free goodnesse, and mercy. If therefore, all that wee haue in the order of na∣ture, or grace, we had ab∣solutly, from his free gift, let all be employed, and hartily referred, to his ho∣nour.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Of the obligations vvhich vve contract in Baptisme. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that as the be∣nefite of regeneration in Baptisme is a benefite of preference, and of singular excellencie, since of slaues of the Diuell, it renders vs chil∣deren of God, and reintitles vs to our right in the Kingdo∣me of Heauen: so it bringes with it greate obligations to which we are all indispensably subiect. We solemnely pro∣messed therin, in the face of the Church. First to renounce
the diuell and all his pompes, wiles, and allurementes (wher∣by he endeuours incessantly to worke our eternall ruine.) That is, to detest and flye the concupiscence of the flesh; the cōcupiscence of the eyes: and pride of life which are the Diuells baites, wher-in he insnares the whole world, and inslaues it to his accursed do∣minion. These renounciations, ô my soule, are the promesses we solemnely made in our Baptisme. These are the chris∣tian duties to which we are all absolutly oblidged; be we re∣ligious persons, or be we secu∣lar: according to these we shall be iudged at the last day. It highly behoues vs then, to run ouer our life past in the
bitternesse of our harts, and obserue whether our holy professions haue bene secon∣ded by answerable practises: and whether due performan∣ces followed our solemne pro∣mises. Haue we indeede, my soule, renounced the Diuell and all his pompes? Or rather, haue we not left Christ, and followed his wicked allure∣ments? Vpon what follies haue we not feasted our eyes? To what highth hath not our thoughtes aspired? Of what impurities, and disloyalties, haue not our hartes, at least, bene brimme full. Obserue and lament our miseries.
THE II. POINTE. Of the seconde obligation vvhich vve contracte in Baptisme. Consider that the seconde obligation which we cōtracte in Baptisme, is, to be listed among the soldiers of Iesus Christ, to fight vnder the ban∣ner of the Crosse, and openly to professe his lawe. That Sweete lawe of loue which conteynes all Christian dutie: the loue of God incompara∣bly aboue all other thinges, as being infinitly louelie, and comprisinge in himselfe all the motiues and obligations of loue: and the loue of our neighbour as our selues; that is, in order to God, in God, and for God. All the loue we can afford to the rest of the
creatures, is but onely for so∣laces to our necessities and pouerties: as prouisions for the way of our pilgrimage: to be vsed, not to be inioyed, not to haue our hates fixed vpon, which are wholie due to God and our neighbour. AFFECTION and RESOL. Ah, my soule, had we bene to haue made choyce of what lawe we our selues had most desired (not to haue receiued it from the hand of our al∣mightie maker, who had full power to impose what lawe he pleased vpon the workes of his hands) what other lawe would we haue wished, but that which we haue? A lawe by which we are not permit∣ted onely, but euen comman∣ded, to loue our Kinge, the
Kinge of Kinges the Kinge of glorie. What more hono∣rable? To loue him wholy, from whose loue and bountie we haue all that we haue. What more reasonable? To loue him from whose libera∣litie we expect all that we yet want; the possession of his heauenly Kingdome; the inioyment of himselfe for all eternitie. What more profita∣ble? And as to the other parte of the lawe, what poore liues should we not leade; nay what deathes, and Hells should we not suffer, did we in lieu of loue to our neighbour, afford him onely neglect, scorne, and hatred. Let me loue thee then, ô my deare Lord, and my neighbour in thee, and for thee, for euer.
THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE SECONDE DAY. Of the third obligation contrac∣ted in Baptisme. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that the third obligation that we con∣tracted in Baptisme, was, that we are bound to liue the life of Christ: according to that of S. Paule: I liue, not novv I, but Iesus Christ liues in me: for vve are buried togeither vvith him by Baptisme: and ought also to ryse with him, and walke after him, in new∣nesse of life: because he left vs an example, and his will is, that we should followe his
foostepps: that is that we should walke in the lowlie pathes of humilitie, pouertie, and abiection, as he did from his verie first steppe into this world in labours, hunger and thirst from his youth: in suf∣fering reproches, contume∣lies, and outragious contēpts, all his life longe: in being abandonned at his death by his Apostles, and euen by his heauenly Father: my God, my God, vvhy haste thou forsaken me? AFFECTION and RESOL. The life of Christ, my soule, is our paterne; the imitation of it, is our obligation; and the liuely expression of it is our perfection. Let vs seeke noe other, nor other way, then by humbly following his
footestepps. To that he calls, vs: learne of me vvho am mylde and humble in harte: not to high speculations, with are more apt to fill vs with vanitie, then feede vs with solide foode. Caluarie was left vs for the imitation of his vertues, Thabor onely to admire his Maiestie: He is our Alpha, and Omega our begining and our end. Let all our applica∣tions be to him, and our de∣pendences of him. Let all our conuersations be with him; our desires followe him; our discourses of him; our con∣tinuall cryes to him. O my dearest Lord and sauiour, thou, my loue; thou, my life. Let this couenant be made betwixt vs. Let me wholy dye to my selfe, that thou
alone mayst liue in me: Let my passions be wholy silen∣ced; that thou alone mayst be heard in me. Let all my sollicitous cares, which are fruitlesse without thee, wholy cease, that thou onely mayst worke in me. THE II. POINTE. Consider that notwithstan∣ding all those former bene∣fits, and obligatiōs contracted therby, we haue bene so vn∣gratfull, and neglectfull of our owne good, as litle to mynde them. Nay like true Prodigalls we haue dissipated and spent, all those gracious, and Godlike talents, and for∣getting our promesses and obligations, we haue returned backe into the slauerie of the
Diuell. And here it was in dee∣de that our good God magni∣fied his mercyes towards vs. We run from him into a fo∣raigne land, and he leaues the ninetie nine to seeke vs. Wee strike at him by sinne, and euen crucify him againe, and he supportes vs with patience. We steppe downe to hell, and he brings vs backe. He frequently knockes at our harts, by his holy word prea∣ched to our eares; by his in∣ternall voyce inculcated to our hartes; by wholsome tri∣bulations multiplyed vppon vs, and breakes through our deafness. And hauinge him∣selfe wrought all this in vs, he crownes his owne mercyes by takeinge vs againe into his familiarity? and he, and all
his courte reioyceth at our conuersion. AFFECTION and RESOL. O thou God of mercy! to what a length hast thou ex∣tended thy patience with me? It was I, that ran from thee in∣to a Land of disproportion I, that forsooke thee, the foun∣taine of liueinge water, and made to my selfe cisternes, broken cisterns which could hold noe water. I, that turned the vse of thyne owne giftes to abuse, by loueinge them more then thy selfe (in such or such an occasion) I that stept downe into Hell (at such or such a time; soe, or soe often) and thou the while ceasedst not to redouble thy cryes: Why vvilt thou perish ô thou house of I sraëll; Why dost thou
loue vanity, and seeke a lye? loose thy chaynes from thy necke ô thou captiue daughter of Sion. At least after all thy disloyal∣tyes, call mee but Father. Ah, my soule, be noe longer deafe to all these gracious inuita∣tions: but run, though alas but too late, to that Father of mercyes, and say, with a con∣trite and humbled hart: Fa∣ther I haue offended against heauen, & against thee, & I am noe longer vvorthy to be called thy Sonne: deale with mee onely as with one of the hy∣relings of thy house.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SECONDE DAY. The greeuousnesse of sinne. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider what sinne is, and your holy father S. Augustine will teache you that it is noe substance at all, but a miserable and accursed no∣thing. Yet such a nothinge it is, that man becomes nothing therby (nihil fiuntbomines cum peccant) yea worse then no∣thing, since it is the verie death of the soule (peccatum mors est animae.) Or take it from him with the whole Catholike Church, in more ample and expressiue tear∣mes. Sinne is a vvord a thought,
a deede against the eternall lavv, or prime reason, which is God himselfe. What doe we then, when we sinne, but speake, thinke or doe, against Gods eternall Lawe, or God him∣selfe? AFFECTION and RESOL. Ah my soule, my soule, it is too hard for thee to kicke a∣gainst the pricke; which by how much more we assault it, by so much more we are woun∣ded by it. It is against God himselfe that sinne ryseth vp; against that great, dreadfull all-mightie, reuengfull God, whom were it in its power, it would destroye: since the sin∣ner, as such, would neither haue God wise to know, nor iust and powerfull to punish his iniquitie. Alas, what ad∣uantage
can wormes, and pis∣mires expect by wrasling with Elephants? Our strength is like to a spiders webbe; how dare we then strugle with om∣nipotencie whose will none resistes? In wrasling we shall onely meete with our owne ruine. In disputing neuer find repose, nor be able to ansvver one for a thousand: for, to conclude with S. Paule, ô man vvho art thou that dost ansvver God? THE II. POINTE. Of the lamentable effects of sinne. Consider what grieuous do∣mages the poore soule recei∣ues by mortall Sinne. It de∣priues of grace & ban̄isheth the holy ghost out of the hart
which it did inhabite. It brea∣kes the league of freindshippe which was betwixt God & vs, & leaues vs his enemyes, and slaues of the Diuell, his & our worst enemie: It robbs vs of the right we had to possesse God for euer, leaueinge only Hell for our inheritance. It wounds, makes hideous, & euen Kills that otherwise im̄ortall soule of ours: in a word, it makes vs crucify Iesus Christ againe, & in effect tread the sacred bloud of Iesus vn∣der our feete. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. Oh accursed fruites of Sinne! O saith God himselfe by the mouth of Ieremie, Know & see how euill & bitter a thinge it is for thee to haue left the Lord thy God. Ah my soule,
these are not dreames imagi∣nations, or rethoricall ampli∣fications, but euen Christian truthes which none dare deny, how doe we then dare to dally with danger, to seeke occa∣sions, to drinke downe sinne like water? If therefore the world, the flesh, or the Diuell tell of I Know not what de∣lightes, let vs haue this ge∣nerouse replye still before our eyes, but they are too dearely bought, with the losse of the holy ghost and all his giftes, Gods friendshippe, and his eternall inheritance, & become the obiecte of his hate. This moment of false libertie is not worth beinge aslaue to the Diuell for euer. This honnor lookes fawning∣ly vppon mee: but it were
madnesse to purchase it with eternall disgrace. This gold glitters agreeably, yet it is not worth the hauing: since it will serue onely to buy Hell. THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE THIRD DAY. Sinne is detestable to God. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider in what horror and detestation wee should haue it, since wisdome it selfe doth soe abhorre & detest it. The Almighty eter∣nall God, whose goodnesse cannot be questioned without impiety; nor his iustice be impeched without blasphe∣my; nor his mercy be exacted
without presumption: he be∣inge indeede, not soe much good as euen effentially goodnesse it selfe, nor soe much iust as iustice it selfe, nor soe much mercifull as mercy it selfe; for one sinne of pride throwes downe the third parte of the Angells in∣to hell, irrecouerably, without any further hope of mercy. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. If, my soule, this be not lesse a truth, which all the Christian world willingly imbraces, then the former; how comes it to passe that mans follie dare be soe damnably aduentu∣rous as to fall in loue with Sinne, which wisdome soe highly detests? How, how, I say, dare we liue in league with it, & be willinge to
meete with it at euery turne? If it haue made Angells Di∣uells, what priuiledge haue men not to dreade the like effects? not for one or a few, but euen for thousands of sinnes; (euery man makeinge reflection in himselfe of the multitude of his sinnes) downe then, my soule, downe; place thy mouth in the dust, and whilst thou canst not pe∣netrate the rigour of Gods iustice to the Angells, turne thy selfe more earnestly to admire his incōparable mer∣cy to thee, humbly confes∣singe, that otherwise Hell had beene longe since thy habita∣tion: makeinge a firme resolu∣tion to singe his mercyes eter∣nally.
THE II. POINT. Adam by sinne turned out of Paradise. Consider how the same God who is equally goodnesse, mercy and iustice, for one acte of disobedience, throwes Adam out of the happie state wherin he had placed him, and subiects him and all his posteritie, to multitudes of miseries of body and mynde (such as we all daylie expe∣perience) to heate, cold, cala∣mities, innumerable sorts of sicknesses, and euen to death it selfe; and that too, not one∣ly to the death of his body, but euen to a second death, the death of the soule: so that there was not any saluation left for all the sonns of men,
at any lesse rate then the death and bloud, of a God∣man Iesus-Christ. AFFECTION and RESOL. O my soule, if this truth be taught vs by faith; if we feele it by a sadd and vniuersall ex∣perience; if it be made ma∣nifest to vs by the death of a God: let it printe in our har∣tes, an absolute horrour, and detestation of sinne, which is so horrible, and detestable in the sight of God; and which his iustice punishes so rigou∣rously. And let vs noe lesse adore that sterne iustice of his, then extolle, and dearly imbrace his mylde mercy; who to expiate the sinne of an vngracicus disloyall ser∣uant, sacryficeth the bloud of a dearely beloued, and deare∣ly
louing, and wholy obe∣dient, and onely child. Be that Iustice alwayes admired, and dreaded; and be that mercy magnified, and loued, by men. THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD DAY. Sinne putt a God to death. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that our sweete Sauiours paines (the dea∣re price of our redemptió) are vniuersall; noe parte of his body passes without its parti∣cular punishment. His head is tormented with pullinge of the haire, with blowes with thornes; His face with foule
spittings & boxes. His tongue with thirst veneger & gale. His torne shoulders with the heauie loade of the Crosse. His armes with rude extentiōs & rackinge. His hāds & feete with cruell nayles. His whole body all ouer with stripes. His Sinewes with conuulsions. His arteries and veynes with wi∣therednesse. His vitall partes with an incredible effusion of his pretious bloud: soe that what the prophet foretolde was fully verified: from the sole of his foote, to the crowne of his head, there was noe soundnesse. See then whether there be any sorrow like his sorrowe. AFFECTION. Alas? it is but too euident, my dearest Lord, thy sorowes passe all our so∣rowes
& yet my soule, it is maiestie that is thus smitten: it's innocencie which thus suf∣fers. It's indeede the God of Gods, whose immensitie can∣not be comprehended; whose perfections & excellencies cannot be numbred; whose goodnesse is boundlesse, whose mercyes cannot be matched. Alas my deformed, hidden, crucifyed Lord? whither hath mercy, good∣nesse, loue to miserable man ledd thee? was it thought fittinge to this goodnesse, that thy wounds should be without number, as are thy perfectiōs, & mercyes to man? soe to make an absolute de∣monstration, that as there is noe loue, soe are there noe sorrowes like to thyne. Let me not liue but to loue thee, &
suffer for thy sake. THE II. POINTE. Consider further that he sufferd inall his senses, by the presence of all the obiects of sorrow, He saw his choysen Apostles sleeping, while he was sweating bloud. He saw the Trayter, whom he had newly fedd with his owne bles∣sed body & bloud, come in the heade of a barbarous band to apprehend him. He saw the execrable crueltie of an vn∣gratefull nation, which he had alwayes oblidged and loued by preference. Finally, his cares were full of blasphee∣mies scoffes and scornes: and his eyes and harte of the sor∣rowes, teares, and bloud of a God dying. AFFECTION. And yet, my
soule, it is the very naturall sonne of God that suffers all this? He is the splendour of his fathers glorie, and the fi∣gure of his substance. And shall we his poore sonns, taken in by adoption onely, see with drye eyes, his, full of teares and bloud? or shall we, after this sad sight, permitt them any more to be filled with va∣nitie? Shall our eares lye open to destractions, adulations, and found rumours, which hurt our soules, whyle his, for our sake, are filled with con∣tumelies, and blasphemies? Shall we Christians pamper the rest of our senses, with sweetes and delicacies, while our Christs so hugely suffers in them all? Ah! be it euer farre from vs; to pay his loue
with such intolerable ingra∣titude! THE III. POINT. He suffers in his soule. But if his body vniuersally and all his senses, be ingaged in the sufference, is his soule at least free? Ah noe, its sadd to death; its replenished vvith euill or sorrow, the bitter vva∣ters of tribulations haue broken in vpon it. The horrour of death, the ingratitude of mē, the scorne of Nations, Pilates iniustice, Herods mockerie: Annas and Cayphas blasphe∣mie, the Scribes and Pharisies circumuentions, the Ministers and Soldiers crueltie, the peo∣ples preference of Barabbas and their tumultuous and
vniust Crucifige. See then vvhe∣ther there be any sorrovv like to his sorrovv. AFFECTION and RESOL. O man of dolours, and accus∣tomed to sufferances from thy youth: Were not thy sor∣rowes, and, in them, thy loue to man, sufficiently expressed, in abandonning that inno∣cent, chast, and tender virgi∣nall body of thyne, to the cruell persecutours wills, vn∣lesse thou didst withall per∣mitt the bitter flouds of tri∣bulatiō, and deadly saddnesse, enter into, and take pos∣session of thy blessed soule? Consider: my soule, and see whether their be any sorowe like to this sorrow, or any loue like to his loue who gaue vp his soule to such sorrowes for
thy sake? If the horrour of death inuade thee, thy Master went before thee, & waded through to death it selfe. Proue friends vngratefull? so they were to thy Lord. Are others, of lesse worth prefer∣red before thee? but so was Barrabas before thy Master Christ. Remember, remem∣ber, my soule, that the seruant is not greater then his master &c. THE IV. POINTE. He suffers vvithout a comforter. Consider his body's tor∣mented, his senses offended, his soule afflicted and oppres∣sed. Is none left to comfort him? Noe none, relictus est so∣lus, he's abandoned. left all
alone, to wrastle with all the legions of sorrowes. Non est qui consoletur eum. There is none left to comfort him. Was there euer so pittious a spectacle? His Apostles are fled; Peter followes a farre of and sweares he knowes him not. The dolorous mother stands neere the Crosse, in∣deed, but her presence affords so smale solace, that her sor∣rowes serue to redouble his. The Angells come not neere. His heauenly father aban∣donns him: nay yet more (Heauens stand amaysed at it) he is euen forsaken by himsel∣fe, while he stopps the influ∣ence of his diuinitie, that it flow not vpon his humanitie, leauing it to suffer all alone without all comfort. See then
vvhether there be any sorrovv like to his sorrovv! AFFECTION and RESOL. O, my soule, looke vpon the face of thy Christ. Admire his his vn wearied suffering loue. Hartily acknowledge that there is noe sorrow like his sorrow. Imprint in thy harte at what a deare rate thou wast bought. Ah my soule! it was not with gold and siluer, and such corruptible thinges: but with the sorrowes, and teares, and bloud, and death, of a a God-man, our Sauiour Iesus. With sorrowes, which spredd thēselues so vniuersally ouer body, senses, and soule: with teares, and bloud, so plenti∣fully and freely powred out: with death so ignominious, so deuoyd of all comfort, so
abandonned, that it forced from the mouth of a most obedient and dearest child: My God, my God, vvhy hast thou forsaken me. Resolue firmely then, that neither sorrowes, nor bloodshed, nor abandon∣ments, nor death it selfe, shall separate vs from the loue of that dearest Lord. THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE FOVRTH DAY. Of Deathe. THE FIRST POINTE. Nothinge more certaine then death, lesse certaine then the tyme therof. COnsider, and striue to imprint in our harts, that
which we all know, yet seeme not to know it; that which we all beleeue, and yet as it were, beleeue it not: to witt, that as there is nothinge soe cer∣taine as death, soe is there no∣thinge soe vncertaine as the houre therof. Consult our owne Knowledge vppō these truthes, & we Know, that neither Salomons witt, nor Samsons strength, nor Ab∣solons beauty were founde proofe against it. They were, and now are not, mortui sunt, is certaine. Consult the word of truth, and we shall finde that we are bound to beleeue what we otherwise Know. Consult our selues againe vppon the vncertain∣tie of it; and we finde that we haue Knowne, many taken
away, when they and their friends least feared it; some by violent, some by naturall dea∣thes, some in their child∣hoode, before they well knew what it was to liue: some in theire flourishinge spring, when vigourous youth pro∣mised them they could not dye. Some in the decline of their age, while death threatned, and yet was not feared: soe certaine it is, that the houre of death is vncer∣taine to all; as Christ himselfe makes it sure to faith. Watch saith he, because you neither know the day, nor the houre. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Dye then we must, my soule, thereis nothinge soe certai∣ne; departe we must out of this cottage of clay; Gods
iustice hath pronounced the sentence. Remember man that thou art dust, & in-to dust thou shalt returne. But when must this sentence be put in execu∣tion? that is noe lesse vncer∣taine our youth may deceiue vs, as it hath done many. our manhoode or middle age, is not priuiledged: our ould age cannot last longe. What then must we doe, but with S. Augustine, quitt the vncer∣taine, and forth-with fixe vppon the certaine meanes, a good & penitentiall life, to preuent the danger of that which cannot otherwise be auoyded by mortall man.
THE SECONDE POINTE. Nothinge more certaine for the thinge, nothinge lesse certaine, as to the manner. Consider that as we are most certaine that dye we must, & as vncertaine when; soe are we noe lesse ignorant, where, and how this irreuoca∣ble sentence is to be execu∣ted. Shall it be in France or in England? at Paris or in the Coūtry; at home or abrode, in our chābers, or in the Church or Garden? Shall it be by a violent, accidentall, or natu∣rall death? Shall we be found dead in our beds, as we haue seene some, & heard of many? Or else, be wrought downe by a lōge and lingeringe disease in the presence of many?
Shall we finally haue the be∣nefit of the Sacraments, which we now haue with soe much ease, yea want not without blame? To all this, the wisest amonge men is not able to answer. That dye we must is appointed by a reproachlesse iustice; but when, but where, but how: mercy, saith S. Au∣gustine, hath concealed, that we might expect, attend, & prouide for it, in all times, places, & occurrences. AFFECTION and RESOL. If certainely we must dye, my soule, & yet neither Know when, where, nor how; and if vppon that certaine vncertai∣ne houre an eternity of blisse or woe depends, what a ne∣cessity is put vppon vs, (if we will not for moments loose
eternities) to be ready in all tymes & places. We Know not, my soule, we Know not when, where, or how death may surprise vs; onely this wee Know, that we haue yet an houre left vs to rise out to four slumber, and it is now his present houre. Now then without further delay, will we, by Gods grace dye (to that, that, & that, &c.) that death findinge vs already dead, may not be able to hurt vs, but onely translate vs to à life which Knowes nor feares not death.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Nothing more dreadfull to the obstinate sinner, then death. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that as death contaynes the greatest certaintie, and withall, the greatest vncertaintie imagi∣nable, so it bringes alonge with it, the greatest dreade, and the greatest comforte possible. That, to the obsti∣nate sinner; this, to the hum∣ble penitent. The sinner vpon the approche of death, hath all the sinnes of his whole life placed before his eyes, which he still placed behinde his
backe; and would neither see them, nor sorrowe for them; which now the vile Tempter aggrauates, and makes ap∣peare in their vttermost inor∣minitie. And hence the sinner begins, before hand, to suffer the tormentes, which he al∣wayes beleeued (tho fruitlesse∣ly, through his obstinacie) to be due to his crymes. And thus Knowing his guilt, and the punishment most iustly due to the same, he deeply ap∣prehends it a thinge full of horrour to fall into the hands of a liuing God. Thence he rages, and despaires, seeing himselfe vpō the verie brinke of endlesse perdition; and readie to be deliuered vp into the hands of his cruell Tor∣menteres for all eternitie.
AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. O horrour which hath no∣thing equall to it! To appre∣hend ones selfe to be vpon the verie brinke of eternall perditiō. O daunting dreade, incomparably surpassing all that ought to be dreaded! To be within a moment of falling into the hands of that euer-liuing Maiestie, which is able to throw both the body and soule into Hell fire. What riches, honours, pleasures, (were they neuer so opulent, superlatiue, and prosperous, and remayned they too till that moment, in their full possession, wheras indeede they all are vanished away like nightly dreames) were able to conteruayle so daun∣ting and damning a disaster?
O my soule, those accursed wretches, shall then say with in themselues; repenting, and sighing (too late) for anguish of spirit. What hath pride profited vs? Or what aduan∣tage hath the vaunting of ri∣ches brought vs? Or what comfort hath the most pros∣perous pleasure of our whole life now left vs. Alas, alas none at all, but contrarilie a comfortlesse, fruitlesse, end∣lesse peniteri. THE II. POINTE. Nothing more confortable to the humble penitent. Consideration. But when the innocent and iust soule, or the poore humble penitent, perceiues death to creepe
vpon her, she lifts vp her lōge deiected heade with ioy, because her redemption is euen at hand. She had vsed her best endeuours, mourn∣fully to purge her sinnes in the bloud of the lambe who was slaughtered for vs, and thence she cōceiues an hum∣ble confidence to meere with mercy, and to be ioyfully ad∣mitted in, to that celestiall mariage of his. In fine, she eyes death as the immediate obiect of her ioy; since it alone has power to deliuer her out of her loathed prison of flesh; and to deliuer her vp into the deare hands, and diuine im∣braces of her dearest spouse whom she loues alone. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Sitt downe seriously, my
soule, and count to what a high degree of consolation it will then amounte, to heare those heauenly inuitations of the heauenly spouse saying: come, come, my spouse thou shalt be Crovvned. Crowned, I say, vvith that crovvne of iustice vvhich is layd vp for, and by a iuste Iudge shall be rendered, to them that loue his coming. The shewers of repentāt tea∣res, are now blowen ouer: the sharpe winter of temptations, tribulations, vexations, and crosses, which we willingly endured for the loue of God, are quite gone: ryse vp my friend and come. O what ex∣cesse of deare delight, shall that happie soule inioye at that houre?
THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE FIFTH DAY. Of Iudgment. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that dye wee must; that is, this soe much neglected soule of ours, must be turned out of the body, which was pampered, caressed, & too carefully looked to by vs, & presently after death, Iudgment (saith the great Apostle) we must all of vs be brought, and be made manifest before Christs Tribunall, that euery one beare away accordinge to his woorks. We haue left the world vnwillingly while wil∣lingly
the world leaues vs; the dearest freind that euer we had will not goe alonge with our abandoned soule, nor euen permitt the body which they loued, to ly foure and twentie houres in the Roome with them. They that offended with vs, will not an∣swer for vs, but leaue vs alas, to answer all alone. AFFECTION and RESOL. Aye me vppon what is it that we fixe our hopes? is't vppon our selues; but alas these muddle walls fall, & the im∣mortall inhabitant is turned our, Vppon the freinds that we haue purchased by sinne, or other wise! but they haue left vs, our body is throwne into the earth, & our poore soule is left alone to be iud∣ged.
Ah how much better were it saieth S. Augustine, to chuse him for our freind, a∣boue all our freinds, vvho vvhen all forsake vs vvill be sure to make good his trust, at the day of our death, vvho vvhen all departe from vs, vvill not leaue vs, but vvill defend vs, & conduct vs by a countrie vvhere vve haue yet noe acquaintance. Thou art my Iesu & noe other, be thou therefore my choyce in tyme & in eternity. THE II. POINTE. Cōsider in what a dauntinge anxiety, & dreadfull expecta∣tion the poore soule must needs be, findinge herselfe all alone, to be sentenced by a Iudge who is all knowinge: all things lyinge open, &
naked before his Eyes. All powerfull, for who resists his will? all holy, & souerainly hates Sinne. Iustice it selfe which can neither be cor∣rupted by bribes, nor moued by prayes. And to behold,; this knovvledge; this povver; this sanctitie; this iustice; armed with implacable vvroth, and inflexable Zeale against the sinner! AFFECTION and RESOL. Alas and woe, my soule, whither shall we run for shel∣ter? To his mercy? but her tyme is past, she leaues the place to iustice. To his sanctitie? But our sinnes are quite opposite to the holynesse of that thrice Holy. To his Iustice? But alas our iniquitie stopps our mouthes. Shall we call vpon
the mountaines and rockes to hide vs? But his power is a hammer bruising the rockes in sunder; his knowledge pe∣netrates the mountaines; and his Zeale and furie spares none. Such certainly, my soule, and infinitly more dreadfull then we can imagine it, will that dismale day be found. How∣beit, we are yet in a tyme of mercye, we can yet safely flye from Christ to Christ; from his iustice to his mercye; from his power to his impotencie, in his cradle &c. From the zeale and wroth of Maiestie; to the sweetnesse and myld∣nesse of the Lambe, who comes to take away the sinnes of the world. Finally we haue yet the meanes to hide our selues in the holes of the
the saueing rocke, and to saue our selues. THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Of Hell. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that as mercy & iustice are equall in God, or euen God himselfe; soe, by the law of contraryes, they will be followed with equall effects. If God out of his mercy then, haue posses∣sed the blessed of the collec∣tion of all good thinges, vnder his heauenly raigne; which is beatitude: he will throw the accursed into the possession of a collection of
all euill, vnder the tyranie of the Diuell, which is dam∣nation. Let vs therefore ima∣gine all that we are able of horrour, of hope turned vnto dispaire; of the loue of God, and all we euer had deare, into hatred, & detestation: let vs add wormes, which neuer dye, weepinge, wailing, gnashinge of teeth, brimstone, and flouds of fire, & yet we must con∣clude, that it is not that which the damned suffer, which will indeede, bee that, which nei∣ther eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor hath entered into the hart of man. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. Ay me my soule, into what a vast sea of misery, disaster, & dispaire, doth sinne cast downe poore man? we ima∣gine
all that euer we can of terrour, of horrour, & tor∣ment; of im̄ortall wormes; fire & brimstone, & yet we fall short. We adde the col∣lection of all euills, & yet we cannot reach to it. What is it alas? what is it, that lulles vs asleepe, & makes vs sense∣lesse, of things soe sensible? O that we could descend into Hell aliue, & consider, who amongst vs, were able to liue in the midest of deuouringe flames? And yet into such is the sinner throwne by the doome of eternall Truth: Goe you accursed into eternall fire. THE II. POINTE. Consider yet more particu∣larly, that as the accursed had misused all that God had
giuen them for his seruice, to offend him; as body, soule, & senses, soe shall they all meete with theire seuerall tortures. The body & soule, become fewell for deuouringe flames. All the senses are replenished with obiects of horrour: the eys are full of dreedfull & gastly Ghosts: the ears of howlinges, roareings, execra∣ble maledictions, & blasphe∣mies: the smell of the stinc∣kinge odours issuinge from the bodyes of the damned: the taste is glutted with what can be imagined most bitter, & abbominably loathsome. Finaly, the sense of touchinge meets with nothinge but flouds of tormentinge flames. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. O horrour, consternation, &
despaire? O lamentation of lamentations, & woe, woe, woe? woe to the corruptible body which waighed downe the poore soule? woe to the soule that quickened that fleshly lumpe, & gaue way to its badd inclinations. Woe to the eys & eares which lay open to vanities, & franticke madnesse, & con∣ueyed poyson into the harte. Woe to all the rest of the sen∣ses & members, which conspi∣red to the seducinge of the soule, & to bringe it, & them∣selues, to lye tormented in this flame. THE II. POINT. Consider that if the mise∣rable state of the damned be most vnhappie by the conti∣nuall presence of the whole
collection of all euill: What an infinite addition is made, to it by the priuation of all good, and that for an eterni∣tie? To be for an Eternitie, se∣parated from all the blessed, were they neuer soe deare vnto vs, while they liued with vs? for an eternitie to be de∣priued of the peerelesse beau∣tie of the Queene of Heauen, & the societie of all the Qui∣res of Angells! For an eterni∣tie to be exiled from the glo∣rious face of God, which is man & Angells essential bea∣titude; & to detest, curse, & blaspheame it for euer? Neuer to haue one moment of ease; consolation or rest, or euen the least hope of any for all eternitie AFFECTION and RESOL.
O God of mercy, now turned the Lord of reuenge, what hart hath assurance ennough, not to endure, but euen to be∣holde this calamitous condi∣tion of the damned? ouer∣whelmed with all sortes of torments; remoued from all hopes, or euen desires of com∣fort: not for some millions of millions of yeares, but for an eternitie! O eternitie! eter∣nitie! how longe thou art! Noe number of yeares are able to expresse thee; the sands of the sea cannot equa∣lise thee; after all, thou still remainest what thou art, Eter∣nitie. Ah my soule let vs vse a timely preuention, & not make our selues away to eter∣nall' torments for light & short delightes (such or such
&c.) nor yet for the auoy∣dinge of, such or such smale crosses, afflictions, or tempo∣rall losses. Let vs couragiously plucke out the Eye, and cutt of the hand, which scandali∣ses, & hazards our eternall losse: & conclude with holy S. Augustine: Let me here be burnt, let me here be cutt in peeces. soe that I may not perish eternally. THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE SIXTH DAY. Of Heauen. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider what this King∣dome is, which is pre∣pared for the Blessed and
which they are called to pos∣sesse (come possesse the King∣dome prepared for you) and this, at least, we shall finde, that whateuer this possession may be, it is greater then we haue any capacitie to com∣prehend. Let vs looke vpon all the beauties, and magnifi∣cencies that euer our eyes be∣held, and they are not it. Lets make reflection of all that euer we haue heard, of ho∣nours, riches, pleasures, and all of them are not it. Let vs by helpe of imagination, put all togeither that we haue either seene or heard; and euen adde to them millions of millions more, and yet we are not arriued at it. Noe, for S. Paule assures vs: that neither eye hath seene, nor eare hath
heard, nor hath it entred into the mynde of man, vvhat God hath prepared for those that loue him. AFFECTION and RESOL. O my most bountifull Lord and Master. Hath thy good∣nesse made me capable of a Kingdome, which thy wis∣dome hath not inabled me at present to comprehend! O too too happie we, could we truly vnderstand our owne happinesse! But ô more then most vnhappie we, if we permitt sinne to robbe vs of it; or that we otherwise make it a way for a messe of potage; or the bitter Mandragores of mixt moments of painefull pleasures: for such inconsi∣derable toyes (I meane) as are daylie obiects to meanest eyes, and fill euery eare. Nay
euen for the greatest thinges our hartes can conceiue, since in a smale tyme they vanish away like dreames, and leaue nothinge in our hands. Alas! were it not a strange miserie, and madnesse, to make away such inconceiuable permanēt possessions, for such knowne transitorie toyes? THE II. POINTE. What heauen is. Consider, againe, what this Kingdome, or possession pre∣pared for vs may be; and we finde it is a state of life per∣fectly accomplished with the whole collection of all good thinges. Not a passage, but a state, a permanencie, without change, without end, without
irkesommesse. Perfectly accom∣plished: not by halues, and peecemeales. With the vvhole collection of all good thinges. Not with a few, as here below, and those, good and ill; paines and pleasures mixt togeither, but with the whole collection of all good thinges: so that what euer we desire, shall be present: and all that we desire not shall be absent eternally. AFFECTION and RESOL. We haue Gods word for it, my soule, and it cannot fayle vs, that he will shew vs all good; that is, all that is aduan∣tagious, gaynefull, and rich, in steede of the transitorie riches of this world: all that is be∣seeming, honorable, and illu∣strious; in lieu of the vaine and vadinge honours here be∣lowe:
all that conteynes in it selfe any cause of ioy, and iubilie, and and all that is deare and delightfull (to witt, that ineffable, vnmeasurable, eternall waight of glorie, ac∣cording to S. Paule) in place of those short, light, deluding, and euen painefull pleasures (as Salomon and S. Augustine experienced them) for which poore man looses himselfe. Thus, my soule, doth faith assure vs: let not then follie perswade vs the contrarie.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 6. DAY. Of Heauen againe. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider, the kingdome prepared for vs, is Beati∣tude: come ô you blessed: and Beatitude is noe other thinge, then to know what is best, and to inioy the same. And wheras none but God himselfe is our summum bonum, or optimum, our cheife good, or our best: it followes, that God himselfe, the father, sonne, and holy Ghost, is our Beatitude, or the Kingdome prepared for vs: accordinge to that: I my selfe vvill be thy exceeding greate
revvarde. Him we shall see face to face, and in that sight our vnderstanding meets with all truth: him we shall see, and in seeing him, our will meetes with all good. Hence the vn∣derstanding hauing noe more to seeke, and the will noe more to loue, they fall, as it were, into a blessed necessitie, of truly seeing what they loue, and louing what they see for all eternitie. AFFECTION and RESOL. Forgett not then, ô man, thy dignitie! By Gods mercy, and the merits of Christ, thou art made the sonne of God, coheire with Christ, to share in his heauenly inheritance, to possesse the same Kingdome with him: that is, to knowe the prime truth, and loue the
cheife good for euer and euer. Let not then the fables, fictions and vaine lyes of the world, take vp thyne vnder∣standinge made to knowe so great and diuine a Truth: nor the vaine loue of creatures ingage thy will, made to loue so souueraigne à Good. But crye incessantly here belowe with holy S. Augustine: Let me knovv thee, ô Lord, and knovv my selfe; and let me loue thee as much as I desire, and as much as I ought. Thus, my soule, may we in some measure, while we liue amidst our miseries, be∣gin, before hand, to possesse our Beatitude, which consists in knovving, louing, and inioying our chiefe Good, which is God himselfe.
THE II. POINTE. Hovv Heauen is to be purchased. Consider out of the Gos∣pell, that the Kingdome of heauen suffers violence; and the violent beare it avvay. Yes, but we must learne of S. Am∣brose how we are to make this violence. We are to assault it, not with swords, with clubbe, or stone; but with myldnesse, with good workes, with chastitie. These are the armes which our faith makes vse of, in that onsett. But yet to make a right vse therof, we must first of all, make force against our owne flesh and bloud, that so gayning domi∣nion ouer our selues, we may imploye all our abilities to force Heauen, as it were, out
of the stronge hands of the Almightie. We are not to hope, saith S. Gregorie, to come to great honours, but by great labours and paines. We must mortifie our members, and all the mutinous people of our hartes, our vnrulie pas∣sions, and badd inclinations. So did all the saintes of God scale and winne his King∣dome. So did that greate Doc∣tour of the Gentiles beare it away: I chastise my body and bringe it into seruitude. So did the sainte of saintes enter into his owne Kingdome. He suffered and so entred into his owne Kingdome. AFFECTION and RESOL. Let vs not hope, my soule, that we who are but younger, and adoptiue children, should
find any other safe way to heauen, then that which the naturall sonne of God, and all his saintes, were to passe: That is, through tribulations, contumelies, and contempts. If vve suffer vvith him vve shall raigne vvith him. Noe, noe, the pure wheate reserued for the heauenly granaries must be winnowed: the gold found worthy to haue course in that celestiall Kingdome, must passe through the hotest fires. Sweete S. Augustine putts it at the lowest rate; that euer it can be expected: and yet ac∣cording to him it will cost vs noe lesse then all we are. The Kingdome of heauen, saith that excellent Sainte, is vvorth as much as thou art: giue thy selfe and thou shalt haue it. Doe not
stand barganing, my soule, and grudging at the price. The naturall sonne of God, purchaced it at noe lesse a rate for himselfe, and thee. THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 7. DAY. A serious reflection to be made, as vvell of Gods gracious gifts beflovved vpon vs: as minaces pronounced against vs. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider (by way of a serious reflection of all the former Meditarions) that since God hath bene so gra∣cious to vs, and we so vngrate∣full to him, as greatly and
frequently to haue offended his diuine Maiestie. Since he so souuerainly hates sinne wherof we stand guiltie. Since death is so vncertaine: iudge∣ment so dreadfull. Hell so intolerable; and the ioyes of Heauen prepared for vs, so ineffablely great; consider, I say, what a necessitie is put vpon vs (if our hartes be tou∣ched, either with dreade of vnspeakable torments, or loue of Beatitude.) To make a good vse of the tyme, which by Gods mercy, we yet haue, to redeeme tyme lost: to make hay whyle the sunne shines: and to treasure vp the ce∣lestiall Manna before the sunne sett. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Noe my soule, we will dare
noe lōger to be so audaciously aduenterous as to triffle our pretious tyme with cold cras crasses. But euen at this verie moment I will striue to con∣clude an eternall peace with God. It is dreadfull to come too late; to heare, verily verily I know you not, and to finde the dore shurt. My conuersa∣tion therfor shall henceforth be in heauen, and heauenly thinges. I will descende into Hell aliue, to obserue the hor∣ride torments of that gastly denne. I will expect death at all houres, since none knowes the houre indeede in which it may surprise me. I will iudge my selfe without flatterie, that I may not be more rigourously iudged. I will endeuour in earnest and
with my whole harte to hate sinne, which God so souerai∣gnely hates. And the residue of my life shall be spent, that by true and hartie pennance (the onely true refuge after sinne) I may take reuenge of my selfe, according to S. Paule, for hauing offended, so gracious a Benefactour, and so dreadfull a Maiestie. THE SECONDE POINTE. Hovv vve are to returne to God by pennance according to S. Augustine. Consider that the way to returne to God by pennance prescribed by S. Augustine, is: First (as to the tyme) to re∣turne speedily, and without all delay: because he who pro∣mised
pardon to the repen∣tant sinner; promised noe cer∣taine tyme for him to repent in, but willed him not to delay his conuersion. Secondly, (as to the manner) mournfully and with confusion. Euery one ought to lament ouer himselfe, as ouer a deade corps: and expresse huge grones vpon his deade soule. Thirdly, in qualitie of Iudge: Mounte into the Tribunall of your owne harte, proue your owne Iudge, and exer∣cise iustice vpon your selfe. And in the first place, take your selfe from behind you, where you endeuoured to hide your faults, and not to be seene, and stand araigned before your selfe. Let feare torture you, till a true confes∣sion
burst out from an hum∣bled harte: and say to God: I achnovvledge myne iniquitie, and my sinnes are continually before myne eyes. AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. My soule, hauing thus, speedi∣ly, mounefully and with the iustice and rigour of an vn∣partiall Iudge, discussed our selues, let vs, presently, hum∣bly, and confidently haue re∣course to God for the rest. We haue an vnhappie power in our selues to commit sinne Thy perdition is from thy selfe, ô Israel: but our saluation is from God alone. To his mercy therfor, which is aboue all his workes, let vs betake our sel∣ues, saying in the bitternesse of our harte: Grant mercy ô Lord to that miserable
wretch, whom thou so longe sparedst in his crymes. O im∣mense pietie, take compassion vpon a confessing cryminall. O publike mercy, looke vpon him with the eye of pitie who hath proued cruell against his owne soule, ah. I should apprehend my case, in a man∣ner, desparate, did I not bewaile it in the fight of an infinite goodnesse; and con∣ceiue my wounds incurable, had I not recourse to an all-souueraigne Physition. Let me perceiue the effects of thy myldnesse, hauing so longe mercifully suspended the sword of reuenge, and let the multitudes of my miseries, be drunke vp in the multitudes of thy drainelesse mercyes.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Hovv vve are to returne to God by the example of the Pro∣digall child. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that the poore prodigall hauing consu∣med all his substance, and rysing (by Gods preuenting grace) out of the sleepe of sinne where he had longe layd, he said in himselfe: hovv many hyrelings are there in my fathers house, vvho haue bread in aboundance, vvhile I lye staruing herevvith hunger? I vvill therfor goe to my father, and say vnto him, Father I haue
offended against heauen, and against thee: nor am I vvorthy to be called thy sonne: treate me onely as one of thy hyrelings. This was all the rhetoricke he vsed: to witt a true acknow∣ledgment of his owne miserie and offences: and the plentie which was found in his fathers house. And so tooke a pious resolution, with the harte of a contrite, and humbled child, to returne to a gracious father, and confesse his fault, willing for his punishment, to loose the title of a sonne, for that of a poore hirelinge. AFFECTION and RESOL. Thus it is, my soule, that we ought to enter into our selues, by comparing the honour and plentie which we in∣ioyed in our fathers house,
where a quiete conscience, heauenly comforts, benedic∣tiōs and graces doe abounde; with the disasters, disgrace, and abandonments which ex∣perience made vs find and feel, when like fugitiues we wandred abroad, and were reduced at length, to that ex∣cesse of miserie, as to feede with swine. Thus it is that we are to returne home againe, by an humble confession of our faults to God, and his Mi∣nisters: hartily acknowled∣ging that we are noe longer worthy of that noble Title of domestikes of God, sonns of God, coheires, and spouses of Christ, but onely of poore hirelings, which we willingly imbrace. Thus doe my soule, and we shall infallibly be
receiued into the open bo∣some of a tender father, whose bowells are more prone to mercy, then our miserable harts readie to craue it as we ought. THE II. POINTE. Hovv vve are to returne to God, by the example of B. Marie Magdalene. Consider that that mirour of true penitents returned to God in the best manner ima∣ginable, that is, with humilitie and loue mixed with teares, &c. Vt cognouit, saith the Euangelist, as soone as she knevv that Iesus vvas sett dovvne, to table in the Phari∣sies house &c. she entred with a pious impudence, where she
was not inuited and placed her selfe, behind him at his feete, she began to water his feete with teares, and wiped them with the haires of her heade, and kissed them &c. She delayed not; to witt, the grace of the holie Ghost knovves noe sluggish delay. She blushed not: because the confusion which she felt within, per∣swaded her, that outward shame was not to be valued. She spoke not, where she knew that the language of a contrite harte was better heard, and her teares, the while, more effectually spoke her errand. So that she wrought her wrothfull Iudge, to turne her pious Aduocate, and to pronounce a fauoura∣ble sentence for her. Thy
sinns are forgiuen thee. AFFECTION and RESOLV. These indeede, my soule, are the blissed dispositions, which leade vs to a perfect recōcile∣ment with God. But alas! who is so impertinētly proude as to presume to haue them without his gifte who com∣mands them, assuring vs by S. Iohn, that vvithout him, vve can doe nothinge Say there-for; giue ô Lord, I humbly be∣seech thee, what thou com∣mandest, that I may loue thee, as much as I desire, and as much as dutie obliges me to. Giue humilitie, that inseparable companion of Charitie, and sure Guardien of virginitie. Giue, finally fountaines of teares, that day and night I may bewaile my offences:
giue them, I say, because without thee we are able to doe nothing. Noe: for if with B. Magdalene we come to Christ, it is because his hea∣uenly Father drawes vs. If the deepe inwarde sense of our crymes make vs insensible (with her) of all outward con∣fusion which they bringe with them; it is the sorrovv vvhich is accordinge to God, and from God, that workes it in our hartes. If we washe his feere with teares; it is God who powres downe that heauenly dewe. If we loue him, it is because he loued vs first. And yet, (ô ineffable goodnesse and benignitie!) by these his owne gifts he drawes vs to him, and then crownes the same by his free pardon,
saying: thy sinns are forgiuen thee. A Prayer. Grant, ô Lord, we beseech thee, that the worke of thy mercy may direct our hartes; because with out thee; we are not able to please thee, per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Other Prayers. O almightie and eternall Father, daigne, by the merits of the life and passion of thy onely beloued sonne, deeply to imprinte in our hartes, true sorrow to haue offended thee, meerely out of the motiues of loue: for alas, if we auoyde sinne onely out of feare of Hell fire, we feare not to of∣fende, but to burne: nor are we iustified therby, since it is
not feare of punishment, but loue of iustice; vvhich makes vs iust in thy sight, ô Lord. Grant me also, deare Lord, a perfect detestation of sinne, and a firme resolution to auoyde it here-after (especial∣ly in such and such thinges which I am most subiect to, and stand most guiltie of in thy sight.) euen purely for thyne owne goodnesse sake, who art infinitly worthy of the loue of all thy creatures. Grant me finally, a true contempt of the world, and a willing flight from it, and all its pompes and vanities (which are the diuells weapons to destroye vs) and therby faith∣fully acquitt my selfe of the solemne promises made in my baptisme. Amen. FINIS.
A SPIRITVALL EXERCISE before profession. THE FIRST MEDITAT. The Preparitorie prayer. Veni Creator. and Deus qui corda &c. THE FIRST POINTE. CONSIDER that since now the yeare of your nouishippe, or tryall, is come to an end; and that by Gods spe∣ciall grace and assistance, (to his honour and glorie, and the
good of your soule) you haue conceiued a generous resolu∣tion, to sett vpon the building of the Euangelicall Towre, you are highly concerned maturely to examine how it is to be done. Nor can you pro∣ceede more securely then by taking it from the mouth of Prime Truth, saying: which of you mynding to build a tower, doth not first sitt downe and reckon the char∣ges that are necessaire whe∣ther he haue to finish it, least that after he hath layd the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that see it begin to mocke him, saying this man began to build, and he could not finish it. You ought therfor to consider the strength of your body: the
bent of your mynde; the motiues which brought you hither: that so you may dis∣couer, whether your body be not in truth too infirme: your mynd too weake and waue∣ring: your motiues too light, and incōsiderate; out of some disgust, rather then a disinter∣rested choyce: out of confi∣dence of your owne abilitie and strength rather then Gods inspirations and dependance of his grace. AFFECTION. Let this be done, my soule, in sinceritie and truth; with grauitie and care; still taking your coun∣sells with God, and from God. It is not a childs play you are going about but the worke of a perfect man. Your choyce is not for a day, but for life. The
consequence of it not for a tearme of some fewe yeares, but for eternitie, eternitie, my soule. In thinges, in a manner, indifferent, the choyce is in∣different. In such things of smale importance, it litle im∣portes whether this, or that be done: so either of them be done to Gods glorie, God is pleased, and we merite: If we should stand a waighing Dou∣bles, saith B. Sales, trading would proue too troublesome, Marrie, goes on the same, the choyce of ones vocation: the proposition of a matter of great consequence: a worke of much difficultie &c. de∣serue a serious ponderation, that Gods will (which is our dutie happinesse and perfec∣tion) may be discerned therin.
And let our firme resolutions be made accordingly. THE II. POINTE. Consider with what it is that this Euangelicall Towre, or spirituall building ought to be built, and S. Augustine will teach you, that it is to be done vvith noe other treasure, then the forsaking of all, and follovving of Christ, which he takes from Truth it selfe, saying; Euery one of you that doth not renounce all that he hath can not be my Disciple. And the same Truth expresses what he meanes by renounceing of all, in these words; If any man come to me, and hateth not his Father and mother, and vvife, and children, and bre∣thren and sisters, yea and his
evvne life besides, he cannot be my Disciple. AFFECTION. This, my soule, is the conctition of the obli∣gation into which we are to enter, for the building of this spirituall Towre. This must be performed by vs, and euen by all Christians in generall (at least in perparation of mynde) or els in vaine doe we pretend to be the Disciples, or seruants of Christ. Giue all, and gayne all. At any lesse coste, this spirituall Towre will not be finished: at any lesse rate the Euangelicall pearle will not be purchaced. Vnlesse all this be performed▪ saith Christ himselfe, You cannot be my Disciples: you cannot be true Religious and true followers of Christ. Vn∣lesse
this generous resolution be absolutley vndertaken: let our designe be absolutly for∣saken. To serue God by halues, will proue vnprospe∣rous to vs, God desires the hart which was made by himselfe, and for himselfe, and he will haue it whole. The virgines whole thoughtes, and sollici∣tudes ought to be imployed vpon the thinges vvhich per∣taine to our Lord: that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. Remember that it was S. Paule who saith it.
THE II. MEDITATION▪ FOR THE FIRST DAY. Of the solide and sure fundation of this spirituall building. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider what fundation ought to be layd to sup∣porte this waightie, and most important building; and your holy Father will tell you againe, that it ought to be noe other then humilitle. Doe you, saith he, pretende to erecte a fabrike of a huge highth? Thinke first of the foundation, humilitie. And by how much higher we in∣tend to rayse the building, and to charge more waight
vpon it, by so much deeper we must digge the fundation. Now, vnto what a vaste highth is the toppe of our Euan∣gelliall Towre to reach? Cer∣tes euen into the sight of God, that great God, that im∣mense and dreadfull ma∣iestie. How vastly deepe then ought our foundation to be digged? AFFECTION and RESOL. Yes my soule: it is euen into the sight of this dreadfull Maiestie, that we intend that the toppe of our Towre should reach. That maiestie, which the Angells prayse, the Dominations adore, the Powers tremble at; the Che∣rubins and Seraphins with dreade singe to. Holy, Holy, Holy, for euer. Let vs not
hazard so hugely important a peece vpon vnsound ground∣workes which will proue at length but ruines. Nay, con∣trarily, let vs digge quite through, this loose earth of which we are made, exinanite exinanite vsques ad fundamen∣tum in-ea. Let vs neuer leaue digging till we meete without owne nothinge; till we knowe it certainly; till we confesse it ingenuously: that, is our safest ground to build vpon. where we may iustly hope that God will put a hand too, and rayse the worke; since his custome is, to trade vpon nothinge and to worke wonders vpon it. All my soule, may we be so truly nothing in our owne eyes, that he vvho is potent, may looke vpon our abiectnesse,
and doe great thinges in vs. THE II. POINTE. What this foundation (humi∣litie) is. Consider what humilitie truly is; and you will receiue from your holy Father, that it is a voluntarie stooping, or lovving of the mynde, out of a serious consideration of vvhat our almightie maker is, and vvhat vve are in relation to him. Or againe; humilitie is a vertue vvherby a man vvaxeth vile in his ovvne sight, by the true Knovvledge he hath of his ovvne miserie. Or els from S. Bernard: Humilitie is veritie; that is the truth of what God is, and what is man; which being well knowne and pon∣dered,
it is impossible but that our hartes should bowe downe to the verie ground, and keepe vs there with our mouthes in the dust wherof we were made. AFFECTION and RESOLV. Now, my soule, if humilitie be nothinge els but a stoo∣ping of the harte vpon the knowledge we haue, of what God is, and what we are, let our consideration be conti∣nually fixed vpon those two thinges, as the sure, solide, and true ground therof; saying with the humble S. Francis. O my God, Who art thou, and who am I? Who art thou, but an immense, inaccessible, ineffable, incom∣prehensible Maiestie? And who am I, but a miserable,
inconsiderable, contemptible abisse of miserie? Who art thou, but an infinite rich Master, who canst neede no∣thinge that is myne? And who am I, but a poore, needie, beggarly seruant, who am constrayned to begge breade at thy dore euery day? Who art thou, but à permanent, independant, eternall essence or being? And who am I, as the scriptures teach, but a vapor, a morning devve, a drea∣me, a fantome, a fading flovver, a pure vanitie, a blast of vvinde, as had ovve, in aword, a thinge, which neither hath any other thinge, more miserably poore, or more vainely proude then it selfe. Dust and ashes, then, vvhy art thou proude?
THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE SECONDE DAY. Of vvhom vve ought to learne humilitie. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider of whom you ought to learne humili∣tie, and S. Augustine will tell you, that he sends you not to publicans and harlots, who yet will be preferred before the proude person in the Kingdome of heauen, but to the Kinge of heauen him∣selfe, who cryes out as it were in a publick auditorie of all man kinde: come vnto me, and learne of me. But tell me; I beseech thee, saith he, ô thou
sonne of God, what must I learne of thee, by coming to thee? that I am mylde, and humble in harte. Are then all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge which are hidd in thee, reduced to this, that we must learne this of thee, as some great matter of impor∣tance, that thou art mylde and humble in harte? Is it so great a thinge to become litle, that vnlesse we learne it of thee, who art so great, we shall neuer be able to learne it? Yes truly, saith he, euen so it is: for the peace and repose of the soule can be noe otherwise attained to, then by dissipa∣ting that vnrulie swelling, which makes a man seeme great in his owne eyes, while he appeares vnsound in thyne, ôn; Lord.
AFFECTION and RESOLV. We are here called to Christs schoole, my soule, to learne a a lesson which the world was neuer acquainted with be∣fore. The great Rabbys of the Lawe looked ouer it, to finde the first places in the syna∣gogue. The learned Phyloso∣phers vnderstoode it not, and thence vanished in their owne wisdome. The great Potenta∣tes of the earth looked vpon it with scorne, and thence they vvere throvvne dovvne from their seates. But the wis∣dome of heauen made him∣selfe the Master of it, and will haue vs to learne of him: not to create newe worlds; not to make visible and inuisible things; not to worke miracles, and raise the deade &c. which
we should haue iudged a strange, since an impossible commande, but this onely, short, sweete and easie lesson; myldnesse and humilitie of harte. For alas, without it, what would it profite vs to be able to say, as some shall say to God: did we not prophe∣cie in thy name? did we not east our Diuells? did we not worke many wonders? What would it profit vs, I say: since we should onely heare with them: I knovv you not; be gone from me, ô you vvorkers of ini∣quitie. THE II. POINTE. Consider that it is noe wonder that the teaching of humilitie, was one of his grea∣test sermons to all mankind in earth, since, as it may seeme,
one of his wisdomes cheife designes in coming downe from heauen, was to teache the sonnes of earth that ne∣cessarie way to heauen accor∣ding to that none ascends but he vvho descends. To witt he had seene one of the brightest of his starrs with huge multi∣tudes of his accursed crue rushe downe to Hell, by their proude ambition of ascen∣ding: and therfor he would reache the earth by descen∣ding to ascende aboue the Heauens. They lost their right to Heauen by aspiring aboue their places, to more then they were; and man was to be taught to cure contra∣ries by contraries, and to re∣intitle himselfe to heauen, by humbly staying in his place,
and by remayning what he was, by dwelling in his poore naked nothing; which alone (were it anything) he might properly tearme his owne. AFFECTION and RESOL. If the verie brightest starrs fall from Heauen, where pride can gett noe safe footing; what ought we poore wormes to doe in earth but feare, and keepe our selues within the compasse of what we are? If they fell to Hell by aspiringe to be like to the highest; let our firme resolutiō and whole strife be, to ascende to heauē, by affecting to be equall to, or euen lesse then the lowest: since Thruth hath said it, nor can he deceiue vs: that he vvho exaltes himselfe shall be hum∣bled, and be that humbleth him∣selfe
shall be exalted. Nay, my soule, since the same Truth comes to teach vs this lesson in his sacred passion, let vs not proue so much contrarie to his blessed designe, and our owne aduantage, as not to en∣deuour to learne it, with the whole strife of our hartes. Howbeit, sith he is as well the teacher, as giuer of it, let vs often say with S. Augus∣tine: thou commandest humi∣litie, ô Lord, giue vvhat thou commandest, and commande vvhat thou vvilt.
THE II. MEDITATION. FOR THE 2. DAY. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that hence it was, that the diuine wisdome, or Word of God, which was in the begining with God; nay, was God (and therfor could thinke it noe stealth to be coequall, coeter∣nall, consubstantiall with God the Father) exinanited, or powred himselfe out, and became flesh, Et Verbum caro factum est, taking vpon him the shape of a seruant. Earth is at a losse, vpon this abismall humiliation, litle kowing, as faith S. Augustine, what to say to it, or what conceipt to
make of it. Nay the heauenly powers stand amaysed, to sea the kinge of Angells, become lesse then the Angells: yee iust like to one of vs (in all thinges saue sinne) nay one of vs indeede: flesh of our flesh: bones of our bones, poore man. Vnlesse we should yet say further, lesse then man: Nouissimus virorum, the least and last of men: a vvorme and not a man, with the royall Prophete. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. Ah my poore soule; if the gracious inuitations, and mylde lessons of Wisdome cannot preuayle to plucke downe our proude harte; let at least the abismall example of our humanised God, the eternall Word made flesh
put before our eyes, dissipate, and cure that pernicious tu∣mour. It is thy verie God that lyes humbled at thy feete my soule; it is diuinitie it selfe, which lyes, as it were, infirme before thee, that so thy swel∣ling being worne downe, thou mightst deiect thy selfe, and caste thy selfe prostrate, vpon that great God, Deus Deorum, now, for thy example, become the last and least of men. THE II. POINTE. Consider that if this hea∣uenly designe, and resolution be truly admirable; farre, farre aboue the reach of men and Angells, and the execution of it, ineffably gracious, and euen rauishinge (as speaking more sweetnesse, and heauēly
delightes to humane hartes, then they are any way capable to comprehende; so that they doe not so much intice, as in∣force the said hartes to hu∣militie, if there be any sense of man left in man) so the ad∣mirable circumstances which accompaignie it, doe power∣fully preach the same lessons to the eyes of the world. If then it hath pleased him, to build himselfe a cottage of the same claye wherof he made vs; he will also haue all the rest suted to it. This most humble, Loue, metamorsised-kinge, will haue an humble mother Queene, a poore hand∣mayde of our Lord, An humble putatiue father, Ioseph a car∣penter. An humble Pallace, a poore: Rocke or caue. An hum∣ble
chaire of state, a manger Humble attendants, an oxe and an Asse, vvith a fevve sillie shephardes: and after that, all his life longe, poore, rude, simple fishermen. AFFECTION and RESOL. What, my soule; will be euer able to decrye pride, if this doe not? And what will be able to imprinte humilitie deepe in the verie bottomes of our hartes, if this proue not effectuall? His poore, abiect, and despicable condition, in the verie first steppe he made into this world began to pu∣blish it: His lowlie, obscure, and hidden life, all the tyme of his infancie, declared it: in his riper yeares he continually preached it: the course of his whole life, confirmed it: and
at his death, he signed it with his pretious, bloude, humbling himselfe to death, and the death of the crosse, the most infamous of all deathes. O my soule, let vs then, being forced by all these pressing, and euen oppressing arguments, either humble our selues to the ground in all occasions of humiliation; or at least, con∣fesse to our confusion, that we are the most vnworthy, and vnsutable seruants, to a diuine Master, who was in all thinges so incomparably humble.
THE I. MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD DAY. Of the Benefit of a religious vocation. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that it seemed not enough to that Kinge of glorie, First to haue made you a reasonable crea∣ture, after his owne likenesse, and all the other creatures for your vse. 2. to haue regenerated you to a new and better life by the holy Sacra∣ment of Baptisme. 3. to haue giuen you the knowledge of the Catholike faith, hauing culled you out of multitudes that daylie perish: but his
gracious beneuolence went yet further on with you, and by this holie vocation to Re∣ligion, called you to be his pe∣culiar friend and seruant and Fauourite, to haue a more neere and deare conuersation with him, and to make it your businesse in earth, to singe his prayses, and mercyes, as the Blessed shall doe for euer and euer in Heauen. AFFECTION and RESOL. O the infinite goodnesse of my deare Lord who goes still on, in my behalfe, heaping benefit vpon benefit, and fa∣uours vpon fauours; yea fa∣uours of singular preference, tender loue, and greatest assu∣rance; towards the attayning of Beatitude, that can be mette with vpon this perilous
sea. Fauours not granted to all, nay scarce to a few, among multitudes who daylie suffer shipwracke; while thy free grace, deare God, not my merits, hath guided my doubtfull nauigation to a safe harbour. Where (witnesse S. Bernard who experienced the same) one liues more pure∣ly, falls more rarely, riseth more quicklie, walkes more cautiously, receiues grace more frequently, reposeth more securely, dyes more confidently, and is rewarded more abundantly. THE II. POINTE. That this vocation leads to a certaine state. Consider that Gods good∣nesse,
by meanes of this holie vocation, lendes you not to a certaine indifferencie of ser∣uing him, or not seruing him, at your owne pleasure and election; but he bringes you therby to a setled and perma∣nent state, wherin your body is tyed to stabilitie in a certai∣ne place; and all your actions are marked out, and limited by Rule and constitutions, and all these confirmed by the three essential vowes of Religion, Pouertie, chastitie and obedience, according to S. Augustins Rule. Which vowes are noe other things then sacred and solemne promises freely, deliberatly, and with out constrainte, made to God in the face of the holy Church, of thinges which are
better, as S. Thomas of Aqui∣ne teacheth. AFFECTION and RESOL. This, my soule, was Gods sin∣gular goodnesse to vs, to winne our hartes by our owne free choyce, to renounce that dangerous libertie, which might happly haue proued our ruine, to imbrace the true libertie of the children of God, which is neuer so free, or euen truly free indeede, but vnder the seruitude of that most pious Kinge of glo∣rie, according to that of S. Augustine; Libertie is neuer greater then vnder a pious Kinge, whom to serue, is in∣deede to raigne: and happie is that blessed necessitie vvhich compells vs to the better. Our false libertie then is turned
into a necessitie, but it is to be truly free: to haue nothing common with the world: not to be tortured with the greedie desire of vaine toyes! to haue noe commerce with wickednesse: to passe our tyme in innocencie. Our for∣tunes are noe more ours: noe, but they are gaynfully spent vpon the purchace of the ri∣ches of Heauen. The dispo∣sition of our body is not in our owne hands: true, but it is to imitate the Angells. The goods of our mynd, our verie will is at anothers dispose. Yes, but it is, that by wanting it for a tyme, we may inioy it for an eternitie.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD DAY. Of the vovve of pouertie. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that if humili∣tie be the basis and fun∣dation, which secures all that is built vpon it, pouertie must be at the charges to rayse the walls. But with what treasure will pouertie performe this worke? Marrie with noe other, as S. Augustine hath told vs, but with relinquish∣ing of all we either haue or can hope for. So is the toppe and perfection of our spiri∣tuall building to be attained to; as wisdome it selfe assures
vs, saying: if thou wilt be perfect, goe and sell all that thou hast, and giue it to the poore, and take vp thy crosse and come and follovv me. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. O glorious and rich pouer∣tie, which alone art able to vndertake and accomplish so great a worke. The riches of a kingdome are scarcely suffi∣cient to finish one princely Louure: and yet the pouertie of one poore free giuing harte, is able to rayse a stately Towre reaching into the sight of God, and to possesse it selfe of his kingdome. O gaynfull cōmerce! ô diuine∣ly-rich trading! Ingenious pouertie is able to improue her smale talent, to an hun∣dred-fold aduantage: and to
the sure possessiō of life euer∣lasting. He sayes it, whom we dare not misbeleeue: euery one that hath left house, or landes for my names sake, shall receiue an hundred fold, and shall possesse life euerlasting. THE II. POINT. That Euangelicall pouertie ought to be learnt of Christ. Consider that though di∣uers Phylosophers both pray∣sed, and in some sort practised pouertie, as not reputing him worthy of God who did not dontemne riches: yea and some among them qualified it laeta paupertas, ioyfull po∣uertie. Yet hardly should we either haue tasted the ioy of it, or haue put our selues to
the practise therof, had we not had a better Master to haue proposed it to vs by way of counsell; preached it to vs with a blissing vpon it; and practised it in his owne sacred person all his life longe: who being rich became poore to inrich vs by his owne pouer∣tie. He was poore in his nati∣uitie; being borne in a poore caue or stable; wrapped vp in poore clothes; layd on a poore locke of hay, lodged in a poore manger, accompai∣gned with a poore oxe and asse. All the course of his life was spent in pouertie and want: neuer hauing any possession, noe not so much as a place to shrude his heade, and at his death he was stript naked vpon the crosse.
AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. And yet, was he not eternall prouidence, and foresawe all this? Was he not eternall wis∣dome and so could haue pre∣uented it all? Was he not the riches of heauen, and our God, who could stand in want of nothing that is ours? Conclude then my soule, with much ioy and consola∣tion? either are we making a good choyce of this poore life we intende to leade; or els the wisdome of heauen may seeme to haue mist in his choyce. But wisdome could not deceiue, nor be deceiued: reioyce then, my soule, to haue made so sure, so happie, so Christ like a choyce. And let vs neuer cease to vse our vttermost endeuours, to imi∣tate
his extreame pouertie in his natiuitie, in his life, and at his death. THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 4. DAY. To vvhat this vovve of pouertie doth absolutly binde vs. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that the pouer∣tie to which you oblidge your selfe, is accordinge to S. Augustins Rule. That is, not to mendicitie, not to penurie, or extreame want of necessa∣ties in meate drinke or clo∣thes &c. But to possesse what you possesse in common, ac∣cording to that Apostolicall and primitiue Christian pro∣ceeding
in the fourth of the Actes: All thinges vvere com∣mon vnto them & neither vvas there any needie among them & and to euerie one vvas deuided, according as euery one had neede. From these blessed first fruites of Christianitie, did your holy father, as himselfe declares, take the model of your life. So that, as you can haue nothing of your owne, nor euen the power to call it so: so on the other side, you haue right to your share in the comon distribution of the whole. AFFECTION and RESOL. How happie are we, my soule, to haue fixed vpon so happie a proceeding; where we are neither to haue nor want ri∣ches: to witt we neither suffer
the danger of hauing them; not the incommoditie of wanting them. Happie con∣dition, which frees vs from the perill of riches, which makes the way of heauen almost impossible: and yet subiects vs not to the incom∣moditie, of the want of them, wherby life becomes loath∣some, and necessitie compells to vnworthy and base thin∣ges. This golden meane, was certainly the production of the holy Ghost in those boylinge primitiue hartes, whence it was deriued downe to vs; and wherby we can ioy∣fully pronounce with the Apostle: vve haue nothinge, and yet vve possesse all thinges, by the harmelesse vse which we are permitted to make of thē.
THE II. POINTE. What pouertie a true Religious ought indeede to ayme at. Consider that though the possessing of nothing in pro∣per, or want of proprietie. be all that you canonically promisse or are bound to; yet your aymes indeede, are the contempt of riches, and of the verie desire of them. It is not gold and siluer that the Apostle tearmes the roote of all euil, but the inordinate coueting of them. Nor are rich persons alone subiect to dan∣ger, but these also that couet to be riche, vvho, saith he, fall into snares, and temptations. The pouertie which our sauiour preacheth with a benedictiō
vpon it, is spirituall pouer∣tie, or pouertie of the d'isin∣terrest mynde which neither has them, nor cares for them, nor seekes the commodities and pleasures they bringe with them, further then a meere necessarie liuelyhoode, as we see in our B. Sauiours example, which is our pat∣terne indeede. AFFECTION and RESOL. The actuall want of riches, my soule, and the banishing of those contentious words myne and thyne, is a good steppe to beatitude: since therby innumerable occasiōs of contentions and quarrells are cut off. Yet alas, that is not all that the spouses of Christ should ayme at who in their pouertie ought to
expresse the pouertie of Christ, who neither had them, nor desired them, nor the commodities and de∣lights which accompanie them. It profits vs not at all, saith S. Caesarius, to aban∣donne riches outwardly, vnlesse we roote out withall the inward desire of them, which sticke close to our hartes. It is not too much, my soule, for poore naked man, to follow poore and naked Christ. THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 4. DAY. Of the vovve of chastitie. COnsider, that if humi∣litie hath placed the
foundation, and pouertie raysed the walls, chastitie woud be at the cost to a dorne it within: for it is indeede Virginitie that is the begining of spirituall beautie and or∣nament. All the beautie and glorie of the Kings daugher is vvithin. Yea saith S. Bernarde, virginitie is the best, and most wishfull furniture, and such as might euen proue a kind of enuie to the Angells themselues, which though otherwise Virgines too; yet are they not virgines inui∣roned with flesh and bloud: whereas to liue in flesh and not according to flesh, is not an earthly, but a heauenly life, saith S. Hierome. AFFECTION and RESOLV. With what other ornament,
my soule, then virginall pu∣ritie, was that royall Hall, or earthly Paradice, to be a∣dorned, which was to receiue the puritie of heauen, which came downe to espouse mans nature? If virginall puritie then was to giue intertayne∣ment to the sonne of God in earth, noe wonder, that pu∣ritie too must adorne the spi∣rituall building which we are raysing vp into the sight of God in heauen. Let vs not fayl, my soule, to put an inesti∣mable price vpon this an∣gelicall vertue, which heauen so highly values. It being in∣deede the iuery Throne which the heauenly salomon built for himselfe. And let vs neuer esteeme it safe but onely vpō its sure foundation humilitie.
THE SECONDE POINTE. That by the vovve of chastitie you are truly maried to God. Consider to what a highth of dignitie you are admitted by this heauenly vowe: certes to noe lesse then an absolute mariage with God. So were we taught by Tortullian 14. hundred yeares agoe; spea∣king to a virgine: thou art maried to Christ: to him didst thou deliuer vp thy body: to him thou didst betrouth thy maturi∣tie. Walke on then, according to thy spouse his vvill and pleasure. Whence the Church of God till this day, appoints these words to be said at your re∣ceiuing of the veyle: receiue this sacred veyle, vvherby you
may be knovvne to haue contem∣ned the vvorld; and to haue subiected or espoused your selfe for euer to Christ the spouse of virgines. AFFECTION and RESOL. O admirable dignitie of the Virgine, where the hum∣ble hand may de is raysed to the honour of a Bride to Christ himselfe, the Bride∣grome! whom when she loues, she's chaste: whom when she touches, she's pure: whom when she takes in ma∣riage, she is a virgine! O supercelestiall mariage! from whence fidelitie, and fertili∣tie are expected, as well as in other mariages: because such as breake the first faith, haue damnation, saith the Apostle. Yea, the happie state of vir∣gines,
assures S. Augustine, is more fruitfull and fertile; not by hauing great bellies, but great myndes: not by hauing breasts full of mylke, but hartes full of candour: and in lieu of binging forth earth out of their bowells, by bringing forth heauen by their prayers. Hence issues a noble progenie; puritie, iusti∣ce, patience, myldnesse, cha∣ritie attended by all herno∣ble traine of vertues; the holy virgins heauenly issue.
THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 5. DAY. Of the vovve of obedience. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that notwith∣standing that in humili∣tie, the ground worke, is sure: that riche pouertie hath raysed the walles, and ange∣licall puritie hath adorned the worke interiourly, Yet must transcendante bedien∣ce secure all, or nothinge will proue stable. All is sure in obedience, all without it is in danger. Obedience, saith your holy Father, is, as it were, the mother, and keeper of all: she continually
watches that noe parte of our spirituall building may be lyable to any danger. And this so necessarie vertue of obedience, is nothing els but a voluntarie and rationall sacry∣fice of our ovvne vvill to the will of another, which S. Iohn Climacus tearmes, the death or graue of our ovvne vvill. AFFECTION and RESOL. If then, my soule, our greatest assurance be found in obe∣dience, let our greatest care be imployed to purchace, conserue, and practise it. By obeying our Superiours, it is (saith S. Gregorie) that God is obedient to our prayers. And your holy Father, dares affir∣me; that one prayer of an obe∣dient person is sooner heard,
thet ten thousand of one diso∣bedient. It is obedience which makes vs secure: obedience which frees vs from care and sollicitude: Obedience which renders our meate, drinke, and play, meritorious. By obedience we equally aduan∣ce our iorney towards heauen in standing still, as walking on; in sleeping as wakinge. O admirable aduantages of obedience! O how happie and secure is the condition of an obedient soule, of whom the wiseman pronounceth that she shall singe victories. THE II. POINTE. That obedience is the most im∣portant of the three vovves. Consider that though the
vowes of pouertie and chasti∣tie, contribute much to the happie state of a religious life, yet doth that of obe∣dience farre excelle them, and in some sorte conteynes them all, according to the sense of the Angelicall Doc∣tour. For wheras Religion is a sacrifice, wherin pouertie offers all her goods of Fortu∣ne; and chastitie all those of the body: obedience goes yet further, and sacryficeth all those of the mynde, as selfe-will, selfe-iudgement, and euen the whole man, which certainly is incompa∣rably more excellent then all the rest. AFFECTION and RESOL. Pouertie, and chastitie, saith S. Bernard, are the two winges
by which obedience mounts aloft. Yet it is she indeede, not they that flye. A douzen such winges would not be able to rayse proude disobedience one inch to heauen-wards. It is neither our goods of for∣tune, nor those of our body, which will proue a pleasing sacry fice in the sight of God, vnlesse they be accompayned with obedience, the humble submission of the will, and iudgement. Banishe out of your harte, this pleaseth, and this displeaseth, saith your brother a Kempis, and nothing shall trouble you. and S. Bernarde, take avvay the vvill, and there shall be noe hell.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 5. DAY. Of the extent of obedience. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider, that as to make obedience absolutly blin∣de, were to depriue man of man, that is, of reason wherby he is differenced from a beast, and to oppose that of the Apostle; let your obseruance be reasonable: so to leaue it wholy to the guidance, and appoint∣ment of reason; were rather to make a man a Phylosopher, then either a good religious person, or euen a good Chris∣tian. It must so farre see, as to be able to discerne Gods part,
because the Decree is without exception, that vve ought rather to obeye God then men. But where we doe not manifestly see, that Gods right is tren∣ched vpon, or violated, we ought absolutly to obeye a superiours commande in all things without reserue, wher∣in he is superiour. And this kind of obedience falls vnder your vowe, and is absolutly necessarie. AFFECTION and RESOLV. O my soule, if our owne reason were made the Rule of our obedience, with what confusions, and endlesse wranglings would not Mo∣nasteries be replenished? They would not so much be found sacred and silent soli∣tudes, as cententious Aca∣demies.
It is at the death of our rebellious wills (that pesti∣lent source of mans miserie and mortall poison of a spri∣tuall life) that obedience aymes, which is not effected by proude disputes, but by humble submissions; hauing continually in mynd that all povver is from God, and he vvho resists povver resists Gods ordonnance. Let vs then, my soule, humbly and promptly obeye God in our superiours person, standing alwayes in a blissed indifferencie with S. Paule, to heare him by their mouthes, and to obeye him, in their persons, saying: What is thy holy vvill I should doe?
THE II. POINTE. Of the diuers degrees of it. Consider that tho necessa∣rie obedience to which you are tyed by vowe, consists in obeying Superiours cōmands, according to Rule and Con∣stitutiōs, or what conduces to the due obseruance therof. Yet are not the pious spouses of Christ to stoppe there, but to be still striuing to emulate the better gifts, and to render themselues wholy agreeable to their diuine spouse. Be per∣fect, as your heauenly father is perfect saith our sauiour, by endeuouring still to obeye in the most perfect man∣ner, which that great seruant of God Ruisbrochius putts
downe as followes. In the first place it must be prudent and discreete. 2. simple. 3. cheer∣full. 4. prompt. 5. couragious. 6. deuoute. 7. humble. AFFECTION and RESOL. O what a blessed life is ledd where all these conditions meete! O what a Heauen appeares in earth where earthly Angells thus liue Let this be our cheife endeuour, my soule, as it is the happi∣nesse, securitie, and ornament of a religious life. Let vs with prudence and discretion dis∣cerne Gods will by our supe∣riours mouth, and whether we be commanded to watch, to fast, to pray or worke, &c. or els vpon occasions, at their pleasure, to leaue them off, let it be done simply, and
with assurance, that by how much more simply, by so much the more fruitfully and excellently its done. Let that discreete simplicitie be secō∣ded with quicke and chees∣full execution: for God loues a free and merrie-harted giuer. If the thinge commanded appeare hard, yet imbrace it with a manly courage, heauen is worth more, and he who gaue the commande can giue strength to performe it. Fi∣nally, let all this be done with humilitie and deuotion, not so much to please men, as that our heauenly father may be glorified.
THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 6. DAY. Of the excellencies of Obedience. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider with deuoute Ruisbrochius, that obe∣dience is a vertue of so great excellēcie, that the verie least worke, be it of what kinde it will, being done by vertue therof, is much better, and more acceptable to God, then euen other geate workes done without it; as for example, hearing of Masse, reading, praying, contemplating, or any other worke you can thinke of. Which lesson we
are yet taught by a greater Master: Kings 1.15. Will our Lord haue Holocausts and victi∣mes, and not rather that his voyce should be obeyd? For bet∣ter is obedience then victimes: and to harken rather, then to offer the fatt of rammes. Because &c. it is as it vvere the vvic∣kednesse of Idolatrie to refuse to obey. AFFECT and RESO. It is not so much the greatnesse of the thinge then, my soule, we ought to looke vpon, as the greatnesse of the obedience with which we are to perfor∣me it. Commandes of great and herociall actions rare∣ly occurre, wheras obedience may be daylie exercised, and merite increased in a num∣ber of smale matters: Nor is
it easily to be conceiued, what riches are to be treasu∣red vp for heauen therby. Deuoute obedience knowes how to render the poore wido∣wes myte a gratfull offering. Industrious obedience nego∣tiates vpon trifles, and yet like the honie bee stores her hyue with huge riches. Many other vertues, daughters of Charitie, gather maine hea∣pes of treasure togeither, yet obedience so farre outstripps them all, that she makes her selfe more gratefull to God then a sacryfice. THE II. POINTE. Of vvhom vve ought to learne Obedience. Consider that we ought to
learne this best of morall vertues of the best of Masters of moralitie Iesus Ch. Who is as well the Master, as the Disciple, of it. He was the Master of it: at his coming into the world; while he liued in it; and at his departure out of it. At his coming, S. Paule tells vs in his person: in the heade of the booke it is vvritten of me, that I should doe thy vvill: then said I: behold I come that I may doe thy vvill o God. His whole life was spent in the doing the will of his heauenly father who sent him, and in obeying his mother, S. Ioseph, and euen all creatures for his sake. At his departure, he vvas obe∣dient euen vnto death, and the death of the Crosse. And he
was the Disciple of it too; sithens, as S. Paule affirmes, though he were the sonne of God, he learnt obedience by the thinges vvhich he suffered; and vvas made the cause of eternall saluation to all that obey him. AFFECTION and RESOL. O what an excellent lesson of obedience hath the sonne of God, left for the sonnes of men to imitate! He, who, as God, could be obedient to none, being God-man, beco∣mes obedient to all men for his heauenly fathers sake. All his life was a cōtinued obedi∣ence, till by his painfull death he consummated the great worke of mans redemption, for which he was sent. Father I haue consummated the vvorke vvhih thou gauest me to doe,
saith that intirely obedient sonne. The worke which we are to doe, my soule, (which is as it were our whole busi∣nesse) is, to obey God in our superiours commandes, and by such submission, and their care, to secure our blessed eternitie. By their eyes we best discerne: By their iud∣gements we most wisely iudge: by their directions, and orders, we most surely walke to mans beatitude.
THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 6. DAY. That Charitie must be the roofe of this spirituall building. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider, that be the foundationes neuer so deeply digged: be the walls neuer so firme, and confir∣med; and the interior partes neuer so fairely adorned: yet if the roofe be not sutable to the rest, and be not establis∣hed aboue the rest, it lyes but vselessely open to receiue winds and shewres; and is vnfitt for the vse of man: being indeede noe perfect buildinge, but onely the ma∣terialls
or ruines therof; vpon which passers by looke with derision, and say: this man began to build, but could not finish the same. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. It is the end, my soule, that euery wise man acts for, without which his worke is imperfect, nor can he repose. Pouertie indeede seemes more then humane. Pure na∣ture knowes noe such pro∣duction. Virginitie is truly Angelicall and diuine; and is a fruite which is onely found in the bosome of the Catho∣like Church. None but a vir∣gine mother brings out vir∣gines. Obedience directs all, secures all, confirmes all: and makes a fitt tabernacle for God in the harte of man; by
banishing thence selfe iudge∣ment and selfe will. But hea∣uenly charitie; as a glorious mother, farr outstrips them all, giues them all their begin∣ing, increase, and perfection. For why indeede, my soule, did we first enterprise this holy worke, but because we loue? What could be able to robbe vs of all we haue, but loue? What did wowe vs to virginall chastitie, but the loue of a virgine spouse? What could moue men to depriue them selues of belo∣ued libertie, and to liue at the dispose of anothers will, but the loue of him alone, who chused rather to dye, thē not to accomplish the will of his heauenly Father? Loue then, saith your holy Father,
and doe vvhat thou vvilt. THE II. POINTE. That vvithout charitie nothing is done to secure our happie eternitie. Consider that if humilitie put the foundation of your spirituall Towre, it was by charities guidance and order: for as humilitie goes not without charitie, so charitie neuer leaues humilitie. If pouertie raysed the walls, it was with the treasure wher∣with charitie furnished her. If chastitie adorned it within: it was with the pure burning gold which she had of chari∣tie. Finally if obedience con∣firmed and secured the whole worke; it was by the force she
receiued of charitie, vvhich is as stronge as death. In a word all is from charitie, and all is for charitie. AFFECTION & RESOLVT. He (S. Paule) knewe this truth, my soule, as certainly, as he affirmes it vndauntedly to wit; that not onely the foresaid vertues profit vs nothinge without charitie, but euen that tho vve should haue all faith, so that vve could remoue moun∣taines: though vve should distri∣bute all our goods to be meate for the poore: finally, though vve should deliuer our bodies to bur∣ne, and yet vvant charitie, it profits vs nothing. Charitie; saith holy S. Augustine, is that which discernes the sonns of God from the sonns of the Diuell. Charitie is that one
necessarie thinge, which alone sufficeth. Charitie, in a word, is that Euangelicall gemme, for which if a man should giue all his substance, he shall re∣pute it as nothing. Come thē, ô come then, ô thou holy spirit, Deus Charitas, and replenish the hartes of thy faithfull, and inflame them vvith the fire of thy loue. THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 7. DAY. That all the vertues are loue. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that so true it is that nothing is done without charitie, that your holy Father makes noe diffi∣cultie
to teach you, that vvithout charitie the rest of the vertues are not indeede reputed vertues: nay further, that the rest of the vertues are but in∣deede loue and charitie, so, or so qualified. For what is humi∣litie but charitie stooping, and reputing her selfe no∣thing? What is pouertie, but charitie contemning all, and stripping herself of all: What is chastitie but loue preser∣uing corruptible man from corruption of bodie and mynde? What finally obe∣dience, but loue freely and reasonably sacrifycing vp the will of man, and making it supple and inclinable to eue∣rie creature. AFFECTION and RESOL. Charitie then, my soule, is
that transcendant heauenly vertue without which there is noe true vertue at all▪ It is she which gouernes as Queene, giues life, vigour and worth to all the other vertues. He who loueth not remaynes in death. It is she who perfumes them all with the odour and sweeenesse of holy loue: since we doe not meerely imbrace them, because they are ver∣tues, but rather in qualitie of thinges that are desired, im∣braced, and beloued by God: (To discouer à man truly vertuous, we vse not to inquire what he beleeues or what he hopes for, but what he loues. If earth h'es earthly: if Heauen, he's heauenly; if God, he's Godlike.) for as such they be∣come all desirable, louing,
and louelie. Let me loue thee, then, ô Lord, let me loue thee, and loue all other thinges which I loue and practise, for thee, and in thee: that my be∣loued may be myne, and I wholie his. THE II. POINTE. That vve ought incessantly to desire, and breath after charitie. Consider that if, as we haue seene, Charitie be all in all, our thoughtes ought to be sett vpon the continuall de∣sire of it. For what ought we, or doe we indeede desire, but what euery one pro∣poseth to himselfe for his end? and the end of the lavve is loue. What ought any Christiā to desire but the accomplish∣ment of the lawe of God, and
the fulnesse of the lavve is chari∣tie. Nor fares it in those hea∣uenly desires, as in vaine worldly wishes: a million of them puts not one pennie into our purses. Wheras by the verie desire of the loue of God, we begin to loue God indeed: and still the more we desire it, the more we loue. Yea, when this desire waxes stronge and hartie, the desire is turned into fire, and infla∣mes the couering harte. He that desires God vvith his vvhole harte has alreadie him vvhom he loues saith S. Gregorie. And S. Augustine: a holy desire, is the vvhole life of a good Christian. AFFECTION and RESOL. But alas, my poore soule, tho we clearely discerne this desire
to be most iust, aduantagious, and most worthy of a christiā harte: yet we somtymes per∣ceiue our selues not to be so happie, as euen to haue this desire. Let vs then at least say with the Prophete: my soule hath desired, earnestly to desire thy iustifications at all tymes. Let vs not fayle to haue this desire of desiring, continually in our harte; saying with S. Au. Giue me thy selfe, restore me thy selfe: for vvhat is not thy verie selfe, is verie nothing to me. and it will happen with vs, as it did with the holie Prophete, that in these holy thoughtes and desirs fire will flashe out; and so throughly inflame our sou∣le, that as the stagge thirsteth after the fountaines of fresh water, so shall we vehementlie
couet, and thirst after our good God, that drainlesse fountaine of liuing water, which flowes into life euer∣lastnig. THE II. MEDITATION Of vvhom vve are to learne Cha∣ritie, tovvards one another. THE FIRST POINTE. COnsider that we ought to learne this most impor∣tant lesson, this one necessarie thinge, of him, who doth as well teach it, as giue it, our Sauiour Iesus; who brought downe this sacred fire into earth and his vvill vvas it should burne the hartes of men. And indeede, neuer did he seeme
so peculiarly to make him∣selfe the Master of any thin∣ge, as of this vertue and hu∣militie. This is my precept, said that deare master of ours, that you loue one another. My litle children. I giue you a new precept, that you loue one another. In this all men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you haue loue one to another. Holy Fa∣ther, I pray &c. that they may be one, as we also are one, I in them, and thou in me. AFFECTION and RESOL. This is the great commande∣ment, indeede, my soule, this Christs speciall precept: Loue one another. this the badge by which he will haue all his ser∣uants to be knowne. If they
loue one another. If we come without this wedding garmēt, we shall be repulsed. If we knocke, not hauing this oyle of charitie in our Lampes, (wherby we may be knowne to men to be Gods Disciples) God vvill not knovve vs; the dore vvill be shut. What thin∣ge more wishfull, could we haue desired to haue heard, thē by affording mutuall loue and assistance to one another, (which we haue all such neede of) to secure our saluation? And yet, the most louing, and beloued Apostle assures vs: It is the precept of our soueraigne Lord, and Master: doe this faith he and it sufficeth. Beare one anothers burden, and so you shal accomplish the lavve of Christ.
THE SECONDE POINTE. Hovv vve ought to exercise Charitie to one another. Consider that this ought to be done by his example, who gaue the commande of it, and afterwards came gra∣ciously downe to teach it by his owne practise. Thus we are taught by the great Apostle. Receiue, helpe, comfort, sup∣port, and loue one another as Christ receiued, assisted, sup∣ported and loued vs. But how did Christ loue vs &c? Marrie, he loued vs first, with a free, and disinterested loue, which looked vpon noe preceedant merites. 2. With a right loue, not to receiue any thinge from vs, but to discharge the
ouer-flowing riches of his mercifull breastes vpon our pouertie. 3. With a perseue∣rant loue: for louing his vvho vvere in the vvorld, he loued them to the end. 4. With a stronge loue; euen as stronge as death it selfe: he loued vs, and deliuered himselfe for vs: for vs men, and for our saluation. AFFECTION and RESOL. If then my soule, we hope for any consolation in Christ; if any solace of Charitie; if any societie of spirit, if any bowells of commiseration, let vs endeuour to fulfill the B. Apostles ioy, by being of one meaning (having the same charitie) of one mynd, agree∣ing in one. That nothing be done by contention, nor by vaine glorie: but in humilitie;
each counting others better then themselues. In a word, let vs receiue, comfort, sup∣port and loue our poore bre∣thren: and that too; as Christ gaue vs the example, with a pure and disinterrested loue, because it is his blessed plea∣sure that so it should be. With a right loue, not seeking that vvhich is profitable, in parti∣cular, to our selues, but that vvhich is profitable to many. With a perseuerant loue, which is not to end but with the end of our liues. Finally, with a stronge loue, readie to wrastle with obuious difficul∣ties, and euen with death it selfe, for the good of our bro∣ther, as our deare Lord gaue vs an example.
