C1698 E131_17 99859069 156336
Certaine considerations wherein the Pre∣lates doe acknowledge that they stand by the meer mercy of the King and Parliament; not ha∣ving any foundation in Scripture. And that the King and Parliament may dispose of them, at their pleasure. WHAT the reason or cause should be, that subscription unto this booke of consecration and ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, hath beene of late yeares so hotly and egerly pursued by the Lords of the Clergy, is a mystery, perhaps, not of many of the lay∣ty well understood. And howsoever under colour of the maintenance of obedience to the statute of the Realme, where∣by this booke is confirmed, the same subscription may seeme to bee pressed: neverthelesse if the maine drift and reason of this pressure, were well boulted out, it is to be feared, that not only the unlawful su∣premacy of an Archbishop is sought to be advanced above the lawful supremacy of our Soveraigne Lord King James; but also that the Sy∣nodals, Canons and Constitutions made by the Clergy, in their con∣vocation, are intended if not, to be preferred above, yet at leastwise to be made equall to the common law and statues of the Realme. By the ancient lawes and customes of the Realme, one parcell of the Kings jurisdiction and imperiall Crowne, hath evermore consisted in granting ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, unto Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates. For the maintenance of which imperiall jurisdiction & power, against the usurped supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, divers statutes, not introductory of a new law, but declaratory of the old, in the time of King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, and of our late most noble Queene deceased, have beene made and enacted. Yea, and in a booke entituled The Institution of a Christian man, com∣posed by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward Archbishop of Yorke & all the Bishops, divers Archdeacons & Prelates of the Realme,
that then were, Cooke de jure regis eccle. fol. 8 fol. 53. fol, 55. dedicated also by them to King Henry the eighth, it is confessed and acknowledged, that the nomination and presentation of the Bishoprickes, appertained unto the Kings of this Realme. And that it was and shall be lawfull to Kings and Princes, and their Successors, with consent of their Parliaments, to revoke and call againe into their owne hands, or otherwise to restraine all the power and jurisdiction which was given and assigned to Priests and Bishops, by the licence, consent, sufferance and authority of the same Kings and Princes, and not by authority of God and his Gospell, whensoever they shall have grounds and causes so to doe, as shall be necessary wholesome, and ex∣pedient for the Realmes, the repressing of vice, and the increase of Chri∣stian faith and religion. Ever since which time (untill of late yeares, the late Archbishop of Canterbury, with the counsell of his Colledge of Bishops, altered that his opinion, which somtimes in his answer made to the admonition to the Parliament, he held) it was generally and publickely maintained, that the state, power and jurisdiction of Provinciall and Diocesan Bi∣shops in England, stood not by any divine right, but meerly and alto∣gether by humane policie and ordinance alone. And that therefore according to the first and best opinion and judgement of the said Arch∣bishops, Bishops, &c, the same their jurisdiction might be taken away and altered at the will and pleasure of the Kings of England, whenso∣ever they should have grounds and causes so to do. Now since, when as the Discipline and government provinciall, & diocesan ministred and exercised by the late Archbishop deceased, and his Suffraganes, was diversly handled, disputed and contraverted, not to be agreeable, but repugnant to the holy Scriptures, & necessary also for the repressing of vice, the encrease of faith and Christan religion, to be changed; they hereupon justly fearing, that the most vertuous & Christian Queen deceased, upon sundry complaints made in open Par∣liament, against the r many unjust greevances, would have reformed the same their manner of government; they then presently upon new advise and consultation taken, D. Sutclif. D. Bilson. boldly and constantly avouched the same their government, to have bin from the Apostles times, and a∣greeable to the holy Scriptures; and therefore also perpetuall, and still to be used, and in no case to be altered, by any King, or Potentate whatsoever. By meanes of which this their enclining to the Popish opinion, and
holding their Iurisdiction to be de jure divino, & professedly maintei∣ning in the Homily (whereunto also subscription is urged) that the King, and all the Nobility, ought to be subject to excommunication, there is now at length growne such a maine position, 2. part of the right use of the Church. of having a per∣petuall Diocesan and Provinciall government in the Church, that ra∣ther then their Hierarchie should stoop, they would cause the Kings Supremacie, which he hath over their said Iurisdiction, to fall downe to the ground: Insomuch as by their supposition, the King hath no authoritie no not by his supreame power, to alter their said govern∣ment at all. And to this end and purpose (as it seemeth) in their late Canons have they devised and decreed, this booke of ordination, to be subscribed unto. Which subscription cannot but quite and cleane o∣verthrow the Kings supremacie and ancient jurisdiction, in the most dangerous degree. For if their Provinciall and Diocesan orders and degrees of Ministery, together with their jurisdiction, be to be used, (as established and derived unto them by the holy scriptures) how then can it be in the power and jurisdiction of the King, to grant, or not to grant the use of Provincial and Diocesan Bishopisme and jurisdicti∣on? Or how may the Provinciall Bishops, with their Diocesan Suffra∣ganes, be called the Kings Ecclesiasticall officers, if their jurisdictions be not derived unto them from the King? For if they be called Gods Bishops, or Bishops of Gods making, how then may they any more be called the Kings Bishops, or Bishops of the Kings presenting, nomi∣nating and confirming? Nay, besides, who then can alter them? who can constrain them? who can revoke or recall their power and jurisdiction? who can resist them? or what King of England may pluck his necke from under their yoke? Nay, how should the Kings supremacie (as by the ancient Lawes of the Realme it ought) remaine inviolable, If Diocesan Bishops bee Scripturely Bishops, them may they stan wthout the King. Dioce¦san Bishops hitherto up∣held only by the lawes of the Realme. when his Royall person, whole Nobility and Realme, is subject and liable to the censure of the Canon law, excommunication? Which law the Provinciall and Diocesan Bishops to this day, in right, and by vertue of their Provinci∣all and Diocesan jurisdiction, and none otherwise, do still use, practise, and put in execution? Besides, if Bishops Provinciall and Diocesan (as they be described in that book) be commanded in the Scriptures, and were in use ever since the Apostles times, then ought they to bee in the Church of England, though the King and his law never allowed, nor approved of them.
But to hold this opinion, as it will uphold the Popes supremacy (be∣cause the generall reasons which uphold a Provinciall Bishop, will up∣hold a Pope) so will it once againe, not only impeach the Kings supre∣macy, but also be repugnant to the lawes and customes of the Realme. By which supremacy, lawes and customes only, the provinciall & dio∣cesan Bishops have beene hitherto upheld. For seeing the lawes and cu∣stomes of the Realme, doe make the Kings nomination, presentation, and confirmation, the very essence and being of a Provinciall and Dio∣cesan Bishop with us. So that these offices ought to be held only from the authority, gift and grant of the King: how ought not the Kings nomination, presentation, authority and gift, yea and the law it self, in this case wholly cease, if the order, degree, ministery and jurisdiction of a Provinciall and Diocesan Bishop be founded in holy Scripture? Vn∣lesse we shall affirme, that that was in the Apostles times, which was not, or that, that it is to be found in holy Scripture, which is not name∣ly, that there were in the Apostles times, and that there be in the holy Scriptures, no Bishops but Provinciall and Diocesan Bishops to bee found. And that by the law of God and the Gospell, every King and Potentate, hath supreme power to suffer none but Provinciall and Di∣ocesan Bishops to be in the Churches. So that by subscription to allow, that Provinciall and Diocesan Bi∣shops be Scripturely Bishops, and that their jurisdiction and power, is a Scripturely jurisdiction and power, is to deny that their jurisdiction and power dependeth upon the Kings jurisdiction and power, or that by the Kings gift and authority they be made Bishops. But now doth subscription (you will say) to the book of Ordinati∣on, approve the orders and degrees of Provinciall & Diocesan Bishops to be by divine right, rather then by humane ordinance? How? Why thus: It is evident (saith the preface of that book) to all men diligent∣ly reading holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times, there have been these orders of Ministers in Christs Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Yea and by the whole order of prayer, and of Scripture read & used in the forme of consecrating of an Arch∣bishop, or Bishop, it is apparent that the order of an Archbishop or Bishop, consecrated by that book, is reputed and taken to be of Divine institution. And therefore seeing the names of those orders of Mini∣sters, must necessarily be taken and understood of such orders of Mi∣nisters, as be set forth and described in the body of that booke, it must
needs be intended, that the Ministers by their subscription, should ap∣prove the order of Ministers, mentioned in that booke, to be of Divine institution, and consequently, that provinciall and diotesan Ministers, or Bishops, have not their essence and being from the nomination, gift and authority of the King. Besides, if we should understand by the word (Bishop) him that hath the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, as the Pastor and teacher; and by the word (Priest) the Presbyter, that is the Governing elder; and by the word (Deacon) the provider for the poore, then for the Ministers to subscribe to the booke of ordination, would no way justifie those officers or degrees of Ministers, which are described in that booke, but would indeed utterly subvert and overthrow them. Because the orders and degrees of a provinciall and diocesan Bishop, of a Priest and Deacon mentioned in that booke, be of a farre diffe∣ring nature from those orders and degrees of Ministers, which are mentioned in the Scriptures: because they only agree in name, and not in nature. Wherefore seeing there be other orders and degrees of Bishops then Provincial & Diocesan Bishops found in the holy Scriptures, & seeing also Kings and Princes being Vicarij Dei, be commanded to authorise all things for the truth, and nothing against the truth: it seemeth ne∣cessary that his Majesty should not only restraine the Provinciall and Diocesan Bishops, from urging subscription to this booke of ordina∣tion, (being so derogatory (in their sence and construction) to his su∣premacy as nothing can be more,) but also to keep the Bishops them∣selves within the tether and compasse of the word of God. For if the word of God, doe approve amongst the Ministers of the Word and Sa∣craments, a primacy of order only, & denieth unto them any prima∣cy of jurisdiction and power in ecclesiasticall government, (as the learned Protestants have proved against the Papists touching Peters supremacy) then will it follow that ours also ought to be reduced to the same compasse, both for the Kings Majesties safety, and the Chur∣ches good. Least Princes giving them more then God alloweth them, they should themselves loose that right and authority, which they ought to retaine in their owne Royall persons. Now that it may not be objected that we begge the question of Scripturely Bishops, not having any primacy of jurisdiction & power in ecclesiasticall government, (to let passe all particular reasons of the
Protestants against the Papists in this point) it shall suffice in this place to produce for witnesses six and fourty Iurors, against whom no cha∣lenge or exception can be taken; Namely, the said Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward Archbishop of Yorke: Iohn Bi∣shop of London: Cuthbert Dunlmen: Steven Winton: Robert Cario∣len: Io. Exon: John Lincoln: Rowland Coven, and Lichfield: Thomas E∣lien: Nicholas Sarum: John Banger: Edward Herefordien: Hugh Wi∣gornen. Iohn Roffen. Richard Cicistren. William Norwicen. William Me∣neven, Robert Assaven. Robert Landaven. Richard Wolman, Archdea∣con of Sudbur. William Knight, Archdeacon of Richmond: John Bell, Archdeccon of Gloster: Edmond Boner, Archdeacon of Lecester: Wil∣liam Skipp, Archdeacon of Dorset: Nicholas Heath, Archdeacon of Stafford: Cuthbert Marshall, Archdeacn of Nottingham: and Richard Curren, Archdeacon of Oxford: Together with William Cliff, Galfrid Downes, Robert Oking, Radulf Bradford, Richard Smith, Simon Mat∣thew, Iohn Fryn, William Lukemaster, William May, Nicholas Wot∣ton, Richard Cox, Iohn Edmonds, Thomas Robertson, Iohn Baker, Thomas Baret, Iohn Hase and John Tyson, Sacrae Theologiae, juris Ecclesiastici, Civilis Professores. All which Archbishops Bishops, Archdeacons and Prelates, having with one voyce and accord shewed unto King Henry the eight, that di∣vers good Fathers, Bishops of Rome, did greatly reprove and abhorre (as a thing clean contrary to the Gospel & the Decrees of the Church) that any Bishop of Rome, or elsewhere, should presume, usurpe, or take upon him the title and name of the universall Bishop, or of the head of all Priests, or of the highest Priest, or any such like title; proceed further, and in the end conclude, and give up their verdicts thus. For confirmation whereof, Fol. 59.60 it is out of all doubt, that there is no mention made, neither in Scripture, neither in the writings of any authenticall Doctor or Author of the Church, being within the time of the Apo∣stles, That Christ did ever make, or institute any distinction or difference to be in the preeminence or power, order, or jurisdiction, betweene the Apostles themselves, or between the Bishops themselves; but that they were all equall in power, order, authoritie and jurisdiction: and that there is now, and sith the time of the Apostles, any such diversity or difference among the Bishops, it was devised by the ancient Fathers, &c. For the said Fathers considering the great and infinite multitude of Christian men, and taking examples of the old Testament, thought it
expedient to make an order of degrees to be amongst Bishops and spiritu∣all Governours of the Church; and so ordained some to bee Patriarkes, some to bee Primates, some to bee Metropolitanes, some to bee Arch∣bishops, some to be Bishops, &c. Which differences the said holy Fathers thought necessary to enact and establish, by their Decrees and Constitu∣tions, nor for that any such differences were prescribed and established in the Gospell, or mentioned in any Canonicall writings of the Apostles, or testified by any Ecclesiasticall Writer within the Apostles time. And thus farre their verdict. But let us grant, that orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons bee contained in the holy Scriptures, yet if those orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, which are established in the booke, bee not the same or∣ders of Bishops Priests & Deacons, which are authorised by the Scrip∣tures: then (through the aequivocation of these words: Orders of Bi∣shops, Priests and Deacons) there being a falacie: how should this forme and manner of subscription be lawfull? viz. that the book con∣taineth nothing contrary to the word of God, and that it lawfully may be used. For onely such orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, ought to be acknowledged, subscribed unto, and used, as by the holy Scriptures are warranted. And therefore such as are contained in the booke, if so be they be divers from those which are approved in the holy scriptures, how should they without sinne be subscribed unto, and used? Vnlesse wee shall affirme, that Ministers of the Gospell of God, may rightfully approve of such orders of Ministers, as the Lord and Lawgiver of the Gospell never allowed ne approved. And thus much have we spoken touching not subscription, touching the not exact use of the order and forme of the booke of Common prayer, and touching the not precise practise and wearing of the rites, ceremonies and ornaments of the Church. Wherein, if we have spoken otherwise then as for our speaking we have warrant from the Kings laws, our earnest desire is, that it may be shewed unto us wherein we have erred. For if there bee any thing whereof we be ignorant, we shall be willing to be taught the same, and having learned it, to yeeld to the practise thereof. In the mean time, seeing not to weare a Surplice in the ministration of divine service, not to make a crosse in Baptisme, & not to subscribe, &c. in it selfe, it not a sinne against any commandement of God nor a thing scandalous unto the people: and seeing also that Parsons who re∣fuse
to weare and use the same, be in every respect men of good note, condition, fame, quality and behaviour; yea, and such as against whom no misdemeanor for doctrine or life, which might aggravate their of∣fence, can justly be objected, we may lawfully (as we thinke) conclude in their behalfe, that de aequitate & misericordia juris, they ought to be respected and tolerated, rather then for their refusall meerly standing upon their consciences, (whether erroneous or not erroneous, it skil∣leth not) de rigore juris, (if there be any such rigour) to be suspended, excommunicated or deprived; yea, and in so generall and doubtfull a case of conscience, upon so slender a ground of perjury and contempt, upon persons every way so peaceable and well qualified, and wherein no scandall hath ensued, we suppose it cannot be shewed among all the decrees and sentences recorded, among all the Popish Canonists, that ever any Popish ordinaries, in any age, have used the like judiciall ri∣gour against any their Popish Priests. It is to be noted, that the forraigne Canon law, is none otherwise in any part of this treatise intended to be the Kings Ecclesiasticall law, then onely upon a false supposition of the Archbishops and Bishops: Because the same law is yet used and practised in their Consistory, not∣withstanding it hath been long since abolished by Act of Parliament.
