C2397 E92_6 99872938 155753
THE KINGS MAIESTIES LETTER, Sent to the House of Commons, and there Read. With A WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN by Sir WILLIAM WROTH, concerning the Parliaments complying with His Majesties Propositions contained therein. Desiring that it may be taken into present Con∣sideration, and an Answer returned to His Majestie, concerning the same. Printed at London for Iohn Wright, and are to be sold in the Old Bayly. 1643.
THE HEADS OF THE PROPOSITIONS IN HIS MAIESTIES LETTER. I. He upholding and maintaining of his Majesties just and Regall Authoritie. II. The settling of his Revenue. III. The establishing of the Liberties of the Subject, in the free and quiet enjoying of their Estates and For∣tunes.
IIII. The Liberties of their Persons. V. The Securitie of true Religion, now professed in the Church of England. VI. The settling of Ceremonies in such a manner, as may take away all just offence.
A WORTHY SPEECH Spoken by Sir VVILLIAM WROTH unto the House of Commons, Concerning His Majesties Letter. THis Letter, or Declaration now read from His sacred Maiestie, expressing His Princely care, and tender affection towards the Parliament, and all His Maisties loyall and dutifull Subiects, is now to be ta∣ken into Our Consideration: And I verily beleeve there is none here present, but hath as tender care and dutifull af∣fection towards His Royall Maiestie, and the preservation of His Honour and Dignity, the Lawes and Religion esta∣blished in His Maiesties Dominions, Parliaments, and their iust rights and Priviledges, as any subiects to any Prince in the whole Christian world. No man, M. Speaker, I thinke doubted, or had the least thought of iealousie (that are true Protestants and Loyall Subiects) of His Maiesties sincerity, and integrity to∣wards His Liege People: For we have sensibly felt, and understood His Cleare Intentions, and Gracious meaning to us all; not onely these His Princely expressions in this His Gracious Letter, and Declaration, but also by former Speeches, Proclamations, and Protestations, both Publique, and Private; His willing and cheerefull
granting us from time to time, our iust desires, and Re∣quests, and His cheerefull passing of many wholesome Acts and Lawes for the good of this Kingdome, and the redressing of many grievances and oppressions, which His good Subiects did suffer, by groaning under the burden of them; and His willing Complying with His Parlia∣ment, for the appeasing of the great Differences that was betweene this Kingdome, and Scotland, and (wee hope) the setling of Peace, and amity amongst our selves (which God graunt.) These have beene sufficient testi∣monies of His Princely and tender Care over His Peo∣ple, and enough to endeare our hearts and affections to His Royall Maiesty, and His Posterity forever. M. Speaker, These Propositions recommended by His Maiesty to the Consideration of the House consists of these Heads. The upholding and maintaining of His Maiesties iust and Regall Authority, and setling of His Revenue, and the establishing of the Liberties of the Subiect, in the free and quiet enioying of their estates and fortunes, the Liber∣ties of their persons, the security of true Religion, now professed in the Church of England, and the setling of Ce∣remonies in such a manner, as may take away all iust offence. 1 For the first of these, it hath beene our Principall Care, and endeavours hitherto, as farre as the present di∣stempers and distractions in the State would give us leave, to maintaine the iust Prerogative, and Regall Power of His Maiestie, and to settle His Revenue. But being neces∣sitated to consult, and consider of the great and weighty Affaires of this State, being so perplexed, and distracted
through the malice and pernicious endeavours of wicked and dis-affected persons, to the Peace and Tranquillity both of His Maiesty, and His Kingdomes, thereby forced to lay aside the Determinations of His Maiesties De∣mand, till His Maiesties Kingdomes be secured, and pre∣served from fatall destruction, which by the malignant Adversaries thereof, dayly sought and practised: but not leaving the same, either as negligent, or forgetfull of His Maiesties iust Demands, or in any undutifulnesse, but that in due time, upon the first opportunity to take the same againe into Consideration, and proceede therein to the finall conclusion thereof; desiring this House that His Maiesty may be informed of our reall intentions therein. Secondly, for the other Proposition by his Maiestie, wee cannot but in dutifull obedience returne our thank∣fulnesse to his Maiestie in the Name of the whole Parliament, for his Princely Care of our Liberties and Priviledges, and Pious Resolution to establish our Religion in its Truth and Puritie, and his indiffe∣rencie in the use and exercise of Ceremonies; concer∣ning which, wee have received many Petitions from divers Counties and parts of this Kingdome, signed with many thousand Hands, for the utter abolishment of the same: shewing likewise the inconvenience in the use and exercise of the same, the great Dammage and many Evils that have succeeded upon the Tolera∣tion thereof hitherto; which, with the continuance of the use thereof, is also like to continue the Evils, and dayly encrease more and more dngerous: upon which, it hath beene thought fit by this Honourable▪House to extinguish and abolish the same, frm being ioyned
with the worship of God in the Exercise of Religio by the generall Vote of the House; and divers Orders have issued through the Kingdome, for leaving off and laying by the further use thereof. These things being thus farre proceeded in by ioynt consent o Parlia∣ments, I humbly desire, His Maiestie may be moved by Petition of both Houses, for his Royall assent there∣unto. Thirdly, as for the setling of Religion, and goo Discipline in the Church, wee have beene much op∣posed and interrupted in our proceedings therein, (when wee had the same in Consultation, and in Considera∣tion) by the Prelaticall Faction in the Lords House, it having beene a great part of our Businesse, to remove such Impediments as have hindered our Proceedings, not onely in that, but other the great Affaires of State, and to appease the present Distractions and Distem∣pers in this Kingdome; To supply with aide and as∣sistance all our afflicted Brethren in Ireland, and to pre∣serve and secure our owne persons from the malice and wicked Designes of our malicious and Malignant Ad∣versaries, Enemies to our Peace and Safetie, and Enemies to the Prosperitie and Tranquilitie of his Maiestie, and his good subiects. Which Lets and Hinderances, which have caused these Stops, in our Proceedings in the set∣ling of Religion, I likewise desire may be represented to his Maiestie. And thus much concerning his Maiesties Propositi∣ons; which I desire may be taken into present Consi∣deration, and Answer returned to his Maiestie concerning the same. FINIS.
