C2380 E437_3 R204683@R204741 99864148 161626
The Kings MAIESTIES LAST SPEECH IN The Isle of WEIGHT. CONCERNING A hot GAME to bee plaid in the Moneth of May; And a Declaration of His Majesties proceedings at Cartsbrooke Castle, coueing the presen ffirs of the Kingdom of England. With an exact Relation of the last Fight, be¦twixt the Parliaments Forces, and Col. Poyer, and the number of men slain and taken. Also, the procee∣dings of the Inhabitants in the Wst And he full pariculars ouching his Hghnesse te Prince of Wales, and the Scots. London, Printed by J. C. for R. G. Anno Dom. 1648
From the Isle of Weight. April, 18. SIR, WE have of late been much terrified as it were by the many and various reports brought hither, of the devisions and di∣stractions of the whole Kingdome, but specially in that we have no good newes from Wales, nor our brethren of Scotland, The uncontrouled behaviour of Poyer, an t VVelsh Malignants, is dayly renewed amongst us, onely we hope to heare in some time, of the proceedings of Colonell Horton, against those disturbers of the kingomes welfare, against whom, as i is said, he is marched against, and is neere upon ingaging; here hath also beene some re∣p rts of distu bances in Cheshire, and some ta ke, as if Swan∣ley, a Commander at Se had deserted the Parliament with some Shipping, but yet I cannot learne, wat grounds they have for this report, or whether it be true, or not true, I can∣not averre; but yet we dayly see to our griefe, that many in trust proove base enough, and betay the trust reposed in them, for whom doub esse thee is vengeance determined, which in convenient time will lay hold on them, and give them the just recompence of the reward that appertaines unto such perfiious wretches. As for his Majestie he is in halth, and merry, and some∣times very pleasant in his discourse, and free in his expressi∣ons
to the Governour, and other about him for his morning exercise; his Majesty most commonly walks about the Ca∣stle, and discourses with his attendance, till towards dinner time, and after dinner, if the weather be fire, his continuall sports is Bowles, it being, as his Majestie saith, an exercise whereunto he hath been continualy addctd, and which is the chiefest pastime is Majestie delights in. It is suspect d that sometimes his Majestie receives letters from France, and other parts, but how, or by what meanes, it is not knowne, but it is supposed by his discourse of the generall affires of this kingdom to forraign parts, with some things which causeth much wonder, to imagine how such things should come to his Majesties knowledge, This day being the 18. of April, many came unto his Ma∣jeste to be touched for the Kings evill, as they call it, and as he came down from dinner, they were admitted into his Ma∣jestie presence, where He touched them, and prayed with them, and so dismissed them; after that he went to Bowles, and being in bowling alley, he suddenly stood, and spake as it were, in a rusticall manner, or as if he meant so, saying, it wil be hot bowling in May. This is the news that for the present I can impart unto you; our feares are many, the Lord settle things as may be most for his glory the advancement of Re∣ligion, the peace of the Church and State, So prayeth Carisbrooke Castle, April 18. 1618. Your assured friend, I. L. SIR, SCotland affords little newes this weeke, onely the Parlia∣ment sits close, and kepe their resolutions private, all things do stand at a stay, neither is it certain knowne what the result will be, the Malignants still are in expectation, and
take as if their hopes were great; and the things will be or∣dered so, as shall prove to their advantage, the English in E∣denburgh re many, and daily increse, who with the Scots Malignants, are very desirous of a Warre wih England. But it is hped, they will not prevaile, God in his wisdome doe what is best for us the Ministers are very desirous o peace, and continually move the Parl. thereto, neither will they consent to making of a war with England, which will bee a chief means to frustrate the desires of the Malignant Party; but the Malignants give ou, that if an Army be not raised to come against England, and if the Parl. will not consent to the raising of an Army, they will rse an Army of heir own cost, which they say they are able to do, but that is no∣thing but a flourish, for without shelter and countenance from the Parliament, their power is of no value. The Eord Lee is supposed to bee on his jouney towards London, and brings Propositions from the Parl. of Scotland to the Parliament of England; what the event will be, a li∣tle time will shew, the English Commissioners labour to the uttermost, to beget a right understanding of all things, and use their constant and utmost endeavours to discharge the trust reposed in them, they are admitted to treat with the Commitee of Danger, and daily wait, and endeavor to see what conclusion the Scots will make, and what answer they shall receive from the Scots Parliament: so desirous are tey to breed a good understanding between the Scots and Eng∣lish, and that they may not frustrate the expectaions of the English Parliament, nor btray trust committed to them: also many of the well affected of the Kingdome of Sco∣land, doe dayly forsee the maintenance of the Con∣junction and Union betweene the two Kingdomes,
as the interest of all honest men binds them to do, and to say the truth, these men deal plainly, and as men that are csible of their present condition. I hpe to see the time when I shall send you better newes: this is all for present, but that I am Ednburgh Yours W. R. The Copy of a Petition from the West, agree upon, and intended to be presented to the Honourable Commons assembled in Parliam nt. First in all humility, acknowledging the constant call of the Parliament to preserve the peace, and safet of this King∣dom, & espcialy in those late timous Voes concerning the King, &c. We desire to present unto that great Assembly, our humble thanks in that behalfe, and our Resolutions unanimously to adheare unto them in preservation there∣of. We do likewise present unto your consideratins, the great & apparent danger under, which this Country lyeth, b rea∣son of the malignant, and appostte persons therein and do humbly desi e to represent the same unto the Parliamens, that a timely and speedy course may be taken to settle peace, and to free us from the power of all Malignants, Newtrals, and Appostates. We further d remonstrate the grat dearth f Cone and graine amongst us, and we do presnt the excessive mutitude of Alehuses an Malsters to be the cause thereof; we therefore desire, that orers may be granted to the Justices of the Peae, commanding them to suppresse all unnecessry Alhuses unto a convenien nūber: as also to lessen the great number of M sters, and to pu in execution the Lawes a∣gainst Foestllrs, Regrators, and Ingrossers, and diso derly Alehouses licensed and not licensed, that the penalties incur∣red by them, may be constantly and impartially levied, not∣withstanding
the contradiction of any man, as hath been lately practised. That notwithstanding divers Ordinances of Parliament to the contrary: Delinquets, and men of ill affection to the Parliament, are chosen, and still retained and placed i Offi∣ces of judicatre and trust, divers now being Recorders, Town Clarkes, Burgesses of Corporations, Coroners Sewards of Courts, Constables, and Bailiffs of hundreds, and other in∣feriour Officers in places of publike imployment, whereby the service of the Parliament is much retarded, and the Or∣dinances thereof not at all, or but negligently, put in execu∣tion. And that Deliquents, and such as are not within Articles of Treaty, do openly practice, as Councellers, Attorneys, & Solicitors of the Law, &c. by whom frivolous, and vexati∣ous actions are brought, and violently prosecuted against the well affected party. Also we further humbly desire that the contents hereon may be effectually put in execution. From Swansey Aprill 17. 1648. SIR, COlonell Horton with the forces ordered to reduce Poyer, all advanced as farre as Keath, and Col. Okey is joyned with them, the enemy is incouraged, on this side the River Towry, wch runneth through the middle of Carmarthenshire, whither the forces are marching to give them battell, if they have but the stomack to figh, some skirmishes tey have had already, Col. Flemming gave them an Alarm at Have∣thry, where with a party of Horse and Dragoones, he beat up their quarters, and after a light skirmish tooke 12. Horse and men prisoners, it is supposed that most of the Of∣ficers and Souldiers, that were under the Command of Laughorne, will come into the Parliaments forcs when they see they must fight. 2. Captains are com in already, & Pow∣ells
declaring absolutely for the King, wil bring in others; Malignants come in daily unto them, an the Commonalty apace, chifly for them, and shew themselves in great num∣bers at the Randezvouz; ut when they shall come to fight, they wil qickly leave them, and as it were sl p their ne ks out of the Coller again; want of Horsmeate is a great trouble to the Parl. Forces upon the barre Mountains, and want of mony as great, without which it is hard to purchase other provisions. Swausey Aprill 17. 168. The Copy of a Letter from France. Here hath been some dispute as if the Prince should have set forward for Scotland or Wales, without farther dla; but he knowes not what to think of the Scots for the present, aso the Prince expects aid from the rench, but they are unwil∣ling to meddle in a business which concernes them not, or will not prove advantagious unto them; but on the contrary, it may cause a division amongst themselves, because the greatest part of France is against any such undertakings. The young King, wih the Queen Regent, and the Duke of Anjou, his brother gave the Queen of England and Prince Charles a visit, lately near St. Jermans, where they then were, but it is verily believed, that the Prince will not have halfe that favour and assistance from the French that he expects. The Parl. or body representative of this Kingdom, hae re∣solved on Thursday nex, (all other busines bring lad aside) to meet together no purpose, to find out and agree upon a speedy meanes for the setling and establishing the peace of this Kingdom, and to compose the many differences and di∣strctions thereof; therefore the Ministers are desired in their respective places, to represent their arnest supplcations un∣to God Almighty, for a blessing upon their r cedings. Imprimatur Gibert Mabbot. FINIS.
