C6138 E463_4 99864524 116754
A Copy of a LETTER Sent from a GENTLEMAN In Carisbrooke-Castle to an Honourable Person at VVESTMINSTER Concerning His Majesties In∣tentions, and their expe∣ctations of the PERSONALL TREATY. Printed at London, 1648.
A Copy of a Letter sent from a Gen∣tleman in Carisbrooke Castle to an Honourable person at Westminster. Honoured Sir, I Received yours of the 15th. and re∣turne you all thankes for your Intel∣ligence, which imports the hastning, if not the precipitation of a Treaty, to which I wishes good an end as is ex∣pected from it by the common voyce of the Peo∣ple, who being not the best Judges of things, hastily embrace and declare, and countenance that which first makes it selfe obvious and pleasing to the fancy. But indeed Sir, (for you are one with whom I dare bee free) Men of the most honesty and judge∣ment can by no meanes give way to any such ex∣pectation, but rather conceive, nay feare that the
drift of a Personall Treaty, is one of the designes of the olde Serpent among us, and that which if obtained, is meerely to put the KING in a capacity to Ast for Himselfe; or in case that faile, to make way for His escape. And verily Sir, if you thoroughly consider it, the former is not wholly free from Iealousie. Eor if you please to remember a part of one of the KINGS Letters which Hee intended to have sent into Scotland by Haliburton: Hee there desires Duke Hamilton to PROMOTE the businesse for a PERSO∣NALL TREATY as fast as Hee can, and when that is done Hee will play His part Himselfe. Now I beseech you Sir, if the KING really intended a Treaty, and a faire correspondency with His People, what needed all these packings and shufflings, and why may Hee not Fairely and Ho∣nourably comply with His PARLIAMENT without any further Delusions. Not to say any thing of the Bragges of many of His owne Party (who pretend to be deepely acquainted with His Interest) that that is the best and hopefullest Pro∣ject that ever they had, and that which hath also thriven the best. Nay they sticke not to say that if they once come to a Treaty, they have done the
Businesse, and that They will never bee able to looke him in the face, as who should say, standing for our Lawes and Liberties, was so great and unpardonable an errour. But indeed we have justly cause to feare an Escape; For not to mention the olde At∣tempt, the Engines whereof should have beene those base and unworthy fellowes, Osborn and Dowcet, who thought by the false translation of the guilt to another, to have becom'd innocent. It is also knowne how Ashburnham and Legge lurked in secret pla∣ces near the Isle, & were once taken, which doubtlesse was not without some expecta∣tion of a Designe, which now seemes to bee more fairely carried on; For these very per∣sons Hee demands for Attendants, as also Titus and Firebrace, men as experimented in these occasions, and such as hee was, by no meanes forced to nominate, since he might have had the choyse of many other more unblemish'd and unspotted reputations. Nay among these there may be Dowcet too, an Alien noted with breach of Trust, and one
that was so neerely concern'd in his former intended Escape. And truly 'tis a wonder that Dowcet (one whom hee had formerly so much trusted) was not summon'd to this employment: But I wonder what the King meanes by sending for so many riding suits, and so many horses sent to him, unlesse thete were strong hints of such a Designe. But they will object that He hath pass'd. His Royall word not to depart within twenty dayes after the Treaty: But I pray why may not Hee doe here as He did at Hampton-Court, slip away, or else make a pretence of a new Designe upon Him, as that was fain'd about Rolph, when He was to escape from the Isle of Wight. But me∣thinks all true English-men should take heed of being lull'd with this Plot; For otherwise why should the Malignants have driven at it all this time? which may argue there is a dee∣per plot in it then we yet know, or else it is to make the Parliament odious, in case that His Majestie be stubborne and breake off the Treaty, and all that odium be cast on the
Parliament, and new Tumults be prepared a∣gainst next Summer, as they may well ex∣pect them, if they continue this indiscreet lenity they have formerly used. But 'tis ho∣ped they will now grow somewhat wifer, for by that wholsome severity exercised up∣on Lucas and Lisle, the Parliament begin to declare, that they will make use of their justice as well as their mercy. I desire you Sir remember my businesse concerning &c. For at this pressing opportunity speed is ve∣ry needfull. I kist the hands of your sweete Lady, to whom with your selfe I wish the consummation of your owne wishes, and rest, Your reall Servant. Carisbrooke, Aug. 30. FINIS.
