C6517A R232722 99898045 171076
COUNT HANLAN'S DOWNFALL, OR A True and Exact Account of the KILLING that Arch Traytor and Tory REDMON ô HANLAN: BY ART ô HANLAN, One of his own Party, on the 25. day of April, 1681. near the Eight Mile Bridge, in the County of Down. Being the Copy of a LETTER writ by a Country Gentleman (now in Dublin) to a Per∣son of Quality (his Friend) in the Country. DƲBLIN, Printed for William Winter, Bookseller at the Wandring Jew in Castle-street. 1681.
Count Hanlan's Downfall: Or, a True and Exact Account of the Killing that Arch Traytor and Tory, Redman O Hanlan, &c. SIR, THough You know I am not inclin'd to Scribling, and therefore can expect no Packet from me, yet being sensible of your want of fresh Intelligence of News from Dublin; and I being oblig'd to shew my gratitude for the last Favours you did me, do readily lay hold on this opportu∣nity of telling you somewhat Remarkable has happen'd within the compass of these five days I have been in Dublin. On Saturday last, when the Lord Lieutenant, Nobility, and Gentry were return'd from Christ-Church, where they had been Celebrating the King's Coronation: according to the custome upon State Feastivals, the Great Guns on the Custome-House Key were discharg'd; the first of which (being either over charg'd, or through age, or ill usage, become faulty) burst into several pieces, which flew divers ways, and fell at considerable distances; particularly one piece of neer an hundred weight, flew into the House of Captain Lovet, on the Blind Key, and did much mischief; several persons were hurt (as 'tis said) by other pieces: but one piece hit a Gentleman on the side of his head, who was leaning on a post hard by, with intention to have fired one of the Guns himslf; which Gentleman (Clerk he was to the Right Honourable the Lord Blessinton's Troop)
was taken up, carried home, dressed by Chirurgeons, died yesterday, and was buried this afternoon. This Account is purely Tragical: But another that I am to give you, may be said to be Tragi-Comical; for it has Blood∣shed and Battery to the highest degree, in it, yet is the Tidings of it very welcome, I observe, to all here, and will be no less to you, though at so considerable distance. 'Tis the Relation was this day brought, of the Surprize, and Killing of the Fa∣mous Northern Tory, Count Hanlan: The circumstances whereof, as I received them from the mouth of one of his Con∣sederates, and Executioner, and Mr. William Lucas, who was Commissioned in that affair. That His Grace, the Lord Lieu∣tenant finding all ways and endeavours hitherto used, as well by Himself, as other Chief Governours, for repressing and bringing to condign punishment, outragious Rebels and To∣ries, infesting this Kingdom; resolved to act by his own senti∣ments and way: which was to this effect. His Grace sent for a Person of Honour of this City, (acquainted in those Coun∣ties these Tories chiefly resorted to,) and commanded him to find some person of choice, who might be capable of His Ma∣jesties Service in that Affair. On which Command of His Grace, Mr. Williaw Lucas of Drumintyan in the County of Down was sent for; who received the following Commission, writ every word with His Grace's own hand, for privacy. None knowing of the design but this Person of Honour, and Mr. Lucas, whom His Grace acquainted with it. Besides other pri∣vate directions given Mr. Lucas by His Grace, which I could not obtain. But the Commission is as follows.
The Lord Lieutenant's Order, or Commission to Mr. William Lucas. WHereas William Lucas Gent. hath given me good reason to believe that he is able to do His Majesty good service in the Apprehending, Killing, and Destroying of proclaimed Rebels and Tories; if he may, upon occasion, have the help and assistance of such of His Majesties Army, as he shall desire. These are therefore to Will and Require all His Majesties Of∣ficers, Civil and Military, to be aiding and assisting to the said William Lucas in the said service. And I particularly require all Officers of Horse and Foot, to send as many of the Souldiers, under their respective Commands, as he shall desire with him; and to direct such Souldiers to obey his Orders. And I further Authorize thes said William Lucas, in my Name, to give, assu∣rance to any of the Tories, that in case they shall assist him in the performance of the said service, that they shall have his Majesties Gracious Pardon for any Crimes formerly committed by them, Murther only excepted. And that over and above, they shall be well rewarded. Given at His majesties Castle of Dublin this 4th of March, 1680/1 ORMOND Pursuant to which Commission, Mr. William Lucas thus acted. Knowing of a Fosterer of his out in Rebellion with Red∣mond O Hanlan, by one of his Relations sent for him; and this Fosterer, one Art O Hanlan came to Mr. Lucas, who gave him this following Protection.
Mr. William Lucas his Protection and Assurance to Art ô Hanlan. BY Vertue of a Power to me, from His Grace the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; For the Apprehend∣ing, Killing and Destroying of proclaimed Rebels and Tories, bearing date the 4. of March last; as also for the giving Assurance and Protection to such Tories as shall assist me in His Majesties Service, and have not had hand in Murder; I do therefore in His Graces name give my Protection and Assurance to Art ô Hanlan, and do desire all His Majesties Officers, both Civil an Mili∣tary to take notice thereof; and that they do not offer to kill, apprehend, molest or disturb the said Art, during the space of one Month, from the Date hereof. And I also desire all His Majesties Officers, and good Subjects, to be aiding and assisting to him the said Art ô Hanlan, in the furtherance of His Majesties Service. Given un∣der my Hand this 3. of April, 1681. To all His Majesties Officers, both Civil and Military and all other His Majesties good Subjects, whom it may con∣cern. WILL. LUCAS. Art O Hanlan being thus furnish'd and encouraged, and pro∣vided with Arms, by the said Mr. William Lucas, for so good an Undertaking, waited for a convenient Opportunity of Exe∣cuting his Design, which did thus offer itself.
On Munday the 25th. Instant, the said Art O Hanlan and William O Sheel, in company with Redmond O Hanlan, were near the Eight Mile Bridge, in the County of Down, waiting for prize, on the score of a Fair that was held there, at which place, while they were watching for their Prey, Redmond took some occasion to quarrel with Art, as they ere smoaking their Pipes, and in the close bid him provide for himself, for he should not be any longer a Tory in any of the three Coun∣ties, (viz. Monaghan, Down, or Ardmagh) whereupon Art rose up and said, I am very glad of it, and will go just now; and then taking up his Arms (having his Authority and Protecti∣on about him) imediately he shot Redmond in the left Breast, with his Carbine, and forthwith ran to the Eight Mile Bridge for a Guard, but Art returned with a Guard, and Mr. Lucas, who soon had notice at the Newry where he was waiting Redmonds motions, for the same Ends, found Redmonds Body, but the Head was taken off by O Sheel, who fled with it, the Body they removed to the Newry, where it lies under a Guard till Orders be sent how it should be disposed of; and since that Mr. Lucas has sent out a Protection and Assurance to O Sheel, to bring in the Head of that Arch Traytor and Tory Redmond O Hanlan. This Evening Art O Hanlan gave in a Relation of this Adventure, to the Lord Lieutenant and Council, who ordered him to have a Sum of Mony paid forthwith, for the good Ser∣vice he has done. And to Mr. Lucas His Grace has promised the Honour of a Command in the Army. These I mention to shew the extraordinary Care, Vigilance and Honour of our Government. If this Relation of mine may prove any way diverting to you, 'twill be a sufficient Reward for this trouble of Letter writing, which is in it self irksom to Your Obliged Humble Servant. Dublin April 27. 1681.
