D1170 E27_5 99873279 125744
A DESCRIPTION of the SEIGE of BASING CASTLE; Kept by the LORD MARQVISSE OF WINCHESTER, for the Service of HIS MAIESTY: AGAINST, The Forces of the Rebells, under Com∣mand of Colonell NORTON, Anno Dom. 1644. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Ʋniversity. 1644.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE SIEGE OF BASING CASTLE. BAsing Castle, the Seat and Mansion of the Marquisse of Winchester, stands on a rising ground, having its forme circular, encompassed with a Brick Rampart, lyned with earth and a very deep trench, but dry; The loftie Gate-house with foure Turrets looking Northwards, on the right whereof without the compasse of the Ditch a goodly building containing two faire Courts; before them is the Graunge, severed by a Wall and com∣mon roade, againe divided from the foot of Cowdreys Downe by Meades, Rivilets, and a River running from Basingstoake, a mile distant upon the West, though Basing Towne joyning upon the East, the South side of the Castle hath a Parke, and toward Basing Towne a little Wood, the place seated and built as if for Royaltie having a proper Motto. Aymez Loyalte. Hither (the Rebellion having made houses or pleasure more unsafe) the Marquisse first re∣tired, hoping integrity and privacy might have here preserved his quiet; But the source of the times villany, bearing downe all before it, neither allowing newtrality or permitting Peace, to any that desired to be lesse sinfull then themselves, enforceth him to stand upon his guard which with his Gentlemen Armed with six Mus∣quets (the whole remainder of a well furnished Armory) he did so well, that twice the enemies attempts proved vaine.
But finding their numbers in those parts (after the Losse of Reading) grown more formidable, their forces quartering round a∣bout him, he solicited His MAJESTY for one hundred Musque∣tiers, which (being sent under command of Lieutenant Colo∣nell Peake) marching with speed and Secrecy the 31. of Iuly 1643. were thrust into the place, which from that time became a Garrison; it's former fortune still continuing, Colonell Harvey and Colonell Norton, within a few houres after attempting to surprize it, being not only beaten off, but the same night forced retreat to Farnham. The place is then begunne according to the quantity of men now added, to be fortified, and some time after upon report of a puissant Army, under command of Sir William Waller, to be appoin∣ted for the taking of it in: Colonell Rawdon with the rest of his Re∣giment (being about one hundred and fifty more) is commanded thither. The Lord Marquisse taking forth Commissions as Colonell and Governour, for the raising of more forces for defence of the same. Novemb. 6. shewes Waller with the expected Army (consisting of seaven thousand Horse and Foot) before the House; where ha∣ving lyen nine daies, and three times storming it, he againe retires to Farnham, having dishonoured and bruised his Army, whereof abundance were lost, without the death of more then two in the Garrison, and some little injury to the House by Battery. He thus drawne off, and His MAJESTIES Army, under com∣mand of the Lord Hopton, advancing two daies after, affords the Li∣berty of farther fortifying, which thus (as time and number would permit) made up, is rather strong then Regular. The ensuing Spring the Rebells, as well consulting the impor∣tance of the place, as the injuries suffered by it, both in their Trade and Force, resolve (having before assayed it by Surprize and Storme) to try by starving it, to which their Armies six weeks Quartering at Farnham, Odiam, Grewell, and Basingstoake, was a preparative, harrowing the Country about untill their March to Oxford. June. 4. 1644. At what time Colonell Norton drawing some forces from the adjacent Garrisons, by Order of their pretended Parliament, is to block up the House, and (by the treachery of a Souldier giving in∣telligence
two daies before) defeating a party of the Garrison drawn out to Odiam, and taking diverse Prisoners upon the fourth of Iune faced the House with a Regiment of Horse and Dragoones, and after some houres stand Quartered in Basingstoake, each day (his Foot not yet come up) keeping his guards of Horse upon our Aveneues to stop the fetching in Provision. Jun. 11. Colonell Morleyes Regiment of sixe Colours of Blew from Sus∣sex, and Sir Richard Onslowes Regiment of five of Red, from Sur∣rey, with two of White from Farnham, and three fresh Troops of Horse fetched in by Nortons Regiment, are all drawne up before the House, upon the South of Basingstoake; The Companies of White at Evening, with one Troop of Horse, marching to Sherfield, Sir Richard Onslowe, with his Troop of Horse to Anwell house, and Morleyes Foot with Colonell Nortons Horse quarter in Ba∣singstoake. During the time of lying at this distance, visiting us with horse (with whom entertaining skirmishes at their returne) were usually made worse with little losse to us. Jun. 15. To see the countenance of the Enemy, fifty Foot are sent toward Basingstoake, under the covert of a Mill and hedge, whilest our Horse forced theirs into the Towne, they reenforced, ours orderly retreat, drawing them on in danger of our Foot, who galling them, they stand the comming of their owne, 'twixt whom some Vol∣lyes being spent, ours are Commanded in. Jun. 17. The Enemies horse seize on two Teemes of ours, fetching Pro¦vision towards Sherfield, and three horse grazing in the Parke. At night, the Companies of white quarter in Basing Towne, and for∣tifying the Church, next day from the adjoyning houses shot two of our men; And being now come here, our numbers few, we divide our men into three parts, keeping two thirds on duty, whilest the other rest, appointing to each Captaine and his Company a particu∣lar Guard, dividing the Quarters of the Garrison to the Field Offi∣cers, viz. to Major Cuffand, the workes adjoyning to the Parke; to Major Langley, those in the gardens; to Lievtenant-Colonell John∣son, the care of the Graunge; to Colonell Rawdon, the workes next the Towne; and dispose of the Guns to Lievtenant Colonell Peake; the Troopers fitted with Muskets, and part of his Foot Company as a Reserve for supply of all places as any need required; The Liev∣tenant Colonells and Majors by course being Captaines of the
watch, Colonell Rawdon, onely in this excused by reason of his yeares. Jun. 18. The Regiment of Blew from Basingstoake releeve the White, on whom at midnight sallying forth, we Fired one of the houses which annoyed us; but the next night sallying againe, we Fired all betweene us and the Church, themselves at same time Firing some beyond, by which their workes growne hot, some flye into the hed∣ges, others further off. But at the ringing of the Bells (their custome upon all Alarmes) reliefe comming on all sides, ours retreat; they that night Quartering round the Parke under the favour of the hedge and pale, where they continue till next Evening, and with continuall Firing kill us one Sentinell, and hurt another. Jun. 20. The following day, the Parke being cleared, and they returned to quarter, and their guard at Church, our Horse are put into it, and 12 Musqueteers lodged at the corner of the Lane in covert of the hedge, some Officers of theirs thinking the Lane secure are blooded from the hedge, and hardly scape to Basingstoake, our Horse pursu∣ing them, and whilest their guard on Cowdryes Downe perceiving it, Troop to their rescue; ours are recalled, and sent up by the Graunge to Fire their Quarter, which is done, and one of them brought in; At same time, more of theirs riding along the Lane, our Musqueteers killing the horse of Colonell Greaves his Brother, take him Prisoner, the Colonell and the rest escaping to pursue their Iourney to the West. Two howers after, a Trumpet is sent in from Colonell Norton to demand his liberty, under pretence of being a Traveller, but is returned with a proposall of Exchange, next day two of Sir Richard Onslowes Foot are taken in the Parke, and a third killed. Jun. 24. Finding a sufferance by our Liberty resolving now more streightly to begirt us, two Companies more from Portsmouth, be∣ing joyned to those of Farnham in the Towne, the Regiment of Blew is drawne into the Parke, and Colonell Onslowes to the Lane and Close towards Basingstoake, where having fixed their quarters, they presently breake ground, shutting us up on three sides with their Foot, and on the other side their guards of horse keeping on Cowdreyes Downe, at night busying themselves with Spade and Pick-axe to secure their Quarters, three of ours runne to them. Jun. 26. Some Musketeers are sent by the point of Basingstoake (a Bul∣warke)
to view their lodging in the Lane, and to cut downe some Trees blinding a ruined Mill, from whence they played on us, both which are done and divers of them killed, with losse of two of ours; At night they run a Line toward the Mill, where we had galled them the day before, next night a Party of horse Firing upon their Sentinells on Cowdreyes Downe, much amuse their guards, whilest others of them are sent by to Oxford. Jun. 29. Their worke in the Parke is brought to some perfection, and by noone their Cannon Baskets placed make knowne they had a Cul∣verin there, giving us sixe shot thence. Next day being Sunday (their Cause allowes not now for Sabboth) doubling their diligence throughout the Leaguer, forwarding the Sconce at Morleyes Quar∣ters in the Parke, and on the Towne side towards a Mill, drawing a Line from the Church. At Onslowes Quarter rasing a platforme in the Lane with so much speed, that the next morning a Demy-Cul∣verin playes from it; at night our Messenger from Oxford inform∣ing us His Majesties successe against Waller at Cropready, We Ec∣choe it to our neighbours with Volleys both of small and great, they answering with their Guns, battering our Kitchin and Gate∣house, till a shot from our platforme spoyling the Carriage, silen∣ced their Demy-Culverin. July. 3. Their Lines being run within halfe Musket shot, by their con∣tinuall Firing powring their Lead into the Garrison, they spoyle us two or three a day, passing within our workes, and shoot the Mar∣quisse himselfe through his Cloathes, the Carriage of their peece being repaired, they now renew their Battery on the House unto the detriment and topping of our Towers and Chimnies. July. 8. This morning they assay to draw us forth by making an Alarme to themselves (leaving their peice neglected without a guard) but faile; at Evening a Prisoner escaping from them under the hazard of 100 shot so chafed them, that they continue Firing untill mid∣night; and shot two of our men next morning: foure Companies of Red from Surrey, comming to the reliefe of Colonell Onslowes men, marching too neare, have three shot placed amongst them from our Minion, making them change their march to Troop at fur∣ther distance. July. 11 One Company from Southampton of sevenscore, march't by the way of Hackwood unto Hollowayes Mill; with which (and those
foure Companies come in two dayes before) Morley is now so rai∣sed in his hopes that making use of Colonell Nortons absence (am∣bitious of the honour, but of summoning the next day being out Fast adding to our afflictions) sends by a Drum this harsh demand; My Lord, TO avoid the effusion of Christian blood, I have thought fit to send your Lordship this Summons to demand Basing house to be deli∣vered to me for the use of King and Parliament; if this be refused the ensuing inconveniences will rest upon your selfe, I desire your speedy answer and Rest; My Lord, Your humble servant HERBERT MORLEY. The Marquisse, upon small deliberation, return'd Mr Morley this Answere. Sir, IT is a crooked demand, and shall receive its answer sutable, I keep the house in the right of my Soveraigne, and will doe it in de∣spight of your Forces; your Letter J will preserve as a testimony of your Rebellion. WINCHESTER. This answer being return'd by the Drum with a Hast hast hast post hast upon the Letter, Morley speaks his choller from his Gunns, which now and some daies following playd on our Waterhouse; Colonell Onslowes men curteously permitting eight of our Foot to fetch six Beasts grazing before their Workes. At night Coronet Bryan, and some Troopers, passing a Messenger by Cowdreys down, bring in two Prisoners. July. 18. A Bonefire in the Park, with two Volleys throughout their Lea∣guer, speake their Committees welcome unto Basingstoake. July. 20. A party of our Musquetiers fall out upon them in the Lane, and having done some execution there, retreat; a Captain of Colonell Morley's being shot dead at same time from our works; two houres after comes a Drum with Letters for exchange of Prisoners, but ra∣ther to informe us Norton's safe returne from the defeat of Waller, and gain time to draw a Morter-peece more covert to their trench; from whence (their Drum return'd) they send us a Granado of 801 next night, concluding their devotion and the day with thundering
from their Culverins, two passed through the Quarters where our sick men lay, but without hurt. July. 22. Their Lines are much advanced, and their Sconce flanking their Battery in the Parke finished, the Marquisse himselfe hurt by a shot, and two men killed by chance shot, and the Carriage of our Cabonet broke from their Culverin; The following night being darke and Stormy, we dispatch our Messenger. Eight Prisoners taking the op∣portunity doe the same for themselves to their Leaguer making our allowance of great shot to be next day doubled, and at night more Granadoes. July. 25. The trenches on the Towne side in the Meades flote with the quantity of raine that fell, thereby forcing them, lye more open to our Towers from whence our Markes men spoyled divers, whilest on the other side our men draw covert to a Blind, and doe as much upon them: in the Lane at night two peeces charged with Case, so luckily are placed upon them (working upon their Lines) that they were heard complaine their suffering. July. 26. Early this morne the Blind againe being manned, an Officer with more of theirs are killed; and a Trooper of our owne afterward fetching a Hog and Cowe neare the same place occasioning some service from the Blind and Bulwarke they receive more losse. The Evening spending with dispute between our great Guns, they adde sixe Granades, one falling in our Granary, spoyled some Corne, and two missed Firing; at night two Souldiers run to them. July. 27. This morning shewes a traverse Crosse the Close from the burnt Mill, flanking our way unto the aforesaid Blind, and in the Parke the enclosing of the nearer side of an old Orchard securing Morleyes Quarter. At night from out their Morrer peece, they shot us sixe great stones sized with the Granades of 361, with each day continu∣ing like allowance, these and the Granades for a while seemed troublesome, but afterwards become by custome so familiar to the Souldier, that they were called, as they counted them, Bables, their mischiefes onely lighting on the house, and that the lesse, our Courts being large and many. July. 30. They plant a Culverin by Basing Church, from thence battering a Tower, on which our Markes men stood, that much annoyed that Quarter, continuing shot from both their other platformes; This day ends the yeare of the places being Garrison'd, and the second
month of the Leaguer, next day a platforme is begun by the Wood side, within halfe Musquet shot of Basing Bulwarke. Towards Eve∣ning paying the shot (it having been their Fast) they spared all the day: At night running a trench from the Church to their worke by the Wood, and (by foure men which last night run to them) per∣swaded of strange executions done by stones and Granades send us store, one whereof Firing our Hay falling into the Barne, had done much hurt, had not our diligence soon quenched it. Aug. 1. Our men tyred with length of 48 houres duty are now divided into two parts relieving every 24: our Gentlemen and Troopers doing the same; and here I cannot passe them over without due Commendations, all the time of the Leaguer undergoing the duty of Foot (that of Sentries onely except) going forth in all Sallies, as well on Foot with Musquets or Browne-Bill, as otherwise on Horseback, as occasion was; and for seven weeks time keeping their Horses with grasse and Sedge, which in the nights they cut under Command of the Rebells workes with hazard of their lives. Aug. 4. Perceiving the intention of the Rebells rather to starve then storme us, and the doubt of a more potent Army now removed, which hitherto had made us frugall of our men (already few in number and much spent with labour) as well to animate our men dismayed through divers wants and raigning of the pox, as also to annoy the Rebels, retard their workes, and gaine by Prisoners, somewhat of their condition: We resolve upon advantages to make some Sallies, and finding then an opportunity, a Party of their Foot lying at hazard upon Cowdreys Downe in Wallers work, Liev∣tenant Cuffand with about 20 Horse is sent to fall on them, whilest Coronet Bryan with like number riding at rate, is to cut in betwixt them and the hedge, where stood their guard of Horse, who seeing themselves thus unexpectedly charged, suddenly rout, flying to Basingstoake, and are pursued with execution on them, almost to the Towne, the Coronet bringing in their Colours, Trumpet, seven Horses, and three Troopers, besides what slaine and maim∣ed; of the Foot eleaven killed on the place, and foure brought in; our men returning under Command of their Cannon without the losse of a man; At first of the Alarme, they apprehending it, a Party with reliefe, began to flye the Parke, till informed better, and a∣gaine returning, they spend their heat at distance with their Guns
and Mortar-peece, we learning from the Prisoners their intention to batter upon Basing-Bulwarke from their new platforme by the Wood, lay on all hands for Lyning it, as yet being very weak there, labouring without enforcing us to doe the like within our workes, in many places slender and no where finished, of which defects our Renegades giving them information necessitates us worke to frustrate their reports. Aug. 5. Their guard at Wallers worke is doubled, and strengthened with Pikes, keeping their guard of Horse by exercise in better readi∣nesse; In the Parke side their Lines advance toward both our plat∣formes, and their worke by the Wood forwarded, liberally be∣stowing great Shot, Stones and Granades, of which they send us of three severall sorts, besides their hand Granades. Aug. 10. Colonell Whitheads new raised Regiment of five Companies, marching through Basingstoake to Cowdreys Downe, take up their Quarters in the Delue, for whose welcome and entertainment (with some sport) they founder a round Tower in the old Castle, by their Battery; in requitall whereof next morning, Major Cuf∣fand with 6 Files of Musqueteers and 20 Troopers with Browne-Bills, falling into the Parke attacque, their outward Lines, where killing some of them, burning their Blinds and Baskets, they bring off one of their Mortar peeces and store of Armes and Tooles; with having two men hurt. Lievtenant Snow with 20 Musqueteers and 12 with Bills during the amazement falling upon their Quar∣ter in the Lane with execution on them, breaking their Demy-Cul∣verin, Firing their guard and Baskets, and from hence with Armes and Tooles bring in some Ammunition. These Sallies were so much unto their losse, and toucht so neare their honour, That Oram (Cap∣taine of the Guards) for vindication must be brought to tryall, and for neglect and Cowardise (running as others then and after did) holding correspondence with the place, (where no man knew him) and sending in Ammunition (which was never received) with the hazard of life is Cashiered their service; A sentence much like that against the Earle of Strafford made with caution not to be brought to president for after times, least it too nearly might con∣cerne themselves: At night provision for our Horse being spent, we make a worke beyond the Graunge neare the Foot of Cowdreys Downe, securing the Meades for our Troopers in darke nights to fetch in grasse.
Aug. 12. We see them busied making provision of Baskets, Brush, and Turfe, to goe on with their workes; which for some daies lay still, filling their Baskets now with grasse to save their fireing; and in the meane time ply their Culverins. At night an Alarme beating through their Quarters, we expect according to the noyse, but they stay quiet till between three and foure, what time a Trumpet sounding on Cowdreys Downe, from forth the Delue, they fall upon us, busied at our new worke with 50 Musquetiers, but soon draw back; at same time 60 more by favour of a Wood, had gotten to the ditch under our platforme, where fired on by the Guard in the Parke Bulwarke flanking the ditch, they returned in hast leaving some Armes behind, having three Guns with case shot powred on their reare, for which they send us plenty from their severall Guards. And now begin a trench into the Parke from the Lane side, the better to secure that quarter, running it toward their great Work, meaning to close their Lines through∣out their Leaguer. Next day they spare their great shot, but at night give us a false Alarme. Aug. 14. Towards evening Lievtenant Cuffand and Cornet Bryan each with twenty Horse and forty Musquetiers, Sally upon the Downe againe, beating the Foot from Wallers worke, and the Horse guard from their Post, pursuing them to Basingstoake, whence strengthe∣ned with fresh Horse, they force ours to retreat, take Cornet Bry∣an and one Trooper, wound three others, and kill Ensigne Amery, ours having done abroad good execution bring in Lievtenant Coo∣per, a Corporall of Horse, and seven more of theirs; from whom we learne, Morley foure dayes before was shot in the shoulder viewing his workes in the Parke; The two next dayes were spent in Parlee for release of Prisoners. They sending us one wounded, we returne them three, offering Lievtenant Cooper and the Corpo∣rall (both stout men, wounded, and taken fighting) for our Coronet, but would not be accepted, so much they valued him; the Parlee ended they play as formerly, at night sending three Granades, whereof one failed them. Aug. 17. They bring Baskets to Wallers worke, and the Delue where they had wrought the former dayes to raise a Battery, and to secure themselves, learning our Sally intended the beating up that Quar∣ter, and had been done, had not our Horse pursuing them too farre,
engaged our Foot to secure their retreat; for at the first they ran, carrying their Colours with them from the Delue, though 300 men were said to Quarter in it; but animated with comming in of more, and drawing to the hedges in the Meade some-Musquetiers from Hollowayes Mill, they againe make good the place streightening our Horse retreat; at Evening planting a Culverin there, they play from thence, and from the peece at Church, this night three run to them, and one the night before. Aug. 19. This day getting their Demy Canon to the worke by the wood, they batter us, with 48 shot; and the two following dayes with eight score more, the least whole Culverin, with which and with Granades they killed two men, and mischieved two more, break our best Iron Gun, and make a breach in one of our square Towers: The injury of the worke before it, the Officers and Souldiers putting hand to Spade repaire, making it Canon proof, before scarce Drake. Aug. 22. This day they are more sparing, and permit the night enjoy its proper silence, disturbed onely by such, whose basenesse prompted them with hope to gaine by craft, what by their force they could not, shooting Notes fixed to arrowes with proffers of preferment to the Souldier, perswading Mutinies, and labouring divisions 'twixt the Regiments, leaving no stone unturned; but all in vaine, except the gaining some faint hearted Knaves, The following dayes send∣ing of Crosse barre, shot Loggs bound with Iron hoops, Stones, and Granades, whereof two missed firing; Two more run to them. Aug. 25. Their Battery neare the Wood having much torne the Tower, they now begin on that side next the Towne, within Pistoll shot to make a worke, to batter it from thence; In the meane time conti∣nuing shooting from their other Guns, they kill two men and maime a third; And in the Parke they shew a Sowe made for their Musquetiers, thrusting before them for to play behind; this night two run to them, and next night foure; inforcing us to seasonable justice in executing one who had attempted to have gone with them, by which our Souldiers were so fastned, that for a long time not one man that stirred, though our necessities grew fast on us, now drinking water, and for some weeks past making our bread, with Pease and Oates, our stock of Wheat being spent. Aug. 28. The Lines from Onslowes Quarter are brought on with a redoubt upon it, opposite to Basingstoake Bulwarke, and having broke their
Culverin, at the Delue, supplying it they play againe from thence, and in the night steal off five Horses grazing in the Meades; next night two Troopers cutting grasse, our River by the Mill being drawne downe, enforce us make a Damme raising the water to secure the Graunge. Sept. 2. At noone with Letters for Exchange of Prisoners we receive this Summons. My Lord, THese are in the name and by the authority of the Parliament of England, the highest Court of Justice in this Kingdome, to de∣mand the House and Garrison of Basing, to be deliveeed to me to be disposed of according to Order of Parliament. And hereof I expect your Answer by this Drum within one hower, after the receipt hereof, in the meane time, I rest From the Quarters before Basing, the 2. of Sept. in the afternoone. Yours to serve you RICH: NORTON. To which the Lord Marquisse instantly dispatcht this Answer. Sir, WHereas you demand the House and Garrison of Basing by a pretended authority of Parliament, I make this Answer, That without the King thore can be no Parliament, by His Majesties Commission I keep the place, and without His absolute Command shall not deliver it to any pretenders whatsoever, I am Basing. 2. Sept. Yours to serve you WINCHESTER. Sept. 4. This Answer sent: From their new Battery by the Towne in sixe houres time they thunder sixscore shot Cannon and Culverin; with which they Founder one of our great Brick Towers, from whence we had annoyed that Quarter, their small shot playing thick this day, they kil'd us three, and hurta woman. The rubbish of the Tower filling the end of a Curtain under it, we cut off the other by a traverse, lyning the Bulwarke where their shot had run: next day their great shot is reduced to 20; their Cannon by the former heat being made at fault, is this day drawne to Farnham, The night brings on their Line at Graunge, blocks up our way to the Downe,
and slights the worke we had made, by us some dayes before deser∣ted, now growne too hot and wanting men to keep it. Aug. 4. The day of promised reliefe our men in readinesse, Noon come and no appearance of them, unwilling to be idle, we resolve a Sal∣lie; Lievtenant Snow, Lievtenant Byfeild, and Ensigne Outram, each with 12 Troopers, with Browne Bills, and 18 Musquetiers are sent at once to fall on Onslowes Quarters in three parts, which is so well performed, that gaining their redoubts, they draw their Demy-Culverin neare our workes, bring but three Prisoners in, our Gaole being full, and having lost three men by the Enemies Case shot, and one hurt, retreat; the great Guns being plyed on both sides, some of ours luckily fell upon them at the Delue. Sir William Waller with two Troopes of Horse, two houres before arrived at Basingstoake, came forth to see the sport, and with his Horse facing the House too neare on Cowdreys Downe, they had their Captaine killed with round shot from our workes. In this dayes service by confession of our Enemies they had 60 common Souldiers killed, and 12 dangerously wounded, besides two Gunners and two Liev∣tenants, one whereof belonged to Sir William, and brought by curi∣osity to see the Leaguer was there slain: of ours, besides the former, we had three sleightly hurt with durt beat up by Culverin shot. At night we endeavour to fetch off the Gun, but find it heavy, they having doubled Guards, we place 12 Musquetiers to wait the en∣gaged peece. This day and next spends 50 shot from their new platforme, by battering downe a stack of Chimnies, making a large breach in the new building; toward night we see two Companies of Foot march∣ing by Hackwood Westward, followed next Evening by two Com∣panies more, two Waggons and twelve Troops of Horse; Next day againe at noone ceasing their Battery, permit us to see two Regi∣ments of twenty Companies follow the Horse had passed, two companies of White turne into Basingstoake and their Artillery, ten of severall sorts conveyed by one Company more of Yellow. This night we expect Alarmes, and were well prepared having for foure nights since kept all our men upon duty. But it passeth with∣out disturbance, more then that of tongues, boasting their Army to be next day shewed us, which Sir Williams hast into the West per∣mit not; And well satisfied with Wednesdaies Sally, the strife for
plunder of the house maintained with so much pertinacy between his men and Nortons ceased, and we againe with our old guests are left to try it out, grown now so mute upon this parting, as in 48 houres we heare but of two Culverin shot, next day recovering heart, they tell us 22, and resting some daies past, now find their worke again. Sept. 11. Silent till towards evening, ten great shot; at night our Messen∣ger Edward Jeffery assures the certainty of our reliefes advance to Aldermarston, and taking of some Scouts, we then make fires up∣on the Gatehouse in signe of notice, and of readinesse, though (through the Fogge) it hardly could be seen to the next hill. By seaven next morne, the Noble Colonell Gage with Horse and Foot past through so many hazards, had attained Chinham Downe, where Colonell Norton with his strength having intelligence did stand in readinesse. And now what here was done I shall referre to what hath been said by others from some one present there, which may relate to each his due desert, in all so much, That notwithstanding all advantages of place, and Men fresh and prepared against tyred Troops and wearied Foot, a Fogge so thick as made the day still night, helping the shrowding of his Ambuscades, and clouding pas∣ses unto such who neither knew nor could discern a way more then their Valour and the Sword did cut, and Maugre all, with executi∣on forced his retreat the Fogge befriending him serving as covert, for his safer flight through Basingstoake, the day then clearing, and report of fight brought near the Garrison, Lievtenant Colonell Johnson with some Musquetiers issuing by the Graunge, beates them from off their Line, pursues them to the Hill, and thence unto the Delue, cleering that Quarter with so small defence as is incre∣dible. The passe thus cleared, meeting our welcome friends, our joyes are ecchoed, whilest the sad Prisoners are led in to see the House they lay so long about, their number 64 Common Souldi∣ers, two Sergeants, one Lievtenant, whereof the wounded were next day sent forth unto the care of their owne Chirurgeons, and two that ran from us had execution. The Ammunition brought put in, and the Lord Marquisse visi∣ted by his worthy friends, they return to Cowdreys Downe; whence the Horse under some hazard of the Enemies Guns retreat to Chin∣ham, thence 100 Musqueteers being sent unto the House, they
march through Basing-stoake, facing the Rebells workes whilest 14. barrells of powder and 100. Armes found in the towne, and what provision of all sortes could be got, were sent into the Garri∣son, where 100. Musqueteers under command of Major Cuffand, seconded with like number of supplies led forth by Captaine Hull, attacque the line on Basing side, take in that quarter and the Church which they had fortified. In it 2. Captaines (Captaine Iohn Iephson and Captaine Iarvas,) 1. Leivtenant, 2. Sergeants, and about 30. Souldiers the rest by severall wayes escaping. During the former fight their Guns being drawn from off that platform to their workes in the park; Sir Richard Onslowes quarter towards Basing-stoake, that fatall place againe is taken in the skonces sleighted; and their peice brought in by Musqueteers, led by Leivtenant-Colonell Peak, their Tents and Huts fiered neere Holloway Mill, the enemy so hastening from these workes as scarcely 3. could be made stay the killing. Thus might we see at once, three of their Quarters blaze, onely one (well fortified and their remaining strength drawne in) is left them quiet. Sept. 1 The next day is imployed in sending warrants forth, fetching provision from the adjacent Townes, and getting in a Culverin the enemies hast had left neere to the wood, which they permitted us with so much tamenesse, as called our men to fall upon their workes, but most part of our foot then busied abroad these are commanded off having a Sergeant and 5. others shot, whereof they after died, care being taken for such Gentlemen of our releife as had been hurt, night comming on, intelligence of enemies appearing from the townes neere Silckester and drawing towards Kingscleare, Colonell Gage ordering his horse and foot to be in readinesse, having supplied the Garrison as much as shortnesse of his stay gave leave, about 11. at night takes Conge of the place, marching the way of Reading, leaving the enemy next morne amused with a letter for exchange of Captaine Love for Jephson, which by noone was done; and they by it assured the certainty of his retreat to Oxford. Sept. 14 The towne of Basing not yet repossest, a hundred Musqueteers are sent under command of Captaine Fletcher to guard our Carts fetch∣ing provision thence, on whom the enemy with horse and foot falls out towards evening, Norton himselfe there present, ours taken in disorder are beat back, but soone restored by the comming forth of
the field Officers, and they forced back into their workes, sixteen of them being slaine in the retreat and 11 taken, of ours an Ensigne and two common Souldiers killed, six hurt, whereof 4. dyed, and 8 made prisoners, Leivtenant Colonel Iohnson Doctor of Physique, was here shot in the shoulder, whereby contracting a Feaver he dy∣ed a frtght after, his worth challenging Funerall teares, being no lesse eminent in the Garrison for his valour and conduct, as a Soul∣die, then famous through the Kingdom for his excellency as an Hbarist, and Physician. The following week keeping the towne with guards we fetch provision, sleight their platforme, and throw down their workes without the least Alarm. Sept. 23. The Rebels againe falling upon our guard in towne, ours are commanded in, having replenished our store for some weeke time, and wanting men to spare. The Church by them thus repossest, they now enlarge themselves and keep us to our workes, of late too loos∣ly growne familiar in the towne. This day two Gentlemen of our releife was exchanged from Reading for three of theirs with us. Next day a party of our Horse are sent forth by the Grange to face their guard on Cowdrey, whil'st our foot draw in twenty fat hoggs from of the Downe, their Scouts draw back unto their Guards kept near to Basing-stoak whence strengthned ours orderly retreating, are pursued neer to a hedg lyned with our Musqueteers, who salving them, they quickly face about, having swormd out the number of 5 Troopes. The morrow entertaines them in like manner whilest our men spoyling their platform at the Delve, bring in their planke and timber. Sept. 27. Some of our horse sporting on Cowdreys Downe, and there amu∣sing them, six others through the Parke Lane toward Basing-stoake fetch in eight of their foot passing unto their Leaguer. And a water leveller imployed for the drawing of our River, Morley himselfe hardly escaping them, causing some foot come forth to stop our horse retreat, are galled by our Musqueteeres purposely lodged in covert. An houre after we receive a Drum from Colonell Norton, for the sending out some gentlemen to treat the change of Priso∣ners, and is returnd with fixing of a day. Sept. 29. The Stage of Coudrey furnish'd again with Actors, a Coronet and three more of theirs are killed and one of ours, At night (the mor∣row being a Faire at Basingstoke,) six Foot with Pistoll and Browne
Bill are sent to try the Market, and foure miles off at a Committees house finding to serve their turne, from thence bring in twenty three head of Cattle by the Delve, which passe our dayly skirmishing kept free, nex day informed the enemy imploed in fortifying the Church, sometimes kept but a carelesse Guard, 100 Musqueteeres led forth by Majr Cuffaud are sent to force the place, and having gained a worke, wanting wherewith to force the doore, theirs comming fast to rescue, ours retreat having a Sergeant and six Soul∣diers shot in the attempt, whereof most dyed, of theirs an Ensigne and some others slaine. Octob. 2. We send forth Captain Rosewell and Captain Rigby secur'd by Hostages, with instructions to treat release of Prisoners. The same night M. Greaves, and Captain Iarvis, next day two Lieutenants with diverse more sent out receiving Captain Rowlet, a Lieutenant, and two Sergeants lost at Odiham, and some daies after Coronet Bryan and three Gentlemen of our releefe released to Oxford. Octob. 4. This and the eight daies following our Horse and theirs change Pistolls upon Cowdreys downe, they having number we advantage of a hedge with Musqueteers, so as the odds was ours, and three or foure of theirs was daily carried off, we all the while loosing one Horse and two Foot Souldiers, at night send forth our Chapmen well furnished and good Market folkes, in five houres time returne with 25 Beasts under the noses of their Sentinells, some Mesque∣teers of ours lying abroad for their security. Octob. 17. Past noon from off our Towers, we see the Van of Manchesters Army Marching to Basingstoake and Sherfield; next day some of his Horse visit the Leaguer, and by our Markes-men two of them are shot, the following day eight Regiments of Foot and some of Horse with all their Carriage and Artillery, drawn on the South of Basing-stoake facing the House, make halt some houres, and towards night returne into the Towne, most of their Horse which all the day had stood at two miles distance neere Rooks downe, at night with hast enough Troop to their Quarters towards Farnham. Octob. 20. Three Foot Souldiers comming too neare to see the House re∣ceive the curtesy of fetching in, and next day by our Foot in Am∣bush in the lane a Cornet of Sir Williams Regiment and two Dra∣goones were taken, our Horse from off the Hill fetch in two strag∣ling Foot, at noon some Regiments of Horse and Foot belonging to
the Earle of Essex, joyne to the Leaguer, their Army toward e∣vening drawn in Battalia, that night keep the field, the Van neare Rooks Downe, the Battle at Basing-Stoake, and Reere by Hack∣wood, next day Marching the Army towards Reading, the Foot by Sherbone, and the Horse keeping along their left, the following day three Troopers more brought in, keeping our Horse abroad to wait on them. At night part of a ruined Tower falling by Tem∣pest on five of our men, killing one, and somewhat bruised the rest. Lievtenant Cuffand with some 40 Horse charging their Guardi∣an Cowdrey's-downe, spoiling five Horses & as many men, takes one of theirs, with losse of one of ours; next day facing their Horse a∣gaine, whilest Coronet Bryan with some few Horse fetcht off a Load of Corne, driving neere to their Guard. And riding through the Garrison from off th'other side, bring in a Cart and Teame pas∣sing to Basing-stoake, These Carts did help us in 3 following nights, secured with Convoyes, to fetch in 5 quarters of thresht Corn, and 12 load in the sheafe from Piats hill, the same nights furnishing us 14 Beasts, they some dayes after keeping at those Barnes a Guard of Horse and Foot, releived each night at nine. Nov. 1. Our slender stock of Bread and Corne, that of Beere being spent, invites the sending forth Lievtenant Colonell Peake with Horse and Foot, to try what yet could more be done at Piats Hill, where comming about eight at night, finding their Fires, but their guards gone off: taking two Prisoners begin their worke, loading their Carts, and sending them away continuing so till 12, what time their Horse from Sherfield comming down the hill, and Foot from Basing drawing up, fall on our Guards, and for some time dispute it, but our Foot from the lyned hedges having gauled their Horse, give way to ours to draw theirs farther off, whilest their Foot acquain∣ted with the ground strive to possesse the hedges some of ours main∣tained, but an Alarum from the Castle given upon the Church, and our Horse now freed of thefts, cause them retreate, driving them through the River, they thus beat off, we to our Worke againe, and by the morning carry in 16 Cart loads in sheafe, our Drovers at same time passed through our Guards eight Beasts, at noon next day some Souldiers steping out seize on 12 sides of Muttō & some Pork loaded upon a Horse as contribution food going unto the Church.
Nov. 5. Our Beere being now spent, the Officers content themselves with water, having for ten dayes past spared one meale a day, and now perswade the Souldiers who as yet had two, this causeth one at night to run away, telling our wants unto our Enimies, now ani∣mating them, before dishartened, had not the comming in of Strowds and Ludlowes horse with some Dragoones fastened thei Leaguer, almost on remove. Nov. 6. Coronet Bryan with a party of Horse using the benefit of a fogge, getting into the Bottome neere to Basing-stoake, steales off three Sentryes, and placing there his owne, after a while with∣out the noise of Pistoll, takes a Corporall and two Troopers more comming to their reliefe, This was a welcome to Strowdes new-come Horse. At night Major Cuffand with Horse and Foot killing a Sentinell, and beating off their Horse, cleereth the passe to Pi∣ats Hill, and sendeth forth our men for Beasts, but the enemies Horse that night too much abroad, make void this Journey; two runne to him, one of em with a horse. Nov. 9. The like party sent out at night under Command of Major Rose∣well, beating their Foot from a worke throwne upon the passe at the Delue (their Horse not daring come too neer the hedges) possesse the Avenues, to Piats-Hill, then sending forth our Grasiers, who in foure houres time returne with eighteen Beasts our Guards in meane while from the Barnes thereby passing six Load of Corne in sheaffe and securing two Messengers on ward to Oxford, one sent three nights before being taken by the enemy. Nov. 13. Colonell Ludlowes Trumpiter is taken upon Cowdreys downe, next day a Regiment of Foot shewing themselves at Chinham, march to Basing-stoake; And the morrow a Trumpet from Sir William for his Coronet is return'd with naming an Exchange; a∣nother bringing in two Officers of ours that long had layen at Farn∣ham, for them carryes out seaven of theirs, wee taking care to fill their roomes againe, within two houres after fetch in one and kill two more abroad, There Army now againe hovering about, afford us sport, each day killing or taking some of their curious ones. And seaze two Carts, one with a Load of Hay passing too neere our workes. The enemy wearied with Lying 24 weeks, diseases, with the Winter seazing them, his Army wasted from 2000 to 700, fearing
the forces of His Majesty now moving about Hungerford, raiseth his Leaguer, and at eight this morne drew off his Waggons, and two Gunnes, three dayes before brought in, The Foot at noone march toward Odgiham, the Hots being fired, and some Troopes of Horse left to secure their reere, On whom a party of our Horse with Coronet Bryan waiting their opportunityes disorder their re∣treat. Next night honoured Sir Henry Gage (the enemies remove not knowne) sent by His Majesty with 1000 Horse brings in supplies of Ammunition and Provision, each trooper in a bagge beating his part having a skeene of Match swadled about his wast besides what brought in Carts, and staying here three dayes most amply victualled the Garrison (drawn down by length of Seige, almost unto the worst of all necessityes, Provision lowe, the Souldiers spent and naked, and the numbers few, having besides our hurt and maimed, and such as runne from us, lost neere 100 men by sicknesse, and the Seige, whereof a Lievtenant Colonell, two Ensignes, three Sergeants, and seaven Corporals. I shall end all with these observations viz. That seldome hath been a Seie wherein the preservation of the place more imediatly might be imputed to the hand of God, That the Souldiers in so long a Seige with all the sufferings incident thereto, should never Mutiny; Nor that that the customary Liberty at all our Parlyes for to meet and talke wrought any treachery, Wants of Provisions al∣wayes so supplyed as if by miracle, during the Leaguer; wee not having lesse then seavenscore uselesse mouthes, that had releife come at the time appointed, Waller then hovering with his force at Farnham in probability a hazard whether they had releived us, or preserved themselves. Or had Norton (able to bring three times, their numbers forth) when the next weeke they came, drawne out his strength, or had wee not got Powder from them, that, by our releife scarse serving till the Seige was raised; or when we were releived, had they not suffered us to possesse the Towne a weeke, thereout supplying our selves for horse and man, before not having for above three weekes, Or had they when we first fetcht Corne from Piats Hill, or fired or removed it. But God that holdeth all things in his hand, appointing times and seasons: ordereth all that tends unto those ends he wils; in vain it
therfore were to Villisy the enemy; blaming his valor or descretion, Or yet to say the care and diligence of the Lord Marquisse Gover∣nour, the skill and valour of the Officers, the courage and obedi∣ence of the Souldiers, (though all these did their parts) had thus preserved the place, in vain we watch and ward, except God keepe the House. Let no man therefore speake himselfe an instrument, onely in giving thankes that God had made him so, for here was evidently seen He chose the weake to confound the strong, Non Nobis Domine. Not unto us, not unto us O Lord. but to thine owne name be all Glory for ever, AMEN. FINIS.
