E3308 E250_1 99871148 159066
A PRECIOUS And most Divine LETTER FROM THAT FAMOUS, AND Ever to be renowned Earl of ESSEX, (Father to the now Lord Generall his Excel∣lence) to the Earl of SOUTH-HAMPTON, in the latter time of Queen ELIZA∣BETHS Reigne. Printed according to Order. printer's or publisher's device London Aug: 14. 1643
To the READER. THis Letter, many Yeares since received from the hands of a most Honourable Person, eminent in the Court in those Elizean dayes, (when Honour crowned Ʋirtue, and Ʋirtue was the glory of the Times) I have long stored up for my owne private, as a Gem and Treasure inestimable. Earthly Treasures waste, but Heavenly increase by Communi∣cation! Besides, I feare (with the Lepers of Old) I doe not well long to conceale, what all that read will judge to be a Common Treasure. What the Author was for Heigth and Greatnesse all know; What for Grace and Goodnesse (though Envy or Ig∣norance, have as it were Conspired to Vaile over his Orient Lustre) thou mayest take some scantling of by this. His Magnanimity and Ʋalour the World knew, as farre as Hercules his Pillars, and the utmost Extent of the Hesperian Pride. His Humility and Plaine-heartednes (which heightned Him above all his Honours) those that knew him were not ignorant of. That Noble Heroe yet lives in the true Successor of Honour and Ʋirtue, our Noble GENERALL. (Neque degeneres pariunt Aquilae Columbas.) His incorrupted Fidelity, Valour, and Wisedonme, are above the reach of Ignorant or Envious Malignants. His immovable Resolution (ever, and of late exprest) to deny his Honour, his owne Wisedome, yea his life for the Common Safety, shines so bright in the Eyes of all Judicious, that nei∣ther
the malicious fomentings of Malignant Spirits, nor the weake Clamors of impatient Ignorance, nor the Necessity of Gods most holy Providence, (exercising his Excellency and the Kingdome, I hope for good) I say that none, nor all of these, can justly cloud and Eclipse his Shine and Lustre. There is nothing within the Circumference of Politicall and prudentiall Arts, that hath more uncertaine and various E∣vents then that of Warre: Eventus Belli incertus. The protracting lengthning, shortning, lies in the hand of a higher Excellency, even onely his, in whose hand is our Way and Breath, as Daniel told Belshazzar. The Greatest and best Commanders that ever the World yet saw, must remember, in whose hand is their VVay and Breath, and both they and all Men must with Patience see (for oft it comes to passe) both Moneths, and Summers spend beyond their Thoughts, Desires, Endeavours, and yet no Blemish to their VVisdome, Va∣lour, Fidelity, or Vigilancy. He that is the God of Peace mercifully shew us the Paths of it, even of that Peace, which no Man can give nor take from us.
A LETTER FROM That famous, and ever to be renowned Earle of ESSEX, to the Earl of South-hampton, in the lat∣ter time of Queen ELIZABETHS Reigne. My Lord, AS neither nature nor custome ever made me a man of complement, so now I shall have lesse will than ever for to use such Ceremonies, when I have left with Mar∣tha to be solicitus circa multa, and believe with Mary, unum sufficit: but it is no com∣plement or Ceremony, but a reall and ne∣cessary duty that one friend oweth to ano∣ther in absence & especially at their seave taking, when in mans reason many acci∣dents may keep them long divided, or per∣haps barre them ever meeting till they meet in another world; for then shall I thinke that my friend, whose ho∣nour, whose Person, and whose fortune is deare unto me, shall prosper and be happy where ever he goes, and what ever he takes in hand when he is in the favour of that God, under whose protection there is onely safety, and in whose service there is onely true happinesse to be found. What I thinke of your naturall gifts or abilities in this age, or in this State, to give glory to God, and to winne honour to your selfe, if you imploy the Talents you have received to their best use, I will not now tell you, it sufficeth, that when I was farthest of all times from dissem∣bling, I spake truly, and have witnes enough: but these things only I will put your Lordships in mind of. First, that you have nothing that you have not received.
Secondly, that you possesse them not as Lord over them, but as an accomptant for them. Thirdly, If you imploy them to serve this world, or your own world∣ly delights, (which the Prince of this world will seek to entertain you with) it is ingratitude, it is injustice, yea it is perfidious treacherie. For what would you thinke of such a servant of yours, that should convert your goods committed to his charge, to the advantage or service of your greatest enemy; & what do you lesse than this with God, since you have all from him, and know that the world, and Prince thereof, are at a con∣tinuall enmity with him? and therefore if ever the admonition of your truest friend shall be heard by you or if your Countrey which you may serve in so great and many things, be deare unto you; If your God, whom you must (if you deale truly with your selfe) acknowledge to be powerfull over all, and just in all be feared by you; yea if you be dear unto your selfe and preferre an everlasting happines before a pleasant dreame, which you must shortly awake out of, and then repent in the bitternes of your soul; if any of these things be regarded by you, then I say, call your selfe to account for what is past, cancell all the leagues you have made without the warrant of a religious conscience, make a re∣solute Covenant with your God, to serve him with all your natural and spirituall, inward and outward gifts and abilities, and then he that is faithfull (and cannot lie) hath promised to honour them that honour him; He will give you that inward peace of Soul, and true joy of heart, which till you have you shall never rest, and which when you have, you shall never be shaken, and which you can never attaine to any other way than this that I have shewed you. I know your Lordship may say to your selfe, and object to me, this is but a vapor of melancholie and the stile of a Prisoner, and that I was far enough from it, when I lived in the world as you doe now, and may be so again when my fetters be taken from me. I answer, though your Lordship should thinke so, yet cannot I distrust the goodnesse of my God that his mercy will fail me or his grace forsakeme; I have so deeply ingaged my selfe, that I should be one of the most miserable Apostates that ever was, I have so avowed my profession and called so many from time to time to witnes it, and to be watchmen over me, that I should be the hollowest hypocrite that ever was borne: But though I should perish in my owne sin, and draw upon my selfe my own damnation, should not you take hold of the grace and mercy in God which is offer∣ed unto you; and make your profit of my fearful and wretched example?
I was longer a slave and servant to the world and the corruptions of it. then you have bin, and therefore could hardlyer be drawn from it. I had many calls, and answered some of them slowly; thinking a soft pace fast enough to come to Christ and my selfe forward enough when I saw the end of my journy, though I arrived not at it, and therefore I have been by Gods providence violently pul'd, hal'd, and drag'd to the Marriage Feast as the world hath seen. It was just with God to afflict me in this world that he might give me joy in another. I had too much knowledge when I performed too little obedience, and was therefore to be beaten with double stripes: God grant your Lordship may feel the comfort I now enjoy in my unfaigned conversion, but that you never feele the torments I have suffered for my too long delaying it; I had none but Divines to call upon me, to whom I said, if my ambition could have entred into their narrow hearts, they would not have bin so humble; or if my delights had bin tasted by them, they could not have been so precise: but your Lordship hath one to call upon you, that knowes what it is you now injoy, & what the greatest fruit and end is of all the con∣tentments that this world can afford. Thinke therefore deare Earl, that I have staked & bounded all the waies of pleasure to you, & left them as Sea markes for you to keep the Channell of religious virtue; for, shut your eyes never so long they must be open at last, and then you must say with me, there is no peace to the wicked. I will make a Covenant with my Soul, not to suffer my eyes to sleep in the night, nor my thoughts to attend the first busines of the day, till I have prayed to my God, that your Lordship may believe and make profit of this plaine, but faithfull admonition; and then I know your Countrey and friends shall be happy in you, and Your self successefull in all you take in hand; which shall be an unspeakeable comfort to Your Lordships Cousin and true friend, whom no world∣ly cause can divide from you ESSEX.
