E3676 E34_11 99859622 111717
AN EXACT RELATION OF FOURE NOTABLE VICTORIES Obtained by the Parliaments Forces: eing informed to the Honourable House of Par∣liament on Satterday last, being the 24. day of this instant February, 1644. Viz. I. The taking of 3000. pound in money, besides Plate and Iewels, with a Convoy of sixty Horse; going from Prince Rupert to Weymouth. II. Collonel Mittons taking of one Collonel, many Captaines and other Officers, and 60. common Soldiers prisoners; with the routing two Regiments of Irish Rbels newly landed, and taking their Bag and Baggage. III. A defeat given to the Newark Forces, occasioned by a discovery of a dangerous Plot, for betraying the Town of Nottingham; with the manner of drowning many of them, and taking others prisoners. IV. The taking of twelve Ships by the Earle of Warwicks Ships, which were imployed against the Parliament, under the command of Browne Bushell; with a relation of what store of Ordnance, Ammunition and Treasure was therein. Published according to Order. Febr. 26. LONDON. Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1644. 1643
A RELATION OF FOURE VICTORIES OBTAINED By the PARLIAMENTS FORCES. The First Victory. Of the taking of a convoy of sixty horse, and three thousand pound in mony, besides Iewels and Plate. THat this relation may not appeare to the Reader like a Nutshell without a kirnell, I shall briefly satisfy you in each particular: and for the me∣thod sake begin with Prince Ruperts marching towards
Wales, and whether his ayme in his passage through Worcestershire to Ludlow in Shropshire, were not more to raise mony then men I leave to your construction; but this is certaine, there was going from him to Weymouth, (with a purpose that it should be conveyed from thence over sea) three thousand pounds in mony, with Plate, Iewels, and other rich treasure, which was sent the last week with a Convoy of about sixty horse, chosen men (most of them being Gentlemen.) But Captaine Syden∣ham the Governour of the town of Pool for the King and Parliament, having notice of their comming through Dorsetshire towards VVeymouth, went out with a party of horse, and meeting with the said Convoy charged them, and after a short fight took them prisoners and carried them to Poole, with the Mony Plate and Iewels, for the service of the State. And whether this Mony and Plate were gotten by plunder, or some other of Prince Ruperts Revenue (lesse visible) I leave to any indifferent man to judge; and although there may bee some pretence that it was going to some of his friends beyond sea, yet is there farre greater probability, that Prince Rupert foreseeing what condition he is like to be in very shortly, begins to wax provident, and make a stock against his flight into Holland; or else, to buy Armes to be imployed against the Parliament. The other matters of greater importance which I have yet to relate in this small peece of paper, will not permit of any longer discourse on this businesse, there∣fore I will passe from that, and come to the next thing of great consideration.
The Second Victory. Of Collonel Mittons taking of one Collonel, many Captaines and other Officers, and sixty common Soldiers prisoners, with the routing of two Regiments of Irish Rebels. IT hath been received for a certaine truth, that of late thousands of the Irish Rebels have come over to Bristoll, Chester and other places, and it is as true, that two Regiments more landed since neare Chester, and intended to joyne themselves with the rest of that blood-sucking and Rebellious crew, which were in actuall warre against the Parliament; thinking them∣selves sure to drive back Sir VVilliam Breretons forces, which since the victory obtained at Namptwich, were drawne neare Chester. And the Rebels being now up∣on their march into the country, Colonel Mitton (a valourous and deserving Gentleman) having notice thereof, admitted of no delay in preparing not onely to defend himselfe, but to offend the enemy, and pre∣servation of the country; but presently drew forth with about six hundred men, and having certain intelli∣gence how the Rebels advanced, it was not long be∣fore he met with them: and drawing his forces into a body not farre from Sir Richard VVilbrams house, they fel so bravely upon the Rebels, that within one houres space, he had killed and taken above threescore of them, and utterly routed the rest, putting them to flight.
In which Skirmish there was taken one Colonell, three or foure Captaines, be sides many other inferiour Officers, and all their bagge and baggage, wherein we have great cause to acknowledge Gods infinite mercy and goodnesse to this land, that notwithstanding the great multitude of the Rebels which have lately come over into England, to joyne with the Papists here to destroy the Protestants, and for the utter extirpation of the Protestant Religion; yet it hath pleased God so wonderfully to manifest his love to his cause, that nei∣ther they nor any of the Kings forces have had any suc∣cesse since their comming over, but notwithstanding all their acting and plotting, they have been disappointed; and their consultations have like the Counsell of Achi∣tophell, turned to their destruction, and their wicked devices brought to light; as lately we have an example in the deliverance of the towne of Nottingham, against which, the Newarke forces had laid a plot for betraying of the said towne into the hands of the enemy, and was very neare to be put in execution; and as we are credibly informed was after this manner, viz. The third Victorie. Of a defeat given to the Newarke Forces, with the drowning many of them, and taking others Prisoners. THere being a party in the Towne which had con∣spired with the Cavaliers for the betraying there∣of (most of them being Malignants which were disar∣med) they had devised a way to convay Armes to them,
under the colour of bringing corn and provision to the Town, and all things being agreed upon, both touching the manner of the execution of the Plot, and the time when their bloudy designs should be acted; divers loads of corn (to the outward appearance) were by persons in the habit of Conntry men brought thither, and being examined what was in the sacks, they said that there was nothing but wheat and other grain, but (upon some cause of suspition) they were not suffered to passe without further search, and were commanded to shoot the sacks, and amongst the corn in the sacks, there were swords, Pistols, and other Amunition. But I should have told you in the first place, of certain persons that were taken upon suspition before in the Town, and after examina∣tion and nothing confessed, there was other means (lesse pleasing) used to make them utter the truth, and after∣wards one of them confessed that they were Spies, but would confesse no more; whereupon they were tyed neck and heels together, which made them within few houres confesse the truth of the Plot, for otherwise in all probability, the sacks had not bin so strictly searched. And so being returned againe to the place where I left off, I shall go on in declaring, that after the Swords, Pi∣stols and Ammunition were found as aforesaid, the par∣ties which brought the same, were taken and carried in∣to the Towne and kept in safe custody, and no persons suffered to go out of the Town for fear of giving intel∣ligence that their Plot was discovered, which was sud∣dainly to be put in execution; and at the hour appointed, at a place where the Enemy were to come over the Ri∣ver
of Trent, they were so bravely assaulted by the Not∣tingham Forces, that many of them were killed, and about thirty of them drowned in the River, divers Pri∣soners taken, and the rest put to flight. The fourth Victory. Of the taking of twelve Ships from Captain Browne Bushell. HAving certified you of the happy successe of our Land Forces, it will not be much unseasonable to give you an accompt of our Navies proceedings, under the command of the Right honorable the Earl of War∣wick, whose vigilant care for the preservation and safe∣ty of this Kingdome, deserves much commendation. Certain of the Earl of VVarwicks ships coasting up and down to scour the Seas, and free a passage for our Merehant men, met with twelve Ships, under the com∣mand of that Arch-enemy to the State, Captain Brown Bushell, who hath robbed at Sea, under pretence of a Commission from Oxford; where after some few hours fighting, they yeelded themselves; which Ships will now be employed for the defence and safeguard of the Kingdome, they being very serviceable Ships and fur∣nished with Ordnance and ammunition, and in one of the Ships is thought to be some store of treasure; espe∣cially in a great Cypresse Chest, for the opening where∣of the Parliament hath given speciall Order. FINIS.
