E3774 E147_19 99871298 156680
Exceeding True NEVVES From Newcastle. Declaring the manifold Distractions, Feares, and Iealousies of that City, and se∣verall other places of Note in the Countrey. Likewise a reall and exact Declaration of the particular causes of their distempers. Set downe in as ample and exact a man∣ner as can be desired, for the satisfaction of all those that desire to be informed of the present estate of those parts. May 17. London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642.
Exceeding True Newes from Newcastle. IT is not unknowne to most men gentle Reader what great Distractions, feares, and Jealousies are fostred in all parts; Nay in every Corner of this Kingdome, as hath beene made apparent by many circumstances which will be too tedious for me to insert in this following Relation. Onely give mee leave to give you a tast of the great Distractions, growing Feares and franticke Iealousies of the Inhabitants in Newcastle, Durham, Nor∣thallerton,
Morpat, and many other pla∣ces in the Bishopricke and Nrthum∣herland. And first touching their  actions. Merchants are distracted for want of Traffique, they are in such a pittifull rage, that they have sworne not to car∣ry Coales for any man, they sweare, that since the Peace was concluded, Coales are fallen at least sixe pence a Bushell, which makes them curse Peace and fall together by the eares amongst them∣selves, likewise your Gunsmiths begin to bounce and breake with a powder, for since the Army marcht away they have had nothing to doe but to make Key-Gunnes for which they curse peace likewise, and make the blacke Pots five one against the other, they are all to pieces on that side too. The Citizens wives that had decrepid Husbands, they are distracted for the losse of their loves honest Gentlemen Troopers (whom they in pitty) of their Husbands weake∣nesse
suffered to hunt in their Conyberies: Your Alewives and Tap∣sters likewise, are distracted to see their Ale sowre for want of good fellowes, their Beere converted to Vineger, they likewise curse Peace till they are a dry; drinke till they are mad, then let the rest about the Cellar, then run Tap run Tapster, all's gone, nothing lest but the empty Hogs-head for the Brewer to make him a Helmet on to cover his Logger-head. The Baker that in the time of Warre made his bread of halfe wheate and halfe sand now, cries out that his bread is dowe bak't, he sweares he had rather have stood in the Pillory then to have had Peace concluded, for now he makes his bread but two ounces to light in a two penny loafe, and then hee made it foure ounces two light, yet now his bread lies on his hands, which makes him pray for warre or a deere yeare, and
then the mealey mouth Rogue sweares he will make them pay for it. But O the generall Lamentation that there is amongst the Maides that should be the wiues that would be, and the whores that must, be those that were Maides curse their owne weaknes, the Brittlenes of their wares that would not endure one knock, but ever after be estee∣med crackt Cōmodities, those that haue gotten their bellies full they curse their greedy stomacks, that they could not bee contented with a bit or so but that they must take so much as to make such a damnable timpany, in their ungodly guts, nothing can cure but Lusts Lacri∣mie, and the vertue of that white sheet, which was guilty of that Venerable Banquet. Likewise Churchwardens and Over∣seers of the Poore are in a pittifull per∣plexity, they are compelled to turne Quarter-Masters, and take up all the Barnes, Stables, Stocks, and Cages, to
lodge a great invisible Army, every day being more visible then other, to wit; young Souldiers, or the fruits of the last yeares warre; who now are drawne together to an almost incredible num∣ber, for lusty Souldiers finding no im∣ployment in the fields of Mars, chose to run a Tilt in Venus Bowers, or to run at a Ring of a Maids setting up. Likewise the late Maids but now Whores are resolved so to continue, which puts the Country Fellowes into a lamentable fright, for feare they should like Cowards be forc't to father those Children, which by the Souldiers were so valiantly gotten, wherefore they were resolved to Petition (but whom they know not.) FINIS.
