F181 E461_35 99862501 162184
A LETTER From his Excellency the Lord Fairfax Generall of the PARLIAMENTS FORCES: Concerning the surrender of COLCHESTER, THE Grounds and Reasons of putting to death Sir CHARLES LUCAS and Sir GEORGE LYSLE; with the Articles and Explanation of the same. Together with a List of all the Prisoners taken, their numbers and qualities therein exprest. Read in the House of Peeres upon the 31 of Aug. 1648. And commanded to be printed and published. Imprinted at London, for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley, 2 Septemb. 1648.
For the Right Honourable Edward Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peeres Pro Tempore. My Lord: I Have herewith sent you the Articles, with the Explanations annexed, upon which it hath pleased God in his best time to deliver the Town of Colchester, and the enemy there∣in into your hands without further bloud∣shed, saving that (for some satisfaction to Military Justice, and in part of avenge for the innocent bloud they have caused to be spilt, and the trou∣ble, damage, and mischiefe they have brought upon the Towne, this Country, and the Kingdome) I have with the advice of a Counsell of Warre of the chiefe Officers both of the Country Forces and the Army, caused two of them who were rendred at mercy to be shot to death before any of them had Quarter assured them. The persons pitched upon for this example were, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, in whose Military exe∣cution I hope your Lordships will not finde cause to thinke your Honour or Justice prejudiced. As for the Lord Goring, Lord Ca∣pell, and the rest of the persons rendred to mercy, and now assu∣red of Quarter; of whose names I have sent your Lordships a particular List. I doe hereby render to the Parliaments judge∣ment for further publique Justice and Mercy to be used as you shall see cause. I desire God may have the glory of his multi∣plyed mercies towards you and the Kingdome in this kinde, and in the condition of instruments as to the service here, the Offi∣cers and Souldiers of Essex and Suffolke (who in this time of so dangerous defection have adhered constant to yours and the Kingdomes interest) for their faithfull demeasnour and patient indurance in the hardships of this service are not to be forgotten. Hieth 29 Aug. 1648. Your Lordships most humble Servant T. Fairfax.
Articles agreed upon the 27 of Aug. 1648. by and betweene the Commissioners of his Excellency the Lord Generall Fairfax on th'one part, and the Commissioners of the Earl of Norwich, Lord Ca∣pell, and Sir Charles Lucas on the other part, for and concerning the Rendition of the Town and Garrison of Colchester. I. THat all the horses belonging to the Officers, Souldiers, and Gentlemen ingaged in Colohester, with Saddles and Bridles to them, shall be brought into Maries Church-yard by nine of the Clock to morrow morning, and the spare Saddles and Bri∣dles into that Church, and delivered without wilfull spoyle to firch as the Lord Generall shall appoint to take charge of them. II. That all the Arms, Colours, and Drums belonging to any of the persons in Colchester above mentioned, shall be brought into St. James Church by ten of the Clock to morrow morning and delivered without wilfull spoyle or imbeazlment to such as the Lord Generall shall appoint to take charge of them. III. That all private Souldiers and Officers under Captaines, shall be drawne together into the Fryers yard adjoyning to the East Gate by ten of the Clock to morrow morning with their Clothes and Baggage, their persons to be rendred into the cu∣stody of such as the Lord Generall shall appoint to take charge of them, and that they shall have faire Quarter according to the explanation made in the answer to the first Quaere of the Com∣missioniers from Colchester which is hereunto annexed. IV. That the Lords, and all Captaines, and superiour Offi∣cers, and Gentlemen of quality ingaged in Colchester, shall be drawne together to the Kings Head, with their Clothes and Buggage by eleven of the Clock to morrow morning, and there render themselves to the mercy of the Lord Generall, into the hands of such as he shall appoint to take charge of them, and that a List of the names of all the generall Officers, and Field-Officers now in command in the Towne be sent out to the Lord Generall by nine of the Clock in the morning. V. That all the Guards within the Towne of Colchester shall be with-drawne from the Line, Forts, and other places by eight of the Clock to morrow morning, and such as the Lord Gene∣rall shall appoint shall thereupon come into their roomes.
VI. That all the Ammunition shall be preserved in the places where it lyes, to be delivered to the Comptroller of his Excel∣lencies Traine by ten of the Clock to morrow morning; and all the Waggons belonging to the Souldery, or persons engaged, with the Harnesse belonging thereunto, shall be brought to some convenient place neare the Ammunition, to be delivered to the same person by the same houre. VII. That such as are wounded and sick in the Towne shall be there kept and provided for, with accommodation requisite for men in their condition, and not removed thence untill they be recovered, or able without prejudice to their healths to re∣move, and shall have such Chyrurgions allowed to looke to them as are now in the Towne. VIII. That all Ordnance in the Towne, with their appurti∣nances shall without wilfull spoyle be left at the severall Plat∣formes, or places where they are now planted, and so delivered to his Excellencies Guard that shall take the charge of those pla∣ces respectively. IX. That from henceforth there shall be a Cessation of Arms on hoth parts, but the Forces within the Town to keep their own Guards, and the Lord Generalls to keepe theirs untill they shall be removed according to the Articles afore-going. Signed by Us The Commissioners on the behalfe of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax. THo. Honywood H. Ireton Tho. Rainsborowe Edward Whalley Wil. Bloys Bram. Gurdon J. Sparrow Isaac Ewer Tho. Cooke G. Barnardiston The Commissioners on the behalf of the E. of Norwich, the L. Capel, and Sir Charles Lucas. WIlliam Compton Ab. Shipman Edw. Hammond. S. Tuke William Ayloffe
Heith, August 27. 1648. Quaeries propounded by the Commissioners from Colchester, to the Commissioners of his Excel∣lency the Lord Fairfax, upon the Conditions sent into the Towne. 1. WHat is meant by faire Quarter? 2. What by rendring to Mercy? To the first. BY faire Quarter we understand, That with Quarter for their lives they shall be free from wounding or beating; shall enjoy warme clothes to cover them and keep them warme; shall be maintained with victuals fit for prisoners while they shall be kept prisoners. To the second. By rendring to mercy we understand, That they be rendred or render themselves to the Lord Generall, or whom he shall appoint, without certaine assurance of Quarter, so as the Lord Generall may be free to put some immediately to the sword (if he see cause) although his Excellency intends chiefly and for the generality of those under that condition, to surrender them to the mercy of the Parliament and Generall. There hath been large experience, neither hath his Excellency given cause to doubt of his civility to such as he shall retaine prisoners, al∣though by their being rendred to mercy, he stands not engaged thereby. Upon returne of these Answers the Commissioners from Col∣chester propounded these two further Quaeries. 1. VVHether these that were surrendred to mercy, shall enjoy their wearing clothes, as well those on their backs, as what other change they have. 2. Whether the Noblemen and Officers shall have use of their owne Horses to the places where they shall be confined. To which was answered by his Excellencies Commissioners.
To the first. IT is intended that those who shall be tendred and received to mercy, shall enjoy the wearing clothes on their backs; but for more the Generall will not be ingaged. To the second. It is expected (in case of surrender upon Treaty) That all Hor∣ses as well as Arms be delivered up, and for circumstances there∣of there is to be an Article yet for the Gentlemen and Officers under this condition in question, (when any of them shall be removed to the places of confinement) his Excellency will take care for Horses to carry them (with respect to their qualities,) but for allowing their owne Horses he will not be ingaged. A List of the Prisoners taken at the surrender of Col∣chester the 28 of August. 1648. THe Earle of Norwich Col. The Lord Capell The Lord Loughborow Sir Charles Lucas Col. Sir William Compton Col. Sir George Lysle Sir Barnard Gascoyne Sir Abraham Shipman Sir John Watts Sir Lodowick Dyer Sir Hen. Apleton Sir Dennard Strutt Sir Hugh Oriley Sir Richard Maulyverer made an escape, but since taken. Quartermaster Generall Carter Col. Gilburne Col. Farr escaped and taken Col. Hammond Col. Chester Col. Till Col. Heath Col. Tuke Col. Ayloffe Col. Sawyer. Lievt. Col. Culpepper Lievt. Col. Lancaster Lievt. Col. Gough Lievt. Col. Powell Lievt. Col. Ashton Lievt. Col. Baggley Lievt. Col. Wiseman Lievt. Col. Smith. Major Aescot Major Smith Major Armestrong Major Warde Major Bayley Major Reade Major Scarrow Major Blyncott Major Genings.
Capt. Wicks Capt. Pits Capt. Buley Capt. Burdge Capt. Bartrope Capt. Lynsey Capt. Myldmay Capt. Osbolston Capt. Estwick Capt. Lovell Capt. Cooper Capt. Blunt Capt. Snellgrave Capt. Dynors Capt. Dussen Capt. Lievt. Caninge Capt. Ward Capt. Busbey Capt. Payne Capt. Hemor Capt. Smith Capt. Kenington Capt. Heath Capt. Rawson Capt. Bayley Capt. Stephens Capt. Gennings Capt. Lodge Capt. Lynn Capt. Lievt. White. Edw. Goodyeare Marshall Gen. Commissary Generall Trouley Fran. Lovelesse Master of the Ord∣nance VVaggon-master Gen. Gravisden Servants attending upon the Lords and Gentlemen 65. Lievtenants 72. Ensignes and Cornets 69. Serjeants 183. Private Souldiers 3067. FINIS.
