F209 E536_24 99873039 164835
A New-years Gift: PRESENTED BY THO. Lord FAIRFAX, And the General-councel of Officers, In severall PROPOSITIONS For the generall satisfaction, and setling the Peace of the Kingdom; BY Equal distribution of Elections An equal Representative of the whole People electing Making of Laws, Constitutions and Offices for the future Government of the King∣dom. By the appointment of his Excellency, the Lord General, and his general Councel of Officers. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH. With the Charge against His MAIESTY. London, Printed for R. Smithurst, 1648.
To the Sons of Freedom. COƲNTRY-MEN, CUstom (amongst the obedient) is become of such a force, that it enableth the Tyrant to reign, and the Cruel to oppress. Custom (by reason of its antiquity) is become a Conqueror of all opposers. Custom (for it excludeth not all good) is often the performer of many good offices among friends: and this Custom (under the later notion) doth in vite me at this time to present unto thee (courteous Country-man) this small New-yeers gift, which thou mayst intitle, Propositions which would set∣tle Peace. And indeed, I think it very seasonable to begin with the yeer, for that I presume it will not in all things be accomplished by the end of it (so great is the retardment of carnal Councels.) For the contents, rendreth it to be even a Catalogue of the Princely Priviledges of a Free-born people, whose splendor hath hitherto been imprisoned in that sad dungeon of darkness, Royall Tyranny; which if a single Champion did at any time oppose, there hath still been some whited-wall-Magistrate to cause him to be smitten on the mouth. Now therefore, if thou wilt but vouchsafe to look back upon past times, and consider the indigentness of the Sub∣jects liberty in those days, and compare it with the Freedom due unto them (which thou hast here presented unto thee,) thou wilt say (if thou take not up a prejudicate opinion thereof) That he is assuredly thy friend that endeavoureth to procure it, as he desireth to be which presenteth it to thee.
NOw (after publick justice, and there∣with the present quieting of the kingdom thus far provided for) we proceed in order, to the generall satisfaction, and set∣ling of the Kingdom, as followeth: I. That you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own power, by which time that great and supreme Trust reposed in you, shall be returned into the hands of the People, from, and for whom you received it, that so you may give them satisfaction and assurance that what you have contended for against the King (for which they have been put to so much trou∣ble, cost, and loss of blood) hath been only for their Liberties and common interest, and not for your own personall Interest, or power. II. That (with a period to this Parlia∣ment, to be assigned as short as may be, with safety to the Kingdom, and publick Interest thereof) there may be a sound settlement of the peace and future government of the Kingdom, upon grounds of Common
Right, Freedom and safety, to the effect here following: First, that from the end of this, there may be a certain succession of future Parliaments (Annuall, or Bienniall) with secure provi∣sion. 1. For the certainty of their meeting, sitting and ending. 2. For the equal distribution of Electi∣ons thereunto, to render the House of Com∣mons, as near as may be, an equal Repre∣sentative of the whole People electing. 3. For the certainty of the Peoples meeting (according to such Distributions) to elect, and for their full freedom in electi∣ons, provided, That none who have engaged or shall engage in War, against the right of Parliament, and interest of the Kingdom therein, or have adhered to the enemies thereof, may be capable of electing, or be∣ing elected (at least during a competent number of years) nor any other, who shall oppose, or not joyn in agreement to this settlement. 4. For future clearing, and ascertaining
the power of the said Representatives; in order to which, that it be declared, That (as to the whole interest of the People of England) such Representatives have, and shall have the supreme power and trust, as to the making of Laws, Constitutions, and Offices, for the ordering, preservation, and Government of the whole; and as to the altering, and repealing, or abolishing of the same, the making of War, or Peace; and as to the highest and finall Judgement, in all civil things, without further appeal to any created standing power; and that all the people of this Nation, and all Officers of Justice, and Ministers of State (as such) shall, in all such things be accountable and subject thereunto, and bound and concluded thereby; provided, That, 1 They may not censure or question any man after the end of this Parliament, for any thing said or done in reference to the late Wars, or publick differences, saving in execution of such determinations of this Parliament, as shall be lest in force at the ending thereof, in relation to such as have served the King against the Parliament.
2 They may not render up, or give, or take away any the foundations of common Right, Liberty or Safety contained in this settlement and Agreement. But that the power of these two things, last mentioned, shall be always understood to be reserved from, and not entrusted to the said Repre∣sentatives. 5. For liberty of entring dissents in the said Representatives, That, in case of corru∣ption, or abuse in these matters of highest trust, the People may be in capacity to know who are free thereof, and who guilty, to the end only they may avoid the further trusting of such, but without further penal∣ty to any for their free judgments there. Secondly, that no King be hereafter ad∣mitted, but upon the election of, and as up∣on trust from the People, by such their Re∣presentatives, nor without first disclaiming and disavowing all pretence to a Negative voice, against the determinations of the said Representatives, or Commons in Parlia∣ment; and that to be done in some certain form, more clear then heretofore in the Coronation Oath.
These matters of general settlement (viz. That concerning a period to this Parliament, and the other particulars thence following hitherto) we propound to be declared and provided by this Parliament, or by the authority of the Commons therein, and to be further established by a general Contract, or Agreement of the People, with their subscriptions thereunto, as that (withall) it may be provided, That none may be capable of any benefit by the Agreement, who shall not consent and subscribe thereunto; nor any King be admit∣ted to the Crown, or other person to any Office, or place of publick Trust, without expresse accord and subscrption to the same. THe Charge against the King is drawn up, and runs thus: That Charles Stuart hath acted con∣trary to his trust, in departing from the Parlia∣ment, setting up his Standard, making a War a∣gainst them, and thereby been occasion of much bloud-shed and misery to the people, whom he was set over for good: That he gave Commissi∣ons, and was occasion of a second War, with be∣sides what done contrary to the Liberties of the Subject, and tending to the destruction of the fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom; all which amounts to a forfeiture of the said trust. With much more to this effect. FINIS.
