G906 E271_22 99870838 123234
God appearing for the Parliament, In sundry late VICTORIES Bestowed upon their Forces, VVhich Command and call for great Praise and Thanksgiving both from Parlia∣ment and People. Die Martis; 4. Martii, 1644. ORdered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Mr. Whitaker, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Mr. Rous, and Mr. Millington, do peruse all the Letters that are come from Shrewsbury, Plimouth, Scarborough, Glo∣cestershire, and Weymouth; and make a Narrative out of them, of all Gods great and late Mercies upon the Parliaments Forces, to be Printed, and Read on the next day of Publique Thanksgiving. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed at London for Edward Husbands. March 10. 1644.
The Preamble. THe Arme of the Lord daily brings mighty things to passe: But there are some things which he brings to passe in such a manner, that therein He makes His Arme bare and naked: He shewes his power and migh∣ty working, with such evidence and demonstration that it strikes and shines like lightning, even into closed eyes, and extorts an acknowledgement, That this is the power, and the very Arme of the Lord: thus is it when effects arise in a notable eminence, far above naturall causes, or contrary to them: When weaknesse performes the worke of extraordinary strength; and when notable strength, even strength unto presumption, is turned into extraordi∣nary weaknesse: When the bowes of the mighty are bro∣ken; and they that stumbled, are girt with strength. In this manner hath the Lords Arme of late appeared visibly in sundry places; But most eminently in the West, where with his own right Arme, he hath gotten Himself the Victory, and bestowed it upon us. The Towns of Weymouth and Melcomb are near by scituation, and one of them being dead, threatned death to the other; yea, the Enemy spake like the Egyptians of old (as it ap∣pears in intercepted Letters) I will pursue, I will over∣take,
I will divide the spoile, my lust shall be satisfied upon them: But thy right hand, O Lord, is become glo∣rious, thy right hand hath dashed the enemy in pieces; The living Town is kept alive, and by it God wrought a Resurrection in that which was dead. But to proceed according to the order of time, as first in that order (among Gods late gracious dispensations of Victory to the Parliaments forces) is presented to our view, and thankfulnesse. Touching Scarborough. An Extract out of Sir John Meldrums Letter written to the Spea∣ker of the House of Commons, dated from Scarborough 19. Fe∣bruary, 1644. IT hath pleased God to give us happy successe in the taking of the Town and Harbour of Scarborough, which otherwise might have proved a receptacle for Strangers, and a subject for the lon∣ger continuance of this war; besides the inconveniences to the City of London, and other Southern parts by the interruption of the Coale Trade. The Service was done after this manner: After that, their three men of war, which were appointed to scoure along the Sands, were beaten and sunke, and their Ordinance made unserviceable: A Summons being sent, and an Answer returned, present order was given, for falling upon their Works and the Town; which was done without any resistance, untill they drew their Body within a strong Work about the Church, which if they had maintained as they might have done, they had pusled us; but upon view of the advancing of our foot, to cut their passage betwixt the Castle, and the Church, they all retired within the Castle in great disorder: There was a strife betwixt the Officers and Souldiers, who should shew most forwardnesse. Sir Hugh Cholmley did expect reliefe within four dayes.
Two Letters intercepted, which were written from Sir Hugh Cholm∣ley, to two Commanders in the Kings Army. SIr, we are close blocked up into the Castle, and though no Forces could be sent to our reliefe, I admire I should not be supplyed with those accommodations which essentially conduce to the defence of this place; I am bound in duty to let you know if we have not timely helpe the King will lose his interest there, and yet I hope my selfe blamelesse. If it may advantage his affaires, for me to fall into the hands of those which seeke my blood, I can willingly submit to it; but it will not be a president to draw others to serve his Majesty with so little private ends, as I have done. The God Almighty direct and protect us all. Feb. the. 23. Your humble Servant. Hu. Cholmley. Meldrum is the active man here, and Commands in chiefe; he hath some six or seven hundred of the Lord Fairfax his Foot, and a Regiment of Scots. SIr, we are now blocked up close into the Castle, divers of our souldiers run away unto the Enemy, and it is to be feared, that the ill accommodation will daily decrease our number; you know the Consequence, and beleeve me it requires speedy sup∣ply, for reasons I cannot expresse. I pray signify where, or from whence I may hope for reliefe, and whether any expectance of Forces from the Queene, or Ireland, or probability of a good issue from the Treaty; of which particulars I desire to be satis∣fied, that I may not be totally in ignorance, not that the fayling of any, or all these shall make me quit this trust otherwise then becomes a Gentleman, and good Subject. Your Colonell Whar∣ton salutes you; And I am your humble Servant. Scarbo. Castle, Feb. 24. Hu. Cholmley. Here is ten Collours of Scots I imagine, though not above eight hundred men of them; But Sir Iohn Meldrum hath six or seven hundred more of the Lord Fairfaxes Foot, and Commands in chiefe.
Touching Plymouth. An Extract out of a Letter written from Captaine Pierce to Sir Io. Young, a member of the House of Commons, 21. Feb. 1644. ON the eighteenth of February last, the Enemy having the night before made a worke upon the old worke at Mont-Stamford, with a very large Line both sides from the worke; the Sea-men in the morning fell on them, and tooke one halfe Moon, which was made at the south end of the Line; but the enemies horse comming upon them, forced them to retreat, but with no losse on our side, blessed be God; Upon which we were all commanded to Armes; severall Companies were drawn out to goe over, and two Troops of horse; one being still quartered on that side, to joyne with some Sea-men taken on shore for that pur∣pose, all (I thinke) consisting of about five hundred, and all the rest of the Garrison were commanded to march out to face the enemy on the North-side, and were drawne without our Line within Musket-shot of their worke under the Hill, the Hill be∣friending us, that they could not play much on us: All we did, was only sending out small Parties to shoot, as if we intended to fall on, that so they might draw off some of their forces from the other side of the water, where our purpose was to fall on: and it seemes, they did draw off some horse; and about two of the Clock in the after-noone, our men fell upon Mont-Stamford, where the enemy powred out mighty vollies of shot, as I have seene or heard; but our men went on with that resolution both horse and foot, that within little more then halfe an houre we tooke the worke, routed the enemy both horse and foot, pursu∣ed them above a mile, hewing and cutting them. The names of them we tooke were Lieutenant Colonell Mohun, Lient. Col. of Horse, Major Richard Heale, Baronet Heales brother, Captaine Maynard, (who had taken up Armes on our side) Captaine Hill, Captaine Aston, Captaine Huchins, Lieutenant Waring, Lieut. Inglett, Lieut. Ashford, Lieut. Manwaring, Ensigne Halse, En∣signe Battishill, and of private men ninety three, in all one hun∣dred and eight persons, with many more Armes. They also found there some Barrells of Powder, and Pioneers tooles, and some horses, and had neare taken them all, but for the woods and en∣closures
neare adjoyning. This day we had a Counsell of Warre, to try such of them as had heretofore taken up Armes on our side, and proceeded upon three of them, viz. Captaine Maynard, Lieu∣tenant Ashford, and Ensigne Battishill, who are to be executed to morrow, and some other common men will follow. Touching Shrewsbury. An Extract out of the Letters written from the Committees of Shrewsbury, to the Speaker of the House of Commons, with the List of the Prisoners. Right Honourable Sir: IT hath pleased God miraculously to deliver the Towne of Sa∣lop into our hands, with all the Commanders, Officers, and Souldiers therein; a List of the chiefe of them we have sent in∣closed. Upon the two and twentieth of this Moneth we drew out of our Garrisons of Wem, Moreton, and Stoke, two hun∣dred and fifty Horse, and the like number of Foot, Sir William Brereton having sent us two hundred and fifty Foot, and three hundred and fifty Horse; which party by our order was Com∣manded by Lieutenant Colonell Rincking (in the Marshalling of this designe he deserves much honour) and Captaine Wyllier, and Master Huson a Minister, led on the Fire-lockes, with fifty Troopers, dismounted under the Command of Lieutenant Ben∣debue; they led on their men with undaunted resolutions, after whom followed three hundred and fifty Foot, which by Severne side stormed the Towne, neare unto the Castle wall, and mar∣ched unto the Market-house, and there surpised the maine Guard, and then sent a Party to secure the Castle-forehead Gate, which was effected without much difficulty, and after a quarter of an houre, the Draw-bridge was let downe, and the Gate opened, where Colonell Mytton, Colonell Bowyer, and all the Gentlemen of this Committee with the Horse entred, and immediatly be∣came Masters of the Towne, within foure houres after the Castle was delivered upon quarter, for all but the Irish to march to Ludlow, and then the Enemy delivered up a strong Out-work in Franckwell upon bare quarter for their lives: by twelve of the clock we became Masters of the Castle and Towne, wherein were taken many considerable Prisoners (whereof the names of many are yet unlisted, by reason of the want of time to secure them) good
store of Ammunition, and great store of Ordnance. It was our care to preserve the Town from plundering, but the promises of a large reward would not satisfie the souldiers. Our horse the day before had a long march, they being sent to surprize Sir William Whitmore, and Sir Thomas Whitmore, his sonne being a Parliament man, which was effected, and they brought safe to VVem. Sir, we shall not trouble you further, but to subscribe our selves Salop, Feb. 24. 1644. Your most humble Servants, A. Lloyd, Sam. Moore. Tho. Hunt. Ro. Clives. Rob. Charlton. Leigh. Owen. A List of the Prisoners taken at Salop the 22. day of Febr. 1644. Sir Michael Enely, Knight; And his brother. Sir Richard Lee Baronet. Sir Thomas Harris Baronet. Sir Henry Frederick-Thyn Baronet. Sir William Owen Knight. Sir Iohn Wyld Senior, Knight. Sir Iohn Wyld Iunior, Knight. Sir Thomas Lyster Knight. Francis Thornes Esquire. Herbert Vaughan Esquire. Thomas Owen Esquire. Edward Kynnaston Esquire. Robert Ireland Esquire. Richard Trevis Esquire. Thomas Morris Esquire. Arthur Sandford Esquire. Robert Sandford Esquire. Pelham Corbet Esquire. Thomas Iones Esquire. Lieut. Colonell Edward Owen. Lieut. Colonell Thomas Owen. Major Francis Ranger. Doctor Lewin. Doctor Arnewey. Capt. Raynsford. Capt. William Lucas. Capt. Iohn Cressy. Capt. Thomas Collyns. Capt. William Long. Capt. Pontesbury Owen. Iohn Pey Feodary. Capt. Henry Harrison. Cassy Benthall Gentleman. Edward Talbot Gentleman. Richard Lee Gentleman. Edward Stanley Gentleman. Francis Maynwaring Gentleman. Iohn Bradshaw Gentleman. Iohn Iones Gentleman. Edward Leighton Gentleman. Peter Dorrington Gentleman. Thomas Barker Gentleman. Iohn Whittakers Gentleman. Ioseph Taylor Gentleman. Francis Sandford Gentleman. Richard Gibbons Gentleman. George Maynwaring Gentleman. Charles Smith, Edward Palmer, Mat∣thew Wightwicke, Ancients. Vincent Taylor, Thomas Dewe, Humphrey Davies, Richard Brayne, Sergeants. Nicholas Proud, Clerk. Master Iames Laton. Master Leadall. Moses Hotchkys. George Bucknall Corporall. Patrick Lawry an Irishman, fourty nine other Prisoners.
Touching Weymouth. BY the treachery of divers malignant Inhabitants of Weymonth and Melcomb-Regis, with the know∣ledge and consent of some Gunners upon duty in the Forts, on the 9 of February, the Enemy from Portland was let in by Sea, into the north Fort; there being then no Parliament ships in the Road, and in∣to the Chappell Fort by land: who seizing upon the Guard and Gunns, possessed themselves of both Forts about twelve at night. Sir Lewis Dives was by the same Confederates to be let into the Towne of Melcombe, the Malig∣nants haveing combined together to let out our pri∣soners, kill the Major of the Regiment, and seize up∣on the Maine Guard: This surprisall of Melcombe was prevented, the Allarm being received at Wey∣mouth first. The Plott and Plotters are every day more and more discovered, divers of them (by a just vengeance from Heaven) have been since slaine, some wound∣ed and others imprisoned, and in a posture speedi∣ly to be hanged. Wee endeavoured the recoverie of the Chappell Fort within an houre after it was surprised, but it was so strengthned with the assistance of the town
Malignants that wee were put to a retreat and Major Francis Siddenham slaine. Being ignorant what number the enemy was of in the Forts, and certain of a thousand at least not many miles off in the field: we were forced to be∣take our selves to Melcombe onely, and to resolve to stand upon a posture of desence as long as we were able. All that weeke they played upon us with their Cannon, battered many of our houses and fired some. February the 16. we took of their horse about eigh∣tie and fortie five prisoners upon a rout. Sir Lewis Dives Sir Thomas Austins and. Cleevelands horse with some foot lay against us to block us up on the other side The next week was spent in batteries as the for∣mer: On Sabbath day morning February twenty third Gorings forces being joyned to those before mention∣ed drew downe in a body and faced us. The same night they began to cast up a worke a∣bout a furlong from the Towne, out of which we beat them on Munday morning, killedsome of their men, and tooke all their working tooles.
An Extract of the Letter written from Captaine Batten, to the Speaker of the House of Commons 28. Febr. 1644. from aboard his Majesties Ship called the Reformation in Wey∣mouth Road. Honourable Sir, SInce my last, thanks be to God, wee are in farre better condition then we were then; On the 25 of this mo∣neth the Governour went out of Melcombe with a party of Horse and Foot, the Enemy on Weymouth side, drew out a party of Horse and Foot to meet them, and so faced each other sometime; the Governour making an orderly retreat with his Forces into Melcombe (having drawne away great part of the enemy from their workes) let down the Draw∣bridge, fell over into Weymouth, stormed the Chappell Fort, and carryed it & all Weymouth, without the lsse of one man, and tooke about 60. prisoners besides what were slain, with divers horse that were in their stables. The 26. and 27. dayes, We playd hard upon the Enemy, and they on us, both with great and small shott, and the 27. at night a Prisoner of ours ran from them, who gave us notice, that they would storme the Towne that night, in all places that they could, which was performed according∣ly; the Enemy getting within our Workes neere to Wey∣mouth Bridge, but were gallantly repulsed by our men, with the losse of some hundreds of the Enemy. The Governour himselfe behaving himselfe like a gallant man, as hee hath done in all the siege; The Enemy at length was beaten back into their Works. The 28. about ten of the clocke, they having recei∣ved
this great blow, (and I believe having some notice of Sir William Wallers approach) drew out all their forces, and left all our Workes, with the Guns in them, as they found them, and so are gone in a very confused manner, so that we now enjoy all our Workes, and both Townes as for∣merly. We have not lost ten men, in the losing and taking all these Workes, nor in all the time of the Siege; I have two of my own Company, one hath lost a legg, and the other dangerously wounded, and will hardly escape, and three of Captain Jordans men scalded by a mischance, by the fireing of some powder: indeed the Sea-men have showne them∣selves very brave men in all this businesse. We have many prisoners on board, and in towne, besides 40. sent away, to morrow we shall shorten the number, by hanging some of the townsmen, who are prisoners aboard us, and were the betrayers of the towne. Within three houres after the Enemy had quitted our Workes, the Endeavour, a ship of Weymouth, of twelve peeces of Ordnance, laden with Salt, (and some part of her be∣longing to Malignants, and was got close under Portland Castle) cut her Cables, and came off to mee, although the Castle made seven or eight shotts at her, so that God hath blest us both by Sea and Land, to him be the glory WILLIAM BATTEN.
Worthy Sir, SInce my last (perceiving the enemy secure, a party of my horse and theirs, having beene lately engaged, and foot on each side to their assistance) I fell on with about a hundred and fifty musketiers in the middle of the day, regained Weymouth, and Chappell Fort, and tooke one Leivtenant Colonell, one Major, three Captains, three Leivtenants, and one hundered common men with store of provisions which the enemy had newly got toge∣ther, and all with the losse of but one man of ours, this did so enrage the enemy that the Lord Goring would needs be revenged, and to that purpose advanced with his whole body on thursday night, and fell upon us about midnight at severall places, but entred only one of our Barracadoes, whence our men wear beaten back, just as I came by, which perceiving, I got a fresh party, and heat them off, re∣covered that Fort, which was Captain Thornhills and kil∣led and tooke some of the enemy there; this night we gave them such a brush, that Mr. Iames Frampon of Buckland, re∣ported yesterday that two of their regiments were spoiled, besides what they left in the Street, and in the Sea, its re∣ported eighty dead men were carryed into Week, upon which (perceiving it seemes no good to be done by them, in keeping longer on the north, which we valued not when we had the Chappell) they suddainly stole out yesterday, and have left both Beneleff and the North Forts, without either burning the Corne, or Houses, or spoyling our Guns, which I admire. Thus miraculously hath God wrought for us in preserving this little disadvantagious place against the other Towne and Forts, and an Army, and which is more in giving us such successe, and at last the possession of
all in the face of that Army which came to releive them; I hope (whatsoever we have suffered) that this will tame the Cavies, and hath (in detaining that body here which might have done mischeife else where) much ad∣vantaged the publique; God bringing good out of evill, my Souldiers Horse and Foot, have all had very hard ser∣vice of it day and night, I shall entreat you to write to the Parliament, for something for their encouragement, they have neither money, nor cloathes, and yet unwearied in this businesse. I have nothing else to adde but that I am. Feb. 28. 1644. Your affectionate servant. W. Siddenham. An Extract of Collonel Siddenhams letter to the Committee of the the West. Dated. 1. March. 1644. Right Honourable, HAveing now some few houres of freedome, from those continued Sallyes, Alarms, Fireings and batteries which almost these three weekes have kept me from the least leasure to doe any thing, but attend the ene∣my. I thinke it my duty to give you an account of Gods miraculous dispensations towards us. All (as you have formerly received) beeing treacheronsly deliver into the hand of the enemy except Melcombe. On tuesday last Feb. 25. the enemy having drawne out many of their foot to re∣lieve a party of their horse, being indanger to be ingaged
by a party of ours which I sent out to discover the enemy. I fell presently upon Weymouth, which Towne (together with the Chappell Fort) was in an houre regained; where wee tooke prisoners, one Lievtenant Collonel one Ma∣jor, three Captains, and one hundred of inferior Officers and Common Souldiers, which so inraged the enemy that upon thursday last about Midnight they furiously stormed us at severall places of both Townes, out of all Weymouth we were not able to keep them, and therefore resolved to make good so much of it as might let us, upon any occasion, too and from the Chappell Fort. The enemy came in great multitudes thorow the Streets and backe∣sides at both ends of the Towne, and disputed with us very hotly about three houres for that smale part of it, which wee were willing to keepe. The Chappell Fort, and Melcombe beeing likewise stormed at the same time from all which places God inabled us to repell them. In all this time they wounded but one of my men. What exe∣cution was done upon the enemy, I am not certaine they carrying off as many as they were able before day, a∣mongst whom (as the people of the Towne have since in∣formed me) were divers in Buffe-Coats, and Velvet-lack∣ets they left much blood behind them in the Streets and slaine men upon the place, they carryed (as it is reported) many wounded men into one Village a mile from the Towne. Upon Friday about 10 of the Clocke, they sudden∣ly left (except plunder) all which they had formerly gai∣ned, quitted their Forts, and marched away in a body, lying now at a little distance but blocking us up still as before, what they meane to doe next I know not, but doe expect some further designe upon us, for they are now summoning in the Country at Dorchester from sixteene to sixty.
An Extract of Collonell Iohn Binghams letter Gover∣nor of Poole, to the Committee of the West. dated the first of March, 1644. Right Honourable, AS soon as this most happy news came to my hand, which our great and good God hath freely don for us, in giving us those unlookt for lost Forts with Weymouth Towne, I have sent it you in a true coppy of the Governors, Collonell Sid∣denhams Letter to peruse: He begs reliefe for his va∣hant tir'd men, I beseech you to tender his case and beleeve they have been put upon much extreame hard duty. My Lords and Gentlmen her's litle of man seen in this, all is Gods great, free, and not to be forgot∣ten mercy, in manifesting his power in their much weaknesse, with which very well agreeth the pro∣fession of the Governor of Weymouth Collonell Syd∣denham himself in these words. God hath discovered himselfe very gratiously unto us in severall acts of provi∣dence, which I would not have wanted the experience of for a world. My Lords I am your faithfull servant. Iohn Bingham. There are in our Countrey now gotten into a body neere a thousand Country men with Gunns and Clubbs, to resist the French and Irish amongst the Cavalliers: We have sent eightie horse to their desired aide
A true Coppy of a Letter intercepted written from Sir Lewis Dives, to the Earle of Bristoll. Dorchester 26. of February. 1644. MY LORD, THe Church Fort by a strange misfortune was sur∣prized this night by the Enemy in Melcombe, but the principall Forts, where all our Ammunition and Provision lies, wee still maintaine; Sir John Berkley is sent for hither by my Lord Goring, to draw his Forces hither to joyne with ours, he having set up his rest for the taking both that and the Towne of Melcombe toge∣ther, which by Gods assistance we doubt not to effect, Wal∣lers Forces being so scattered by the withdrawing of Essex his Horse, and Manchesters Foot from him, as he is not in a condition to advance towards us, and this newes was last night confirmed to us by Kell. Digby, who came from Ox∣ford. I beseech your Lordship be pleased to employ all your Interests with Sir Richard Greenvile, to hasten the sending of fifteene hundred Foot, or two thousand Horse at the least towards us, to make good Devonshire against the Forces a∣bout Taunton, and that we may be at a neere distance to joyne together if there be occasion, and he shall want no Horse from us that he shall have need of: The businesse is of that importance, as little lesse then the Crowne depends upon it, so as we are confident he will not be wanting to us in this extremity, so ceasing your Lordships further trouble, I remaine, To the Right Honourable, the Earle of Bristoll at Exeter. Your Lordships most humble servant, LEVVIS DIVES.
Another Letter intercepted From Sir Lewis Dives, to Sir Iohn Berkley at Teverton. Noble Sir, YOu will, I presume, receive notice by Collonel Froad, before this will be with you, of the difaster that happened to us this day, by negligence of ome of our Horse, which were beaten off their Guards, and per∣sued by the Enemy to VVeymouth; VVhereupon a hundred Muskettiers were drawn out of VVeymouth to relieve them, which the Enemy in Melcombe, taking all advantage of, made a sally over the Draw-bridge, and have surprized the Chappell Fort, but the two principall Forts, where our Provisions and Ammunition lyes wee still maintaine, and doubt not by Gods assistance to keep them still, hoping that this misfortune will turne to our advantage, and bee a meanes that wee shall gaine both the Towne and Fort to∣gether. Whereupon my Lord Goring hath set up his rest to goe through with it, being confident of your speedy assi∣stance in a worke of that infinite importance to his Maje∣sties service; and in case Waller should draw this way, which is not probable, yet your strength united with my Lords, will be much superiour to VVallers, so as doubtlesse, wee may fight with him upon advantage, for Kell. Digby came this night to Sherborne from Oxford, who assured mee that Essex and Manthesters Forces have absolutely left him, and that he hath not a considerable party with him, his Army being utterly broken, so that this place being taken, which we are confident cannot bee a worke of many dayes, the West is not only secured thereby, but my Lord Goring will
likewise have an opportunity of advancing into the Asso∣ciated Counties, which are now left naked: And there is order likewise taken, that two thousand Horse from Oxford and the Vize, shall be ready to attend VVallers motion, so shall by Gods blessing our game goe faire, if not mar'd in the playing. Feb. 26. 1644. LEVVIS DIVES. Touching the taking of Cardigan Castle and Town. An Extract out of a Letter Written by Captaine William Smith, to the Lord high Admirall, from aboard the Ship called the Swallow in Milford Haven, Dated the 5. of February, 1644. AFter many great raines which have fallen in these parts (which was no invitation for a Souldier to lye in the nelds) yet such was the gallantry of Major Generall Laugherne to promote the Cause in hand, that the Almigh∣tie no sooner crowned his desires with a happy season, but in a gracefull acknowledgement, hee placed a Garrison in Laugherne Castle, and from thence marched towards Cardi∣gan, with about five hundred Horse, and three hundred Foot; and on the 21 of December, 1644. hee sate downe before Cardigan Castle, demanding a surrender thereof for the ser∣vice of the King and Parliament: But Major Slaughter who commanded in chiefe, replyed, he held that Castle for the
service of the King, and so long as he had life he would keepe it for his Majesty, (though therein he was not a man of his word.) After three dayes siege, the Major Generall perceiving all further attempts would be in vaine, unlesse a breach could be forced, and having no artillery with him he forthwith gave order the Demy-Culverin should be brought from Laugherne, which with much difficulty and industry came safe to Cardigan, and being placed to the best advantage he fell to battery. The enemy within the Castle-yard cast up a halfe moone some distance from the place on which the Demy-Culve∣rin played, in which they placed their great gunnes laden with Case-Shot, that in case a breach should be made those guns might disanimate our men in entering, or per∣forme suddaine execution on them: Our men plying the Demy-Culverin forced a breach, and being full of resolu∣tion entred, running in the mouth of their guns, recovered the halfe moone, where the enemy, as men bereft of all sense, having not the power to give fire to their guns, al∣though the Linstocks were in their hands ready lighted, cast downe all their armes, and cryed for quarter, the which was granted: from thence we entred the Castle and tooke Prisoner Major Slaughter and his wife, one Captain Vaughan with their Lievtenant and Ensigne, one Doctor Taylor a Divine with about an hundred Common Souldiers, six great guns, a hundred and fifty armes, a quantity of pow∣der, ball, and other provisions, and this was done the 29. of December last. On the fourth of Ianuary, Generall Ger∣rard set downe before the Castle with about 1200 horse and 1300. foote; Major Generall Laugherne recruted his forces to about 600. horse, and 300. foot, and advanced towards Cardigan to redeeme his friends, who were in the
Castle out of the power of the Enemy; Lievtenant Collo∣nell Powell in the night sent a Souldier who swume through the river, and informed Major Generall Laugherne, that unlesse he could releive the Castle, within eight dayes, he should be enforced to surrender it for want of victualls, and ammunition, which he beleeved might be supplied, if some seamn versed in managing a water fight, and climing up rocks were employed; So 120. Seamen were sent, who after a view had of the place, undertooke it, which was performed on this wise: A boate laden with provisions was placed in the middle between foure boats on each side, two of which were manned with Seamen, who in flankes faced both wayes, plying their Musketts on the enemy, who from the shore played on them with about 300. Musketiers, yet our Seamen gallantly proceeded, put all the provisions into the Castle, and returned without the losse of one man onely two slightly wounded. After this Collonel Laug∣herne having drawn his foot into a body, being without Sea∣men in all about 350 he encouraged them to give an assult on the Towne, which after some debate was attempted, and on the 22. of January last our foote forced their passage over the Bridge, in which we lost but one man and having beaten the Enemy from their first guard, they pressed on to the second, which they also tooke, and pursuing the vi∣ctory beate them out of their maine guard, which was at the market place, and then out of the Church, where our For∣ces tooke two brasse Demy-Culverins, which Gerrard brought from Bristoll, with some Powder, Ball, and all their provisions, and following the enemy beat them all out of the Towne, and so we are now Masters both of the Towne and Castle. Of the enemy were slaine in the place, 85. besides those that were slaine before the Castle, 100. prisoners were taken, and their whole Forces routed,
and I believe in their flight they never looked behind them, untill they came to Castle Emlyne, which is six miles from Cardigan: In the Town we also took 250. armes I have not heard since these unhappy differences begun in this King∣dome, that the hand of the Almighty hath more visibly ap∣peared in giving so great victories to so small a handfull then hath been manifested in these parts, and to his own power we attribute all the praise and glory. Die Martis 4. Martii, 1644. REsolved upon the Question by the Commons Assem∣bled in Parliament; That Publique Thankes shall be given unto God for his great Mercy and blessing upon the Parliament Forces, in the regaining of VVeymouth, the gaining of Shrewsbury, and Scarbo∣rough, the late deliverance at Plymouth, and the great Victory over the Forces under Sir Iohn VVinter. Resolved upon the Question, That Wednesday come seven-night (being the 12. of this present March, be appointed for this day of publique Thanksgiving. Ordered that the Lord Major of the Citie of London be desired to give notice of this day of publique Thanks∣giving, to all the Ministers within the Lines of Communica∣tion, that they may give notice of it to their Parishioners in their Pulpits on the next Lords day. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Die Martis 4. Martii, 1644. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That the Lord Major of the City of London, and his Brethren be desired to bee at the Thankesgiving on the 12. of this instant, in Christ Church, London, where the Mem∣bers of both Houses have appointed to meet to praise God for his blessing to the Parliament, for the good successe at Shrewsbury and Weymouth. And that the Church be kept empty for the Lords and Commons. Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parl.
The Conclusion. ANd now since the Arme and Power of God hath so plainly appeared; and a fire is come downe from Heaven into the hearts of those that fought for Gods Cause, to inflame them with zeale and courage, by which fire also their Adversaries have been consumed; Let the people no longer halt between two opinions, but confesse as in the dayes of Eliah, That the Lord is God, and let it be seen, That God at last hath turned the heart of this people. Let them no longer fight against God; for who ever fought against him and prospered? Howsoever let Gods own peo∣ple, behold and magnifie the worke of God, and let their hearts be lifted up in dependance upon him, and in the maintenance of that Cause which he so manifestly owneth. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? Prudent, and he shall know them; for the wayes of the Lord are right, and the just shall walke in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein. FINIS.
