H3440A e698_16 R33807 99872363 166549
The Humble PETITION AND REPRESENTATION OF Several Aldermen, Aldermens Depu∣ties, Common-Councel men, and other Citizens of London, in the behalf of them∣selves, and many others; concerning the Re-sitting of the late Parlia∣ment. TOGETHER, With a Catalogue of the Representators Names; And an Order of the Councel of State, for the demissing and discharging them from all places of publike Trust in the Common-Wealth. LONDON, Printed for George Horton, 1653.
To his Excellency OLIVER CROMWEL, Captain General of all the Forces of this Commonwealth; And to the Ho∣nourable COƲNCEL of the ARMIE. The humble Representation of several Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, Common-Councel men, and other Citizens of London; In the behalf of themselves and many others. SHEWETH. WHen we call to minde how eminent In∣struments Your Excellency and the Ar∣my under Your Command have been, in the hands of the most high God, to vin∣dicate and recover the just Rights and Liberties of the Free people of this Nation, according to the Trust reposed in You; And how to these ends You have not spared to expose your selves to the extremest hazard of Lives and Estates from time
to time, in the three Nations of England, Scot∣land and Ireland, although one trouble succeeded another, occasioned by the several Warres and Commotions therein, in all which the Lord of Hoasts crowning Your endeavours with most hap∣py success, hath given a large interest in the hearts of the godly and well-affected of this Nation, who continually wrestled with God in prayer on your behalf, while your were jeoparding your lives for our Liberties in the high places of the Field. We therefore humbly conceive our selves bound in duty, from that zeal we bear to the Religious Laws Liberties and setled Peace of our Native Country, which we have cordially prayed, fought and acted for, and very principally also, out of that tenderest affection and most sincere respect we bear your Fxcellency and the Armies under your Conduct, to represent to You and them, the sad condition of this Nation, which seemeth as in one day, to be deprived of its ancient Liberty, viz. They being governed by Representatives cho∣sen by themselves, which in all ages since England hath been civilized, the People have so constantly been addicted to, as that notwithstanding the va∣rious change of the Kings, and the exercise of their Kingly power even when they have atchieved it by
Conquest, there hath ever been found a necessity of governing the Nation by Parliament. Hereupon we cannot but hope, and do believe it is the earnest desire of thousands well affected in this City, that so ancient and usefull a Priviledge the birth-right of this Nation, will be as tenderly preserved in your Councels, as it hath been reso∣lutely maintained in your blouds. May it therefore seem good in your eyes, that some effectual means may be found out and persued, for the meeting of the Parliament a∣gain; That so in some short time, provision may be made for setling successive Represen∣tatives, which may carry on with effect and assurance those great Ends the Parliament hath continually held out, and Yee valiantly fought for; And to make provision for sup∣ply of the Armies and Navie, and other pub∣like and pressing affairs in the mean time, as hitherto hath been done. It would be a re∣viving to the sad and doubtful thoughts of those that have fervently prayed, and do con∣tinually look up and wait for such a settle∣ment of our Liberties, as may assure us that our prayers and your endeavours have not been vain in the Lord.
A Catalogue of the Names of the most eminent persons that sub∣seribed to this Representation. Thomas Foot. Thomas Andrews. John Wollaston. John Kendrick. Stephen Estwick. Thomas Arnall. James Russel. Nicholas Warren. William Hobson. James Hayes. Morris Thompson. Thomas Eyres. Nicholas Roberts. Samuel Wardner. Thomas Steane. Lawrence Waiteman. Nicholas Herren. Bar: Meire.
James Waineright. John Lawd. Edward Story. Thomas Allen. William Beeke. Thomas Steane. Edward Winslow. Michael Davison. Tempest Milner. Walter Bushly. William Thompson. Richard Loton. Alexander Jones. William Pennoyer. VVilliam Mollens. Samuel Lee. Henry Bonner. Thomas Coghil.
Friday May 26, 1653. Ordered at the Councel of State at VVhite-Hall. UPon Reading a Representation brought in∣to the Councel by the Lord General, which was this day delivered to his Lordship, by some persons of the City of London, in the Name of se∣veral Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, Common-Councel-men, and other Citizens of London And upon consideration thereof it is Ordered, That all such persons who have signed the said Re∣presentation, and who have any place of publike trust upon them, and for which they receive sal∣lary and allowance from the Commonweal, be forthwith demissed and discharged from their Re∣spective places and Employments. FINIS.
