H3412 E400_17 R201750 99862251 114404
The Humble DESIRES OF THE CITIZENS, YOVNG MEN, and APPRENTICES, of the City of LONDON: PRESENTED To both the Honorable Houses of Par∣liament, July 26. 1647. Together with two Ordinances of Parliament. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.
THE HVMBLE DESIRES OF THE Citizens, Young men, and Ap∣prentices of the Citie of London: Presented to both Houses of Parliament, July 26. 1647. I. IT is our humble de∣sire, in regard Religi∣on, our Lives, Liber∣ties and estates are so much indangered, and the peace and safetie of this Citie and Kingdome, that the pretended
Ordinance for the change of the Militia of the Citie of London may bee presently repealed before the ri∣sing of the Houses: And that for∣mer Ordinance that was confer'd for a yeere by a free Parliament up∣on the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common-Councell, and by them legally chosen may bee established; In which regard wee doe conceive, that no justice, though it runne in never so free a Channell can lawful∣ly dispossesse them of it, unlesse it shall appeare to bee abused contrary to the trust reposed in them. II. It is likewise desired that the Citie of London may immediatly bee vindicated against a late preten∣ded Declaration of both Houses, which declares all those Traytors,
and so to forfeit life and estate who shall after publication thereof act thereupon to get Subscriptions, and that the said Declaration bee now presently reversed and canceld. III. That both Houses of Par∣liament doe presently make an Or∣der upon some speciall penaltie for the calling in of all their Members of either Houses to discharge the trust the Kingdome hath reposed in them, especially the eleven late accused Members, against whom there hath beene nothing proved of their accusation to this day. That yet againe wee may come to bee so happy as to injoy the healing influ∣ence of a full and free Parliament in these distracted times. These particulars we cannot but
insist upon, since the distractions a∣mong us begin to grow so high, and the Honour and Priviledges of Parliament, the peace and safety of the Citie and Kingdom are so great∣ly violated.
Die Lunae 26. Iulii 1647. BEe it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Declaration of the twentie foure of this instant July, which declares all those Traytors, and so to forfeit Life and Estate, who shall after publication thereof, act thereupon to get Subscrip∣tions, bee Null and Void, any thing in the said Declaration to the contrary notwithstanding. Joh. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
Die Lunae 26. Julii 1647. BEe it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Ordinance of the 23. of this instant July for the setling of the Militia of the City of London be, and shall bee hereby revoked and made void to all intents and purposes; and that the said Ordinance of the fourth of May 1647. for the said Militia of London bee in full force and vertue, any thing in the said Ordinance of the 23. instant, to the contrary notwithstanding. Joh. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
