H3481 e137_21 R15477 99859871 156504
THE HUMBLE PETITION Of some of the inhabitants of the Parish of Leonard Shoreditch against Iohn Squire, Vicar of the Parish aforesaid, together with thirteene ARTICLES Against the aforesaid Iohn Squire. ALSO The humble Petition of the Major, Recorder, Alderman, Common Councell men, and inhabitants of the Borough of Kings Lyn in the County of Norfolk. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Franke, and are to be sold at his shop next doore to the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.
The humble Petition of some of the Inhabitants of the Parish of Leonard Shoreditch to the House of Commons. SHEWETH, THat the Petitioner have formerly presented a Petition to this Honourable House, wherein they did remonstrate their agreevances con∣cerning John Squire, Vicar of the Parish afore∣said, upon the proofe of which charge, the Honourable Committee found just cause to vote him a Scandalous Minister, notwithstanding hee still continueth in his place as Invective as ever, alwayes endea∣vouring (as your Petitioners humbly conceives) to worke in his hearers an ill opinion of this honourable House, by having an eye to the severall proceedings, and accordingly to preach in opposition to them, as many partly appeare by the Articles hereunto annexed; And that hee hath peremptorily said, that none shall come there to Preach, but himselfe or his Curate, so long as hee hath any thing to doe in the place. All which premisses your Petitioners humbly present to your Just and pious considerations, humbly praying, that in
your grave wisdomes you would be pleased in due time to take some order for the removall of so corrupt and dan∣gerous a Preacher, and (by the power of this Honoura∣ble house) to establish one amongst us that is faithfull and able, in the dispensation of the Gospell. And in the meane time your Petitioners doe humbly supplicate, that they many have Master George Smith to bee a Lecturer, to preach every Lords day in the afternoone, to begin at two of the clocke in the parish Church aforesaid, to the com∣fort of our soules, And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c, Christopher Debdale. Samuel Samwayes, William Crooke. Edward Ramsey.
1 THat the said Master Squire is voted a scan∣dalous Minister. 2 That hee hath refused to obey the order of this Honorable House concerning Lecturers. 3 That hee said it is possible for the highest Court to be angry too much in passing greater sen∣tences then the offence may deserve. 4 That hee said wee have got Hallifax law a∣mongst us to cut off mens heads, and after exa∣mine the cause, and hardly then neither: these be called your Religious men. 5 And in bewailing the present times (not one∣ly Nationall, but more particularly the Clergies) he said how that many are like to lose both their Livings and Estates, so that he could wish with the Prophet Jeremy, That his head were water, and and his eyes a fountaine of teares: and thereupon hee chose that Text, 1 Thes. 5. Rejoyce evermore, to cheere up himselfe and others in like condition with himselfe. 6 That hee said, that hee could wish that they would wash their hands from bloud, that were the cause of throwing down the Rulers of the Church, and woe be to them that hath cast dirt in their fa∣ces. 7 That it is little lesse then the sin against the Holy Ghost, to put downe one Minister and setup another. 8 That it is greatly to be feared, that the way is now a paving for the Popes re-entrance againe into this Kingdome, because the three Bulwarks which kept him out are a beating downe, (viz.) the
Book of Common Prayer, secondly, the govern∣ment of the Church, thirdly, the peace which Christ left to his Church. 9 That he publike Prayers is the onely means to attaine life and salvation, and if they will come Wednesdays and Fridays, and a little on Saturdays his soul for theirs they shall have their reward, life and salvaion. 10 That it is unlawfull to use long conceived extemporary prayer, for it transgrest the command of Christ, and the rule of the Apostle Paul. 11 That hee spake in derision of those that would have a warrant from the Word for all they would doe, saying, That then women must not re∣ceive the Sacraments, and if they will have all done that the Word biddeth them do, they must sell all that they have and lay it downe at the Teachers feet, which they will never do. 12 That he still continueth his second Service, and introduceth forms of Prayer, which are not to be found in the Book of Common Prayer. 13 That as the Petioners humbly conceives he hath been the means for causing the Constable to present many of the Parish to the Grand Inquest, and there indicted upon the Statute of Recusancie, for not comming to divine Service, and now they lie in the Crown Office, for Robert Moore Church∣warden hath confessed that Master Squire and they had concluded in the Vestry house, what to doe in the businesse.
The humble Petition of the Major, Recorder, Aldermen, Common Coun∣cill, and Inhabitants of the Borough of Kings Lyn in the County of Norfolke to the House of Commons, Sheweth, THat, whereas by the blessing of Al∣mighty God, of his Majesties grace, and of your incessant labours, this whole Kingdom hath beene eased of my griev bns, both in Church and Common wealth, and especially by the late excluding Bi∣shops from their Votes in Parliament, and setling the Militia of this Realme, in an happy posture of Defence, against the threatning dan∣gers of these distracted times. Wee therefore (your Peti∣tioners) humbly acknowledge, that as we cannot, but with all thankfulnesse, according to our duties, blesse God, the King, and you the great Court, and blessed cause of this de∣sired Reformation and Securitie: So we cannot but humbly beseech you to goe on cheerefully in that blessed Worke, as∣well by quickning the Lawes of the Land against Papists, and by bringing to Judgement the discovered, imprisoned, and other wise cautioned delinquents; As also, by speeding Reliefe to our distressed brethren in Ireland for their present sucour, and our future safetie.
And; as the duty of our late Vow and Protestation moveth us, wee further pray and implore your high Wisdomes, to improve all meanes (as hitherto you have done) for the better maintenance of the true reformed Protestant Reli∣gion, and of the Union and Peace of the three Kingdomes, of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And to that end, that his Majestie and Parliament will be graciously pleased, to remove all popish Lords out of the House of Peeres. Lastly, wee humbly desire, that by your helpe, the Seas be effectually guarded, and our Trading thereby advan∣ced, our English from Turkish slavery redeemed, Pro∣jectors at home punished, Scandalous Ministers remo∣ved, and the Petitions against Bishop Wren prosecuted, under whose tyrannie and popish innovations we have much suffered. And your Petitioners shall ever pray for the continuati∣on of happy Successe to all your endevours in this blessed Parliament. FINIS.
