H692 L1827 E61_17 E61_18 99860626 155346
The Levites Lamentation. IF ever Persecution merited a remembrancer, Protestant bloud a condoler, or cruell Rebellion a reprover, this Irish cruelty, and English calamity (both which exceed the beliefe of any but the Actors and Sufferers) might justly awake the pens of Eusebius, Fox, or the most famous Martirologers to record, Jeremy to bewaile, or the sharpest Satyrist to re∣prove. Even now my heart bleeds for the bloud I saw, and my inke seems not blacke, but sanguine; the horrid cries afresh awake, affright, astonish, whilst I see the purple robe and hat wreaking in the bloud of the Lambe offered, but Christ crucified; to see the Popes Bull goring, and men borne blinde, cruelly massacre the sonnes of illumination; the big-bond sinewy, and grisly tyrant trampling on the feeble woman, and unborne Embrio. It drew tears from holy Elisha, to see cruelty character'd in the face of Hazael, 2 Kings 8.12. which makes him breake out, Because I know the evill that thou shalt doe unto the chil∣dren of Israel, for their strong Cities shalt thou set on fire, and their young men shalt thou slay with the sword and shalt dash their infants against the stones, and rent in pieces their women with childe. This day by the Romish Aramite was this Prophesie fulfilled. Now is the greatest murderer held the most valiant, as if valour consisted in a bel∣ine horridnesse, and fortitude were the eldest son of fury. Me thinks Nero (the depraver of the Cesarian Monarchy) at sight of this bloudy banquet should appeal to all Historians no more to list him for the Monster of men, nay the bloudiest of Monsters: for indeed the sight of other crimes, maketh us of∣ten to lessen, but not leave our owne. The common stature exults at the sight of a Dwarfe, as a Dwarfe would doe at Pigmies. Satan having infused this poysonous aour into the soules of men, that our ills are extenuated by the ills of others This I call pharisaicall frensie. You shall see the Popes doctrine as dangerous as the Divells. Religion must now be the Irish mantle for Rebellion. A pretended plot of ours for their conversion or correction, is by this counterplot of theirs made both our subversion and destruction. This was the cursed pretende of those more accursed pretenders, to stick the Ravens plumes in the wings of the Dove. To make the mournings of that harmlesse olive-bringer, the croaking omens of the
Arke-deserting-Raven. For such is the deformity of sin that none desires to be the ill he seems. Saul at the threshold of his accursednesse begins with a blessing, 1 Sam. 15.13. by a Jsuiticall policy doe they wear piety like a perriwig trimly curld and combd on the deformed head of Rebellion, and murder. Tis true that once Jacob desired to seem Esau, but ever since sin like Rebecca hath taught the Esaus to seem Jacobs. Judas learnt this not from so many, as he hath taught it. Our Saviour tels that under a pretence of long prayers we swallow widows houses. O God, since I cannot be what I would, give me grace not to varnish my ills, or cheat my salva∣tion with a seeming sanctity. How hardly is my pen drawne to this inundation of bloud? I finde in my eyes the same stoppage that Basil the Great did, who after he had read his text could not proceed for weeping, my minde would gladly deviate from my intentions, and they digresse from a more peaceable subject. 1643. The Climatericall yeare of the English Nation in Ireland, some well affected Christians sent divers abroad with Petitions for subscriptions to supplicate from the honou∣rable Houses of Parliament (which are the refiners of Religion and Laws) a gene∣rall Reformation, which was an Apostolicall act. This net was not cast out by any, save those that were truly Piscatores hominum. Satan and Antichrist his first-borne as malitiously suggest that this arrow was shot not only at their spirituall good, but temporall goods. The man of sin imploying his Sodomiticall Seminaries, Papisti∣call Prelates, and Jesuiticall Incendiaries to sow these tares, firebrands in the wombe of their Hecuba, borne for the destruction or disquiet of their naturall pa∣rents, and native Country. Men borne in antipathy to Prometheus, for as he was fained to have stolne fire from heaven to restore life into dead bodies, they fetch fire from hell to bring death to the living, not only by murdering the Religious, but Religion; as if the death of the spirituall life, as well as the temporall were in one ballance or line with them that observe neither weight nor measure. The Ro∣mish Salamander lives not but in fire, nor can lesse flames then a Kingdome keep him surviving. Now was it that God for our sinnes determined the English pros∣perity, should be like Joshua's Sunne be a day permanent, but retrograde like Heze∣chiahs, it being the miraculous expression of his justice in ruining either the for∣getters, or contemners of his blessings. Then began the despised blasts of Irish Rams-hornes to demolish the walls of Brittish Jericho's, when by a judgement as terrible as their cruelty; armed forts were surprised by unarmed men; then ranne the Lion from the Hare; the shaking leafe and trembling Partridge now terrifie the Oake, and hawke the thistle, and beards the cedar; the base Lackey not running by, but away with his mistris, whilst innocencie and chastity become the reprovers of that life they would lose but cannot. Judge of that great contestation between ho∣nour and life, beauty and deformity, and resolve me in this blanke list  for thy opinion if God ever shew'd, or Nation ever suffered a greater judgement.
Acteon ruined, and ravined by his pack of pleasures, for indeed we had too much  Diana of Ephesus (not the piety but the pomp of a church) the silver shrines had too many Advocates most men exclayming, but few besides profitable respects either desired a reformation, or knew what a one to desire. Thus was the golden Calfe prefferred to Moses, Barrabas to Christ, Garlicke to Manna. Nature a prompt master having taught us to advance politick ends, before pious. As a period to our civill distractions fell these publicke, and whilst many were distasting the present government, God tooke away all: the rejection of Samuel that made his publicke vindication cannot prejudice the election of Saul whom God deserted. Thus God makes our curiosity our scourge. Midas his wish shall be his famine. Phaeton desire his death, and Jupiters diety the consumer of his concubine. Them that would not quietly enjoy what they had, shall unquietly dispose of what they had, or would enjoy. Civill dissentions, and dislikes being terminated by a mar∣tiall (or shall I say an impartiall sword.) The Church like Dianah is ravisht by lustfull Shechem as a punishment of her ro∣ving, had she kept the tents of Jacob, she had been free from his rage, had we not like her erred from our paternall protection, we had not endured their rapines. Tis just with God to expose them to all malediction, that out of wandring fancie leave the ranges of the sanctuary. Athaliah was there slaine for destroying the seed oyall, which I spiritually conceive to be the integrity of a Church, born and continued without the milke, or meat of Canaanitish, and adulterous traditions, which being spurious slips cannot flourish, nor have a longer prosperity then the gourd of Jonahs, or the infortunate, and earthy wombe that gave them conce∣ption. Sin ripened like the pride of Gath, defies the Host of the Lord of Hosts, bathing the monstrous spearhead of his rage, in the bloud of the chosen: how feeble hath the fall of Adam made his haplesse posterity? the glorious English long clad in the victorious spoyles of that barbarous people, become the rebaters of their skeins, but not of their rage; finding now how dearly the Israelites paid for their cruell mer∣cy in not extirpating the Idolatrous Canaanites, those that policy left, for hewers of wood, and drawers of water, hew the flesh, and draw the bloud of their masters: thus humane policy is punisht by inhumane impiety, teaching us that all the purpo∣ses of flesh and bloud, having not godlinesse for their basis, have sandy foundations, and that policy without piety is a damnable discretion. The Dove and the Ser∣pent should like those two kine of Bethshemesh at once be yoked to draw the Arke of God, from the possession of the heathens to the people of God; or like Cleobis and Biton to draw their mother to the Temple: where observe the kine, and bre∣thren were rewarded by death; the kine sacrificed to the true God, the brethren to the false. O God, so blesse my pilgrimage that at my termination my last act may be best, that so I may like Manoahs sacrifice ascend up unto thee by an Ange∣licall convoy.
Those that sacrificed up the calves of their lips, are now like beasts sacrificed. The rude reed runnes through the hand that sustained it, whilst the hoofes of unta∣med and untaught monsters trample on those heads that shod them; all alliance turning rebell either to civill, or legall contracts. Those Nationall tyes held sacred, and Gordian, of gossip, or fosterer are denied by the brutish, to the Brittish Ha∣zael and Zimri murthering their Masters, the act not disavowed, but countenanced, pardoned, and applauded by depicted Jezabel that Romish harlot. Solomons great sacrifice at the Temples dedication was here outvied in number, but not nature, the Beast was not offered, but preserved; for here the Minister was the chiefe sacri∣fice, the Beast the sacrificer. The Ram was not offered for Isaac, but he for the Ram, as if the gold had been more holy then the Temple, or sacrifice then Altar. Eliahs once slew the priests of Baal, but now Baals priests slaughter the sonnes of the Prophets; nor place, nor person is regarded, but the Protestants are murdered in the very Churches, as if Protestant bloud were only the hallowed water to san∣ctifie those places for their Idolatrous, prophane, damned, and accursed Masses. Certainly it may be feared that we did something that displeased God, which justly called for his exploding. Now are the fountaines of living waters, the balme of Gilead, the holy seales of the Covenant, the sacred columnes of Gods word made the derision of the ungod∣ly, whilst they are rent in pieces and dasht about the heads of the owners, till they drew bloud on their heads and faces; with these, and the like opprobrious and im∣pious speeches, here you English dogs and hereticks, you shall have Bibles enough: Surely had not those holy legacies or the blessed Spirit, been first by our selves un∣dervalued, it had not been in the power of those reprobates, thus to have propha∣ned the holy food, or the feeders thereon. Their first expressions began in the ruine of our estates, having first publisht all correspondence with the Scottish our brethren, whether out of an intent not to awaken their dislikes of these new insolencies, or perchance conceiving they had not forgot our hostil preparations against them the foregoing years, and therefore might hope to make them Newters: at all which conceits I admire had they but conceived the irreconciliable distance between their Religions; yet their divelish pretence and disguised affection, too much wrought in those dismall dayes (in which every head was perplext, if not darkened with distractions) on that valia Nation; insomuch, that one Barhome by title, but by name John Mac. Culloh, Cap∣taine of a foot company, with others, advised me (when I had kept my house se∣ven weeks after the Rebellion began) to fly for my life, adding they were reason∣ably well secured by a Proclamation publisht by the Rebells by direction of their chiefe, for the Scottish protection, in returne of a favour done him in his infancy by a Scottish Gentlewoman, who either saved his life, or liberty in his swathing bands. And but that God determined they should mingle with us in that great con∣fusion.
and effusion of estates, and bloud: I admire so wise a people, and perspicu∣ous in the darkest aenigmas, should be so deluded: but where God intends an infa∣tuation all humane wisdome is emerged. The deepest reaches of earthly know∣ledge, have had as deep precipices; none had a fearfuller fall then him the Scripture stiles as an oracle of God, we the defeats of those great projects of Pharaoh and Herod, that neither of their designes, or wise intendments could suffocate the type or substance, the penner of the law, or publisher of the Gospel the Scribe of the sacrifices, or him sacrificed by the Scribes. But this Romish Machiavilian plot tooke effect, so the prevention of bloudy and helborne projects are seldome pre∣vented, nay nor suspected by those of a holy & an upright conversation. Tis for the sonnes of darknesse to bring those things to light. But our brethren paid dearly for the cruell mercy of the Irish, for they staying after the English, of which some were slain, some stript, and sent away, were most of them, man, woman, and child cruelly massacred. The English are now left, as God left his, when they had first left him; some flying when none pursued, sin addes to the stature of our feares, for nothing makes men terrible even to themselves but their transgressions, whilst the greedy pursu∣ers seem like Mercury with winged feet to fly with a devouring sword to kill them already near death, with the expectation of death, whilst the enemies swords are as drunke with our bloud, as they with our drink, of both which they seem insatiable: the thirsty earth not more greedily receives the early, and latter raine then they of both liquors, insomuch that one  O Mallon was heard to boast in∣humanely that he with his owne hands had murdered sixe and twenty English and Scotch in two dayes, whereof there were twenty five Scottish: O unheard of cru∣elty, it is a wonder to me that this man should be borne by the common course of generation, for certainly his sire or dam must needs be an Irish wolfe, in whose bosome was harboured, so little humanity. Now doe these like those Philistims, inflamed with rage, and drinke, their soules intoxicated more then their bodies with the cuppe of the Whores Forni∣cations, Revelat. 17.2. drawe out the poore Captives to death, as if the best banquet were the bloudiest. The sonne of Hagar now abuses the heire of the Promise, now is disoculated Sampson that grindes his abused soule more then their meale brought forth to make pastime to the Philistims. I knew one Bel of Muckamore near Antrim, whose eyes they stubbed out to make him confesse his money, then abused him, and lastly murdered him, that death which is terrible to our selves, afford us delight if inflicted on others. With what delight and pleasure can wee reade those cruell persecutions of Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Marcus Aurelius, Severus, and the rest: nay, the bloudiest of our murthering Mary, who drew the bloud in stead
of milke from the paps of her Nurse, having such a Catholicke Spanish heat in her veines, that the bloud of many English Martyrs could not allay. The cruelties exercised at Merindol, and Cabriers, wher the craggy mountains exprest more mercy to the hunted martyrs, then the flinty soules of their persecu∣ters. That damned massacre of Charles the ninth anno 1572. whose bloud issuing from severall parts of his body (at his death) fully exprest his belluine disposition. Not King themselves profusely wasting, or unmercifull exhausting the bloud of their Subjects, shall finde exemption at that great and just Audit kept by Jehovah. The highest deputations have the heaviest cares. How soon is Saul lost in his new Mo∣narchy? These I say could we peruse with patience, and pleasure. The Spanish cruelty more heathenish then those on whom it was exercised in the Indies, which were till now the grand patterns of abused hostility, invasion, and victory are so far unfit to parallell with the Irish inhumanity, as they have lost our wonder. The horse-leeches of Rome bloudily conceiving that Protestant bloud is the marle of their Religion, and that nothing produces so rathe a spring to the Catho∣licke cause as the carcasses of purer professors: when as it is the generall assent that the bloud of martyrs is the seed of the Church. Sacks of wool are held the best foundations for bridges in the strongest currents, as on those were built up∣on the martyred carcasses of our predecessors (the Protestant Religion so surely) that all those great inundations from the Apostolicall, or rather diabolicall sea, could never overwhelme, yet then was our profession but like to Mephibosheth who though he was of the seed royall, had Sauls possessions, and eat bread at the Kings table, yet was he lame in his feet, 2 Sam. 9.3. and I suppose his cure would have been more needfull, and acceptable to him (could it have been effected) then either his possessions or honour. God alwayes preserved his Church, of which the Arke was a type which shall float over the world-drowned-shores to preserve a holy remnant; and the earth swallow up those streams of poysonous malice, vomited by the serpent against his love, his dove, his fair one; all these persecutions could not so much as startle the English lethargy; the evils that we expect are lessened, if not prevented, when as sudden alarms not only awake, but astonish. The great battells of Canna, Marathon, and those two daughtes of Epaminondas, Mantinea, and Leuctra, with those more famous where the Starres fought in their order, and Kishon like a besome swept them away: (even so let thine enemies perish, O Lord) those great defeats given and received by the Turke, and Christi∣an, the sword, fire, famine, pestilence, and desolation of the Jews, with what other horrors have eradicated the Roman and Gretian Empires; were by us perused with pleasure, and yet now that a destructive insurrecton, drawes his daggar at our
throats death walking over our owne thresholds, famine having entred to cling up our bowels, fire to dissolve our beings, and unkinde exile to shoulder us from our abodes, poverty rushing like an armed man, meager and pin'd visages meeting us at every pace, wounded and mangled carcasses peeping out of bushes like ghosts from the grave, Christians expos'd naked to unmercifull cold, and moun∣tainous wayes, with not a fig leafe to hide their nakednesse, poore women with childe brought a bed, and dead in woods, and caves, in that unchristian manner that my pen dares not expresse: but leaves their miserable condition to the consi∣deration and commiseration of those that expect a happy deliverance: heaps of slaughtered Christians, to part of which the dogs had given sepulchre, many han∣ged upon trees and boughes, part of which we could perceive had been burnt be∣fore: at these sights, and many more horrid, how are our resolves amated? our courages qued? our resolutions daunted? now doth poore Germany, and our slight neglect of their calamities deeply possesse us, the afflictions of Joseph are a∣fresh bemoaned, and the martyrdomes of the Apostles are now lamented, and what is more the poverty of our Messias, his teares, pilgrimages, sripes, spittings, con∣tempt revilings, agony, and bloudy passion, which before was read over as an ordi∣nary story of Scripture, and if read, not remembred, if remembred, not lamented, if lamented, twas but a qualme of sorrow, now are we sufferers in his sufferings: Oh bitter miserie, how sweet are thy lectures? teaching sorrows are cordiall griefes, and tis a blessed maim that heals the soule; give me those wounds, O God, through which as a glorious mirror, I may behold the mirror of glory. Now began the famine of some to conclude that the violentest death was the best, and the lengthned life the only miserable, that the shortest way to the grave was the sweetest, and that the last gaspe was most comfortable, many searching for the pangs of death as the only Elixar to cure all diseases, the feared winding sheet, and insatiable grave proving now desired, which was before horrid. That heaven the seat of God under which we regardlessely walked is all the canopy is left the English, the humble earth the footstoole of God, and mother of us all, on which we proudly trampled, lets her wofull children lie on her bosome, that fain would lye within it; the woods and bogs becomming either out shelter or sepulchre, the contemned food of the Irish, sorrell, watergrasse, three leaved grasse, weeds, and water is now made our delicates. The tender and loving wife repines at the nourishment eaten by the husband of her bosome, whilst the infants complaints begets fresh throws in that breast which used, but could not nourish it, the mothers tears shewing a compassion, but not a redresse, happy were the infant could it have been cherished with tears, as before with milke, for the eye was wet to see the breast so drie: fruitfulnesse is now held a greater curse to the for∣lorne English, then sterility was to the Jews. Jeremy thou mourning turtle of Sions sorrows, I wish not a double portion of thy spirit, but thy sorrow, that I might be
that silver trumpet that should publish to all posterity the calamities of those our brethren, that did, and do want those succours our luxury devours. She is no Nio∣be that cannot finde one teare to cast into our Ocean of brine, and lend a sigh to those broken hearts that sorrow hath rather made statues, then men. Suffer not the afflicted of the Lord to tread the winepresse alone, lest when thy aloes are given thee to drinke thou findest none of Elishas salt to cure the brackishnesse. Partner∣ship in sorrow hath the power of mitigation, and thou shalt have the praise if not to have relieved, to have eased our pangs. But whither am I transported? Summons to griefe finde but deafe cares, and a dead welcome: every man desiring rather to go to a theater, then a tribunall, mirth having as many assistants too many, as tribulation too few. Solomon is as little fol∣lowed in these two Proverbs, as in any, better is the house of mourning then the house of mirth, and the day of death then the day of ones birth; but when be comes with an inviting exultation Eccles. 11.9. Rejoyce O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheare thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walke in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eies, he shall have more followers then Darius or Xerxes: this gripe of pleasure hath gotten Rome so many Proselites, when Religion complies with Nature, our corruptions are wooed, and wedded to a glowe wormy hap∣pinesse. The great Belshazzers in their greatest elevations, finde their knees knocking, and discerne the hand writing of death on their walls, and those Nebuchadnezzars that prided themselves in their spacious structures (as many there were that built with marble which contemned the corner stone) are now sent amongst the beasts of the field, not only for their abode, but sustenance. Those holy duties before neglected are now with a compulsive trepidation observed. Tis a miserable thing for a soule inur'd to sinne, to be hurried into his devotions, death at the heeles and hell in the eyes, seldome produce any but distracted supplications: when as he that dies dayly hath wrested the iron scepters out of the power of death and hell; having an in∣fallible interest in him, that not only got the conquest, but sung the comfortable soule-cheering insultation over both these, till then indomitable tyrants. Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? Therefore, Quid retribuam? but thankes be unto God, which hath given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 15.55.57. Now would those that had consumed a patrimony, rejoyce to finde those husks that none shall give them. How gladly would the gripple hand receive that almes it hath detayned? finding a sad returne of his uncharitable repulses. That Dives that would not give a crumme demanded, shall find a drop denied. O God so in∣large my heart, that I may give what I can, and so enlarge thy mercies, I may re∣ceive what I would.
It was no single arrow God shot in that Nation, or us poore English; for as if the sword had beene too blunt a sithe, or sickle, to mow both the wheat and darnell, and a single punishment too favourable a scourge, God sent the fire, and lest that should be too sparing in consuming our sinnes that made us so combustible, and not fully refine the oare from the drosse: God sent the famine to devour those that had nothing to eat; and lest that should leave any gleanings in this Irish Aceldama, the Lord sent a pestilent Feaver, that swept away innumerable people: insomuch that in Colerane there died in fowre moneths by computation six thou∣sand, in Carickfergus two thousand and five hundred, in Belfast and Me∣lone above two thousand, in Lisygarvi eight hundred, and in Antrym and other places a proportionable number. So that heer the chariot of Gods justice was drawne by those fowre horses Rev. 6. a white, a red, a blacke, and a pale horse; this disease augmented our miseries, the Fea∣vers being so contagious, that the living durst not see them sicke, nor bu∣ry them dead; that I have seene the husband carry his dead wife to the Church-yard, and borrowing a spade, digge a grave for her that living was his life: and the same man have I seene the next day die in the same Church-yard: the like affection have I seene the wife expresse toward her departed husband, the sonne to the father, father to the son, and the like. Heere were the words of our Saviour, not onely metaphorically, but verbally true: for the dead did not only bury the dead, but the dying buried the dead also. Not any that escaped this Feaver but lost all their hayre: I had it in the Newry seven weekes, where not only without, but contrary to meanes, my God preserved mee, to whom on my bended knees I give all possible thankes. This sicknesse beyond the power of perswasive Divinity, shewed me God thwarting Nature, preserving in the grave, quenching the flames of my sicknesse, even with what Physi∣tians say it is inflamed; my cordialls and julips, were running water, in stead of barly, and sometimes a little milke, salt beefe, or porke, oaten bread and cheese, the allayes to my heat and hunger. Thus from the jawes of death and brims of the grave hath God delivered me, to lament and publish the death of those of my owne Tribe. For on them fell the brunt of this martyrdome: they were those appointed to slaughter at the birth of this designe: they could expect no quarter; others might ran∣some their lives with their hidden goods: but this profession was sure to cope with death in the horridst shape, as if Iaacobs curse were renova∣ted, for they met with a wrath more fierce, a rage more cruell then they used to Shechem, and found a division in Iaacob, and a scattering in Is∣rael,
Gen. 49.7. Which I the rather undertake, because some ill affected to the con∣dolements of the Irish Clergy heere distressed, and by some harsh tongues depraved, have lightly run over the miseries of that despised, and disper∣sed Ministry, to whom I owe that little I have left, as being of the same messe with those sonnes of the Prophets, that find More in olla. I shall but in two passages digresse from the Martyrology of the Mi∣nistry in the Province of Ulster, and the one is my engagement that I ought to Mr. Morgan Aubry Esquire, my honoured friend, and his Man, to this I am drawne by my love, the other is the unmanly and un∣christian asage shewed to Mrs. Smithson, a Ministers wife, and her mayd, that lived within fowre miles of Dublin, to this I am drawne by my won∣der, and these two I shall transfer to the last. The first on whom their unsanctified hands were fastned, was Master Madder, of Donnamoore, Rector, who in a most cruell and bloudy ma∣ner, they cut in pieces, and left unburied. Secondly, Mr. Blith, Minister of Dungannon, whom they hanged, whose wife with 3 small children, after 8 months miserable captivity, I saw in the Newry, great with child, stripped naked, and ready to per∣ish for want of reliefe. Then Mr. Fullerton of Loughgall, Rector, to whom Sir Phelsmy ô Neale, owed at least six hundred pounds, upon mortgages, who though he and Mr. Aubry abovesaid, had his Passe and Convoy for their safe conduct, was payd that debt, by his paying his debt to Nature: for he at a bogges side was stript, murthered, and left unburied. With this coyne hath that flaming firebrand payd his debts, such cancelling of bonds must they all expect that traffique with the progeny of the Babilonish whore. Mrs. Fullerton with two children, and great with child, came to the Newry after eight months imprisonment, with sevenscore women and children in her company, her selfe having not to hide her nakednesse, nor no thing to keepe her feet from the ground, but two pieces of a raw cow hide tied upon her feet with pieces of packthred, and what was more miserable, she was constrayned to leave two of her children upon the mountaines, to the mercy of their Fathers murtherers: judge now, you that tie your lives upon the prosperity of your infants, of the agonies of this distressed Gentlewoman, which made me call to mind that mination of God, Deut. 28, 56.57. The tender and delicate wo∣man amongst you, which never would venter to set the sole of her foot
on the ground (for the softnesse and tendernesse) shall be grieved at her husband, that lieth in her bosome, and at her sonne, and at her daughter, and at her after birth (that shall come out between her feet) and at her children which she shall beare: for when all things lacke, she shall eat them secretly, during the siege and straitnes where with thine enemies shall besiege thee in thy strong Cities. Mr. Matchett Minister of Maharafelt, was after long imprisonment and extream hard usage, the Lord having given him the bread of teares, and ashes to drinke, he being an aged and reverend Gentleman, was most cruelly murthered at Lievetenant Thurshies in the County of London-Derry, the Lievetenant and his wife being both Recusants, could not by any meanes or intreaties, eyther save or respite him from death, such fa∣vour found the English Papists amongst the Irish, and such finde the En∣glish revolters with the Spaniard, between whom is as great correspon∣dence, as between the Scotch and French Nations. Mr. Hudson, Minister or Desert Martin, after many troubles, and cala∣mities, was taken from betweene two fetherbeds, out of Mr. Chappels house, where that vertuous Gentle woman had long fed, and concealed him, but at length the Rebels gave a date to her charity to him, and to his life, for the Rebels in a most cruell and most barbarous maner murthe∣red him. Mr. Campion of Kilowen, being at the battell of Ballemony, which the English in regard of the fatability of the day, call Blacke-Friday, ha∣ving received a great overthrow, which in all possibility had beene the losse of Colerane, and a dismall day to all the poore Protestants within it, had not God infatuated eyther the wisedome, or daunted the courage of those Rebels, under the command of Colkittoes sonnes, there did this Gentleman seale his love to the Gospel with his bloud, like Zuinglius in the head of his Company, honourably expiring amongst his slaughtered Brethren. In the same cause and maner was slaine a Scottish Minister, (whose name I cannot remember, though I was then in the same County) who tooke his leave, and shewed his love to the cause, (in which to their ho∣nours, that Nation is forwardly zealous) under the command of Colo∣nel Archibald Steward, late Agent to the Earle of Antrym. Mr. Tudge Minister of the Newry, after long imprisonment, and many perfidious promises from the Lord Magenis, Sir Con Magenis, Governour of the Newry, and the rest, was with thirteene more, under a pretence to be exchanged for other prisoners at Downe-Patricke cruelly put to
death, of which none but one Greene a Tapster to Mr. Butterfield of the Newry escaped, ransoming his life for forty shillings: this Greene brought me this Relation in May 1642. and as they were leading to their slaugh∣ter, the poore Gentleman called upon Sir Con Magenis for mercy, and performance of his promise; but the perfidious tyrant stopped his eares, to his and their complaints; upon which Mr. Tudge, in the bitternes of his soul desired God to require his bloud at their hands, with these words of the Psalmist; (Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord) then he with his fellow Martyrs, taking the Communion in a little running water, in stead of the bloud, and a piece of an oaten strowen, in stead of the body of their Saviour, commending themselves, and their vile bodies into his hands that was able to translate them into glory, yeelded their lives to the stroke of the bloudy executioners, by whom he was hanged: but Lievtenant Trever and his wife with some of the rest, which were divers were cut to pieces. Soone after, as all the English Inhabitants of that place often affirm∣ed, Sir Con Magenis was by the strange judgement of God, strucken with a strong frenzy, running home to his owne house on foot, the Lord taught him by the way, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth and Penu∣el, his clothes and skin being justly torne by the bushes and briers, in those uncouth wayes his madnesse made choyce of, raving on his death bed, Take away Tudge, take away Tudge, doe you not see how hee pur∣sues me for his bloud? in which desperate condition he died. Thus God made this Rebell and mercilesse beast, by the lash of his Di∣vine Justice, acknowledge his transgression in taking away the lives of the innocent. The same Sir Con having besides innumerable other mur∣thers, at one time betweene Greene Castle, and Carlingford, drowned sixty and eight Protestants, to which he had promised quarter, affirmed by Mr. Holland, who with some others, in a boat miraculously escaped to Dublin at that time, by which meanes he and the rest escaped from tast∣ing Sir Cons holy water. Mr. Hastings Minister, endowed into a living of Mr. Fairfax being Schoolmaster in Ballisegart a house belonging to my honoured friend the virtuous Mrs. Clotworthy, for which deliverance after a grievous thral∣dome, my heart rejoyceth. Him they caused to swim in the Lough till he was drowned. Mr. Dorrah, my Lord Canlfields Chaplaine killed. Mr. Fleming Minister of Clanfeckle, murdered. Mr. Mercer inster of Mulifrk, murdered. Mr. Burns Curate of Loughgilly, murdered.
Mr. Bradlyes Curate of Artray, Mr. New killed. Mr. Wilkingson of Clovins, killed at the Cavan, he comming to the Crosse-keyes Inne, desired a lodging, to whom an Irish mantendred him∣selfe, telling if he walked into the garden, he would provide him one, the innocent Gentleman was no sooner in the garden, but the Serpent be∣trayed him, asking him doe you want a lodging? yes, replied he, I have saies Judas provided you one, and with that drew his Skeane, and stroke him so violently on the head that his braines fell out: this lodging was intended for the whole Clergy, had not God miraculously defeated the purposes of these bloudy hel-bounds; children whose mothers have sore breasts, doe sometimes draw bloud as well as milke, which makes me be∣leeve that the breasts of the Church of Rome, are sore, and full of cor∣ruption, that her children draw so much bloud amongst their milke (if any) that they generally during their whole time thirst after it. Mr. Thomas Traford killed by the Rebells after quarter was promised. Mr. Mongommery hanged by the Rebells, he was of Dunamain Pa∣rish. Mr. Paulmaster that once lived at Carickfergus Minister there, (was as his wife informed me) hanged at his Church doore. Mr. Flack of Fermannah, a Minister of speciall note, was with two of his sons taken out of Castle Crevenish, and also offered up to God as a sacrifice. Mr. Michart Berket of Salters Towne flying for safety with his wife, and seven small children to Carickfergus, where his wife, and all his poor children died most miserably for want of ordinary nourishment, himselfe being famished to the point of death, finding the pangs strong upon him, got leave to goe into the Church of Carickfergus, where he had not long stayed, fitting himselfe for the reward promised to them that made their long robes white in the bloud of the Lambe, to that land of Goshen, where they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat, Rev. 7.16. did there depart this life. Mr. Griffin, All of Ardmah, and murdered by those bloud suc∣kers on the sixt of May. Mr. Bartly All of Ardmah, and murdered by those bloud suc∣kers on the sixt of May. Mr. Starkey Curat, All of Ardmah, and murdered by those bloud suc∣kers on the sixt of May. For about the fourth of May, as I take it, we put neare forty of them to death upon the bridge of the Newry, amongst which, were two of the Popes Pedlers, two Seminary Priests, in returne of which, they slaugh∣tered many prisoners in their custody, where of these three were part,
Mr. Bevrge a of Killaan, Ministers of the same County, were suf∣ferers in this massacre. Mr. Robinson of Kilmoore, Ministers of the same County, were suf∣feres in this massacre. Mr. Lutfoot oof Castle Blany, tasted of the same mercy, being cruelly murdered. Romulus the first founder of that City, is faind to be fosterd by a Wolfe, and was the murderer of his brother Rhemus, a presage of the cru∣elties should proceed from that foundation, certainly there was some bloud (which is a great cementer) mingled in the morter, for I am assu∣red both the Empire, and Hierarchy, the temporall and anti-spirituall dig∣nity, have been supported by cruell massacres, or bloudy machinations, no act of hostility, conspiracie, treachery, murder, symony, or what e∣ver is accounted detestable amongst meer moralists, but hath beene co∣lumns to uphold that grand bawdy-house, wherein not only corporall whoredomes, but spirituall are tollerated, from thence was fined, and on the grindstone of Rome was this sacrificing knife ground that cruelly cut off these Martyrs. Thus have I shewd the unhappinesse of the Irish, who perchance are yet living, the happinesse of them that are slaine, but yet alive. Well did the Jewes call the grave domus viventia, from thence did arise that life that assures us of the resurrecton to life, whereas the wicked man is accursed in his grave, Esay 14.19. These are but a remnant of them that could not escape the Rebells tyranny or my intelligence: many more must needs suffer that never came my care, for the Inland Countries of whose passages I am not informed so credibly, I dare report it, must needs afford great slaughters being re∣mote from those garison Townes upon the coast, where many (God be praised) spared their lives. Besides these that were thus massacred, there dyed of the pestilent fea∣ver, who chiefly miscaried through poverty, famine, and succors in their sicknesse. The reverend, learned and famous Martyr Bedle Bishop of Kilmore, who suppported many distressed English, and was kept in restraint at Clowater, and died at Mr. Srednies house after some five monthes im∣prisonment, where like Paul, he spent his time in converting his jailors, making his prison his pulpit; wicked tyrants may barre Gods people from the congregation of the righteous, but not God from the habitations of his people. M. Peirce Minister of the Lurgan at Carickfargus. Mr. Simon Chichester Minister of Belfast. Mr. Ducket Curate of Lisnigarvy.
Mr. Redshaw Minister of Colerane. Mr. Collins Minister of Kilrae And three Ministers more, whose names I cannot learne, but was informed of their deaths by Anne Jackson, Francis Barnaby, and Went∣worth Moulsworth that came from thence, and are now all in this City. Mr. Tailor of Carlingford. All these dyed in Cole∣rane. Mr. Chesman of Moninmoore Minister. All these dyed in Cole∣rane. Mr. Winter of Astra Minister. Mr. Luke Astrie Minister of Ballekelly. Mr. Farwood Deane of Drummoore. Mr. Edward Stanhop Archdeacon. Mr. Backster of Kildallon dyed in Castle Crag. Mr. Edward Livesly. Mr. Erskin of Fermanah who tooke his sicknesse in Derry, but dyed in Scotland at Antrim. Captaine John Kilner of Jaughen-vale, having a Commission from His Majesties Commissioners for a foot Company, issued out in Decem. 1641. as also a Commission from the Lords Justices, to be Provost Marshall of the City and County of London-Derry, in both which, his sonne being a Minister, became his Lieutenant and Deputy, being a preaching Soul∣dier, and a military Minister, who preacht to his Souldiers when they were not in fight, and fought when he could not preach, shewing at once his love to Christ, and hate to Anti-Christ, who having done exceeding good service, he being a forward and well qualified Gentleman, but stri∣ving above nature to shew his zeale in that holy war, by many heats, colds, and other sufferings contracted that sicknesse wich ended his daies, having time to apply that Swan-like song of Paul, the second of Timo∣thy, the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, which a legacie to his brethren, and cordiall to himselfe, was his last antheme, But watch thou in all things: suffer adversity: doe the worke of an Evangelist: make thy Ministery fully knowne. For now I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. For henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. I have seen a large certificate of his fathers unparalled services, in which he ought to be a partner, as being an assistant, all wich is subscribed un∣der the hands of Sir John Vaughan, Knight, governour of the City of
London-Derry, and one of the Privy Councell of that Kingdom, Robert Thornton Major of that City, Henry Vaughan, Simon Pits, Henry Finch, Henry Osborne Aldermen. Mr. Newcomen Minister of Fawne, at Fawne. Mr. Richard Walker Minister of Lifford, at Lifford. Now you have seen Steven ston'd, you shall see Peter and John, Paul and Silas in interiorem carcerem, you shall see Jeremiah in the stocks, Jer. 20.2. You shall behold Pashur putting him downe into the dungeon with cords, where the poore Prophet is not only fast in prison, but in mire, Jer. 38.6. for as they held the Ministers the basest of men, so they provided for them the basest of prisons: should we returne their cru∣elties, we should put their Priests and Jesuits into our common shoares. 'Dignum pattella operculum, those not marked with the letter (T) for destru∣ction, or on the lintells of whose doors the Angel had sprinkled the marks of deliverance, found the protraction of life a death; the taskmasters of Ireland, being more cruell then those of Egypt, and enjoyning more cruell conditions; for what can be more horrid then for an Apostle, to be urged to be an Apostate, to be constrained to leave the way, the truth, and the life, to walke in the labyrinths of falshood, and death? I shall shew you some of the Lords captives in that Province. Mr. Archdeacon Price of Drumlane, Mr. Adam Watson of Kilshanar both of the County of Cavan, besieged in Castle Crag eight months, get∣ting off by quarter. Mr. Creighton of Virginia kept in misery eleven months. Mr. Fitzgarret Minister, in hard and cruell restraint till the sixt of May 1642. who though a native, and next to the Primate of Armagh, a man of the greatest splendor for Urim and Thummim of that Nation. Mr. Boyle of Carickmaharosse Minister, in bondage five months. Mr. Gil Minister of Killally of the County of Monahan imprisoned five months. Mr. Edward How Curate of Dartrie in bonds six weeks. Mr. Ferchar Parson of Cnish County Fermanah two months. Mr. Francis Sympson of Kilmore, County Monahan imprisoned eight months. Mr. James Fethie Minister, kept in restraint eight months, having been preserved from famine by M. Fitzgarrets goodnesse, who for his County take found a little more cruell favour then other of his brethren. Mr. Bradly Minister of Artra, imprisoned eight months, being often brought out to be hanged, but next unto God preserved by the unmatch∣able
goodnesse of Mrs. Chappel now in the City finding save from one friend raised up for her by Almighty God, a small returne of that talent of charity, which she in those dayes of bloud and famine extended to many, especially the Ministery, which sometimes brought her owne life in ha∣zard. Mr. Archdeacon Maxfield of Glaslough, or if you will Buchamon ju∣nior for his elegant, and smooth expressions in divine posies, kept in re∣straint by the Ovendens, halfe bothers to Nero junior. Sir Philomy ô Neal nine months. A Scotch Minister, that after long imprisonment made a miraculous escape, with Lievtenant Smith, Lievtenant to Captaine George Blunt of Montjoy, and some others in a small boat and oares, hackled out with their knives, over Lough Neaugh to Antrym, it being above twenty miles by water, in the Winter season, a dengerous passage: whose name I have forgotten, yet I heard him preach in Belfast, upon this portion of Scripture, Jer. 4.4. Thus we see as Antichrist strives to drownd, kill, and famish the elect, even so Christ by a Divine providence, sowes up the mouths of these ravening elements, and preserves his owne Paul in spite of the whistling Euroclydon, and angry Adriaticke, hee shall have his Angell aboord, to bring him blest tidings of his life and his companions, Act. 27.23. That passage of Esay 43.2. Feare not: for I have redee∣med thee: I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine, when thou pas∣sest thorow the waters. I will be with thee, and thorow the flouds, that they doe not overflow thee, was fulfilled on these distressed escapers. Mr. George Cottingham Rector of Monahan was put into a close dun∣geon, where his frankiscense was the excrements of men in heaps, it be∣ing the dungeon belonging to the goale, where five dayes he was de∣tained, obscured, living himselfe unrelieved with any kinde of nourish∣ment having his wife and foure children in the same misery. Mr. Beale prisoner at Clowater, and in restraint nine months. Mr. Dennis Serreduie an Irish man, but a minister, still in restraint. Mr. Henry Steel minister of Clautubeit was the space of nine weekes sometimes in the dungeon, and sometimes in the gaole, having a young childe to keep, not above a quarter old, which he cherisht sometimes with milke, and sometimes with water out of a sucking bottle, that now those that wanted tongues or language to call for gengeance on these homicides, make their bloud louder orators to implore justice, he was at last deprived of his childe, himselfe being stripped, escaped to Dublin, where, and here he hath indured by the flux, and other sicknesse extream misery.
Mr. Dennison minister of Tedawnet, was stript naked, and beaten worse the a Turkish gallyslave, lying naked in a ditch all night, and brought from thence to Monahan Castle, where he lay long halfe dead, and benumed. Thus is poore Joseph because he will not lye with Poti∣phars wife unjustly condemned to a miserable bondage, because we were betrothed to the Spouse of Christ, and would not mingle our selves with the harlot of Rome, therefore is the lap of our garment (our profession) made our destruction. But these resolved martyrs though tempted with the beauty of that Romish Thais, upon a holy consideration, ponder Jo∣sephs consultation, and with that armed themselves against their tempta∣tions, and their owne persecutions, saying with him, Gen. 39.89. Be∣hold my master knoweth not what he hath in the house with me, but hath committed that he hath to mine hand, there is no man greater in this house then I: neither hath he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because thou art his wife, how then can I doe this great wickednesse, and so sin against God? mistake me not, I intend not to have that appli∣cation hold in all the particulars, for I dare not derogate from Gods presence, so will I not arrogate to our Ministery giving them any thing that may more honour them, then that which will be onerous to them (the weightinesse of their charge) so great, that he is like unto Issacar, or so made. Thus far of the slaughters, deaths by the feaver, and cruell thraldomes of the Ministery. I come now to render an account of such as I left in Carickfergus, Belfast, Newry, Lisnygarvy, and the neighbou∣ring parts, in so unfathomed a misery as my plum and line is to light and short to expresse their indigencies. Mr. Cloggir of Dean Parish, Co. Cavan. Mr. Doctor Tate of Ballihaire, In Cavan. Mr. White of Kilmore. In Cavan. Mr. Mosse of Newtowene in Fermanah. Mr. Commin of Clankee in the Co. of Cavan. Mr. Jenton senior Cou. Down. Mr. Jenton junior Coun. Antrim. Mr. Slack of Callee hill Cou. Cavan. Mr. Hudson of Belturbutt Co. Cavan. Mr. Henry Fethy, mr. James Fethy, mr. Lutefoot of Strangford, mr. Pa∣trick Gar, thee thre Watsons the father, son and nephew, mr. Massy, mr. Jones, mr. Jues, and mr. Paul Read of Blackstaffe, both which were com∣pelled to lead a horse and a carre, with either hay or wood, for a groat or six pence a day to keep themselves from famishing, mr. Wilson of Enver,
mr. John Dunbar, mr. George Lesly, mr. Andrew Law, mr. Craford, mr. Ogleby, mr. Laurence Tompson, mr. Durry of Ballimenah, mr. James Tracy, mr. Hardir, mr. Walter Lamont, mr. Jorrest of Dumagur, mr. Robert mc. Neal, mr. mc. Neale, mr. Dr. O Neale, mr. Veazy, mr. Major, mr. Back∣ster, mr. Charles Vaughan; mr. Cade, mr. Hollana, mr. Dean Rhodes, mr. James Stewart of Garvahir, mr. David Roven of Redbay, mr. Nichols Todd, mr. John Michel of Ana Clowen, mr. Hugh mc. Lecinan late of Leakin-larke, mr. James Creighton, mr. James Melvin of Down-Patrick, mr. Johnson, mr. Fullerton, for distinction sake called red Fullerton, mr. Monopeny, mr. James Portus, mr. Downes, mr. James Downham, mr. Lam∣bert, mr. Brooks, mr. Patrick Doncan, mr. Dr. Blare, mr. Joster, mr. Hamil∣ton, mr. Travis mr. Thomas Stewart, mr. Bel, mr. Wallet, mr. Woodridge. These with some others that escaped like Jobs messengers to bring sad tydings of their brethrens deaths, but not intermits, and are now on the dunghills of calamity with holy Job, finding as ill comfort as comforters, and still hangs at the bloudy and dry paps of the Church in Ireland, whence they can draw nothing but winde, and that may be heard from their full soules (though empty bellies) in their sighes and groanes, the silent interpreters speaking sorrows, so that there needs no winde but that to overthrow their houses of clay. Now if you please survey with a commiserating eye those whose wea∣ried steps, fainting bodies, and wounded soules, have repaired to the Be∣thesda of England for cure of their heart-rending sorrowes, where in all acknowledgements of gratefull humility, some of them have found the Angel stirring the sovereigne balme water of your charities to their re∣liefe, which many of the feebler sort, either through weaknesse of friends, abilities of expressions, or a selfe-killing modesty lye at the brinke unre∣mied to them, divine Charity open the doores of thy Physicke, and Chy∣rurgery, and into their bleeding wounds poure thy oyle and thy wine, Samaritan-like eye the robbed and bleeding Levite, pay thy penny for his present harbour, and promise for a slender remainder these underta∣kings, Angelicall vertue shall make thee be translated with Enoch or E∣liahs in a fiery chariot, thy owne immortality will guide thee to the pre∣servation of us mortall men. Mr. Mors of Fermanah, and Parish of Rammullie after he had beene robbed, and stripped, was constrained being starke naked to carry his two children twelve miles upon his backe, by which time she grew so urbated that his uxoriousnesse prevailed beyond his paternall love to his children, so in that a great agony of spirit, he was forced to leave the
fruit to the mercy of the enemies, and to preserve the tree carried his wife above eight miles upon his back, they being both naked, Eneas could not out patern this affection to aged Anchises. From that Province are here under thy wings, as chickings fearing famine that predatory Kite, Mr. Richard Burowes, Mr. Baker, Mr. George Walker, Mr. Bedle, Mr. Dr. Bayly of the Cou.Cavan, the two Sings of A∣haderick, the other of Dundalke; mr. John Freeman, mr. Hammond, mr. Bunburie, and as I heare his brother, mr. Boyle. mr. Cottingham, mr. Na∣thaniel Draiton, mr. William Green, mr. Francis Sympson, mr. Gabreath, mr. Cohun, mr. Henry Steel, mr. Edward Carter, mr. Clearke, mr. Sempil, mr. Anthony, mr. Harrocks mr. Philip Tandy, mr. Tinly, mr. Richard Head, mr. Kean, mr. Bradley, my unworthy selfe, mr. James Reynolds, mr. Steere, mr. Leigh, mr. Diggery Holman, mr. Waterhouse. These stars shew in the lower orbe, of the higher, is that famous, learned, and studious in∣grosser of learning, the late Lord Primate or Ardamgh Ʋsher, the fluent and elegant Seneca of Rapho, the solid and grave Buchworth of Deum∣moore, quicke and Eagle eyed Singe of Cloyne. The learned, prompt, politick, and engine headed Bramhal of Derry. Lastly, one Clergy man more I finde whose names sake promises a sudden termination of all our sorrowes (without speedy succors) and that is Mr. Death, Minister of Seapatrick. Thus you finde amongst the distressed Clergy, an Ʋsher and a Voyder, but no meat on their tables; these with their charges are fit objects for Dorcas to cloath, the Sarepthan widow, or good Obadiahs to feed, and the Shunnamite to lodge, the prayers of which will revive thy dying or dead hopes, encrease thy decaying store, being raine to thine inheritance, and restore thy hurt, mained or dead issue. Lastly, as thou hast opened thy bowells of compassion, they shall open to thee the gate called beautifull, that leads into our elder Brothers Fathers, where are many mansions, for the poore for Christ, and of Christs are janitores Coeli. And now I come to the two digressions specified before. The first digression is from the subject. With Mr. Fullerton was mur∣dered Mr. Morgan Aubrey Esquire, and his man (who though no Mini∣ster) I have thought good to mention in regard of those many deare tyes of love and friendship between us, to whose disastrous death I dedicate this tragick remembrance as a monument of his sufferings, and my sor∣row, a Gentleman of an active, brave, and Roman spirit, whose breast was not only filled with pleasing flames of learned Poetry, but the more heroick fire of resolution, sweetly allayed with a modelt and wel tempe∣red disposition; a man that had merited as much from that laethe drinker
Sir Phelomy O Neal, as a Gentleman could, having effectually negotiated for him in many particulars of consequence with the late Lord Strafford, to whose Countesse he had been Gentleman usher, yet was he all ingage∣ments waved, betraied by letters of safe conduct to a cruell and merci∣lesse but chery, first stripping him, then killing him at a bogs side. But en his servant Henry Lawrence (whom I have heard to be of a mighty stature and valour) a Warwickshire man, who by surprising one of the Rebels swords, having slaine foure or five before he was seised on, was shewed that cruelty which was forborne to ravilliac the parricide of Henry the fourth, that Caelar of the the Flower du liz and was only exer∣cised by Cambises upon one of his unjust judges whose skinne he flaied off, and nailed it to the tribunall, as a terrour to his sonne that succeeded him, had but some of ours been made so exemplar, unjust votes had not laden our Kingdome with these bloudy contestations. The Judges of Israel rid on their white Asses, to shew I thinke as well their purity and innocency, as their patient undergoing the insupportable weight of their callings; but it is feared some of them have not only cast off that integri∣ty, but purity and constancy also, this Laurence after many wounds re∣ceived, they flead some part of him, and so left him cruelly murdered. The second digression is from the Province, but something adhering to the Subject. But above all barbarous, inhumane, hethenish, and un∣heard of murders, was that of Mrs. Smithson a ministers wife living at the Kilne of the Grange within foure miles of Dublin, who being perswa∣ded to returne to her house, in hope to have the Communion cup, and a barrell of wheat given her, all which was promised by her satanicall se∣ducer, her poverty having made her too credulous, she went along with her maid servant, no sooner had they gotten this unfortunate Gentlewo∣man in their power, but they stript her of her apparrell, setting her na∣ked a stride upon a leane jade, tying heavy weights at her heeles, then with stripes forced they the horse to runne through waters, and leap o∣ver ditches, and to travell in the most uneasie passages till they brougt her into their army, that so they might not seeke for any other then Pa∣pisticall evidence of this their bestiality; this usage she had untill her bo∣dy was torne in a unheard of manner, feeding her with bread and water, which was rather affoarded to protract the miseries they intended her then to preserve or reprive a life, and when that her body could not any more be made a spectacle of their shame, she was restrained, where first
they cut off one eare, boyld it, and rubbed it about her mouth, then the other, after that her nose, using them in the same manner, had Zopieus beene here to have seene this picture in her face, he would have declined his notable resolution; at last they put out her eyes, and when they saw nature willing to ease her torments by dissolution, and that mercifull death would set a period to their butcheries, they hanged her and her maid upon one bough, Her husband as before she went having used all possible perswasions to keep her from going, so used all manner of dili∣gence to procure her returne, after he perceived shee had outstaied her intentions, bomplained to the State that she was gone to Justice Wol∣verstons, whose brother was then in Dublin (being both obstinate Pa∣pists) who being sent for to the State, and admonished of their jealou∣sies of the womans miscarriage, prevailed to be sent thither for her deli∣very and restoration, but finding her past recover, deserted Dublin, his estate which was great, and obedience which was little, and turned Re∣bell, which was no marvell; thus these cruell Benjamites for doubtlesse they were so in that other act of unseemlinesse, did not abuse the Concu∣bine, but the virtuous wife of a Levite, the story of whose mangled and macerated carkasse I transfer to the eleven Tribes of our English Israel, knowing they will conclude, having seen this sad and dismall spectacle, as they did, Judges 19.30. And all that saw it, said, there was no such thing done nor seen since the time that the children of Israel came up from the land of Egypt unto this day. Consider the matter, and consult and give sentence, then shall we all domestick intestines laid apart, joyne with Israel, to punish this damna∣ble, and other facts of unpattern'd cruelty like them in the 20. of Judges 48. then ye men of Israel returned unto the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, from the men of the City unto the beasts and all that came to hand: also they set on fire all the Cities that they could come by, moreover the men of Israel sware in Mipeh, saying, none of us shall give his daughter to the Benjamite, to wife: thus fare have I floated in the blood and brine, of the tribe of Levie, a subject so terrible that I could not but mingle my incke with teares for whom I close up to the tragicall discourse with that lamentation of holy David for his friend Ionathan, 2 Sam. 1.25.26. How were the mighty slaine in the midst of the battell? O Ionathan thou wast slaine in thine high places. Woe is me for thee my brother Ionathan: very kinde hast thou been unto me; thy love to me was wonderfull, passing the love of women: how are the mighty men over-throwne, and the weapons of war destroyed.
This martirologer of part of that Ministery, I was the rather induced to publish, in regard some calumnious tongues have charged the Irish English Clergy to adhere to the Romish faction and fictions, which had they done they had saved their lives and estates, with the losse of their soules, but they with holy Philpot have sealed their zeal to the Gospel, by the effusion of their blouds, confusion of estates, taking a miserable exile with Iohn to Pathmos, where I hope God will reveale himselfe to them in their straightnesse to their comfort, and his glory, to whom be ascribed all honour, and glory, now and for evermore, Amen. FINIS.
