J1145 E115_9 R21893 99871532 156015
JOYFULL NEWES FROM THE ISLE OF ELY, DECLARING The manner of the apprehending of Bishop Wren, and his bringing up to London, together with his Treasure, on Thursday the first of September, by a Company of Horsmen that went to search his house, being suspected to have store of Armes and Ammunition, attested by George Hubbard, dwelling at Downham where the Bishops Pallace is, and now evidently ap∣peares by his apprehension. ALSO THE TRUE PROCEEDINGS AT PORTSMOVTH. OR, The humble desires of Colonell Goring to the Forces of the Parliament: Wherein is declared, that he will deliver up the Town to them, provided they will grant him his life. Printed for W. B. Septemb. 2. 1642.
JOYFULL NEWES FROM THE ISLE OF ELY: Declaring how a Troupe of Horse is gone into Cambridge shire to search the Papists Houses, among which D. Wren Bishop of Ely is like to suffer, being suspected to have store of Ammunition. ON Munday the nine and twentieth of August a Troupe of well-affected Horsemen met together in Cumbridge-Skire neere Cherrie-Hinton, with an intent to search all the Papists house thereabouts, in which search they found but small store of armes and ammunition, at which they not a little wondered: but one among the rest told them, they had mist one of the greatest Papists, of a little one, in the whole King∣dome: and being asked who it was, he told them it was D. Wren Bishop of Ely; and that it was not improbable that the Papists had made his house their Magazine, he being
the chiefe authour of these troubles in this Kingdome. This being mentioned, they all agreed furnish themselves accordingly, with pow∣der and shot, and forthwith to march thi∣ther, purposing to search out all his treache∣ry, witall promising to clip his wings, if they could catch him. Moreover, it is reported by the Attester of thi Relation, that the Bishop doth counenace all outrags whatsoever, nay murder it selfe; for his Steward lately kld a poore man for demanding money for his labour, who after many reproachfull and menacing words, had his braines beatn out, and the Steward now lives under the Bishops protection. Likewise the said Bishop hath entertai∣ned all the deboist Cavaliers that inhabited in the Colledge and townes▪ being fittest for his purpose. The Island of it selfe is very strong; but the chiefe Officers thereof are for the most part of the Bishops faction, his power ha∣ving beene formerly so great and uncon∣trouleable in the Island: But there is great hope that they will stand firme to the Par∣liament: and the rather, because they hope that the Parliament will give them their
Fennes againe, and curbe the undertakers, the countrey being almost undone for want of them. The Isle is furnished with store of good horses, and able men, but in their discipline vey rude, for want of expert Commanders. This is the truth, Attested by George Hubbard, inhabitant of Downham in the Isle of Ely. The truth and certainty of this attestation is ow most evident: for now after this re∣lation of the Horsemen that were sent to search the Prelates house, he was brought up to London, togeher with great store of money, which the Priest had gathered toge∣ther to further the designes of the male-con∣tent and ill-affected Clergie, as is probably coniectured. The iust summe of his trea∣sure is not yet certainly known. Ex aliis alia quaeras, if thou thy selfe hast better.
THE TRUE PROCEEDINGS AT PORTSMOVTH. OR, The humble desires of Colonell Goring to the Forces of the Parliament. Wherein is declared that he will deliver up the town to them, provided they will grant him his life. THe Parliaments Forces by the assistance of the trained bands in Hampshire having cooped up Colonell Goring in the towne, and seized upon all his out-works, daily plying him with their Ord∣nance, the towne being divided, and keep∣ing garrison one upon the other, insomuch that Colonell Goring finding small hope of security in the towne, and seeing His Maie∣sties expected aid intercepted, hath thought
it most requisite to make the best of a hard bargaine and having lost all but the last stke, well to husband it, lest in losing that he bcome a bankerupt. Wherefore he hath humbly presented his desire to the Commanders of the Parlia∣ments Forces, wherein are contained these particulars. That although it were in his own power to keep the towne against them, yet so farre he did pitie the distressed estate of the town, that to prevent the effusion of blood he was willing to resigne up the towne, upon this condition, that upon the delivery of the said towne, his life might be secured, and have free recourse to his Maiesty. But they knowing that this request made by the Colonell was more for his own ends, then any intention of good service to the State, still proceed in making of works, the Pioners being very active in their designes. The souldiers likewise are very forward, and mke severall assaults, thinking to draw them out of the towne: but they play least in sight, only playing with their Ordnance; but, the besiegers being intrencht, they do little hurt, onely now and then a bullet lights in the trenches. The Cavaliers made an attempt to sal∣ley out of the towne upon some forces of
ours came with provision, but being resi∣sted, they were forced to flie, some of the takig the river, were forcd to swim for it, being glad they could so escape away. ertaine letters were taken which were opened, wherein there was a discovery of the intention of the Cavaliers to give an alarme by night from Chichester side, by that meanes to draw our Forces from before Portsmouth, thinking by that meanes to give the Colonel and his souldiers opportunity to escap but their proiect being discovered, the Co∣lonell remaines our fast-friend, without a∣ny hope of deliverance. FINIS.
