M2296 E333_9 99872395 159647
A LETTER TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Concerning the SVRRENDER OF Ruthin-Castle To Colonel Thomas Mitton, Ma∣jor General of NORTH-WALES. Together with THE ARTICLES Concerning the same. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter with the Articles be forthwith Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. April 14. 1646.
To the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Honorable Sir, THe Reducing of this Castle of Ruthin hath cost me more time and Ammuniti∣on, then I expected when I first laid Siege to it: At last having a Mine almost in a readinesse to spring, and Batteries prepared for a Demi-Ganon and a Cul∣verin to play upon it; It was this day agreed to be Sur∣rendred upon the Conditions in the inclosed Articles, which I was willing to accept, having perfect Informa∣tion by some that escaped out of the Castle, that there was in it Provision sufficient for two moneths longer; which now I finde to be true: And if I should have forced it, I must have hazarded many men, and made the place unserviceable, which is of very great use to the Reducement of this Country, it being the most con∣venient place for a Garrison in all North Wales, as things now stands with us. Yesterday before the break of day, a party of the Enemy out of Denbigh Castle, being about sixscore, and thirty mounted fire-locks, fell upon Captain Richard Price his Quarters, within two miles of this Town; but he was vigilant, and his Scouts per∣formed their duty so well, that they were drawn into the
field before they came upon them, which gave him oppertunity to avoid them, and convey the Alarum to this Town; And thereupon Colonel Carter with a standing Horse-guard, which we are fain to keep in the field constantly to secure our Out quarters; and Captain Simkies with my own Troop, which was then upon the Guard in this Town, drew out and fell between them and Denbigh, and within half a mile of their Garrison met with them, and charged them so gallantly, that they broke in upon them, killed seven of them (as is said) upon the place; and in the pursuit, took four Captains, one Lieutenant, two Cornets, divers Troopers, and about fourty Horse, with the losse of one man of our side. The Siege at Hoult hath of late been of great difficulty and hazard to those few men I have there: For the draw∣ing off of the Cheshire Fire-locks from that Service, without any privity, gave the Enemy an advantage to burn the Guard the Firelocks kept (which cost the Coun∣trey much to fortifie) and above fourty dwelling Houses more in the Town, and exposed my men (who lay in open Quarters, and were fewer in number then the Ene∣my within were) to their power, which necessitated my men to be upon continual duty. Upon the first of April the Enemy sallied out and fell upon Major Sadlers Quar∣ters, resolving to put all my men in that House to the Sword, which they had been like to effect, had not a Guard which was placed in a Mount, erected by us three dayes before relieved them: In this storm I lost five men, and fourteen wounded; of the Enemy there were killed their Commander Captain Cottingham a Papist, a Lieutenant, and two more, and many wound∣ed: There hath been never a day since, but they sallied out constantly twice or thrice a day, and as constantly
beaten in. This service, and the furnishing of such Gar∣risons which are reduced, occasions the expence of very much Powder and Match; and therefore, I humbly de∣sire, that the Honorable House will be pleased to grant, that I may have a hundred Barrels of Powder, and four or five hundred Firelocks sent me, and that some course may be prescribed to convey it down speedily; the car∣riage and Convoy of the last Powder I had, cost above half as much as the Powder was worth. And further, that they will be pleased to appoint a Governor for this Castle, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Mason, is a very faithful active and godly Gentleman, and the most know∣ing man in his profession that we have in these parts, having been a Souldier above twenty yeers, and lost his command in Ireland, because he refused to bear Arms against the Parliament: And if this place were worthy of him, I should make bold to recommend him to their consideration. This neverthelesse, I leave to their Wis∣doms to determine, and rest Your very humble Servant, THO. MITTON. Ruthin the 8 of April. 1646.
Articles agreed and concluded betwixt Robert Fogge, Chaplein to Colonel Thomas Mitton, Major General of Northwales, and Captain Edward Thelwall, Commissioners on the be∣half of the said Major General on the one party, and Lieutenant John Rey∣nolds, Deputy Governour of the Ca∣stle of Ruthin on the other party. 1. IT is agreed and concluded by the parties a∣bove mentioned, That the Castle of Ruthin shall be Surrendred unto General Mitton afore∣said, or his Assigns on Monday next by ten of the clock in the Forenoon, without any dis∣mantling, demolishing, or defacing the same, or any Works now made in or about the same. 2. That all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammuni∣tion, Provision, and Goods now in the Castle
be left safe, and no way harmed (saving the par∣ticulars hereafter mentioned). 3. That the said Deputy Governour shall march away quietly, and without molestation, with his Sword and one case of Pistols, and six Gentlemen with him, and each of them his Sword. 4. That the rest of the Souldiers and others (the Irish onely excepted) who are barred by the Ordinance of Parliament, to passe to their respective Habitations, or to Conway with a safe Conduct (they behaving themselves civilly). 5. That the said Deputy Governour take onely with him two Trunks, containing onely therein his wearing Apparel, and some few Clothes and Linnens of his Sisters; And that a Cart be provided for the carriage there∣of. 6. That in the mean time there be a Cessa∣tion of Arms on both sides, and no advantage taken by admitting any strength of men or Am∣munition into the said Castle (other then the Hostages agreed upon by both parties;) And for the firm confirmation of the Premises, the
parties to these presents have interchangably set to their Hands this Eighth day of April, Anno Domini, 1646. Robert Fogge, Edward Thelwal. I do consent to what my Commissioners have agreed unto, Tho: Mytton. I also agree to the Articles above written, John Reynolds. FINIS.
