M1907 E473_16 99864671 162437
A MESSAGE SENT FROM THE OFFICERS & SOULDIERS IN THE ARMY, TO THE Kings Majesty in the Isle of Wyght, on Wednesday Novemb. 22. 1648. Communicating their last and finall Resolutions, touching their disposall of his Royall Person. And their Remonstrance and Proposalls, for the executing of speedy Justice, upon King, Lords, and Com∣mons, who have acted contrary to the trust reposed in them by the People. With the Charge of the Army thereupon, and their Articles of High Treason. BY the appointment of his Excellency, the Lord Generall, and the generall Councell of Officers. Signed, John Rushworth Secr. London, Printed for R. Williamson, and are to be sold in St. Danstons Church-yard, near Temple-Barre, 1648.
The Armies Message and Remonstrance. VVHereas we have endeavoured to Remonstrate the danger and evill of the way you are in, and cleared the way unto what we have to propose, we shall with the same plainnesse and faithful∣nesse, give you our apprehensions of the remedies; for which pur∣pose upon all the reasons and considerations aforegoing, we pro∣ceed to offer, as followeth. First, we conceive and hope, that from what hath before been said, you may find abundant cause to forbear any further procee∣ding in this evill and most dangerous Treaty, and to return to your former grounds in the Votes of Non-addresses, and thereupon proceed to the setling and securing of the Kingdom without and against the King, upon such foundations as hereafter are tendred; but if notwithstanding all the evills and dangers remonstrated to lie even in the Treaty it self, you will ye proceed in such an evill way, we shall at least desire that you make sure to avoid that main venome and mischief attending it. viz. The Kings restitution with impunity, &c. and that imperfect bargaining for partiall justice against inferiour offenders; And for the avoidance of these, we propound. 1. That you would reject those demands of the King, sent to you on his and his Parties behalf, and (especially in relation to that concerning his restitution or return to London with freedom, &c.) that it may be expresly declared and provided by you, that, notwithstanding any thing concluded, or to be concluded in this Treaty, the Person of the King may, and shall be proceeded a∣gainst in a way of justice, for the blood spilt, and the other evills
and mischiefs done by him, or by his Commission, Command or Procurement, and in order thereto shall be kept in safe custody as formerly. 2. That for other Delinquents you would lay a side that parti∣cular bargaining Proposition, which as we understand, the King hath refused in the termes you offered, and whereby all your ju∣stice and mercy too would be rendred, to be dependant upon par∣ticular contract, with, and grant from the King; and not upon the judiciall power of the Kingdom in Parliament; We therefore desire. 1. That that capitall and grand Authour of our troubles, the Person of the King, by whose Commissions, Commands, or pro∣curement, and in whose behalf, and for whose interest only, (of will and power) all our Warres and troubles have been, (with all the miseries attending them,) may be speedily brought to justice, for the treason, blood and mischief, he is therein guilty of. 2. That a timely and peremptory day may be set for the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York, to come in and render them∣selves, by which time (if they do not) that then they may be im∣mediatly declared incapable of any Government, or trust in this Kingdom, or the Dominions thereunto belonging, or of any kind of Right within the same, and thence to stand exiled for ever, as enemies and traytors, to dye without mercy, if ever after found and taken therein;) or if by the time limited, they or either of them do render themselves, that then the Prince for his Capitall Delin∣quency (being in appearance next unto his Fathers,) may either be proceeded against in justice, or remitted, according as upon his appearance he shall give satisfaction or not; concerning his being drawn into the rebellious engagements, he has appeared to head; and the Dake, as he shall give satisfaction, or not concerning his carriage in and since his going out of the Kingdom (being without leave) and in opposition or contempt of the Parliament and to the prejudice of the publike peace,) may accordingly be considered as to future trust, or not; But (however) that the Estate and Revenue of the Crown may be sequestred, and all the matter of costly pomp or state suspended for a good number of years, while the desola ion and spoyles of the poor people made, by and in behalf
of that Family, and for that vain interest (the state and greatnesse thereof) may be in good measure repaired, or recovered; And that the Revenue (saving necessary allowances for the Childrens main∣tenance, and to old Servants and creditors of the Crown, not De∣linquents) and also the 100000 l. per annum, Voted to the Crown in Liew of the Court of Wards, may for those years be disposed towards publike charges, debts and dammages for the easing and lessoning of the peoples Contributions towards the same; so as the Estates neither of the friends to publike interest, nor alone of the inferiour Enemies thereto, may bear wholly the burthen of that losse and charge, which by and for that Family, the Kingdom or the good people thereof have bin or (for future security) shall be put unto. 3. That for further satisfaction to publike justice, Capitall punishment may be speedily executed upon a competent number of his chief instruments also, both in the former and latter War, and (for that purpose) that some such, of both sorts, may be pitcht upon to be made examples of justice in that kind, as are re∣ally in your hands or reach, so as their exception from pardon, may not be a mockery of Justice in the face of God and men. 4. That the satisfaction of Arrears to the Souldiery. with o∣ther publike debts. and the competent reparation of publike Da∣mages, (especially and primarily of such as voluntarily engaged for, and have constantly adhered to the common Cause, and suf∣fered for the same) may be put into some orderly and equall, or proportionable way, &c. Now (after publike justice, had therewith the present quieting of the Kingdom thus far provided for) we proceed in order, to the generall satisfaction, and setling of the Kingdom, as fol∣loweth. 1. That you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own power, by which time that great and supream trust re∣posed in you, shall be returned into the hands of the people, from, and for whom you received it; that so you may give them satis∣faction and assurance, that what you have contended for, against the King (for which they have been put to so much trouble, cost, and losse of blood) hath been only for their Liberties and com∣mon Interest, and not for your own personall Interest, or power.
2. That (with a period to this Parliament, to be assigned as short as may be, with safety to the Kingdom, and publike interest thereof) there may be a sound settlement of the peace, and future Government of the Kingdom, upon grounds of common Right, Freedom, and safety, to the effect here following. 1. That from the end of this, there may be a certain successi∣on of future Parliaments (Annuall, or Bienniall) with se∣cure provision. 1. For the certainty of their meeting, sitting, and ending. 2. For the equall distribution of Elections thereunto, to render the House of Commons, as near as may be, an equall Representa∣tive of the whole people electing. 3. For the certainty of the peoples meeting (according to such Distributions) to elect, and for their full freedom in elections, pro∣vided, That none who have ingaged, or shall engage in War, a∣gainst the right of Parliament, and interest of the Kingdom there∣in, or have adhered to the enemies thereof, may be capable of e∣lecting, or being elected (at least during a competent number of years) nor any other, who shall oppose, or not joyn in agreement to this settlement. 4. For future clearing and ascertaining the power of the said Representatives; in order to which, That it be declared, That as to the whole interest of the people of England) such Representa∣tives have, and shall have the supream power and trust, as to the making of Lawes, Constitutions, and Offices, for the ordering, pre∣servation, and Government of the whole; and as to the altering, and repealing, or abolishing of the same, the making of War, or peace; and as to the highest and finall Judgement, in all civill things, without further appeal to any created standing power, and that all the people of this Nation, and all Officers of Justice, and Ministers of State (as such) shall, in all such things be accounta∣ble and subject thereunto, and bound and concluded thereby, pro∣vided, That, 1. They may not censure, or question any man after the end of this Parliament, for any thing said or done in reference to the late Wars, or publique differences, saving in execution of such determinations of this Parliament, as shall be left in force at the
ending thereof in relation to such as have served the King against the Parliament. 2. They may not render up, or give, or take away any the foundations of common Right, Liberty or Safety contained in this settlement and agreement. But that the power of these two things (last mentioned) shall be alwayes understood to be reser∣ved from, and not entrusted to the said Representatives. 5. For liberty of entring dessents in the said Representatives. That, in case of corruption, or abuse in these matters of highest trust, the People may be in capacity to know who are free therof, and who guilty, to the  only they may avoid the futher trust∣ing of such, but without further penalty to any for their free judgments there. 2. That no King be hereafter admitted, but upon the election of, and as upon trust from the People, by such their Representa∣tives, nor without first disclaming and disavowing all pretence to a negative voyce, against the determinations of the said Represen∣tatives, or Commons in Parliament; and that to be done in some certain form, more clear then heretofore in the Coronation Oath. These matters of generall settlement (viz. That concerning a period to this Parliament, and the other particulars thence fol∣lowing heitherto) we propound, to be declared and provided by this Parl. or by the authority of the Commons therein, and to be further established by a generall Contract, or Agreement of the people, with their subscriptions thereunto, and that (withall) it may be provided, That none may be capable of any benefit by the Agreement, who shall not consent and subscribe thereunto; nor any King to be admitted to the Crown, or other person to any Office, or place of publike trust, without expresse accord, and sub∣scription to the same. We have thus plainly, and faithfully propounded our appre∣hensions, how the evill and danger of the present Treaty may in good measure be avoyded, and our further conceptions of a way, wherein, hopefully through the blessing of God (if most men be not given up, some to unjust domination, or particular Interest, the rest to servitude) the Kingdom may be quieted, future disturban∣ces prevented, the common Rights and Liberties provided for,
and the Peace and Government of the Kingdome setled, to a just publick Interest; and this wee have set forth in such hands and particulars, which (if you'l but set aside, for the time, lesse importaint matters) may most of them be brought to effect, and the rest assured, and put into a good way of effect, within a few Moneths, so as you might then ease the Kingdome from the burthen of the greatest part of that force, which otherwise (in case of Accommodation with the King) you will be necessitated, for a much longer time (probable for many yeares) to keep on, upon the publick charge, unlesse, upon the Ac∣commodation you would give up all to the Kings power again, ad expose those that have engaged against him, as sacrifices to his and the Cavaliers Reveng: And (for our parts) let but that way of justice be effectually prosecuted and the settlement of publick Interest (upon which foun∣dations as are afore propounded) be assured to us and the Kingdome, and put into a course of effect (and we shall not only imbrace with chearfullnesse, but shall with ea∣gernsse desire discharge from our present service, and shall be most ready to disband all, or part, as shall be though sit, the Arrears of the souldiers being satisfied. Novemb. 22. 1648. THere is a generall Report, that the Army is ingaged to expe∣dite a Message to his Message, to advertise him of their pro∣ceedings, and Overtures, for the executing of Justice, and bring of all Delinquents to a speedy Tryall; to the end, that the enemies of peace, may be all remanded in, and the differences of this san∣guishing Kingdom speedily united and composed. FINIS.
