R2001 E1237_3 99869241 121616
KEIPOMANTIA: OR, THE ART OF DIVINING BY The LINES and SIGNATURES Engraven in the HAND of MAN, By the HAND of NATƲRE, Theorically, Practically. Wherein you have the Secret Concordance, and Harmony betwixt It, and Astrology, made evident in 19. GENITURES. Together with A Learned Philosophicall Discourse of the Soule of the World, and the Ʋniversall Spirit thereof. A Matchlesse Piece. Written originally in Latine by Io: Rothmanne, D. in Phisique, and now Faithfully Englished, By GEO: WHARTON Esq. Manus membrum Hominis loquacissimum. LONDON, Printed by J. G. For NATHANIEL BROOKE, at the Angell in Corne-Hill, 1652.
TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND Universally LEARNED (My much Honoured Friend) ELIAL ASHMOLE Esquire. WORTHY SIR, WEre it not that in Common Civility. I am Bound upon this Occasion, as to acknowledge my Infinite Obligations to you (that being the best Quality of a Bad Debtor, and even All a Chrsti∣an Creditor should expect, where the Meanes of a juster Requitall is wanting,) so to give you an Account of the present Worke, unto which you First incited Me: Yet (Sir) the Rarity of the Subject, and the Gypsy∣like Esteeme it hath amongst the vulgar: would have necessarily enforced Me, to shelter in under the Wings of none but an Absolute Mercurialist. That you are no lesse, The Ingenious Workes you
have already Publish'd; The Succinct and Learned An∣notations you have made upon some Part of those, (to omit what I know you have in Designe;) your Exqui∣site knowledge in Arithmetique, Geometry, Astrolo∣gy, Naturall Magique, and Physick: and in those other Inferiour Objects of your Delight, viz. Limming, En∣graving, Painting, and Musique, may and doe abun∣dantly manifest: I shall not, I need not Expatiate: (To instance the particular knowledge you have in Chiro∣mancy, were but Actum agere, in that Astrology (be∣fore Mentioned) comprehends the same, as here it is Ap∣ply'd: and your selfe Them both.) Nor could I glory at All in the Name of a Greater Personage, to Patronize this Piece: it is not the Blustring Noise of an Empty Title, or the Fraile Sup∣port of a Signall Birth, Only, that can be a Fit Cham∣pion, for this or the like Mysterious Sciences: Learn∣ing is best Fortress'd of those, by whom she is most un∣derstood: I confesse her Admirers may wish her Happinesse; yet they commonly faile her in Extre∣mity. And herein I follow the Example of mine Authour, who made choise of the best Deserving in his Countrey, unto whom he Ddicated this Worke in the Originall: that is, unto such as were sober and skilfull: Not to Men that were Mighty and Ignorant, or Learned and Malitious. Nor yet have these any just cause to complaine, un∣lesse for the want of Ingenuity: whereby they are Doom'd to an Absolute Depravation of that, whereby Wise Men daily Ascend, even to the Presence of God and his Angells; I meane the Knowledge of his Works:
For it is not sufficient we heare a story of God in the Scriptures, unlesse also we read or see him in the large Volume of his Creatures: neither doe we Read Him by a Bare Gazing upon the outward Forme thereof, but by a narrow Enquiry and search made into their hidden Nature, and Disposition: For, In the Beginning (saith my Author) God adorned All things Created, with Signatures, that so the Minde of an Ingenious Man might delight it selfe by a Diligent searching into the Nature and Disposition thereof, and thence bold∣ly acknowledging the wonderfull Workes of God, and converting them to a Right use, be cheerfully constrained to the Love of God himselfe, and to worship him with all his heart, for his Infinite Wis∣dome and Goodnesse. Let us therefore Behold the Heaven, the Starres, and Celestiall Signes, the Animalls, Plants, Roots, Stones, Metalls, &c. in and upon the Earth; and con∣sider how wonderfully their various Signatures every where present themselves unto us, and by a Tacite Lan∣guage proffer us their Nature and Disposition! How exceedingly the Seven wandering-Starres (vulgarly called Planets) doe Differ, not onely in Magnitude and Motion, but also in the Brightnesse, and Beauty of their Light! How variable an Influence is in each; what a Lively, Lasting Spirit, diversly disposing, Moving, Animating, Producing, Signing, and Sustaining these Inferiours, according to their different Position in the Heavens, and the sundry Complications and Mixtures of Beames accurring from other Starres! The Philosophers of old have acknowledg'd, (and we shall willingly the same) Et infmis Suprema, & in
Supremis infima: There are in Heaven Earthly things, in respect of the Causes, and by a Celestiall man∣ner, and Celestiall things in Earthly, but by a Ter∣restiall manner: whence indeed it is, That the Sun, the Moone and other Starres are considered in the Earth, but that in regard of a Terrene Quality; so also Plants, Stones, Metalls, &c. in the Heavens, but this in respect of a Heavenly Nature, indued with Life-In∣tellectuall. And this was the Reason why Heaven it selfe was Depainted with sundry Images by the An∣cient and Holy Fathers: and that he who had through his Ingenuity▪ attained these Holy Mysteries of the World, was by the Hebrewes truly named Rabbi, by the Latines, Magister; and by almost all other Nati∣ons, Magus: Neverthelesse this Name is now so much suspected and hated, that some had rather for-goe the Gospell it selfe, then receive it againe into Favour: so willfully Obstinate, Blind, and Stupid are the Masters this Age hath produced. But let us Instance a few Examples, and First of the Celestiall Bodies: you know that the Image of the Ser∣pent, hath the Nature of a Serpent; that is, it cau∣seth Death by Poyson, so oft as the Lord of the Ge∣niture, or the Moone is therewith unhappily Posited at the Birth: The like of the Scorpion; For even the same Images drive away and kill Serpents and Scor∣pions, Spiders and Flyes, they expell Poyson and the Plague, being deduced from Heaven upon the Ter∣restriall Chaos, at an observed time: Leo makes Men Bold; Virgo, Docile; Taurus, Robust; Aquila pro∣cures Honours; Lyra instills the love of Musique, and the study of Poesy: Sagittary addicteth to Hunting;
and much more of that Nature, marked with their proper Signatures. Next, let us contemplate the Animalls of the Earth, how every one Beareth its owne Nature: and how wee know the same in most of them by their Effigies, [viz. by their Countenance] Voyce, Gesture, Habit. often by their Colour. The Horse by his Gesture be∣wrayes his Pride: The Asse his Slownesse: The Lyon (by the Face and Gesture) his Courage: The Beare his Fircenesse; The Cock his Cheerfulnesse: The like are every where obvious in other Creatures, unto any but such as regard the knowledge of nothing. Now by observing the outward Formes of Beasts, ariseth Phisiognomy in Man: For looke what Beasts a Man resembles most, either in Face, or Proportion, hee is truly said to possesse the Disposition and Nature thereof. If now we descend to Plants, and Roots, wee shall there enter a Theatre of Signatures worthy our Con∣templation: For Example: Solatrum vesicatorium (barbarously termed Alkakenge) shutts up its Huskes so soone as the vessells thereof are Filled with Juice, and replenished with little Stony-Graines, as if Intima∣ting unto us by a Tacite Language, That therein resides a vertue of Purging the Bladder, and of Diminishing the Gravell and Stone therein. Chelidonia, not onely Blushes with a certaine Bloody Moisture, and therewith Staines the Hands of him that Touches it, but in the Roote it also shewes a Cavity much like the Ventricles in the Heart of Man: whereby is intimated that its vertue is to Purge the Blood to quicken the vitall Spirit, and to free
the Heart from the injuries of Poyson. Cynosbatus, as also Mespylus, fill the Belly with Little Stones, that breake in Pieces the Stone in the Bladder. Carduus offends the Fingers of those that touch it by Prickles, yet such is the secret vertue thereof, that it consumes and Expells all Pricklings and Stingings in the Body of Man. The Numulariae resembles in the Leaves thereof the Epiglossis, and heales the Inflamation of the Throat. Nux Juglans and Moscata represent in the Faces thereof, the Composure of the Braine and Head, and are therefore comfortable to both. Orchis in the Roote thereof, resembles the Testicles, and therefore is Venus excited by it. The Hypericon, and Persicaria are notoriously knowne to operate according to their proper Signa∣tures. Many Hundreds more might be Instanc'd of Flow∣ers, Seeds, Leaves, and Roots. The Signatures are most apparent in such Herbes as are least indued with Odour: Those that are Sweeter, Evidence their Ver∣tues unto us (notwithstanding we were Blind) by their Smell. So also in the Leaves of Trees, in Rinds and Barkes, in Wood and Roots, we finde such Signatures, as doe manifest the hidden vertues thereof, and thereby learne to apply them to Humane use, or the Healing of Diseases. The like we see in Stones and Me∣talls. If this then be so cleare in the Starres and Signes of Heaven, if so in Animalls, Plants, Roots, Stones, and
Metalls: who but a Mad-Man, or Foole dare say, That the like Signes in the Hand of Man▪ are Idle and Vaine? Man is he for whom all things were made, and wherein all things of the Greater world are comprehen∣ded, although with a Face more Occult. Man onely Rejoyceth in this Honour [that he hath a Resemblance, Operation and Conservation with all things in the World:] He symbolizeth (as I may say) with the Matter in the Proper Subject, with the Elements in their Foure-fold Composure of Body: with the Plants in the Vegetative vertue: with the other Ani∣malls in the sensitive: with the Heavens in the Syde∣reall Spirit, that is, in the Motion and Influence of the Superiour Bodies upon these Inferiour: with the Angells in the Intellect, Wisdome, and Speech: with God himselfe in the Containing Power of all things. And therefore we cannot imagine the Signes so vari∣ously Pourtray'd in the Hand of Man are in Vaine: but that they are there placed by Nature, with intent to make knowne unto us the Inscrutable Workes of GOD, if Job (Chapter 37.) may be Cre∣dited. That the Explanation of these Signes is named Chi∣romancy, I need not acquaint you: Nor what Ca∣nons the Ancient and Moderne Philosophers have written concerning the same: Onely this I shall tell you, My Author hath not onely (in this small Tract) Reduced All to a Concise and Methodicall Discourse, and Added divers others of his owne Observations: But also Illustrated the Practique Part thereof with sundry Notable Examples, whereby he hath Mani∣fested an Astrologicall Consent and Harmony be∣twixt
the Hands and Genitures of all Men. A worke not attempted by any before him. And whereas the Masters in this Science have not Assigned  Tuber∣cula, or Mounts of the Hand to the Planets, without some Successive Discrepancy: Nor although all of them deliver it for a Generall Rule [That by how much every one hath a Planet more Dignifyed at the Houre of his Birth, by so much more Evident the Characters and Signes will appeare upon the Regi∣on appropriated to the same Planet,] yet hath not this been approved untill by this Author, who hath hereby abolished all former Doubts, and clearly demon∣strated the Truth of that Doctrine. Nor hath He thereby (in my Judgement) restor'd the Art of Chiromancy to more certainty, then he hath confirmed the Grounds and Credit of Astrology, and Das'd in Pieces the Bug-beare Arguments of all the Enemies of either: For what more Convincing to the Juditious, then if (by Inspection made into the Hand of any Man) I truly pronounce this or that Planet Essentially Dignified or Angular in his Geniture, or in such or such a Position with other Planets or Starres: another Infortunate Afflicted, or Dejected? Or if (on the Contrary) by looking first into the Geniture, and considering therein the severall Positures of the Planets, and their Configurations one to another, and with other Starres; I tell him (and that Distinctly and Truly) the Lines and Signatures Engraven in his Hand: what (I say) is or can be more satisfaction then this to Rationall Men, as touching the Power and In∣fluence of the Planets and Starres upon these Inferi∣ours, and consequently of the Lawfull use, and verity
of the Sciences of Astrology, and Chyromancy, be∣twixt whom there is such a secret Coherence and Har∣mony? And this I dare undertake to performe for the Honour of these Sciences, to the shame of all Malitious and Pestilent Detractors. Indeed (I confesse) we cannot by Chyromancy so ex∣actly determine the time of any Accident, as by Astro∣logic, where the Arch of Direction may be Resolv'd into the most Scrupulous Parts of Daies: I suppose Chiromancy was not so much Ordained by Providence for the use of such whose Purer sights can penetrate the Celestiall Spheres, and there Exactly reade their owne, or others Fate, in those Golden Letters of the Starres: But rather for the Benefit of such that be of a Grosser Genius, and whose Dimmer Eyes cannot Discerne the Decrees of Nature at so Great a Distance. Yet are not these Signatures wanting in any Man (more, or lesse) lest he should prove wanting to himselfe in th' Accom∣plishing of a Higher Scrutiny. As touching the Version it selfe, I have done it with all Integrity: and if in some places I may seeme to Differ from the Originall, it is but where I find the Au∣thor abounding more with Elegance, then Variety of Matter, and even forsaking the Tearmes of Art, rather then he will Misse of an Eloquent Expression: for per∣haps I have herein sometimes Contracted him, yet still retained His Genuine Sense. In other Places I have onely Corrected the Errours of the Presse, the which indeed were many more, then the Author's Errata spe∣cified, and very Grosse ones besides: and therein have done no more, then I desire others may doe for Me. For any thing else I know not that I have Exceeded the
Lawes of Translation, unlesse it be in retaining the Tearmes of Art, and that I did purposely, lest in Abo∣lishing them, I should therewith abolish the Art also: Neverthelesse in the First Seven Pages I have given the English thereof, and that (I hope) is suffici∣ent. The End proposed, is, That hereby all Persons, who are not acquainted with the Latine, might in Plaine English Reade and understand their owne Destiny: and (if Possible) Avert (at least wise Mitigate) the Mischiefs Threatned them: Or with comfort attend, and (by Humane Prudence) Cherish and Augment the Good portended: whereby they may Greatly be Enabled to Give God thankes for his Infinite Mercy, and Goodnesse: At least wise Glorifie him in the Midst of their greatest Afflictions. And this is the first Tract (of this Nature) that ever appeared in the English Tongue: and I may confident∣ly say in any Language whatsoever, (the Latine excep∣ted;) wherein the Author writ no lesse Learnedly, then Elegantly: And I heartily wish (and desire, Sir, you will joyne with me in it) That some one or other of our ablest Astrologers, (who have better Encouragements then my selfe,) would pursue this Designe of the Au∣thors, it being (in my Opinion) the best and onely way of bringing this Science the nearest to Perfecti∣on. Sir, I have now but a little to say, and that is, First, to give you Thankes for all the variety of Favours you have conferred upon Mee ever since the First Houre of our (to Me) Happy Acquaintance: Next to as∣sure you (in a short time) Ptolomy himselfe, in the Eng∣lish
Tongue, which so long hath beene expected from Me, yet still Retarded by Reason of the many Discou∣ragements and Crosse-Grain'd Events I have Labou∣red under for some yeares past, begging your kind Acceptance of this in the Interim: Then to crave your Pardon for this Prolixity: And Finally, the Conti∣nuance of your wonted Affection, and Opinion of Him, who unfeignedly am Feb. 18. 1651/2. Sir, Yours in the utmost of all True Love, and Friendship, GEO: VVHARTON.
M Manilius in his Preface to Aug. Caesar. VVHen every Species of the glittering Sphere (The Stars returning) Ranked did appeare In their own Seates: and by the Fates Decree, Each had restor'd it's Formall-Potency; Experience framed Art, by various use, Example guiding where it was Abstruse: And (though at a vast Distance) plainly saw The Starres All-ruling, by a Tacite Law: The whole World Mov'd by Reason-Alternate, And how, by SIGNES, to Judge the Turns of Fate.
Iobi 37. 7. Qui in manu omnium hominum signa osu∣it, vt cognoscerent opera ejus singuli.
A Short and Plaine Rule of CHIROMANCY. CHIROMANCY is a Rule whereby to know the Signes in the Hand of Man, and a Science of Jud∣ging Rightly concerning them. There are Two Primary Parts of Chiromancy, 1. Theoricall, and 2. Practicall. 1. The Theoricall is that which considereth the Parts of the Hand, as the  [i.e. the Argument, matter, or Subject] of the Art. The Parts of the Hand [that is, of the Hand and Palme thereof Extended and opened,] are. 1. The Vola, or Inner-Part of the Hand, wherein the Lines, the Turbercula or Riseing parts, the Feriens or Smiting-part, the Ca∣vea or hollow, and the Mensa or Table there∣of, are, (by a cleare and certaine Method) known and considered. 2. The Five Fingers; viz. The Pollex, or
Thumbe, the Index or Fore-finger, the Medius or Midle-finger, the Annularis or Ring-finger, and the Auricularis or Litle-finger. 1. LINES. THE Incisures, or Lines, are engraven by God and Nature, within the Spaces and Distinctions of the Inner-part of the Hand: And of these, some are Principall, others Lesse-Prin∣cipall. The Principall Lines. 1.  Cardiaca [that is, the Line of, or belonging to the Heart] which includeth and imbraceth the Mount of the Thumbe. It is also called, The Line of Life. 2. Epatica, The Liver-Line, or the Naturall-Meane, which runnes through the Midle of the Hand, arising from the same place with the Cardiaca at the Roote of the Fore-finger. 3. Cephalica, or the Line of the Head and Braine, which ariseth below from the Cardiaca, and (being drawn thence to the Epatica) makes a Triangular Figure. 4. Thoralis, the Table-Line, or the Line of Fortune, which takes its originall under the Mount, or Roote of the Litle-Finger, and extends it selfe towards the Fore-Finger. 5. Restricta, or the Dragon's Tayle, which seperates and distinguishes the Hand from the Arme, either by a Simple or
Double Transcursion. This Line determineth the , or Subject of the Art. It is likewise called the Discriminall Line. The lesse Principall Lines, Are not in every ones Hand, or when they be, not very clearely to be seene. And of these there are Five in Number. 1. Via Solis, or the Sunn's way, which is a Right Line running downewards from the Tu∣berculum (or Rising Part) of the Ring-Finger, into the Cavitie of the Hand. 2. Via Lactea, or the Milkie-way, running upward, from the Restricta, through the Feri∣ens. 3. Saturnia, or the Line of Saturne thence as∣cending through the Midle of the Vola, to the Tuberculum of the Midle-Finger: which Line, if it be cut and parted, is called Via Combusta, or the Burnt way. 4. Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus, which is the Figure of a Hemicycle, drawne from the space betwixt the Fore-finger and Middle-finger to the space betwixt the Ring-finger and Litle-finger. 5. Linea Martis, the Line of Mars, or the Vitall Sister, which is Parallel to the Line of Life, in the Turberculum of the Thumbe.
2. TUBERCULA. THe Tubercula, are, the more Eminent Muscles under the Fingers. 1. of Venus. In the root of the Thumbe. 2. Jupiter. Fore-finger. 3. Saturne. Midle-finger. 4. Sun. Ring-finger. 5. Mercury. Litle-finger. 3. FERIENS. THE Feriens (or Smiteing part) taking its name à Feriendo, or Percutiendo, is, that part of the Hand which we turne about in give∣ing or receiveing of things: And this is the Mount comprehended betwixt the Menfall and Discriminall Lines, under the Tuberculum of the Litle-finger, the which is attributed to the Moone. 4. CAVEA. THE Cavea, is, the Hollow place in the Midle of the Palme, wherein the Three Principle-Lines, Cardiaca, Epatica, and Cephalica make the Triangle. And this is given to Mars.
5. MENSA. THE Mensa, is, the Intervall, or Space, be∣twixt the Thorall and Epatica, the which is given to Fortune: whence the Thorall is called The Line of Fortune. VERSUS. Est Pollex Veneris; sed Jupiter Indice gaudet: Saturnus Medium; Sol Medicum{que} tenet. Hinc Stilbō Minimū: Feriente candida Luna Possidet: In Cavea Mars sua Castra locat. Venus the Thumbe and Iove the Index guides; Saturne the Midle, Sol the wanton Brides: Stilbon the Least, Luna the Ferient, And Mars in Cavea doth Pitch his Tent. Here we must note, That there is some diffe∣rence amongst Authors concerning the Places of Mars, Venus and Mercury: For some give the Tuberculum of the Thumbe to Mars, The Cavea to Mercury, The Region of the Litle-Finger to Venus: Now to satisfie my selfe, I first of all observed such Men as were Venereall, [that is, such as were given to Ieasting, Faire, Merry, Agile, Lovers of Musique, &c. And these I found had the Region of the Thumbe plainly Marked with decent Signes, comely
Notes and Characters: And that, not without their Nativities portending the Luxury of Venus, she being either collocated under her Proper Prerogatives in a competent place of the Figure, or in a good Aspect of some Planet. The like regard I had concerning Mercury. Wherefore the Cavea belongs to Mars. THE Practicall part of Chiromancy. The Practique of Chiromancy is that which gathereth Probable Predictions from Lines, the Places of the Planets in the Hand, and from the Notes and Characters every where posited in the Hand and Fingers. Wherefore let this Series be observed for Method-sake. 1. Cardiaca, or the Line of Life. 2. Epatica, or the Liver Line. 3. Cephalica, or the Line of the Head and Braine. 4. Thoralis, or the Table-Line. 5. Restricta, or the Dragons Tayle. 6. Via Solis, or the Suns way. 7. Via Lactea, or the Milky way. 8. Via Saturnia, or Saturnes way. 9. Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus. 10. Via Martis, or the way of Mars. 11. Mons Veneris, or the Mount of Venus. 12. Cave a Martis, or the Cave of Mars.
13. Mons Jovis, or Iupiters Mount. 14. Mons Saturni, or Saturn's Mount. 15. Mons Solis, or the Sun's Mount. 16. Locus Lunae, or the Moones Place. 17. Mons Mercurii, or Mercury's Mount. 18. Mensa, or the Table. 19. Pollex, or the Thumbe. 20. Index, or the Fore-finger. 21. Medius, or the Midle-finger. 22. Annularis, or the Ring-finger. 23. Auricularis, or the Litle-Finger. QUESTION. Whether we must judge by the Right-Hand, or the Left? IT is certaine, that in one Hand the Lines, and other Signatures, are very often more manifest, and by their Featnesse more perspi∣cuous, then in the other, as well in Men as Women: wherefore a Question hence arises, whether in both Sexes the Right or Left Hand is to be taken: or whether the Right Hand in a Man, (as some teach) and the Left in a Woman only?
ANSWER. THat Hand (in both Sexes) which showes and exhibites the Lines thereof most clear∣ly, and abounds with a Series of Characters and Signes: yet so, as that the other whose Lines are more obscure may pay its contribu∣tion. If in both Hands they consent and appeare to be faire and comely, they declare a Constancy of Fortune and Health. The cause of which di∣versity is this: He who is Borne in the day time, and hath a Masculine Planet [the Sun, Saturne, Iupiter or Mars] Lord of his Geni∣ture, beares the more Remarkeable Signes in his Right Hand, especially when the Signe As∣cending is also Masculine. The contrary be∣falls those that are borne by Night, so oft as a Feminine Planet predominates, and the Signe Ascending is Feminine. If both Hands agree, it must needs be, that in a Day-Nativity the Feminine Planets Rule: or that there falls out a Mixture of Masculine and Feminine. So in the Night, by the contrary Reason: which Diversity must necessarily be observed. I. Of the Line of Life. This is also called Cardiaca, or the Heart-Line. 1. WHich being Broad, of a Lively-colour, and decently drawn in its Bounds,
without Intersections and Points, shewes the Party Long-Lived, and subject but to few Diseases. 2. If slender, short, and Dissected, with ob∣verse litle Lines, and deformed, either by a Pale or Black colour: It presageth weaknesse of the Body, sicknesse and shortnesse of life. 3. If orderly joyn'd to the Naturall Meane, and beautifyed in the Angle with Parallels, or a litle crosse, it argues a good wit, or an evennesse of Nature. 4. If the fame have Branches in the upper part thereof extending themselves towards the Naturall meane, it signifies Riches and Ho∣nours. 5. If those Branches be extended towards the Restricta, it threatens Poverty, Deceipts, and Unfaithfulnesse of servants. 6. If in this Line there be found some con∣fused litle Lines, like hayres, be assured of Diseases: and they to happen in the First Age, when they appeare below; if towards the Cavea, in the Midle; if towards the Epatica, in the Declining Age. 7. If this Line be any where broken, it threa∣tens extreame danger of Life, in that age which the place of the Breach showeth: For you may finde out (almost ad unguem) the Dan∣gerous or Diseased years of your age, if (this Line being divided into 70 parts) you begin
your number and account from the lower part thereof, neare the Restricta, for the number falling where the Breach is, determines the yeare. 8. If the Character of the Sun (as com∣monly it is made by Astrologers) be found in this Line, it presages the losse of an Eye: But if two such Characters, the losse of both Eyes. 9. A Line ascending from the vitall be∣neath the congresse of it and the Epatica, to the Tuberculum of Saturne, designeth hominem  [That is, An Envious Man, who rejoyceth at anothers Calamity;] the scite of others concurring. This also frequent∣ly showes a most perillous Saturnine Dis∣ease, as is the Plague, &c. in that part wherein it touches the vitall: And so much the worse if it cut the same. 10. But such a Line passing from the vitall to the Annular or Ring-finger, promiseth Ho∣nours to ensue, from or by meanes of some famous Woman, or Queene, or the gainefull favour of some Lady of Honour. 11. The vitall Line thicker then ordinary at the end under the Fore-finger, denotes a la∣borious Old-age. 12. A Line passing through the vitall, to the Cavea of Mars, foretells of wounds and Feavers, and of Misfortunes in Iournies.
II. Of the Epatica, or Naturall-mean. 1. THis Line being streight, continued, and not dissected by obverse litle Lines, de∣notes a healthfull Body. 2. If it be short (or Broken) and reach not beyond the concave of the Hand, it bodes Dis∣eases, and shortnesse of Life. 3. By how much more the same is pro∣duced, by so much longer the Life may be warranted. 4. If cut at the end thereof, by a small in∣tervening Line, it threatens Poverty in Old Age. 5. If in the upper part, it be distant from the vitall by a great space, it bodes distem∣peratures of the Heart, as Palpitation, Syncope, &c. 6. This also shewes Prodigality, especially if the Table be broad. 7. If Tortuous, [that is, if it wind and turne severall wayes,] unequall, of a different colour, and dissected, it argues an evill constitution of the Liver, and thence Diseases proceeding from the weaknesse thereof: covetousnesse also, & a Pravity both of nature and wit; especially, if from under the Region of the Middle finger,
it approach towards the Cardiaca, thereby making a short or narrow Triangle. 8. If Decently drawn and well coloured, it is a signe of a cheerfull and ingenious Dispo∣sition. 9. If it have a Sister, it promises Inhe∣ritances. 10. If continued with fome litle hard knots, it demonstrates Manslaughters, either perpetra∣ed, or to be perpetrated, according to the number of those knots. 11. If therein a crosse be found under the Region of the midle-finger, it denounces death at hand. 12. If it terminate with a Forke towards the Ferient, it is a signe of a Depraved wit, of Hy∣pocrisy, and evill manners. 13. When it tends to the Mensall, it is a token of a slanderous and reproachfull tongue, and of Envy. 14. When it projects a remarkable cleft through the vitall, to the Mons veneris, and the sister of Mars, especially if the same be of a Ruddy colour, it bids beware of Theeves! and intimates also Fraud and Deceipts of E∣nemies. 15. This cleft likewise insinuates a most vehement Heat of the Liver, proceeding from the Rayes of Mars, whereby the Life is dis∣quiered, for that the Line of life is dissected.
16. This Line having some Breach, yet such a one as that neverthelesse it seemes to be al∣most continued, showes, that the manner of life will be, or is already changed. And this in a Declining Age, if the Breach be under the Ring-Finger: But if under the Middle-Finger, in the strength of years. III. Of the Cephalica. 1. THis is called the Line of the Head and Braine: which if (arising from its place in a due Proportion,) it connect the Lines of the Liver and Heart, in a Triangular forme, have a lively colour, and no Intersection fal∣ling out betweene, declares a Man of admi∣rable Prudence, and one of no vulgar wit and Fortune. 2. By how much more Decent the Triangle is, by so much happier shall the Temperature, wit, and courage be: But if it be obtuse, it argues an evill disposed nature, and a Man that is Rude if no Triangle, farre worse: [A Foole, a Prodigall, a Lyar, and commonly a short life.] 3. The Superiour being a Right-Angle, or not very Acute, foretells the best Temperature of the Heart: but when it is too much Acute,
especially, if it touch the Line of Life upon the Region of the Midle-Finger, it argues Covet∣ousnesse. 4. The Left-Angle, if it be made upon the Naturall Meane, in the Ferient, and be a Right Angle, confirmes the goodnesse of the In∣tellect. 5. But when the Cephalica projects une∣quall, and incomposed clefts to the Mons Lunae, thereby making unusuall Characters, in Men, it denounces Weaknesse of the Braine, and Dan∣gerous Sea-voyages: but in Women, frequent sor∣rows of Minde, and Difficulties in Child-bearing. 6. Equall Lines (thus projected) presage the contrary in both sexes: viz. In Men, a good composure of the Braine, and Fortunate voy∣ages by Sea: In Women, cheerfullnesse and Fe∣licity in Child bearing. 7. This one thing is Peculiar to the Cepha∣lica: [if it project a cleft, or a manifest Starre, upwards, to the cavea Martis; it signifies Bold∣nesse and courage: But if it let fall the same, downwards; Thefts and Deceiptfullnesse.] 8. The Cephalica joyned to the Dragons Tayle, by a remarkeable concurse, promises a Prudent and joyfull old-age. 9. The same drawn upwards in the shape of a Forke, towards the Place of Fortune, sig∣nifies subtilty in managing of affaires, and craf∣tinesse, either to do good or bad.
10. If in this Forke a Marke appeares, re∣sembling the part of Fortune, as it is noted by Astrologers, that gives an assurance of Riches and Honours to succeede, by meanes of Inge∣nuity and Arts. IV. Of the Thorall Line. 1. THis is also called the Line of Fortune; It is tearmed likewise the Mensall, be∣cause it makes up the Table of the Hand: which Line, when it is long enough, and without Incisures, argues a due strength in the Prin∣cipall Members of Man, and withall, constancy: The contrary, if it be short or crooked, cut, or Parted. 2. If it terminate under the Mount of Saturne, it showes a vaine and lying fellow. 3. If projecting small Branches to the Mount of Iupiter, it promiseth Honours. 4. If there it be naked and simple, 'tis a signe of Poverty and Want. 5. If cutting the Mount of Iupiter, cruelty of mind, and excessive wrath. 6. If it project a Branch betwixt the Fore-finger, and the midle, in a Man it threatens a wound in his Head, in a Woman, danger in child-bearing.
7. Three Lines ascending directly upwards from this line, viz. One to the space betwixt the middle and Fore-finger, A second to the space betwixt the middle, and the Ring-finger; and a thd to the space betwixt the Ring and the Little-finger, argues a contentious Person in many Respects. 8. A little line onely thus drawn to the In∣tervall, or space betwixt the middle-finger, and the Ring-finger, sorrow and labour. 9. If annexed to the Naturall Meane, so, as that it makes an Acute Angle, it bringeth sor∣sow and labour. 10. If the Naturall meane be wanting, and the Thorall annexed to the Vitall, it threatens Decollation, or a Deadly wound. 11. If no Mensall at all, it showes a Man ma∣levolent, contentions, faithlesse, inconstant, and of base conditions. 12. Confused little Lynes in the mensall, de∣note sicknesses: if under Mercury, in the First Age: under the Sun, in the Flower thereof, un∣der the Midle-finger, in old Age. 13. When in this Lyne there are certaine Points observed, they argue strength of the Genitall, and Burning lust.
V. Of the Cauda Draconis, or the Restricta, and the Lines arising thence. 1. IF this be double, or treble, and drawn by a right and continued tract, it promi∣seth a good composure of the Body. 2. That line which is nearest the Hand, con∣tinued, and of a good colour, assureth of Riches. 3. But if the same line be cut in the midle, crooked, and very pale, it denounces debility of Body, and a want of all things. 4. A Crosse, or Starre upon the Re∣stricta, foreshewes tranquillity of Life, in old Age. 5. If there be a Starre, simple or double, or any Lines neare the Tuberculum of the Thumb, in Women, they denote Misfortune and Infamy. 6. A Lyne running from the Restricta through the Mons Veneris, presageth adversi∣ties, either by the meanes of some kindred, or a wife. 7. A Line extended from the Restricta to the Mons Lunae, denotes adversities, and pri∣vate enmity. If it be crooked, it doubles the evill, and betokeneth perpetuall servitude. 8. Such a Line also being clear, and straight,
and reaching so farre as the Region of the Moone, foretells many journeys, both by Sea and Land. 9. If it extend to the Tuberculum of the Fore-finger, it tells the Man hee shall live in a forraigne Countrey, in great Esti∣mation. 10. If to the Epatica, it argues an honest be∣haviour, and prolongeth Life. 11. If to the Mons solis (be it simply, or doubly) it showes inseperable good, and en∣ableth to govern, or rule in great affaires. 12. By the same reason, if it passe to the Mons Mercurii, it betokeneth a Man, that is fit for many things. But if it reach not the Mons Mercurii, but be broken about the midle, and end beneath the Mons Mercurii, this markes out a Prating Fellow, a Lyar, and a Murmurer. 13. If directly ascending to the Mons Sa∣turni, it signifies a good position of Saturne, in the Geniture, whose decrees shall shortly fol∣low: But if crookedly both towards the Re∣stricta, and the Epatica, especially; it bodes a Man that is Covetous, Laborious, and hard.
VI. Of the Via Solis, or the Sunn's Way. THis being whole, equally drawn, and well coloured, promiseth the favour of great Men, and joyfull Honours: But if dissected, and inaequall, the contrary: and exposes to divers impediments, and envy in attaining the same. VII. Of the Via Lactea, or the Milkie-way. THis well proportion'd, and continued, presages journeys that be fortunate, both by Sea and Land, and moreover, a good Braine; the favour of Women (Venus as∣senting,) a composednesse, and gracefulnesse of speech: If it be cut, or distorted, it argues Infelicity, and Lies; but whole, and ascend∣ing to the Little Finger, is a signe of great Happinesse.
VIII. Of the Saturnia, or Line of Saturne. 1. THis being fully and wholly protracted to the Midle Finger, is an Argument both of profound cogitations, and likewise of fortunate events, in counsells and actions. 2. Combust or Deficient, an evill signe, por∣tending many misfortunes, unlesse other posi∣tions favour it. 3. Bending backward, in the Cavea of the Hand, towards the Ferient, in the forme of a Semi-circle, threatens imprisonment. 4. A Line drawne from the Vitall through the Epatica to the Tuberculum of Saturne (if there it touch the Saturnia) the same. IX. Of the Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus. IF this Line have a Sister, it argues intempe∣rance and lust, in both sexes, and basenesse in venereall congression; a filthy Man espe∣cially, who abhorres not the carnall knowledg of Beasts. And if dissected, and troubled, losses, and infamy by reason of Lusts.
X. Of the Via Martis, the way, or Line of Mars, or the Vitall-sister. THis Line (so oft as it appeareth) augments and strengthens the things signified by the Cardiaca. But (particularly) it promises good successe in Warre, provided it be cleare, and decently Red. Two Observations concerning Lines. 1. THe Quantity of all Lines must be wisely observed, [that is, their Length, and Depth:] so likewise their Quality [that is their complexion, and shape, whether they be crooked, or streight.] Next, their Action, which is, to touch or cut other lines: their Pas∣sion, to be touched or cut of others. And lastly their Place and Position. 2. We must know, that the Lines are some∣times prolonged untill certaine yeares of our Age, otherwhiles shortened: now they wax pale, anon they become notable, and as it were Luxuriate with a kinde of Rednesse, and this aswell in the Principall, as Lesse Principall lines.
Againe, (as touching the Lesse principall, and such as are found in the Tubercula of the Planets,) it is most certaine, that some doe one while quite vanish, and that another while, others rise of a different shape, and com∣plexion. The cause of which, I suppose to be no o∣ther, then the various Progressions of the A∣pheticall Places in the Genitures, that is to say, Fortunate, and Infortunate, to the influence whereof Man himselfe is wonderfully subject. The Signes of his Hand are presented at dif∣ferent times with differing Faces: Such a ver∣tue, Such a love resideth in the Imagination of the Greater World, towards this Lesser. And therefore the most studious in Chiro∣mancy cannot attaine the knowledge of Par∣ticulars, by one inspection, onely made to a certaine yeare of the persons Age. Things that worthily merit our observation, yet knowne or approved of but by a few. Of the Planets. The Planets also administer not a little in judgement, from their respective places: For, if they be Happy and Benevolent, good things are portended, but being Unhappy, and Fro∣ward, the contrary. Here wee must also note; that those Planets
are tearmed Benevolent, in whose Tubercula, and places, the accustomed Lines are found to be Equall, their Characters faire and pro∣portionable, as a crosse, Starres, three, or foure parallel Lines, Ladders, little Branches, a Qua∣drangle, the character of Jupiter. But the Froward and Unfortunate are those Planets, whose Tubercula and places are deformed with Trouled lines, and Uncoth Figures, as a lame and interrupted Semi-circle, Grid-irons, the character of Saturne. And this is to be ob∣served in all the Lines of the Hand. Now as touching the Planets, let us proceed according to the Method proposed. XI. VENƲS. VEnus shining well and happily, (that is, when in her Tuberculum shee presents a cleare Starre, or Furrowes that be red and transversly Parallel; and so often as her Tu∣berculum is much elevated, makes such men to be merry, cheerfull, luxurious, yet amorous, gratefull, comely, and libidinous, very honest also, and just, with whom an entire and in∣corrupted tye of friendship (once made,) is permanent. Shee renders the body somewhat tall, and
cleare, the Eyes pleasant, and sparkling with the splendour of beauty, full of allurement and temptation: The haire crisped, and very thick, yet gently curling: she Instills a spotlesse, and a noble minde. Yet oftentimes gives men full of boasting, and incontinency. She enclines the minde to Musique, Painting, and all other Arts that have Beauty, &c. Sometimes (according to the strength of the Geniture) shee produceth Priests, and Peda∣gogues, Apothecaries, Gardners, &c. But being Infortunate, shee causeth lasci∣viousnesse, incontinency and boasting: And if you finde a Crosse also, neare the first joynt of the Thumbe; it commonly designes an Adulterer, or such a one, on whom a mishap hath fallen in some uxorious matter, or thing. If the place of Venus be untill'd, and void of Incisures, it points out an effeminate, rude, and sorrowfull person, foolishly and ridiculously addicted to be merry and jeasting. XII. MARS. MArs is Fortunate, so often as his Sister appeareth red, cleare, and decently
drawn, and when either Starres, or a Crosse are found in his Cavea. Thus therefore he denotes such as are bold, and full of courage, stout, warlike, contentious and not easily mutable, strong, and lusty trencher-men, imperious: The haire for the most patt yellow, the Eyes from black wax∣ing red and terrible. If Iupiter participate, he possesseth the Gall, the Reynes, the Back, the Liver; If with Venus, the privy Members, &c. But if he be Froward and Infortunate, that is, when his Signes, and Place are afflicted, &c. He describes Men that be Litigious, Violent, Deceitfull, Angry, Intollerable: Also (the rest dissenting) Theeves, Bloody-minded, and such whose Arts or Occupations are con∣versant with Fire, and Iron. Hee hath signi∣fications of a Wife, Sonnes, and dissembled Friendships: thus also hee ingendereth Fea∣vers, and Blisters or Wheeles, filthy Eyes, and skin, the Apoplexy, Holy fire, wounds, and troubled thoughts. If you finde a Saturnine Particle in the Ca∣vea of Mars, it threatens a Precipice, or fall, from some high Place. If there ascend a crooked Line from the same Cavea, to the Tuberculum of Saturne, it threatens imprisonment. If a Line run from the Cavea of Mars to∣wards
the Restricta, and terminate in that part thereof which is under the place of the Moon, it is an infallible signe of many Peregrinations and Journeys. XIII. JƲPITER. JUpiter is Happy, or Fortunate, when in his Region he exhibites signes that be auspicious, that is, if there be a Starre, or a Doubled Crosse, Parallel lines, or a Line decently drawn from the vitall to his Tuberculum, &c. For, thus hee signifies Men that are Noble, Glorious, Ho∣nest, Benevolent, Affable, Honourable, Merry, Renowned, Neat, Just and Equitable, Beau∣tifull, Formidable, and Happy, such as have comely Eyes, thick haires, and a Grave Ge∣sture; likewise such as be shamefast, and keepers of their Promises. These Men are preferred to great Dignities, and solicited by the Conversations of Great Men, &c. and doe highly favour and esteeme of their Wives, Sonnes, honest and good Men, &c. In a Man Iupiter hath the Liver, Blood, and Ribbes, the Lungs and Gristles. But if he be unhappy, he oft-times throws a man head-long from a great estate, to ca∣lamities:
If there be halfe a Grid-iron in his Tuberculum, it betokeneth losses, especially by meanes of the more potent sort of Women: otherwise (thus constituted) hee occasioneth Griefes of the Heart, the Crampe, Inflama∣tion of the Lungs, and other Diseases pro∣ceeding from wind. If a Line transversely cut his Tuberculum, and afterwards tend to the place of Saturne, making there little hayrs, it threatens the Apoplexy. But if you finde a Crosse especially, or a cleare, and red Starre in his Tuberculum, he premonstrates splendid Honours, conferres Riches, and Publique Rewards from Princes, or other great Personages. XIIII. SATƲRNE. SAturne is happily Placed, when wee finde his Line wholly running to his Region: But lesse happy, when hee presents some inauspi∣cious Characters: unhappily, if hee show con∣fused, and infortunate Signes. Hee governes the Spleene, Bones, and Bladders. When he is Fortunate hee makes Men silent, Provident, of good, and profound Counsells: such as Muse much, and are somewhat sorrowfull;
Men that are puft up with a silent spirit, and whose aime is at Honours. And these are slender of Body, somewhat tall, pale and feeble, their haire blackish, Eyes hollow: they are fortunate in tilling of ground, and in mettalls of all sorts, yet more carelesse of their Wives, and lesse addicted to Venery; foolishly laughing, and jeasting: tenacious also, and more worldly then is fitting or just, &c. But if Saturne be Infortunate and Froward, hee makes Men Sorrowfull, Laborious, Sor∣did, Humble, Covetous, Unfaithfull, Lyers, Luck-lesse, Malitious, incumbered and op∣pressed with perpetuall Griefes and Anxieties: Thus also hee afflicteth with dangerous Dis∣eases, Catharres, Coughs, Melancholly, and Hypocondriacall infirmities; The Dropsy, Gowte, Falling-Sicknesse, Hectique and Quartane Feavers: Hee likewise occasioneth Imprisonment, Falls from Houses, and en∣dangering of life by Waters. A grosse line running from the Intervall of the Middle and Fore-finger, to the Mensall, and breaking or interrupting it, denotes Diseases or wounds in the lower part of the Belly.
XV. SOL. IF the Sun do Fortunately Rule; hee makes Men faithfull, ingenious, Honoured, High∣minded, Wise, Humane, Religious, Just, Moderate, Aged, and such as alwayes manage their affaires honestly. Hee gives a Body well composed, and a∣dornes it with yellow hayre. He governes the Heart, the Midriffe, and Nerves. But if Infortunately, Men that are proud, and highly elated, manifesting their accesse to dignities by unjust meanes, boasters, and immodest. Hee brings Fluxes of Rhume upon the Eyes, and thereby hurt both to them and the Mouth, trembling of the Heart, Syncope, &c. The Via Solis, being cheerfull of colour, sig∣nifyes honours in politicall affaires, the favour and grace of Princes: But if (on the contra∣ry) it be Confused, and Infortunate, it ob∣structeth Honours, and intimates the wrath, and hatred of Princes.
XVI. LƲNA. THe Moone, happy, makes Men famous, honest, honourable, and of a great body; yet well proportioned, pleasant also, and wil∣lingly journeying by Sea, and walking by the Sides of Rivers. But if any wayes dis∣senting in the rest, unconstant both in Life and Actions, yet tending (for the most part) to the best. She Rules the Braine, the Stomach, and Belly. But if Infortunate, shee portends a various, and inconstant kinde of life, weakenesse, and an increase of Griefes and Anxieties: shee (thus) occasions the Paralysis, a commoti∣on of the Members, oftentimes an Epilepsy and Canker, Spots of the body, cruell Col∣liques, and whatever else proceedeth from aboundance of Cold, and Moisture: and this the rather when the Lines found in the Tu∣berculum of the Moone doe appeare very pale. If there be Faire and Comely Signatures neare the Ferient, they premonstrate Happinesse to the Man in his journeys, and Messages; and in Forraigne Countreys: to the Woman felicity, and fertility in bearing of Children. Ominous signes doe shew the contrary.
XVII. MERCƲRY. MErcury, Happy, and Fortunate, makes Men ingenious, desireous of Sciences, and seeking diligently after secrets, such as be apt for any thing; Orators, Poets, Eloquent, Crafty, Variable, and ready to learn any thing, Mathematicians, Arithmeticians, and Men addicted to Merchandize, &c. Hee governes the Tongue and Memory, &c. If he be Unhappy, he denotes Men full of Le∣vity, Lyars, Pratlers, Theeves, Cheats, un∣constant, Faithlesse, Traytors, &c. Hee suscitates dry Diseases, Madnesse, Fury, and acute Feavers, according as the rest shall as∣sist him. But forasmuch as hee very seldome yields the Rule to one Planet onely, (the Familiari∣ty of Two, Three, or Foure often concur∣ring) wee ought to proceede very warily in finding out their Decrees: For, to collect and dispose the Mixtures of the Planets rightly, is, a thing very hard to be done, especially of those who are but slenderly excited: because such Mixtures are almost inscrutable, in respect of the generall influence of the Heavens.
Neverthelesse, the Worke is sooner effected, where the Lines and Signatures are Faire and clear: but if they be obscure, the judgement is more intricate. XVIII. The Mensa, or Place of Fortune. 1. THis space being Great, and Broad, and the Figure Decent, declares a liberall Man, magnanimous and long-liv'd. 2. But if small, and narrow, it argues a slen∣der fortune, Niggardize, and Fearfulnesse. 3. A Crosse or starre within it, cleare, and well proportioned, especially under the Regi∣on of the Ring finger, betokeneth Honours, and Dignities, to ensue; from, or by means of great and noble Personages: If the character of Jupiter, it promiseth notable Dignities Ecclesiasticall. 4. The same Crosse, or Starre Tripled, excellently increaseth the Portents of good fortune: but if it be cut by confused little Lines, the good fortune is therby diverted, and Anxieties and Labours threatned, in defending his Honours, especially if they be under the Region of the Ring finger. A Crosse, or starre in the uttermost part
of the Mensa, is a signe of Fortunate Journeys. 6. The Mensa sharpened by the concurse of the Thorall and Cardiaque Lines, point out Deceipts, and danger of Life. 7. If no Mensa be found in the Hand, it showes obscurity both of Life and Fortune. 8. Good and equall Lines in this Space, doe speake the Fortune good: but if evill and in∣composed, they quite overthrow it. 9. A little Circle, showes Perfection of wit, and Sciences, the rest Assenting. XIX. The Pollex, or Thumbe. OVerthwart Lines, that be Cleare and Long, underneath the Nayle and Joynt of the Thumbe, conferre Riches, and Ho∣nours. A Line passing from the upper Joynt of the Thumbe, to the Cardiaca, threatens a violent Death, or Danger by the Meanes of some Married Woman. Lines every where dispersed in the Lower-joint of the Thumbe, describe Men that be contentious, and such as rejoyce in Brawling and Scolding. A Line surrounding the Thumbe, in the Middle-joynt, portends the Man shall be
hang'd: Equall Furrowes drawne under the Lower-joynt thereof, argue Riches and Posses∣sions. If the first and second joynt want Incisures, it is a token of Drowsinesse and Idlenesse. XX. The Index or Fore-finger. MAny Lynes in the uppermost Joynt, and they proceeding overthwartly denote Inheritances, but running so in the Midle-joynt, an Envious and evill Disposed Person. Right Lines running betwixt those Joynts, declare (in Women) a Numerous Issue; In Men Bitternesse of the Tongue. If they be in the First joynt, neare unto Jupiters Mount, they manifest a Joviall Disposition; that is, they point out the Man, whom Iupiter favoured well in his Geniture. That Woman who hath a Starre in the same Place, may safely be Pronounc'd un∣chast, and Lascivious.
XXI. Medius, or the Midle-Finger. THis Finger, presenting little Grid-irons in the Joynts thereof, plainly declares, an unhappy, and Melancholly wit: but if Equall Lines, it manifesteth Fortune in the veines of Mettalls. A Starre there, presages a violent Death, by drowning or Witchcraft, &c. If a Grosse Line be extended from the Roote thereof up∣wards through the whole Finger, unto the end of the last joynt, it argues Folly and Madnesse. XXII. Annularis, or the Ring-finger. A Lyne rising from the Mons Solis, and ascending by a Right Tract through the joynts thereof, is an Argument of Noble Fame. Equall Lines in the First Ioynt, premonstrate Honours and Riches: overthwart-Lynes, the Enmity of Princes; Howbeit, if these Lynes shall seeme to be Intersected, it is the better, because they argue impediments.
XXIII. Auricularis, or the Litle-finger. FRom the Ioynts hereof, as from the Mount it selfe, are Judgements and Decrees pass'd concerning Merchandize, and Fa∣vours. A Starre in the First Ioynt neere the Tuber∣culum, argues Ingenuity and Eloquence. Other Obtuse Signes, the Contrary: But when there appeare Infortunate Signes in the First and Second Ioynt, they Marke out a Thiefe, and a very deceitfull person: If Ad∣verse Lines in the last Ioynt, perpetuall In∣constancy. Some there are, who predict the Number of Wives from the little Lynes in the Mons Mercurii, at the outmost part of the Hand: and I have often observed them hit the Truth; but yet I will not boldly confirme any thing, in this respect, because it properly appertaines to Venus, and her Disposition. If the End of this Finger, reach not so farre as to touch the last Ioynt of the Ring Finger, it signifyes a Wife most Imperious in all things: The Truth thereof may be approved, almost, in any Body.
Two Observations, touching the Mounts and Fingers. 1. AS the Mounts adorned with good Figures, and Characters do carry a good and happy Omen: so likewise being vitiated with confused and unhandsome Lines, they ever∣more bode the contrary, and this as well on the Fingers as Mounts, unlesse they be re∣strained by the Confederacy of other Lines that be good. 2. Chiromancers doe Teach and Affirme, That the First Ioynt neare the Mount of the Finger, must be attributed to the First Age: The Second to the Flourishing Estate of Age; And the last unto Old Age. The Markes found ac∣cording to the Nature of the Planets, we have already ined; concerning which (not∣withstanding wee have formerly admonished it) it is our Opinion, that the Directions, or Progressions of the Principall places in every Geniture, doe in due times, manifest their respective Markes and Characters, whether Fortunate or Infortunate.
The Speciall Practice of Chi∣romancy, and its Genethliacall Concordancy, in 19. Examples. I Have Read in Authors, That the Characters of Places, and the Faces of Lynes, are repre∣sented according to the Position and Habi∣tude of the Predominating Planets, in every Geniture: And I found it so: Nor shall I (anon) deny it verifyed in my owne: But met with none that had ever brought Ex∣amples, or Collected any thing of this Na∣ture. Whereupon, I, more Ardently endea∣voured to make Tryall thereof my selfe, That so the Truth, and Excellency of this Science, might (both with mee and other remaine fully approved of and certaine,  having observed one, and another Example, mani∣festing their Concordancy, by a more Cove∣tous, and diligent search, I quickly found the like Harmony in divers others, Nineteene whereof (Ingenious Reader) I now expose to thy view: Read, Understand, and Iudge. As for the Ignorant, let him either Learne, or be Silent: And for the Envious, God send him his Health, and let him upbraide where hee pleaseth.
Example I. One borne at Uratislavia, in the Yeare of Christ, 1567. August 17. Hor. 12. 10. in the After-noone. HE is promised Long-Life, and seldome to be Troubled with Diseases: His Com∣plexion (for the most part) Phlegmatique. Mercury Angular, and in his owne House, denotes his Ingenuity. The Mid-Heaven, Irradiated, by the Trine of Iupiter, an Affluence of Joyfull, and easily-Attained Honours, without Impedi∣ments. Mars in the 12 and in the House of Mercury, whom he Afflicts by a Quartile, obstructs his Muse, by Martiall Men, especially: and such as are given to Merchandize, &c. Venus is excellently well and fortunatly Placed, for Marriage, and Plenty of Chil∣dren.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. Wee finde an encrease of Riches, by Mar∣riage, so likewise from his own Services, and Offices, honestly undertaken, on the behalfe of others: No Testimony of Imprisonment, or a violent Death: yet some Misfortune to be taken heed of, proceeding, either by the meanes of Theeves, or by some of the Grea∣ter sort of Beasts: Frequent Journeyings in his First, and Middle-Age, and those Famous, Ho∣nourable, and Gainefull.
Now, if we Trace these things, by the Linea∣ments of the Hand, we shall find an agreement. 1. For, in the first place, the Mens Veneris notably Furrowed, showes, that Venus had the best Positure, in the Geniture. Hence we must gather the significations of Venus, to compleat the Judgment. 2. There are Three cleare Lines, in the First Ioint of the Little-finger, which tell us the Dominion of Mercury: The like, the Tri∣angle so aptly described. Whence wee con∣jecture a most Excellent Wit, and Commend∣able Behaviour. 3. The Sunn's Place hath its little Lines not foolishly posited, which contribute Honours: And the like doth the Partile Sextile of Iupiter, and the Sun who is Angular in the Geniture. 4. Saturne (by the Incisures of his Mount) showes Adversities, some Diseases: yet those but Light and Easy. 5. The Breadth of the Mensa confirmes the Liberality of Nature. 6. The Saturnia extending to the Epatica, showes an Honest Behaviour, Good Judge∣ment, a Long Life. 7. The Mons Ivis decently adorn'd with Incisures, the Height of Honours. 8. The Crosse neare the Ferient, promises Happy, and Honorable Journeys: other∣wise
the Region of the Moone, were here untill'd. 9. The Crosse in the Menta under the An∣nular, contributes Honours, and good For∣tune: But insomuch as it is Cut by the same, (being let downe through the Epatica) it threatens losse of House-hold-goods, in his Old Age. To be short, the Principall Lynes being en∣dow'd with the best conformity, demonstrate strength in the Principall Members of the Body, as also appeares by the Geniture: For, it is not our purpose to draw, or examine all the Incisures in Generall, especially the least of all, running through the Fingers or the Restricta: we hold it sufficient, that wee have Rightly applied the significations of the Prin∣cipall Lines and Characters, to the Planets and Starres in the Geniture, and their Significa∣tions: so, that the rest may be very well re∣ferred to the Readers own Ingenuity.
Example II. Another borne (Spurcè puta) in the Coun∣trey of Uratislavia, of Ignoble Parents, in the Year 1590. Feb. 2. New stile, Hor. 1. 30. After-noon. AS soone as I saw this Child (in my Tra∣vailes) I desired to know the time of his Birth: For, he was hardly Foure years old, and looked with an exceeding Free and com∣ly Face: And perceiving him Illegitimate, I did the more diligently observe and describe the Lineaments of his Hand; And how ex∣actly they Agree with the Starres in his Geniture, shall be the next presented to our Enquiry. We finde Foure or Five of the Planets ex∣cellently well dignifyed; in which respect, it might fittly be called, A Regall Geniture. Venus her selfe is in her Exaltation, and more then so, in mutuall Reception with Iupiter, from Houses. The like Reception there is betwixt Saturne and Mercury. Mars is in his Tripli∣city, and very strong in that part of Heaven. Sol, Saturne, and Iupiter make a Triangle, in Aery Signes, and so doth the Part of Fortune.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. They all premonstrate not onely length of Life, and constancy of Health, but also an absolute Wit, and a Mind that is Noble. In his Hand you finde an excellent Concin∣nity of Lines, and the places thereof admirably well adorn'd [viz.] The Tubercula of Venus and Iupiter, then the Tuberculum of Mercury, and lastly the Moon's: yee behold a conspi∣cuous Sister of Mars: whereby wee may pronounce him a most Fortunate and Formi∣dable Warrier.
2. Mercury enclines Him to all Manner of Sciences, and gives a Profound Wit. 3. The Region of Iupiter is Grac'd with his proper Character. So you see, in the Ge∣niture, the Great Dominion of Iupiter with the Virgins Spike, not without the Reception of Venus. 4. In like manner the Tuberculum of Venus, beautifyed with convenient Incisures. And therefore in describing the Genius of the Na∣tive, wee must make a Mixture of the signi∣fications of Mars, Venus, Iupiter, and Mercury. 5. Saturne letting downe Three Litle Lines from his Tuberculum, and therewith cutting the Thorall, denounce Sicknesse in his Old-Age, Poverty also and Needinesse. 6. The Capaciousnesse of the Mensa, shewes the Goodnesse of his Nature. 7. The Via Solis designes him to Honours, but (being touched by Diminutive Lines) not without some slender Impediments. 8. The Line of Saturne Ascending (by a streight Path) even to the Midle Finger, confirmes the Excellency of the former Iudge∣ments. 9. The Ferient tells of Iourneys: And the like are signifyed in the Geniture, by the Po∣siture of the Moone in the West-Angle: so also by the Trine of Mercury to Saturne, Lord of the Ninth House.
10. The Epatica (having a Breach in the End thereof) denotes a Change of the Man∣ner of his Life, in Old Age, &c. The Excel∣lent Reception of the Planets disposing of the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12th Houses, what further concernes the State and Condition of the Native. Example III. The same Day and Yeare (abating but 12 houres and 30. Min.) A Female was Borne in Turingia, where the Pole is elevated 51. Degr. 30. min. IT will merit the Paines, if (in some sort) wee compare the Discourse of the former Hand, with this that followes.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. The Principall Lines, [viz. the Vitall, Epati∣tica, and Thorall,] doe almost agree in their Scite and Conformity: In the Lesse Principall you see a Difference. 2. The Vitall is thrice Cut. First, neere the Restricta, which showes a Disease about the 7th yeare of her Age: And although in Di∣rections there appeare nothing suspitious, a∣bout that time: yet, in regard there are for the most part some Dangers of Sicknesse, or
Crazinesse in all Clymactericall yeares, even when there happens no unlucky Progression of the Apheticall places: you may conjecture a small Feaver, some short and slender distem∣peratures, the small Pox, or the like. Another Section (conspicuous in the Midle of the same Line) Agrees with the Direction of the Horoscope, to the Opposition of Saturne, which falls out about the 32. Yeare of her Age; and brings with it a Disease very Dan∣gerous. The third Section must be referred to the 52. or 54 Yeare of her Age, the Horoscope then comming to the Quartile of Mars: And this premonstrates Wounds, or a Bur∣ning Disease in the Lower Parts of her Belly; Because it interrupteth other Lines, through the Cavea of Mars. But dye shee does not of this Disease, in regard Venus Assists in the Geniture. 3. The Sister of Mars is wanting: But the Venereall Furrowes are sufficiently Eminent. Wherefore they portend Lasciviousnesse. The same is signifyed by the Conjunction of Mars and Venus in Pisces, Mars being Lord of the Horoscope. 4. The Cephalica, here, excells; and there∣fore indues her with the more Ingenuity. In the Geniture you see Mercury in the Third House (a Competent place) in Reception and
Aspect of Saturne himselfe: notwithstanding the Tuberculum of Mercury scarce showes so much as one Incisure. 5. A Crosse in the Moons Place, foretells of Fertility and Happinesse in Bearing of Children. And to this, Venus is fitted in the Geniture, notwithstanding she hath Mars in Conjuncti∣on with Her. Yet, seeing hee disposeth of the 6th. House, it is to be feared, lest at some time hee occasion Danger in the Birth of a Boy. 6. The Place of Iupiter is also other∣wise understood, then in the Preceding Example. The Region of the Sun likewise fa∣voureth in some measure. An Honorable Life is seldome obtained by the more Generous sort of Women, unlesse by Marriage. 7. The Line Arising in the very Midle of the Hand, and thence Ascending to the Root of the Thorall beneath the Region of Mercury, by Discecting the Epatica; points out an un∣faithfull Friend, which (in her Declining Age) should occasion Losse, and Detriment, in her House-hould Goods, and Things. 8. The Epatica (Cut in the End thereof) bodes a deficiency of Wit in her Old Age: The Crosse there, is the Fore-runner of some Good: The Reception of Mercury and Saturne from Houses, in the Geniture, and they Dispositors of the 3, 4, and 8. Houses, a signe of Inheritance.
9. The Bredth of the Mensa is very Feate, and the Site of the Thorall comely, and decent, which argue her Goodnesse of Nature, Readi∣nesse of Wit. 10. The Line of Saturne running in an Ob∣lique Tract, from the Restricta, to the Tuber∣culum of Saturne, doth usually marke out such as be Laborious, something Covetous and Hard. But that the Lines of the Hands are not compleatly perfect, at the Houre of the Na∣tivity, this Example abundantly manifests. Moreover, seeing by this, it is certaine, That the Positure of the Planets in the Figure are of great Authority; It necessarily followes, that the Lines especially the Lesse Principall, doe truly receive their clearer Conformity from the First Moment of the Birth, in which the Infant begins to move its hands, and make, as it were, to lay hold of, or Catch at things. As touching the Principall Lines, there is no doubt but that they are Clearly enough Engraven, at the very Instant of the Nativity: But that (in processe of time) there is an Accesse of some Incisures and Characters, Reason it self will teache him, that shall make more Diligent Inspection into the hands of little Infants. For, at first wee finde an ob∣scure and subtile Draught of the Lines: After∣wards, (the thinne, and tender skin being
worne away, by the continuall Motion, and Bathing thereof) all the Lines grow Fairer and Brighter, every day more then other: For then the vertue of the Starres, and the Syde∣reall Spirit, (wherewith every one is Inspired) begin to perfect the Lines more Compleatly (the Element of Water intervening.) What∣soever is Generated in this World, is Generated of Water, and the Spirit. And whosoever is not Regenerate of the Water and Spirit, shall not enter into the Kingdome of GOD, (as our Saviour speakes:) Water hath a respect unto the Heart of Man, But the Spirit hath regard of the Divine Efficacy. Moreover, the Starres doe first of all convey their Influence through the Aire, which is neerest the Nature of Fire, like as is the Nature of the Starres themselves: whereby the Water it selfe, (that is next to the Aire in Situation) receives the Caelestiall ver∣tue, and Communicates it to the Earth, from which Communication, the Fecundity thereof proceedeth. And this is evident in the Spring-time, whilst things are Sprouting from the Bosome of the Earth: For, if Showers be then wanting, they grow but slowly: and the Increment they have is either by the vaprous Cold of Night, (the Image of Humidity) or else the Nightly Dew, or both together, (the Heate of the Sun assisting in the day time:) which being con∣tinued
for some dayes, afterwards (when a Shower comes) you shall quickly perceive hem Encreased in a Moment: because that now the Sydereall spirit enlivening them, ren∣ders it selfe more Excellent then they, by its plentifull besprinkling of Moisture. The like is to be understood of the Slender Skin upon the Hands. You see also in the Plants themselves, how Rude their Leaves be, when First they peepe out of the Earth, in respect of the Linea∣ments, and Pictures of their Branches, (they are otherwise called Signatures:) which by little and little show themselves more plaine and openly to our view. The like wee must judge of the Lines, or Incisures of the Hands, which hold the like Analogy and Proportion in the Manifestation of their Signatures. Where∣by it appeares, How Great the Workes of GOD are: He hath put these signes in the Hand of all Men, that every one also might hereby acknowledge his Workes past finding out, as Iob saith, Chap. 37. v. 7. Neverthelesse, there are some, (both Di∣vines and Philosophers) who account it a Haynous thing of us, that wee wrest this say∣ing of Jobs to Chiromancy: But that wee may Briefly satisfy such, we will examine the mea∣ning thereof more fully.
The Text there, runs thus: V. 5. God will Thunder Marvellously with his Voyce, who doeth Great and Inscrutable things. V. 6. Who commandeth the Snow to fall upon the Earth, so likewise the Winter showers, and the Raine of his Strength. V. 7. Who hath placed Signes in the Hand of every Man, that all Men may know His Worke. V. 8. The Beast entereth into his Covert, and remaineth in his Den. IN the Beginning of the Chapter, you have, as it were, certaine Praeludiums to a following Proposition, layd downe in the 5. Verse: For thus he saith, Iehovah Thundreth, or speaketh Lowd in his Workes, That they may be Great and Inscrutable. The Examples of the Proposition follow in the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, &c. He maketh (saith Hee) the Snow to Descend like Wooll, as the Psalmist addeth. The Rea∣sons of the Generation of Snow, are indeed speciously delivered amongst the Peripate∣tiques: yet if you Reduce them to a Levell, they will by no meanes stand, but terminate in Dotage. Another Example of the Proposition, you have in the 7th Verse, GOD Signeth all men n their hands, That every one might know his
worke, that is, Those Lines were not made there by Chance. The Hebrew Version verbatim: He shall Signe all Men in the Hand, that every man may know his Worke. The 70. Interpreters. He marketh all men in the Hand, that every Man may know his Infirmity. S. Hierome. He hath placed Signes in the Hand of all Men, that every one may know his workes. The Chaldee Translation. Hee maketh Signes in the Hand of all the Sonnes of Men, that all the Sonnes of Men might know their Worke. These wee wholy apply to the Lines of the Hands, because that every Man beholds them dayly, but seldome knows what they signify unto him. You have in each an Universall Particle, and therefore no Man is Excluded: which very thing Refutes the Translation of some, who Read [That every one might know his Worke-men:] But there are many Thou∣sands of Men Living, that have no Work-men, at all, who Earne their Bread with the Labours of their own Hands. Besides, To know their Worke-men, is, not a Great and Inscrutable Worke, but altogether such a One, as every common Rustique day∣ly is capable of.
And therefore that version wholy dissents from the Proposition. Object. But now yee may Object, That if the Disposition, and Draught of the Lines of the Hands be an Inscrutable Worke, then no∣thing of Certainty can be pronounc'd as touch∣ing their Decrees and Significations: and there∣fore the Science of Chiromancy will be Imper∣fect and Lame, or (if you please,) no Science. Solu. I Answer: All Sciences in this Life are Imperfect, and Lame, if yee looke upon the Force of Humane Wit: as the Apostle him∣selfe testifies. And surely they were so made lest we should wax Proud, and Boast of our Wit, and of those Sciences, but rather seeke for the Absolute Perfection of all things in GOD, who hath reserved that Perfection for the World to come: yet therefore are not those Sciences to be Despised, and utterly Re∣jected: But that the Mind of an Ingenious Man might delight it selfe in them, because Sciences are the only Food of the Mind. Wee maintaine also, that Chiromancy con∣taineth things that be Inscrutable, by a Three∣fold Reason. 1. Because that in this Science, wee cannot attaine the Knowledge of all the Particular and scrupulous Lineaments, so, as that we can expli∣cate the Decrees of every Incisure. And al∣though many Particulars may be pronoun∣ced,
yet are they such Particulars as may not re∣cede from the Number of Universalls: yet when yee can or would pick out the Decrees of all the most Scrupulous Incisures, there may be oft-times above An hundred Portents to be considered, which is Impossible to be done. Therefore our knowledge hardly reaches to the one halfe of this Science: In which respect the Sgnifications of all Particular signes, are not Injuriously deemed Inscrutable. 2. Another Reason, is, for that the Positi∣on of these Lines, very much differs in all Mens Hands: For, although you should observe A thousand, yet could you not finde any Two exactly agree in every Particular positure of their Lines. And this Diversity proceeds from no other thing, Then The Soule of the World: She it is that by her Spirit, frō houre to houre, variously Disposeth, Moveth, Animateth, Pro∣duceth, Signeth, Sustaineth all things of this Inferior World: This is it that Communicates to every Man, a certaine Sydereall Spirit from the seven Planets, and Twelve signes, by whose Rule and Instinct every thing (that is it selfe,) exceedingly Profits; the Liberty of Will remai∣ning. The Ancient Philosophers called it, The Good Spirit, or Proper Genius of every one: wherefore, if the finding out of these Signa∣tures were not to all Men almost Inscrutable, every one might easily find and know his own
Genius, and what were needfull for him to doe. But touching the Soule of the World, and the Spirit thereof, I shall annex some things at the end of this Worke. 3. Lastly, the Structure of the Hand it self, is admirable, in regard of the Proportion it beareth to the Face, and certaine Parts thereof: Which is this: 1. The whole Hand, is of Equall length with the Face. 2. The Greater Ioynt of the Fore-finger (which adjoynes upon the Tuberculum of Iu∣piter,) Equalls the Height of the Fore-head. 3. The other Two (to the Extremity of the Nayle) are the just Length of the Nose: [viz. from the Intercilia, or place betwixt the Eye∣browes, to the Tip of the Nostrills.] 4. The First and Greater Ioynt of the Midle-Finger is so long as it is betwixt the bot∣tome of the Chin and the Top of the Under Lip. 5. But the Third Ioynt of the same Finger, is of equall length with the distance that is betwixt the Mouth and the lower parts of the Nostrills. 6. The Greater Ioynt of the Thumbe, gives the Widenesse of the Mouth. 7. The Distance betwixt the Bottome of the Chin, and the Top of the Lower-lip, the same.
8. The Lesser Ioynt of the Thumbe, is equall to the Distance betwixt the Top of the under-Lip, and the Lower part of the Nostrills. The Nayles obtaine the just halfe of their respective uppermost Ioynts, which they call Onychios. Now I suppose it well enough understood, what consideration is requisite to the knowledge of the Hand, the Parts and Signatures thereof, which yet is supposed but a small Particle of the Humane Body: But the cause of the afore∣said Proportion, who can tell? verily there∣fore, Man is the worke of GOD, as the Hebrew translation hath it, (Ad verbum,) in the afore∣said Place of Job. The third Example, proposed by Job, is, concerning Beasts that seeke their Denns, and leave them at their pleasure, not otherwise, then as if some-body had taught them it. Whence it is manifest, Beasts doe live indeed by sense, yet not wholy destitute of some Reason: which very thing is proved also by other Documents. But we may more Rightly attribute unto them, an Image or Proportion of Humane Reason. Now the rest, I leave. Nor yet have I here said thus much, as if without it this our Chiromancy could not stand. Let those to whom it is acceptable, approve there∣of; otherwise, let him it pleases not abound in his own sense.
Example IV. One Borne upon the River Rhene. A. C. 1546. Ianuary 6. Hor. 1. Min. 20. in the After∣noone, the Pole Elevated almost 52. Degrees. depiction of palm of hand with markings. The things considerable in this Example, are: 1. A Token of the Gowt, under the Finger of Saturne, whereof hee was sick (by Turnes)
for some years: notwithstanding, that Dis∣ease could not be fore-told (In specie) from any Characters. Mars Posited at the Geniture in Sagittary, and in the 6. House, brings infal∣libly the Gowt▪ of which Positure, we have also known other Examples. The Girdle of Venus whole, yet Twice Inter∣sected, is a palpable signe of Intemperance, and of Beastly Behaviour in venereall Actions, not without some staine both in Name, and Repute, which he found by the Event. Con∣sider, I beseech you, Saturne in the 7th House, joyned to Venus in a Quartile of the Moon. 2. For, such a Conjunction produces Minds that be Impure, unlesse Iupiter interposeth. He likewise denyes Issue, and oft-times takes away the Children given, or maketh such as are to be borne Infortunate. 3. The Triangle perfect; the Cephalica ex∣tended, by a Continued tract, to the place of Mercury; and the Saturnia rightly touching the Naturall Means; the Place of Iupiter, Mer∣cury, and Venus; And lastly, the via Lactea, not foolishly formed, argue, A fortunate Man. In the Geniture you may behold Saturne and Iupiter disposing of the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th, not without Reception of Houses: In which places, you find all the Planets (Mars onely excepted:) this Native therefore was
most Fortunate in such things as are subject to Venus, Mercury, and Iupiter. 4. The two Parallel Lines conveniently drawn (in the forme of a Ladder) from the Region of Saturne and the Sun, to the Moons place, denote a prosperous and constant for∣tune, in forraigne Countreys. 5. The Mons Lunae well and fairely depict∣ed with convenient Incisures, premonstrates Iourneys. 6. The Mensal Cutting the Mount of Iupi∣ter, denotes Men that are full of wrath: And so they are wont to be, for the most part in whose Nativities Mars resideth in the 6. 7. The same Dissected, under the Finger of Saturne, by a short and thick Line, threatens a Grievous Disease in the lower part of the Belly, and that in his Old-age. 8. The vitall broken, towards the end thereof, by a double Incisure, bodes Diseases about the 52. or 54. yeare of his Age. At that time the Horoscope comes (by Direction) to the 6. degree of Leo (the Terms of Saturne) very Ominous, &c. 9. The Via Lactea adhering to the Dragons Tayle, (another Crosse accurring,) speakes his Old-age to be full of Tranquillity. 10. The Crosse in the Mensa, under the Solar Finger, designeth Honours, and the Fa∣vour of Great Men.
It is not requisite to describe all that is sig∣nifyed by the Geniture, because in the Disposi∣tion of the Planets, shewed you before; all things are comprehended: which Sydereall Face and Position, very seldome happeneth. Example V. One Borne in the yeare 1586. Decemb. 9. New Style. Ho. 8. Min. 40. Before noone, in the upper Lusatia. depiction of palm of hand with markings.
AS you see but a simple Concurse of Lines in the Hand: so the Places of the Planets in the Geniture, are sufficiently dejected. 1. 'Tis true, Iupiter is accounted Angu∣lar, and in his Exaltation: yet is he Retrograde; and by Calculation, not (partily) found to be in the VVest Horizon: Hee hath not (as yet) adorned his Mount with any Lines; yet there, (in the Geniture) hee favoureth Mar∣riage, and when hee doth so, the Lines that shall arise in their due time, upon the Tubercu∣lum of Jupiter, will manifest; not without some other Prosperity. 2. Venus also, is hereunto fitted, as being in the Second House, yet adornes her Tuberculum but slowly, because she is Peregrine. 3. This Child was sometimes afflicted with an Epilepsy: nor was hee ever Cured thereof: which Accident, whether it should be attributed to those litle Branches, arising from the Tho∣rall, under the Region of Saturne; Or, to the Conjunction of the Thorall with the Epatica, by that litle cleare Incisure, I cannot deter∣mine. 'Tis hardly possible, to find the signes of all Accidents, in the Hands: And I confesse, I have not, here, so Accurately distributed the Lines of the Fingers: for that in Children we can very seldome perceive their Delineations plainly. Indeed, in the Geniture, the Conjunction
of the Luminaries, is Infortunate; because the Braine is thereby much weakened, and greatly bereft of the Animall Spirit. By how much neerer their Conjunction is, by so much more evidently doe wee find the Evills thence descending. I know that such are of a weak and simple Ingenuity; almost con∣tinually Sick; but especially Afflicted with Hypocondriacall Melancholly. Moreover, Saturne being here in Aries, augments the Infirmities of the Head. 4. The Epatica, enclined towards the Re∣stricta; (thereby making a Narrow-Triangle,) Contracts his Wit, diminisheth his Prudence: But withall it renders him somewhat Cove∣tous. The Cephalicall decently drawne, helpeth the wit, in some measure. In the Geniture, you finde but slender Te∣stimonyes of Ingenuity; for Mercury in Sagi∣tary, nigh to the Sun, is altogether weake: The Moon is hardly a Dayes Iourney from the Sun: The Horoscope also not Irradiated by either Iu∣piter, and Saturne Annular, are the onely Assi∣stants. The Line passing by the Vitall, to that Con∣cave of Mars, and there Erecting a Crosse, with he dimidiate Line of Saturne; betokeneth wounds, and dangers of Life, by the meanes of Theeves, &c.
The same is rightly manifested by Mars in the Geniture, he being then in the Cuspe of the 9. House, because of his North Latitude; and in Quartile to the Sun and Mercury. The Conjunction of the Thorall and Epatica, by the small Intervening Line, confirmes this Iudgement. The aforesaid Crosse in the Concave of Mars, threatens Feavers, and other Diseases of his Nature, &c. Now it sufficiently appeares, that the Abject Concurse of the Stars in the Nativity, doe agree with the Rude Draught of the Lines in the Hands: which very thing I have else∣where also observed. Another Borne in Thuringia, in the yeare of Christ, 1585. Iune 26. halfe an houre before noone. IN which Geniture, Saturne falleth in the 7th House, in Aries; Iupiter in the 9th in the beginning of Gemini; The Sun in the 10th in Cancer, and in Conjunction with Mercury, who is Retrograde & in Square of Saturne: Mars in Virgo possesseth the 12th House, the Moone in Scorpio, the Second, Venus being Retrograde in Leo. This Positure, as it is the most dejected, so found I the Lineaments of his hand according∣ly Infortunate.
For first, the Vitall is Dissected by a part of the Cephalica, not touching the Cavity of the Hand. And I beheld (as it were) some Ruder Lines not onely here and there projected from the Cephalica through the Ferient, but they also broken one by another, neere to the Place of the Moone. Moreover, in the Concave it selfe, or rather under the Tuberculum of Sa∣turne, then the Sunns; a certaine Starre ad∣heres to the Epatica, casting a Cleft through the Mensa upon the Thorall Line, under the Region of Saturne, &c. These Signatures bring not onely Infelicity, but shorten the Life. The same you may collect from the Geniture it selfe. The Horoscope comes by Direction to the Opposition of Saturne, about the 15. yeare of his Age, designing a Deadly Disease.
Example VI. The Brother of the former Borne in the yeare 1588. December 17. (New Stile,) at 5. in the Morning. depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. MArs (Lord of the Horoscope) received of Venus from Houses, (yet they de∣jected) ingenders Lust, and Incontinency. You see the Region of Venus how evidently it is
adorned with Furrowes, a Crosse being posited in the upper part thereof: which oftentimes produceth Adulteries. 2. Iupiter is partly collocated in the Mid-heaven, making a sufficiently decent Triangle with Saturne and Mercury, in Earthly Signes. And therefore Iupiter adorneth his Seate by the little Line, and the Crosse annexed there∣unto: whence you may conjecture, that this Planet hath greatest Dominion over the Na∣tive. His Significations may be collected from what hath beene said before, yet more Re∣misly, because he is in his Detriment. 3. Saturne (in Conjunction with the Moone;) is Lord of the Geniture, and this by a double Proportion in respect of Iupiter. And therefore you see the Saturnia whole and Entire, and which is more, a Sister annexed thereunto, the same extending beyond the Thorall by a de∣cent Tract. 4. Although that from Iupiter, Venus, and Saturne, there be something (of Wit) demon∣strated: yet you may see the Cephalica drawne to the Taberculum of Mercury; and the Au∣ricular bearing a small Line, which is cleare enough, and running through the Ioint it selfe. Mercury in the Geniture, in Capricorne, promotes the Wit exceedingly, (and so he does when he is in Aquarius and Libra, in which
Signes Saturne predominates.) The like is de∣clared by the Trine of Iupiter, and also the Sextile of Mars and Mercury: But the Quar∣tile of Mars afflicts Mercury, obstructing the Atainement of Honours. 5. The Moone is excellently well-Posited in Taurus, and in Trine to the Sun; but yet in the Cuspe of the sixth, and therefore Two litle Cleare Lines adorne the Ferient, assuring an Increase of Honourable Journeyes. 6. The Via Solis whole, and equally drawne, promises the Favour of Noble Men, and Joyfull Honours. The Dignities fore-seene by the Geniture will come by the Excellent knowledge of Learning, and from such things as are dedicated to Mercury: The Position of the Sun in Capricorne, brings something pecu∣liar to all manner of Affaires. 7. The Mensa it selfe of a large Capacity, confirmes the former significations. A Crosse there troubling the Saturnia, shews some Mis∣fortune to descend from the Malice of Sa∣turne. The Opposition of Venus and Saturne, is not onely adverse to Matrimony, but also usually wont to deny Issue. 8. The Thorall emitting little Branches to∣wards the Ferient, doth sometimes presage Poverty. Thus (we hope) both the Lines of this Hand, and the significations of the Geniture, have been sufficiently examined.
Example VII. The Brother of the former Borne in the yeare of Christ 1590. December 30. (New Style) Ho. 4. min. 30. in the Morning. depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. THe Genius of this Native depends upon Mercury, Venus, Saturne and Iupiter, because you see their places handsomely a∣dorn'd,
and the Lines wholly produced. And although Mercury exhibites no Character on his Taberculum, save onely a litle Line: yet the Cephalica, drawne by a direct Path, even to his Tuberculum, universally gives his Decrees. Hence doe appeare the Endowments of a Ready wit, a Happinesse to Eloquence, and o∣ther Ingenious Arts: whereof before in its proper Place. 2. Although the Sun be (here) in Capricorne, (as in the precedent Geniture) yet appeares there no Via Solis in the Hand: In which re∣spect the Favour of Princes shall not so easily be gained by this as the former Native, who hath Iupiter himselfe partly constituted in the Mid-heaven. Neverthelesse, the Cephalica showes, that this Native shall happily Man∣nage great Affaires. 3. The same is promised by the Conspi∣cuous Starre in the Mount of Iupiter. The Line running (as you see) from the Vitall to the Mount of Iupiter, hath very often mani∣fested to me the Conjunction of Mars and Iu∣piter in the Genitures, especially when it passeth through the Vitall, and the Temple of Venus, as you see it does, in the two following Examples, and in the 17th, therefore Iupiter is excellently well placed, he being Direct in Motion, and nigh to the Southerne Lance of Libra, beholding the Mid-heaven by a Sex∣tile,
notwithstanding he be in a Dejected House of the Heavens. 4. The Moone affords but slender significa∣tion, because she is not as yet come to a Sextile of the Sun. The Ferient presents but one Line, and that is attributed to short jour∣neyes. 5. The Mensall projects litle Branches to∣wards the Ferient, as in the former Exam∣ple. 6. Concerning the Portents of Saturne, which are yet more Obscure, we say nothing. For, seeing he is Retrograde in the 8. House, (although in his Triplicity) his Condition is but Indifferent: he afflicts Venus more by his Opposition, then he does Mercury, in that he is Extremely Adverse the Nature of Venus. As to their Opposition, we have but newly spoke. 7. The Mensa it selfe hath a due and simple proportion, whereby the goodnesse of Wit, Temperament and Behaviour is confirm'd. 8. The little Line posited in the Intervall of the Index and Medius, is Infortunate, and points out a Wound in the lower part of the Belly. 9. The Vitall vitiated neere the Beginning thereof by an Incisure, bodes a Disease in his Infancy. And he was accordingly seiz'd on, by an absolute Phrenzy, at the middle of
the Spring, in the yeare 1593. Yet happily es∣caped it without the Application of any Re∣medies, Corruption flowing abundantly from one of his Eares. Hereupon wee thought him Reserv'd for greater matters. The same vitall discected by the Intervening of a Line descending from the Region of Saturne, theatens a most dangerous Disease, of the Nature of Saturne: and this about the 40th yeare of his Age: you see also the Horoscope it selfe comes (at that time) by Direction, to the Opposition of Saturne. This thing (as also elsewhere) wee can scarce suf∣ficiently admire. Mercury Lord of the 8th (the House of Death) is found in his Detri∣ment, hostility Afflicted of Saturne himselfe: which denotes a Fall from some High-Place, Drowning, Poyson, Plague, &c. Venus inter∣posing her selfe mitigates, and Abates of the Evill, in some sort, but takes it not wholly away.
Example VIII. A certaine Man Borne on the Confines of Bo∣hemia, in the yeare of Christ 1588. the 8th day of November (New stile) at 8 a Clock, 45. Min. 40. Sec. in the afternoone: the Latitude of the Place 50. Degr. 30. Min. THis Gentiture is Fortunate, as are also the Lineaments of the Hand. 1. The Moon Partilly Posited in the Horo∣scope, in Trine of Mercury, demonstrates an Excellent Wit: so also the Reception of Mer∣cury and Mars, from Houses. The like Venus being Angular, and in her own House: And Lastly the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the House of Mercury, they imbraceing the Moone by a Sextile. The like is signified by the Cephalica, extending it selfe to the Tuber∣culum of Mercury: so likewise by the Finger and Tuberculum of Mercury, they exhibiting not undecent litle Lines. Herewith agrees the Mensa it selfe, and those very faire Characters in the Places of Jupiter, Venus, and the Sun. 2. Venus is conspicuous in her Furrowes as being Angular (at the Birth) in her owne House. 3. The Trine of the Sun and Mercury, (in
Watery-signes) to the Cuspe of the South-Angle, and Horoscope it selfe (where wee meete with the Moone, and also the Part of Fortune) Salutes him with Honours, and wish'd for successe of all things. Such a Trine is seldome met with. It promotes a Prosperous Fortune. Unto these let be added Venus Angular in Libra, &c. The Regions of the Sun, Iupiter, Venus, and the Moone, are excellently Beau∣tified in the Hand: And a double Triangle therein wonderfully accurring: one of which is form'd of the Vitall, Epatique, and Cepha∣lique Lines: The other, by the Cephalique, Men∣sall, and Vitall, if you adde the Little Line of the Vitall, which runs thence to the Tuberculum of Iupiter. The Two Parallel Rules assist notably in Point of Marriage, Honours, Ingenuity and Affaires: One of which is made by the Line that passes from the Intervall of the Index and Medius, to the Mensall, touching the same, below the Intervall of the Medius and Annu∣lar; and thence Protracted to the Intervall of the Auricular and Annular; (some by such a Line Prophesy Incest,) the other from the Line falling from the Pollex, upon the Midle of the Vitall, and running thence by a Right Angle through the Cavity of the Hand, to the Naturall Meane. All these things doe plainly presage a most Excellent Man in all manner
of Sciences, especially the Mathematicks. And this very same judgement, manifestly ariseth from the Geniture, by the situation of Mer∣cury in Scorpio, the Positure of the Moone in the Horoscope, in her owne house, and the Trine of Mercury: Lastly, by the Reception of Houses betwixt Mars, and Mercury Be∣sides, the Sextile of Mars and Mercury &c. argues Celerity: the which are so manifest to the Intelligent, they cannot be look'd upon and conferr'd without Admiration. depiction of palm of hand with markings.
5. The Region of the Moone, presenting a very Cleare Line, betokeneth Journeys: the Moon Angular, in a moveable signe, the same: so also Mercury Received of Mars, Lord of the Third. 6. The Vitall, and that Line which Runs from the Tuberculum of Saturne through the Hand, unto the Region of the Moone, doe seeme to resemble a Skale, or Ladder, of an Excellent Bignesse, and that by a Notable tract: In which Skale are every where found Transverse Lines, requisite to the Shape there∣of. This presages a wonderfull and formi∣dable tract of Dignities, but not without Great Envy. 7. As touching Riches, what need wee say more? There are no Dignities, no Kingly and magnificent Affaires, wherein an Affluence of all things is wanting. Venus Centrally in the 4. House, contributes Honourable Possessions in his Old Age, and no little Fame after his Death: you see how her Taberculum even Lux∣uriates with accustomed Incisures. 8. The Vitall diversly Cut, concernes no small or Light Infirmities. In the 5th yeare of his Age, hee was sick of the small Pox. The rest you may judge to fall out in the 11, 21, 25, & 43 Yeares of his Age, or there∣about. 9. Moreover, Saturne projecting (in his
Region) an Incisure, through the Mensall, bodes a Disease in the lower part of the Belly: (I suppose the Stone in the Bladder, &c.) As therefore this Geniture of it selfe, is happy; so are likewise the Lineaments of his Hand, and the Conveniency in the Lines themselves, which was to be Proved. Example IX. One Borne in the Yeare of Christ, 1551. The 8th day of March, at 9. a Clock and 30 Min. before Noone, where the Elevation of the Pole is 51. degr. in Silesia. WE observe the Right Hand of this Per∣son, because that therein we perceived the Lines most Cleare, according to our for∣mer Annotation: wee have also made Proofe thereof in other Examples, yet oft-times found a certaine Diversity (as before wee have said) wee must not every where repeate this same thing, which makes so little to the purpose. First, let us see the Practise, and throughly en∣quire its wonderfull Agreement with the Geni∣tures themselves.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. The Line of Life conspicuous with Incisures, as it were some little Haires, por∣tends no small Diseases: the like Saturne cut∣ting the Thorall with Foure Incisures: whereby he also foreshewes Foure more Grievous Infir∣mities proceeding from his Nature. The First of which befalls the Native about the 21. year of his Age, by a suddaine Catharre upon his Brest and Lungs, not without some strang∣ling, and Difficulty of Breathing: the second
in the 35 yeare of his Age, by the meanes of a Poison'd Drinke. But in regard hee shall not wholy Drinke off the Cup, at one draught▪ (because of some Nauseous thing appearing the Deadly dregs is left in the Bottome: yet hurts it him something. But by the Helpe of a Physitian the strength of the Poyson is easily Compress'd. If you take the Paines to Calcu∣late, you will finde that the Progression of the Sun comes exactly then to the Quartile of Saturne. The Third we conjecture will be in the 45. Yeare of his Age, or thereabout, the Horoscope then passing out of Cancer into Leo. This Progression also is wont to bring a Change of Outward Goods. The Fourth, we judge to fall out in the 54, or 55th yeare of his Age, the Horoscope coming then by Di∣rection to the 6th degr. of Leo: which degree how greatly it threatens in Directions, wee will more clearly explaine to you, elsewhere. But although this ensuing Disease may prove very Grievous; yet is it not to be thought al∣together deadly, because of Jupiters divol∣ving himselfe to the very degree of the Horo∣scope. Let him then take heed of a Quartan Fea∣ver, the Plague or Pestilence. Upon the Direction of the Horoscope to the Body of Mars, in the 13. or 14. yeare; the Native fell into Hot-scalding-water, with the hurt of his Arme and Breast. Now this ac∣cident
we seeke for in the Vitall (yet not in Specie) where we behold little Haires. The Place of Mars according to the Calculation of Copernicus hath of North Latitude 2. degr. 10. min. wherefore his Oblique Ascention is 62. degr. 50. min. 2. Jupiter conspicuous in his Tuberculum, with no unusuall Incisures, showes Dignities that be sufficiently Great (respect being had to the Place of his Birth.) The like in that he is Collocated in the Cuspe of the Ascendent. We have also elsewhere observed (from the Line of Mars drawne through the Vitall, to the Region of Iupiter) the Conjunction of Iu∣piter and Mars in the Geniture. Nor does the precedent Example very much dissent from the same. 3. The Sun is not ill placed neare to Venus in Pisces: you see therefore in his Mount a lit∣tle Line that is clear enough. 4. The Region of Venus adorn'd with con∣venient Furrowes, not onely manifests her good habit in the Geniture, but also presages some goodnesse to accrue by the meanes of a Wife. The Sun therefore coming by Directi∣on to the Sextiles of Venus, greatly Enriched him by the Inheritance of a Wife, and this a∣bout the 41. yeare of his Age; in which we observed his Hand thus Delineated. 5. Iupiter and Mars arising together in
the East, denotes Ingenuity: So Mercury in Aries (thus remote from the Sun) a Ready Wit. Observe his Region, and therein you shall finde Three Parallel Incisures. The same you may pronounce from other places, accor∣ding to the former Precepts. 6. The Cephalica, & Via Lactea doe hereunto both contribute, notwithstanding they be of a shorter Extent. 7. The Region of the Moone is Incult, and quite destitute of Incisures, and therefore wholly Silent; like as also she is in the Geni∣ture, being scarcely departed from the Sun a∣bove a dayes Journey. 8. The Restricta continued, and of a good Colour, argues Riches, and a good Crasis of the Body. 9. The Mensa very Broad, his goodnesse of Nature: And the like you shall finde by Iupiter in the Nativity. 10. The Naturall Meane dissected by the Intervening of an Incisure, Heate, and Griefe of the Liver: the like from Mars, (next to Iupiter in the East) in an Aery Signe. 11. Saturne in the Cuspe of the 10th is (in some sort) averse to Dignities, occasioning Envy, especially. He also exhibites (and that not vainely) an Incisure under his Finger, ari∣sing from the Intervall of the Medius and Annular.
Thus also have we briefly demonstrated from this Geniture, the wonderfull Consent and Harmony of the present matter. Example X. Another Borne in the yeare 1588. the 8th day of February, at 4. houres and 30. min. in the Evening, at Witeberge. depiction of palm of hand with markings.
WHat Familiarity there is in this Illu∣strious Example, shall be shewne you in briefe. 1. The Dominion of the Geniture, rests chiefly in Iupiter and Mercury: Next in Ve∣nus and Mars; yet not excluding Saturne, and the Moone. The Rule for finding and consti∣tuting the Lord of the Geniture shall be ex∣plained in our Astrologicall Commentaries: and that we will alwaies follow, and doe certainly know we deviate not from the Truth. Now seeing that Iupiter, Mercury, the Moone, and Saturne are all of them Angular; it must be of necessity, that these are very conspicuous in their Mounts. Venus also, and Mars Luxu∣riate in no Evill Conjunction. 2. This Geniture (therefore) is very fortunate, (except in those things that concerne Health:) For, Saturne is so adverse to Iupiter and the Moone, that (almost perpetually) he suscitates Distillations upon the Breast and Liver. Here∣with agree the Intersected Lines in the Tuber∣culum of Saturne: Then the Vitall also and Epatica are on every side Assaulted by the Touch of other small Lines. Whence I con∣clude that the more notable Assault of Disea∣ses will happen in the 30, 32, 36, 44, and 50th yeares of his Age, or thereabout. 3. The Position of all shewes, a Great Wit, Eloquence in abundance, and a Propensity to
all Arts whatsoever: So many Parallel Lines, Crosses, and Convenient Characters, there are every where found: But especially the Cepha∣lica Invading the Region of Mercury by a con∣tinued Martch: The Place of Mercury, and the Auricular it selfe adorned with Lines and a double Crosse: Lastly, Iupiter, Venus, the Mensa, the perfect Triangle. In the Geniture such things as appertaine to the Ingenuity, are gathered from the Positure of Mercury, the Moone, Saturne, &c. 4. The Cephalica doubled up to the Natu∣rall Meane, argues Craftinesse and Subtilty in Managing of Affaires. 5. The Starre of Venus in its proper place, and thereon most cleare Furrowes, denoteth Lust. The three Incisures upon the Eminent part of her Tuberculum premonstrate Good things to be obtained by Marriage. The same you have from the Conjunction of Venus and Mars in Pisces, [to wit, a Venereall, and Io∣viall Signe] in a Sextile of Saturne, and Trine of the Moone: Venus in the second house, and Iupiter in the 7. descending to the Head of the Twinns, doe import an Affluence of Rich∣es by Marriage: Iupiter there, doth also assure him victory over all his Enemies. 6. Although the Sun be not excellently well Posited in the Geniture: yet adornes he this Region in some Measure, by certaine Little
Lines: But they are Cut, and doe therefore Insinuate troubled Honours. Iupiter and Mer∣cury promise those that be more Joyfull, and so doth the Mensa, here and there offering a Multiplyed Crosse. 7. The Saturnia drawne to the Naturall Meane, in a cleare Tract, and afterward (by an Obscurer) to the place of Saturne, concerns the happy Issue of things: (Saturne is here more adverse to His Health then Outward For∣tune:) & this (in the Geniture may be collected from Saturne, Angular; from the principall Rule that Iupiter and Mercury challenge therein, and also from Venus and Mars, who are joyned in Pisces: which Congresse raiseth not easily to Fortune. 8. The Line rnnning from the Cavea of Mars, through the Saturnia, untill it attaine the utmost part of the Hand (below the Re∣gion of the Moone) denounceth Long Iour∣neyes: So likewise the place of the Moone, which is signed with three Parallel Incisures: The same Judgement ariseth from Mercury in the East Angle of the Geniture: The Moon Angular, Saturne Lord of the Horoscope, (in the Moones Exaltation,) and in the House of Venus (Lady of the 9th.) And Lastly, from the Conjunction of Mars and Venus, Dispositors of the 9. and 3. Houses. 9. The Part of Fortune in the 8. insinuates
Goods by Inheritance, as also such as flow plentifully from his owne Ingenuity and Arts. But yet Mars and Venus in Opposition there∣unto, pronounce a Profusenesse through Plea∣sures and Luxury. I conjecture the same Ac∣cession of Inheritance, from the Crosse, and small Lines in the uppermost Joynt of the Thumbe, below the Nayle, &c. 10. Capricorne in the Ascendent, and Sa∣turne in a Signe of the same Quality, is an Ar∣gument of Long Life. The Epatica more then usually produced, the same. 11. This Figure doth almost insinuate a Violent Death, either by Drowning or other∣wise being Ruin'd: Venus also promotes the Provocations of Immoderate Lust: But be∣cause of Iupiter (who potently restraines Sa∣turne) I shall Judge the Primary cause of his Death, to be an Apoplexy, or Dropsie: Let him beware of a Philtre in his youth. Saturne also so very much adverse the Moone, and that from an Angle, threatens dangers of Impri∣sonment: Here the deceipts of Venus are suspected. Indeed there is a Braunching Cha∣racter in the Mount of Saturne, but 'tis In∣tersected by the Intervening of two small Lines. 12. The somewhat Bigger Crosse in the ut∣most part of the Mensa, neere the Ferient, as also that Crosse annexed to the end of the
Epatica, towards the Restricta, denote a plentifull Life in his Old Age, and Journies that be prosperous. 13. That Line which from the Mensa is Recurved through the Epatica, and Cephalica, untill below the Ferient, and towards the Re∣stricta, it become a Semi-Circle, denotes Cap∣tivity, and secret Enemies: The like (as was said before) appeares by Saturne in the Geni∣ture, who is therein Diametrically Opposite to the Moone, and partily afflicting Iupiter (Lord of the 12. house) by a square. You may there∣fore pronounce those Enmities to ensue in re∣spect of his Wit, the store of Sciences, and the Excellencie of Dignities wherewith he is in∣dowed. And now (we trust) we have sufficiently Explained and demonstrated what was pro∣posed. Example XI. Another borne at Angusta (a City of the Van∣dalls) in the yeare 1581. the 11. day of May, at one of the Clock in the Morning. 1. ALthough Iupiter be in his Fall▪ and in a Dejected place of the Figure, yet in that he assumes the Lordship of the Geniture,
and is the first that receives the Moon into his Imbracement, hee leave not his Tuberculum untill'd. Whosoever thou beest that art Ad∣dicted to Astrology, and wouldst know the Principall Lord of the Geniture: observe (a∣bove all others) that Planet which first Re∣ceives the Moone (as before we have said) into Conjunction with him, and so powreth upon her his Celestiall Moisture: which thing you shall understand more plainly elsewhere. 2. Mercury participates in the Rule of the Geniture, (for that he Receiveth the Moone) is collocated in his own House, and in a Good Place of the Figure: the which he also signi∣fies in his Mount, notwithstanding hee is Re∣trograde. Saturne in the Horoscope, in his own House, and Triplicity, augmenteth and amply∣fieth the Depth of his Wit. 3. Saturne partily Afflicting the Lumina∣ries, by Maligne Aspects, and from a violent Signe, the Sun also not farre distant from Pa∣lalitium, or the Bulls Eye, (a malevolent Fix∣ed Starre) denounces a violent Death, or great danger thereof: whereof the troubled Character upon the Region of Saturne is an Argument: for thereon shall such Characters appeare, either in some other forme, or else more Clearely, when the Evill ap∣proacheth.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. 4. We doe judge the Integrity of Behavi∣our from the Saturnia, terminating at the Na∣turall Meane. Venus in her own House, Irradi∣ating the Moone by a Trine, begets a Na∣turall shamefastnesse, the which is seconded by Jupiter, who (as we told you) hath the Domi∣nion in this Geniture: Mercury (if not Su∣periour to him,) is certainly his equall in Go∣vernment. 5. The Tuberculum of the Sun presenting al∣most
the Character of Saturne, is not ac∣counted very Fortunate, for that it betoken∣eth many Enemies, without Cause, Envy ac∣companing. The Luminaries (so greatly in∣fested of Saturne) presage the same. As often as the Sun's Place beareth the Greeke Letter, Χ, (so, that the Line cutting that which is errected on his Tuberculum, descendeth from the Intervall of the Auricular and Annular, the like whereof the Cingulum Veneris usually describeth;) you may most certainly adjudge Difficulty of Businesses, through the Envy of Men. 6. Venus forming three little Cleare Lines on her Mount, augments his Revenue in some Measure, by the Meanes of a Wife, as is Clear∣ly evinc'd by her Posture in the Second, with the Part of Fortune. 7. The Vitall vitiated in three Places, by the Transite of three little Lines, threatens three sufficiently Grievous Diseases, about the 32th. 40th and 45th yeares of his Age. If you bring the Horoscope to the Quartile of Mars, and in like manner the Moon to the Quartile of Mars and Saturne, you shall surely produce the years before nominated.
Example XII. The Brother of the former Borne A. C. 1583. 27. June; Ho. 11. Min. 30. Afternoone. depiction of palm of hand with markings. .1 THe Line of Life troubled by the Inter∣vening of another, threatens a Disease about the 20th yeare of his Age. And doubt∣lesse
at that time the Direction of the Horoscope comes to the Quartile of Mars: so likewise the Progression of the Moone to Saturne him∣selfe: Howbeit this Direction (in regard of the presence of Jupiter) is not much to be feared. 2. The Rule of the Geniture belongs to Sa∣turne and Iupiter. Wherefore the Tuberculum of Iupiter affords us overthwart litle Lines: but the Tuberculum of Saturne, a Star, untill the Saturnia also Ascendeth. 3. You have likewise the Signatures of Mercury and Venus, in their own Places, which are now Conjoyned in Leo, the Conjuncti∣on being not to be despised, although it be Platique. 4. The three little Lines collocated on the Ferient, insinuate Iournies; and so doth Mars Lord of the Horoscope (in the House of Mer∣cury) and the Sun in Cancer. 5. The Crosse in the Cavea of Mars, in∣creaseth his Martiall Disposition, and the Heate of the Liver. 6. The Suns Place presenting a Cleft, in∣creases his Honours but slowly. In the Geni∣ture, the Decrees of Dignities are obscure: yet the Sun is Angular with the Heads of the Twins. 7. The Saturnia being whole, promiseth a Happy successe of Events and Actions, and so
doth the Conjunction of Saturne and Iupi∣ter, Dispositors of the 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Houses. Example XIII. A Brother of both the two last Borne A. C. 1577. Nov. 7. Ho. 3. Min. 12. Afternoon. This Third Example I lately got at Ritispone. depiction of palm of hand with markings.
1. THe Saturnia whole, although oblique∣ly drawne to its proper Seate, shewes, that Saturne is Lord of the Geniture. Hee des∣cernes not absolutely an Adverse Fortune, &c. (Hither transferre the rest of Saturnes Signi∣fications, from their proper Place, when he is not Infortunatly posited.) Yet Saturne in the Cuspe of the 10 perturbes the good Fortune of Venus and Iupiter, who share in the Rule of this Geniture: Mars also in the West Angle, and there in a strange Signe, denounceth the same: which Mischiefes shall be Multiplyed in his Old Age. 2. Venus (by reason of her North Latitude) Resides on the Cuspe of the 7th, having the Moone joyned with her, in regard of Her South Latitude. And therefore their Place tels us of Lines, and Markes that be trimme and handsome: notwithstanding the Moon's more Remissely, in Regard that shee (hasting to the Sun,) is not Illustrated with Light suf∣ficient. 3. Iupiter Direct, and in Conjunction with Venus neare unto Spica Virginis, adornes his Region with a Little Line that is Decent e∣nough: But yet hee is oppressed of Saturne. We have often observed, that his Conjuncti∣on with Venus hath bestowed very Great Riches, by Marriage: wherewith here agree
the Condition of Venus and the Part of For∣tune. 4. The Via solis showes it selfe in some sort a Friend unto Honors. That Planet Angular, in Scorpio, and with the Scorpions Heart, must not be rejected. 5. Mercury Retrograde, in his Detriment, and in the Eight House, is accounted very weake: (Hee is somewhat strengthened of Venus and Iupiter:) wherefore you see (at this time) no signature to be found in his Region. 6. The Due Breadth of the Mensa, differeth not much from this Habit of the Starrs. 7. The Crosse above the Restricta, promi∣seth Tranquility in his Old Age: But the Sa∣turnia denyes it: But seeing that Crosse is made of the Little Line, which descendeth from the Vitall, and the Region of Venus, looke if it bring not Misfortune and strifes by the Meanes of Wives, &c. The rest are left to every Mans Discretion: Neverthelesse, we must needs acknowledge, that All Incisures are neither here, nor elsewhere scrupulously Delineated.
Example XIV. One Borne at Thuringia A. C. 1586. Decemb. 3. Ho. 7. Min. 30. Before Noone, Lat. 51. Degrees. WE have, before, in the 5th Example, almost the same Position: the Distance of their Births is only 5. dayes. The Princi∣pall Lines doe Agree in Situation and Con∣formity: In the rest there is some (yet no very notable) difference. 1. The Vitall is often Dissected about the End and Midle thereof: Wherefore it denotes a Sickly Disposition, in his Old Age. The two litle Lines vitiating the same by their Transite, and Descending upon the Cavea of Mars, manifest Martiall Infirmities of the Body, about the 50. and 52. yeare of his Age. Wounds also in the Head or Feete are then to be feared. 2. In like sort, Saturne letting fall a Line, Obliquely, from his Place, shall at the same time besprinckle his Poyson: wherefore that time shall be full of Misfortunes. A Dis∣ease also must be expected about the 11th yeare of his Age, because the Vitall is there Marked by a touch of the Cephalica▪ the Horoscope comes at that time to the Quartile of Mars.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. 3. The track of the Cephalica, extended to the Mensall, argues a Ready Wit. In the Ge∣niture, Mercury is not unhappily posited in the Horoscope, in a Trine of Saturne: But yet he possesseth a strange signe, being likewise op∣press'd by the Quartile of Mars: whence you see the Region of Mercury but slenderly Marked. 4. A Crosse in the Cavea of Mars, betoken∣eth the Quality of Mars, and a Heate of the
Liver, Danger and Wounds in his Journeys. In the Figure, Mars afflicts the Sun by a Quar∣tile from the 9th House: the Moone is also in Square with Saturne. 5. That Line which is almost Parallel to the vitall, occasioneth many unprofitable Journeys; because it is Decurt, and Tortuous. The two small Lines also so conspicuous upon the Tuberculum of the Moone, concerne Jour∣neys. Mars in the 9th in the House of Mercu∣ry: He in the First, and the Moon in a Moveable Signe, in the Geniture, the same. 6. Venus and Iupiter doe in some sort ma∣nifest their Bounty in their respective Places: But in the 5th Example, the Mons Iovis is Incult. Yet because hee here showes his Assistance, from the New-moone, preceding the Nativity, in Sagittary, it will doubtlesse Flow aboundantly so soon as he gets the Prin∣cipall Dominion. Such a strength Iupiter had not before in the 5th Example. 7. Furthermore, the Virgins Spike with the Dragons Head in the Cuspe of the 10th. And likewise Aquila it selfe now Rising in the East, do all of them largely contribute Ho∣nours: the like doth the Positure of the Sun, he being in his Triplicity, and Angular: which gives the two litle Lines on his Mount.
Example XV. The Brother of the former Borne A. C. 1589. Apr. 24. at 4. in the Morning. HEre wee give you the different Faces of either Hand. 1. In his Right Hand the Epatica is visible, but passeth not the Concave thereof. And therefore it showes his shortnesse of Life: espe∣cially, because a certaine Line is transversly let fall from the Vitall, to the end of the Epa∣tica, as it were interrupting the Progresse thereof. The vitall of the Left Hand, receiveth a Line arising from the Tuberculum of Saturne. The Place of the Vitall, thereby touch'd and al∣most Broken, appertaines to the 25. yeare of his Age, or thereabout, wherein without Doubt the Horoscope comes by Direction to the Body of Saturne. Indeed Venus is present, but in a strange signe: whence the Native shall then very hardly escape. The Oblique Ascention  Saturne is 54. degr. 36. Min. that is, the 5.  of Gemini. 2. In the Left Hand the Epatica is wanting,  Lines (almost Parallel) are let fall  to the Mensall: which argue  and an evill compo∣sure
thereof: likewise a Pravity both of Wit and Behaviour. 3. But although Venus (in the very Cuspe of the Horoscope) by reason of her South Latitude, 1. degr. 12. min. doth produce no slow Inge∣nuity: yet being in the House of Mars, or a Forraigne Signe, shee will encline the Native to all manner of wickednesse, [Petulancy, Lasciviousnesse, Inconstancy, &c.] Mars Lord of the Geniture (Venus participating) Afflict∣ing Mercury (in Taurus and Retrograde) by an Angular Opposition, the same. Therefore hee denoteth, or rather maketh him Contentious, Disobedient, violent, unfaithfull, &c. All which are manifestly seen by the Evill Disposition of the Lines in his Hand. 4. The Cephalica of the Left Hand, increa∣seth the strength of his Wit, wherewith the Tuberculum of Mercury agreeth, though slen∣derly, because it is Marked with two Incisures, at the least, in the utmost part of his Hand. Venus presents three sufficiently clear Incisures in her Region: the rest I found Incult.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. 5. Mars hath a Sister appearing in the Right Hand; but none in the Left. This begetteth wrath, and incites the Native to Warlike Arts, as to be an Engineer, or a Gun-smith, making Warlike Armes and Instruments of all kinds: Only this, when Mars is not An∣gular, and in his owne House, you shall finde no Effects of him in the Hand: yet being Retrograde hee possesses Men with unhappy Malice, and threatens some Adversities,
especially in Old Age. And therefore when hee neither showes a Proper Line in both Hands, nor exhibites in one a Line that is decently drawn, you may safely adjudge his Decrees Imperfect, and lesse Prosperous. 6. In the Left Hand, the vitall is variously touch'd: wherefore number yee so many Fu∣ture Diseases, about the 7, 14, 25, 32, &c. yeare of his Age. 7. A treble Crosse about the vitall, by the Place of Mars, confirmes the Assistance of Mars: But in Uxorious matters, it argues Crosse Fortune, and a bad Belief. In the Nati∣vity, Venus is shrewdly suspected for her Po∣siture, especially for that her Dispositor is resi∣dent in the West Angle. 8. The Saturnia descending by an unacu∣stomed Path, plainly showes a Corrupt Na∣ture. 9. The same Line passing above the Re∣stricta, to the Region of the Moone, is also a Signe of Adversities, and secret Enemies. And verily there is almost nothing observed in this Geniture, that disposes to a Prosperous Fortune. 10. The two Lines in the Tuberculum of the Moone, premonstrate Journeys: as doe also the Moon in the 9. and Mercury in the first House.
11. Jupiter is most dejectedly Collocated: yet hath he adorned his seate with a little Line. He makes a Triangle in Earthly Signes, the Moone shining by a Sinister Aspect unto him the Sun and Mercury by a Dexter. Where∣fore, he asswageth and strangely declineth all Misfortune, especially such as appertaine to the Impediments of the Mind. 12. The Sun is Angular, and Riseth exactly with the Pleiades, in a Trine to Iupiter. And therefore you see a small Crosse under his Mount, notifying, that this Man shall not altogether live obscure. This Diversity of Lines in the Hands, floweth from a troubled Imagination of the Macrocosme, as we shall show in its due Place. Example XVI. One Born in Thuringia A. C. 1592. March 24. Ho. 3. Min. 11. Afternoon, the Pole elevated 51. Degrees. I Have here also put both the Hands; be∣cause in the Left Hand, the Thorall, or Men∣sall, and some other Lesse-Principall Lines, appeare with another Face, then they doe in the Right.
depiction of palm of hand with markings. We wil now consider of the Question former∣ly put at the beginning of this Tract, [whether the Left or Right Hand is most commodiously to be assumed, that thence we might frame a constant judgement; Or whether both Hands are to be considered?] For, I find that both exhibite Lines that be clear enough: Wherefore seeing that this Man was Borne by Night, whilst a Masculine Signe Ascended, and when Jupiter (especially) and Venus had
Dominion in the Geniture, we cannot deter∣mine whether Hand should be Chosen: Because those testimonies equally Contend. [A Masculine Signe Ascends: A Masculine Planet predominates: The time of the Birth is Noctur∣nall, resembling the Female Sex: And Venus A Planet of the same Sex participates in Do∣minion.] Wherefore (things standing thus) we are forced to retaine both, comparing them together. The former Example requires the same Practise in Election of the Hand. 1. Venus is Rightly Placed in both Hands, because that each presents a Starre on her Re∣gion: which portends a most Libidinous Man, and such a one as may be Impetuously hurried unto all manner of voluptuousness. So the same Planet doth also Luxuriate in the like Inclina∣tion, being excellently posited both in her Exaltation, and in the Horoscope. Her Longi∣tude is Calculated from the Alphonsine Tables, as being the surest and best for finding of her Place. 2. In like manner, the Place of Jupiter ap∣peareth in both Hands well-disposed: even as he possesseth his own House in the Geniture, & a good Place of the Figure: For, the 11 house is called the joy of Iupiter: Both these Planets administering the Geniture so Favourably, Import a Glorious and Lasting Fortune; the Place of Saturne excepted:
3. For, he brings Captivity; yet not so heavily, because he is in Cancer, and Disposing of the 12th. In the Right Hand he lets fall a Line beyond the Place of Mars, the which growes Crooked towards the Ferient; but is more streight in the Left Hand. The Pro∣gresse of the Mid-Heaven to the Opposition of Saturne, Points out the 36 or 37 Year: At what time other Characters also, will appeare on his Tuberculum, which shall bode some Misfortune at Hand. 4. The Peregrination Line proceeding from the Cavea of Mars, towards the Restricta; appeareth in the Left-hand: But in the Right it is Cut, and conveighs it selfe to the Cepha∣lica. Hence wee gather a various Fortune in Journeys. Venus Lady of the 9. House, and in the Horoscope, maketh the Journeys Prospe∣rous: Mars in the third impugnes that Prospe∣rity; but yet Venus prevaileth: Mars so posited premonstrates great Strifes with Bre∣thren and Kindred. 5. The three Parallel Lines drawne from the Tuberculum of the Sun and Mercury, to the Vitall, promise him Fortune in his own Coun∣trey, and this by the meanes of Courtiers, Learned Men, and the Nobler sort of Women: which significations are confirmed by the small Lines that are found in the Mensa of the Right Hand. All which depend upon Iupiter, Venus and the Sun.
6. The Place of Mercury is not altogether Barren, and therefore he not destitute of Inge∣nuity: Besides the Cephalica and Lords of the Geniture, are, Assisting unto him. 7. The Mensall of the Right Hand, is ex∣tended by a continued Tract, to the utmost part thereof: But in the Left it passeth not the Tuberculum of Mercury: wherefore, That, de∣clareth a strength of the Principall Members, or Genitalls; This, some hurt or losse therein, especially in the Genitalls: But what that hurt, or losse will be, is not so boldly to be deter∣mined. 8. The Epatica of the Right Hand passeth not the Extremity of the Ferient, as it doth in the Left: This, shows a Decrepid Old Age; That, otherwise, notwithstanding it is decently enough produced. 9. The Vitall agrees in both Hands, as well in the Draught as tacture of other Lines. Wherefore the little Haires in the beginning thereof, presage a Diseased Infancy. Other Diseases are premonstrated about the 14, 21, 25, 32, &c. yeare of his Age: we will also observe the 56. yeare, wherein if the Native shall escape an Apoplexy, without dan∣ger, then will we allot him a Longer Life. Without doubt those yeares will answer to their respective Directions.
Example XVII. Another Borne in Thuringia, under the Lati∣tude of 51. degrees, A. C. 1588. Septem∣ber 21. at 7. in the Morning. depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. THose Planets which have Predominancy in the Geniture, are also very Clearly to be seen in the Hand; [Venus, Mercury, Iupiter
and Mars.] The Via Solis, and Via Saturni, are both Dissected: The Region of the Moon presents an obscure draught. 2. Therefore Venus giving a Starre in her Region, showes a minde that is Lascivious; In∣genious, Merry, &c. as before we have De∣scribed, Pag. 23. concerning her Ingenuity. Wherefore the Positure of Venus most exact∣ly agrees in the Hand and Geniture; for here she Glittereth in her owne House, and in the very Cuspe of the Horoscope. Her oblique As∣cention is 202. degr. 15. min. That is, 15. degr. 15. min. of Libra. 3. Mercury (by the like Reason) shows his Fortunate Assistance, exhibiting on his Region both a Starre and a Crosse, with convenient In∣cisures. So in the Geniture he is most excel∣lently well seated, being in a competent Place of the Heavens, in his owne Mansion: where∣by he conferrs the things that be of his Na∣ture with abundance of Favour: See before, (viz. pag. 31.) where we have Treated of the Rule of Mercury. 4. The Cingulum Veneris not obscure, confirmes the incontinent Lasciviousnesse, and Luxury of Venus: The same Dissected under the Finger of Saturne and the Sun, de∣clareth Losses by the meanes of Lusts: This Decree is confirmed by Venus in the Horoscope, Retrograde in Libra.
5. You see also the Dominion of Iupiter, noted by Incisures and a double Crosse. This conferrs Honours, and renders the Native a Goodly Person, jocund, &c. He there peculiarly administers Aide Inseparable. He is direct in the Geniture: and although in his Detriment, yet he rejoyces in that Place of the Figure, as being neere to the Tayle of the Lyon, and the Dragons Head, and his Dispositer strong and Fortunate. But because he is within 10. degrees of Mars, and Afflicted by the Square of Sa∣turne, he abates somewhat of his Favour. 6. There is indeed a Sister of Mars, (not∣withstanding it be but obscurely drawne) let∣ting fall a Cleft upon the Tuberculum of Iupi∣ter. I told you before that I had very often found out the Conjunction of Iupiter and Mars in the Geniture from such an appearance of the Sister of Mars. Therefore Mars thus found nigh to Basiliscus, or Regulus, increas∣eth his Courage, and Anger: Yet bodes it a desired end of Contentions, Mars in Partile opposition to the Moone, doth sometimes oc∣casion Adversities in Honours, Marriage, Sonnes, and Moneys. Moreover, this Position of his takes away the Favour of the People. 7. The Epatica, Cephalica, the Triangle, and Mensa, are all exceeding well Formed. Be∣sides, the Mensa is decently adorn'd with Lines that are drawne thither from the Region of
Venus. By all which we generally Conjecture, not onely a more Prosperous and Healthfull habit of the body, then ordinary; but also Ingenuity, the best Indowments of the Mind, and Dignities that be excellent; especially within his owne Countrey; and by the meanes of such Persons and things as are Dedicated to Venus. 8. The Line that passeth from the Vitall (by a Crooked path) through the Concave and Epatica, to the Ferient in the Mensa, (whereunto other Incisures likewise tend, be∣neath the Region of the Sun) doe intimate Strifes in Old Age, for Defence of his Honour and Estimation 9. The Via Lactea, being of it selfe fairely Furrowed, denotes the Goodnesse of his Braine, Favour of Women, sweetnesse of Expression, and Fortunate Journeys. The like Mercury in the Geniture, as being Lord of the Ninth House, in his owne Mansion, in a good Place of the Figure, and free from the Rayes of the Malevolent Planets. 10. The other Intricate Lines in the Trian∣gle, presage a confusednesse in those Affaires, which belong unto Mars, the Moone and Mercury. 11. The Via Solis is interrupted by the Cingulum Veneris, which will bring a Staine upon his Honour, by the meanes of something relating to his Wife.
12. The Tuberculum of Saturne hath upon it the same Marke that we found before in the fourth Example: which threatens the Gowt; and some other grievous Diseases, of the Na∣ture of Saturne: And the same is discern'd by the Residence of Saturne in the House of Death afflicting the Moone and Mars by a Platique Quartile. 13. The Vitall somewhere touched and cut by other Lines, presageth Diseases about the 14, 20, 24, 30, 48, &c. yeare of his Age: The Horoscope proceeds from Libra into Scor∣pio about the 20. yeare of his Age, and there remaines in the Termes of Mars for the space of 9. yeares. Saturne Infortunate in Nativities, is wont to Vomit his Poison most vehemently after the first Revolution, that is, after the 29. and 30. yeares (in which time he moveth round the Zodiaque.) What the Crosse above the Re∣stricta meaneth, wee have often told you. The other Incisures, (especially those that seeme to shadow the Saturnia) are but slender, and obscure as yet.
Example XVIII. One Borne at Erphordia, in the yeare 1589. the 8. of May, at 1. h. 45. min. Afternoon. depiction of palm of hand with markings. 1. VEnus, Mercury, and Iupiter rule the Geniture: and therefore you see their Regions in the Hand, decently enough a∣dorned.
2. Hence therefore we Prognosticate a happy wit, and other things that flow from Iupiter, Venus, and Mercury. 3. The Triangle drawne with the best Con∣formity helpes the Ingenuity and all the In∣dowments both of Body and Mind. 4. The Region also of the Moon showes her Dominion, the same being Marked with no despicable Incisures: It occasioneth prospe∣rous Journeys, addeth Splendour both to the Body, and Manners of the Native, and gaines the Favour of Women; which very thing the Moone (in Cancer, and in the 10 House of the Heavens) most plainly demonstrates. 5. The Lines of Jupiter are somewhat troubled, and therefore his Condition is but indifferent: yet gives he Honours not con∣temptible, although with some Difficulties, some Impediments. 6. The Conjunction of Venus and Mercury in the House of Venus, and in a Partile Trine of Iupiter, is accounted very Fortunate. For thereby his Mind is excellently enclined unto all such Arts as are dedicated to Venus and Mercury. I see he will prove a most Eloquent Man. The two Parallel Lines (which are drawn in the Forme of a Scale, or Ladder, from the Region of Mercury, to that of Venus;) doe clearly manifest this Conjunction, and the very same judgement. Wee have almost
the same Scale or Ladder in the 15. Example, which gave that Native the Benefit of a vo∣luble Tongue, and a quick Pronunciation. 7. Saturne hath Ominous Signatures upon his Tuberculum, intimating wounds and other grie∣vous Accidents: And the Line which runneth underneath the same from the Thorall, to the Concave of the Hand, threatens a fall from an High Place, or Drowning. The same is Denounced by the Sun in the Geniture, who is Afflicted of Saturne by his Conjunction with him, neare to the Hyades: Mars (Lord of the Eight House) being in his Detriment. 8. The Vitall is thrice touched: First, by a Line running from the Cephalica: but because it breaks not the Vitall, wee suppose the Dis∣ease (thereby signifyed) will not be so grie∣vous, as otherwise: the Moon comes by Direction to the Quartile of Mars, about the 18 yeare of his Age. Besides, the Progresse of the Horoscope to the Body of Mars, about the 47 yeare will agree to the other Incisures. And lastly, the Progression of the Moon to the Square of Saturne, about the 54. year; in all which years, the Native must take heed of a violent Death. 9. The Mensa excellently Rased, confirmes the goodnesse of Wit, and temperament, and the continuance of a plentifull Fortune, &c.
But here it is to be Noted, by every one Desirous of this knowledge: that in the prece∣dent Examples, the Incisures and small Lines, are not all of them Delineated, partly for that they were excedingly slender, and partly be∣cause they could not be described so accuratly as requisite. Besides, we must observe, that even of those Lines which wee have posited, some ought to be more obscure, and slender: others more cleare and Conspicuous; and therefore good Caution must be had, when we would apply them to other Examples. The skill of the Engraver can never follow the Forme of the Lines so precisely, as they present themselves in the Hand. Moreover, we have often omitted some Accommodati∣ons in the Geniture; lest their significations (as considered in themselves) might Nauseat the Readers.
Example XIX. Now that I may performe the present Taske by a more Commendable Example, I shall annex the whole judgement of the Geniture, to the Practique of Chiromancy, as I delivered the same almost Two years agoe, to a certain Saxon, a Friend of mine; He was Borne in the yeare of Christ 1561. January 17. Ho. 13. Min. 35. Sec. 40. Afternoon; in the Latitude 54. degr. 45. Min. depiction of palm of hand with markings.
HEre are Five Planets excellently well Plac'd in their own Prerogatives: [Saturn and Mercury Received from Houses, and Lo∣cally in their own Triplicity: So Iupiter and Mars, assume a just Power by their Reception of Houses: Venus also is in her Exaltation, and in the Angle of the Earth.] Lastly, the Moon is in her Triplicity: But shee having not as yet obtained her due Light from the Sun, is here very Silent. Mercury and Saturne are notably united by a Trine. The Part of For∣tune Rises with the Scorpions Heart. Venus and Iupiter are the Prime Rulers of the Ge∣niture; Saturne and Mercury Participating, &c. 1. A Long-Life, is conjectured from the Horoscope, and the Luminaries being not impe∣dite: although the Moon be opposite by the Quartile of Mars: yet the Progresse of the Horoscope is first to the Opposition of Saturne: whereof anon. 2. His temperature excells by an Equall Mixture of Humors, because he receiveth his Ferment chiefly from the Perfusion of Iupiter and Venus; Saturne and Mercury besprinkling a Melancholy juice. 3. Hence the Force of Discerning and Re∣presenting (vulgarly called the Phantasy) breatheth nothing but what is Moderate and Agreeable to Reason: For Iupiter maketh such
as are borne under him, Honest, Just, Wise, and addicted to Quiet and Peaceable Coun∣sells, doing alwayes that which is Right and Honest both in judging and Adviseing: such also as are very Desirous of Praise and Re∣nowne: yet (in gaining the same) recede not from their Naturall Modesty and Temper, neither from good Arts, whereby Honour and true Glory are wont to be obtained. But because Saturne and Mercury are both excellently well placed (in respect of their Reception, and Partile Trine) they also doe largely bestow their vertues: they make the Native exceeding diligent in his Arts, and Affaires: so that in administring them, hee useth singular Sedulity and Care, they cause him to search after secret things, and make it his study for to Penetrate Hidden Mysteries, to finde out the Causes of Naturall things; to understand the Civill Lawes: and to unfold Mens secrets: Generally, such Men as are ad∣dicted to all manner of Sciences. Venus the chiefe that participates in the Rule of the Geni∣ture, occasions such Commotions of the Native as be Delightfull, Merry, Pleasant: yet so, as that he studyeth Good Workes, and Friend∣ships, whereof he is most observant, and here∣by becomes gratefull to all Men: He abhors all Filthy, but is taken with cleanly things, comely Gestures, decent Attires, Ornaments, and Elegance.
4. Venus (therefore) and Iupiter doe Pro∣mise great Felicity, in Affaires both Civill and Ecclesiasticall. 5. There are most evident testimonies, of an Excellent Ingenuity. (1) Mercury in A∣quarius doth of him selfe suscitate the strength thereof. (2.) Besides there is a Reception (from Houses) and a Partile Trine betwixt Him and Saturne. (3.) Venus Angular doth the like. (4.) Especially for that the Moone and the Dragons Head are together in the same Angle; (5.) Mercury and the Moone are Asyn∣theti [Pure and not vitiated:] yet both behold the Horoscope; [she by a Platique Trine; He by a Partile Quadrature. 6. Iupiter Lord of the Second, Direct in Mo∣tion, and Received of Mars, plainly Assures an abundance of Wealth. The Part of Fortune most excellently augments this signification, the same being posited in the second, where he is Disposed of, and Aspected by Iupiter. These Riches take their Encrease from services faithfully performed, from most Eminent Honours and Dignities, and they more aboun∣dantly in the third, or last Age. 7. Mercury Lord of the 10 and having con∣venient society with Saturne, presages Digni∣ties not obscure. We have spoken before con∣cerning the Dominion of Iupiter and Venus; wherefore seeing they equally share the Rule
of the Geniture, How can it be that they should not reward the Native with some or other most eminent Dignities? 8. Your Neighbours or Kindred shall sometimes occasion your Dammage, in house∣hold Goods or Affaires: and you shall expend very much in Building. 9. Mars Lord of the 6. ingendereth Hot Infirmities, yet they not so vehement because of Iupiter's Interposition. Moreover, Mars in Sagitary causeth most commonly a gravell in the Joynts of the Feete: If he be found in that Signe, and in the Sixth, hee inevitably brings the Gout, the paines whereof are not to be taken away, but by the Influence of Sa∣gittary, Pisces, &c. deduced from Heaven it selfe, &c. Some other Remedies also may doe much, yet not any that are got by Common Artifice. 10. Your Death will be Naturall by the meanes of some Chronicall Infirmity, pro∣ceeding chiefly from Saturne, such as are Di∣stillations upon the Jawes, the Breast, the Lungs, Splene, &c. Howbeit, Old Age is a Disease, and an Easy Passage unto Death it self. 11. The Sun and Moone disposing of the 9. House, doe discerne Honourable journeys: Mercury well posited in the Third occasioneth Journeys undertaken for the Cause of Ho∣nours and Dignities, and to Persons most
Honourable for Learning and Dignities Civill and Ecclesiasticall. 12. Venus Lady of the 11 concerneth a Multitude of the best Friends: yet Mars be∣holding Venus by a Quartile shall stirre up the envy of some Persons, sowing oftentimes Dissention, and inverting all goodnesse. 13. Venus shall give you victory over your Enemies; whereof indeed there are but a few denounced; because she is Lady of the 7. Angu∣lar, and in her Exaltation. 14. Your Marriage shall be Fortunate, as to an Affluence of Riches: yet herein beware of the Faithlesse Brawling, and Luxurious Quadrature of Mars. But this very much de∣pends upon Mans Free-will: and young Men oft-times finde themselves at a losse, through their Ignorance and Rashnesse. We will now consider the Signes of the Foure Angles. 15. Scorpio Ascending, gives the Natives an Elegant Acutenesse of Wit, Plenty of Dis∣course. It also often Instilleth Great vices, [Infidelity, Envy, Covetousnesse, Ingratitude,] which Learning and Right Reason Exter∣minate. 16. Virgo Culminating is wont to Raise the Native to Magistracy: It conferrs a tollera∣tion
of Great Authority: It transferres many Benefits to others, from whom it returnes not the like Favour. 17. Taurus in the West-Angle presents you with such Adversaries, as at length hee will see oppressed by sundry kinds of Misfortunes: He there incites you to Love, Luxury, De∣lights, and Jeasting. 18. Pisces posited in the Fourth, indue the Minds of the Natives with much Faith, Inte∣grity, and Dexterity of Wit, whereby they gaine great Authority in their Administrati∣ons: they delight to Walke and Dwell neare Rivers: But almost abhorre uxorious Mat∣ters. The Planets in the Houses of Heaven. 19. The Sun in the Third presages Journeys in the Causes of Honours and Dignities: He brings a Mutation of Places, and Honour in Forraigne parts. 20. Mercury there, well posited, renders a Man most Learned in every Science: whereof I could produce innumerable Examples: those shall invent many things by their own Ingenuity: they are Fortunate in Church Mat∣ters, Writing, and Merchandize. 21. Venus most excellently well collocated in the Fourth, will give you Large Possessions,
and Habitations, chiefly in your Last Age: she declares the Period of your Life Honour∣able and Praise-worthy. 22. Mars in the First, and there not Infor∣tunate makes a Man Couragious, Rash, and somewhat Angry: sometimes he presageth Wounds in the Head and Face. 23. Iupiter in the 5. doth sometimes con∣ferre the Great Rewards of Great Men: He makes a Man Fortunate in Embassies. 24. Saturne thus excellently seated in the 8. gives many inheritances: He threatens death by Catharres, A Cough, &c. and oftentimes by the Plague. The Planets in the Signes. 25. The Sun in the House of Saturne makes the vitall vertue more Robust, and as it were more Compact, whence hee gives a Longer Life then ordinary. 26. The Moone in the House of Iupiter pro∣motes all things that are good: yet being here Afflicted by the Quartile of Mars, exciteth some strifes in Possessions: often reiterateth small Fevers. 27. Saturne in the House of Mercury, gives a Profound Wit, Occult Sciences. 28. Iupiter in the House of Mars indifferently well Affected, makes one victorious.
29. The same is signified by Mars in the Mansion of Iupiter: Thus they both of them render the Native very gracious with Prin∣ces, and Noblemen, and under them to have Authority. 30. Venus in the House of Iupiter, bestowes many Benefits, either by the meanes of Wo∣men, or of some Ecclesiasticall preferments. She makes you Discreet, Honest, Healthfull: sometimes she occasioneth strife, and falling out with your Neighbours, and some of your Friends, for that Venus is expos'd to the Qua∣drature of Mars. 31. Mercury in the House of Saturne, gives alwayes a profound Wit, and a Man that is greedy of all Sciences. The Lords of the Houses. 32. The Lord of the Horoscope received of Iupiter from Houses, plainly declares a Gene∣rous Mind. 33. The Lord of the Second in the Fifth, in∣creaseth your Wealth through Rewards be∣stowed by Great Men. 34. The Lord of the Third in the Eight occasioneth Journeys, either on the behalfe of some that are Dead, or by reason of the Plague: He often destroyes Elder Bro∣thers.
35. The Lord of the 4. in the 5. makes you Fortunate in Tillage, or Navigations. 36. The Lord of the 5. in the 4. brings Glad∣nesse and Delight to you from things that be Immoveable, as the Building of goodly Houses, and the tillage of sweet and pleasant Gardens. And here Venus undoubtedly con∣firmes that Portent, because such things are contained under her Dominion. 37. Mars Lord of the 6. in the First excites many hot Infirmities, but this is qualified by the Reception of Iupiter. 38. The Lord of the 7. in the 4. presageth strifes about the Father or Wives Inheritance, and this the rather for that he is most cruelly Afflicted of Mars. 39. The Lord of the 8. in the 3. showes that the Native shall survive all his Brothers. Hee often designeth Death in a Forraigne Countrey. 40. The Lord of the 9. in the 3. occasions Journeys for the Cause of Dignities. 41. The Lord of the 10. in the 3. and there excellently well Placed, makes the Native more Honourable then the rest of his Bre∣thren. 42. The Lord of the 11. in the 4. denotes a Se∣cond Fortune in Goods that be Immoveable, especially in Old-Age. 43. The Lord of the 12. in the 4. Displeasures
and strifes for Possessions, and Church-Goods. These may be sufficient in Generall Iudgements. Now if we will Consider the Principall Lines of the Hand, we shall every where finde the same things signifyed, notwithstanding that we have curtailed the Decrees of the Sig∣nificators. We told you (Experience her self bearing witnesse) that the lesse Principall Lines are changed at a certaine time, according to the Progressions of the Celestiall Places and Starres, who are Significators: whereby it comes to passe, that we may best judge of any thing from them, either when they ap∣peare de novo, or begin to wax clearer then they were before. 1. The vitall indeed is continued, but yet Marked with some Incisures, although but slender ones. Whence judge you some Dis∣eases about the 14, 30, 40, &c. yeare of your Age. 2. Venus is Fortunate in the Geniture: and therefore she hath thus Rased her Region, with the accustomed Furrowes. 3. The Epatica decently drawn, and with∣out Sections, argues a Good temperance of the Liver, health of Body, and a Life that is long enough. 4. The Mensa full of Branches, shows an In∣crease of Riches.
5. The Mensa form'd by a sufficiently de∣cant space, perspicuously bearing the Character of Iupiter, under the Region of the Annular (or Ring-finger) is an excellent Argument of Honours, chiefly Ecclesiasticall. 6. The place of Iupiter beautified with a most cleare little Line, the same. So likewise the Tuberculum of the Sun, not undecently Fur∣rowed. 7. The Moons Region presenting a cleare Incisure, premonstrates Journeys. 8. The Dominion of Mercury is also most obvious, in that he excellently adorneth his Region, as also the First Ioynt of the Auricular, or Litle-Finger. 9. The Cephalica contributes to the Wit, in that it decently composeth the Triangle. Iu∣piter, Venus, and Mercury, doe the like. 10. Saturne also hath some Portents, especi∣ally a Disease, in that he Beares a Character under his Finger. 11. The Parallel Lines which Run through the Midst of the Hand, towards the Ferient, confirme the Arguments of Felicity. 12. The Saturnia produced even to the E∣patica, declares uprightnesse of Judgement and Manners. The same Line having a Crosse about the Restricta, argues a Peaceable, and most Honoured Old Age.
Generall Elections. In the use of all Purgative Medicines, you must observe the Decurse of the Moone, in Scorpio, Aquarius, and the third Decade of Pisces: although she be not joyned to Iupiter, or Venus. For, the Conjunction of these Planets with the Moone, inhibites the vertue of the Purgative Medicine, in regard they affect the Body, and Incline the Medicine to the nature of Nourishment. In other Actions, [as in Buying of Houses, in Journeys, and the Com∣mencement of Administrations, &c.] Let the Moone be in Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Li∣bra, or Aquarius, and Aspected by one or both of the Fortunate Planets. And as for the Day, let it be upon a Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. And now lest this Geniture should have seemed Defective, I present it wholly as I composed the same, unto the studious in Astrology: indeed chiefly for that it is not in the Number of the vulgar sort, but diligently enough composed.
A Speciall Judgement of this Ge∣niture, giving you the Directions of the Principall Places, and their Significations. 1. THe HOROSCOPE to the Body of Mars. The Place of Mars in Sagittary, 03. Deg. 10. Min. His Latitude 00. Deg. 06. Min. N. Declination 20. Deg. 56. Min. S. Right Ascention 241. Deg. 06. Min. Circle of Position 54. Deg. 45. Min. Ascentionall Difference 32. Deg. 47. Min. Oblique Ascention 273. Deg. 53. Min. Direction sought for 29. Deg. 40. Min. The Oblique Ascention also of the Horoscape, is 144. deg. 13. min. 2. The Horoscope to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in Sagittary 08. Deg. 00. Min. Oblique Ascention 280. Deg. 32 Min. Direction sought for 36. Deg. 19. Min. 3. The Horoscope to the Scorpions Heart. Scorpions Heart in Sagittary 03. Deg. 45. Min. Latitude 04. Deg. 00. Min. S Declination 24. Deg. 53. Min. Right Ascention 240. Deg. 53 Min. Assentionall difference 40. Deg. 52. Min. Oblique Ascention 281. Deg. 45. Min.
Direction required 37. Deg. 32. Min. 4. The Horoscope to the Opposition of Saturne. Opposition of Saturne in Sag. 13. Deg. 40. Min. Latitude 2. Deg. 20. Min. N. Declination 20. Deg. 10. Min. S. Right Ascention 252. Deg. 34. Min. Ascentionall Difference 30. Deg. 36. Min. Oblique Ascention 283. Deg. 10. Min. Direction required. 38. Deg. 57. Min. 5. The Horoscope to the Trine Dexter of Iupiter. Trine of Iupiter in Sagit. 19. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Deg. 43. Min. N. Declination 22. Deg. 23. Min. S. Right Ascention 258. Deg. 36. Min. Ascentionall Difference 35. Deg. 41. Min. Oblique Ascenton 293. Deg. 17. Min. Direction sought for. 47. Deg. 04. Min. 6. The Horoscope to the 26. degr. of Sagit. (the Term of Saturn) he hath in the year. 59. Deg. 20. Min. 7. To the end of Sagittary in 63. Deg. 47. Min. 8. The Horoscope to the Sextile Dexter of Venus Sextile of Venus in Capricorn 04. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Deg. 27. Min. S. Declination 23. Deg. 50. Min. S. Right Ascention 274. Deg. 55. Min. Ascentionall Difference 38. Deg. 36. Min. Oblique Ascention 313. Deg. 31. Min. Direction required. 69. Deg. 17. Min.
The Directions of the Sun. Sun's Place in Aquary 08. Deg. 00. Min. Declination 18. Deg. 19. Min. S. Distance from the Fourth. H. 23. Deg. 47. Min. Circle of Position 21. Deg. 40. Min. Oblique Ascention 318. Deg. 00. Min. 9. The Sun to the Square Sinister of Mars. Quartile of Mars in Pisc. 3. Deg. 10 Min. Oblique Ascention 339. Deg. 09 Min. Direction required. 21. Deg. 09. Min. 10. The Sun to the Body of Venus. Venus in Pisc. 04. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Deg. 55. Min. S. Declination 10. Deg. 44. Min. Right Ascention 336. Deg. 43. Min. Ascentionall Difference 4. Deg. 28. Min. Oblique Ascention 340. Deg. 11. Min. Direction required. 23. Deg. 11. Min. 11. The Sun to the Square Dexter of Saturne. Quartile of Saturne Pisc. 13. Deg. 40. Min. Oblique Ascention 347. Deg. 32. Min. Direction sought for 29. Deg. 32. Min. 12. The Sun to the Trine Sinister of Mars. Trine of Mars in Aries 3. Deg. 10. Min. Oblique Ascention 52. Deg. 24. Min. Direction required. 44. Deg. 24. Min. 13. The Sun to a Proper Sextile. Suns Sextile in Aries 08. Deg. 00. Min. Oblique Ascention 06. Deg. 07. Min.
Direction sought for 48. Deg. 07. Min. 14. The Sun to the Sextile Dexter of Saturne. Sextile of Saturne in Ar. 13. Deg. 40. Min. Latitude 1. Deg. 10. Min. S. Declination 4. Deg. 21. Min. N. Right Ascention 13. Deg. 00. Min. Ascentionall Difference 1. Deg. 40. Min. Oblique Ascention 11. Deg. 20. Min. Direction required 53. Deg. 20. Min. 15. The Sun to the Body of Iupiter. Iupiter in Aries 19. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 1. Deg. 26. Min. S. Right Ascention 18. Deg. 32. Min. Ascentionall Difference 2. Deg. 31. Min. Oblique Ascention 16. Deg. 01. Min. Direction required. 58. Deg. 01. Min. 16. The Sun to the Sextile Sinister of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Taur. 04. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Deg. 26. Min. S. Declination 12. Deg. 40. Min. N. Right Ascention 32. Deg. 22. Min. Ascentionall Difference 5. Deg. 7. Min. Oblique Ascention 27. Deg. 15. Min. Direction required 69. Deg. 15. Min. 17. The Sun comes to the Trine of the Midd-Heaven in 66. Deg. 50. Min. years.
The Directions of Venus. 18. Venus to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in Ar. 08. Deg. 00 Min. Right Ascention 7. Deg. 20. Min. Right Ascention of Venus 336. Deg. 21. Min. Direction sought for 30. Deg. 59. Min. 19. Venus to the Body of Iupiter. Iupiter in Aries 19. Deg. 30 Min. Latitude 1. Deg. 26. Min. Right Ascention 18. Deg. 32. Min. Direction required 42. Deg. 11. Min. 20. Venus to a Proper Sextile. Sextile of Venus in Taur. 4. Deg. 30. Min. Right Ascention 32. Deg. 24. Min. Direction required 56. Deg. 13. Min. The Directions of the Midd-Heaven, whose Right Ascention is 154. Deg. 13. Min. 21. The Midd-Heaven to a Sextile of Mars. Sextile of Mars in Libra 30. Deg. 10 Min. Right Ascention 182. Deg. 54 Min. Direction required 28. Deg. 31. Min. 22. The M. Heaven to the Trine Dex. of the Sun. Trine of the Sun in Libra 00. Deg. 00. Min. Right Ascention 187. Deg. 20 Min. Direction required 33. Deg. 07. Min. 23. The Midd-Heaven to the Trine of Saturne and Mercury. Trine of Saturne in Libra 13. Deg. 40. Min.
Latitude 1. Deg. 10. Min. N. Right Ascention 193. Deg. 00. Min. Direction required 38. Deg. 48. Min. 24. Midd Heaven to the Virgins spike. Virgins spike in Libr. 17. Deg. 40. Min. Latitude 2. Deg. 00. Min. S. Right Ascention 195. Deg. 32. Min. Direction required 41. Deg. 19. Min. 25. M. Heaven to the Opposition of Iupiter. Opposition of Iupiter in Lib. 19. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 1. Deg. 26. Min. N. Right Ascention 198. Deg. 32. Min. Direction required 44. Deg. 19. Min. 26. M. Heaven to the Trine Dext. of Venus. Trine of Venus in Scorp. 4. Deg. 30. Min. Latitude 0. Deg. 26. Min. N. Right Ascention 212. Deg. 13. Min. Direction required 58. Deg. 10. Min. 27. M. Heaven to the Southerne Lance of Libra. Lance of Libra in Scorp. 09. Deg. 00 Min. Latitude 00. Deg. 40. Min. N. Right Ascention 216. Deg. 50. Min. Direction required 62. Deg. 37. Min. The Directions of the Part of Fortune. 28. The Part of Fortune to the Sextile of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Capri. 04. Deg. 30 Min. Latitude 00. Deg. 28. Min. S. Declination 23. Deg. 51. Min. S. Right Ascention 274. Deg. 55. Min.
Distance from the Fourth H. 59. Deg. 18. Min. Circle of Position 40. Deg. 20 Min. Ascentionall Difference 22. Deg. 02. Min. Oblique Ascention 296. 57, Direction required 28. Deg. 06 Min. 29. The Part of Fortune to the Antiscia of Mars. Antiscia of Mars in Capr. 26. Deg. 50 Min. Declination 20. Deg. 47. Min. S. Right Ascention 298. Deg. 55 Min. Distance from the Fourth H. 35. Deg. 18 Min. Circle of Position 29. Deg. 00 Min. Oblique Ascention 310. Deg. 26 Min. Direction required 48. Deg. 45 Min. 30. The Part of Fortune to the Body of the Sun, giveth years 60. Deg. 30. Min. 31. To the Trine of Saturne, Trine of Saturne 13. Deg. 40. Min. S. Latitude 1. Deg. 10. Min. N Declination 15. Deg. 36. Min. S Right Ascention 315. Deg. 48 Min. Distance from the Fourth H. 18. Deg. 25 Min. Circle of Position 18. Deg. 12 Min. Ascentionall Difference 5. Deg. 15 Min. Oblique Ascention 321. Deg. 3 Min. Direction required 64. Deg. 22 Min. 32. The Part of Fortune to the Sextile Dexter of Iupiter, giveth yeares 71. Deg. 12. Min.
Judgements upon the Precedent Directions. IN the 22. Current yeare of your Age, The Direction of the Sun to the Quartile of Mars had surely Excited some Commotion of Humors, or Misfortune in Journeys: But that Venus Corporally Assisting the Degree of Direction, easily averted every Adverse thing. In the 24. yeare, the Sun's coming to the Body of Venus, foretold some Dignity or Com∣mendation of your Name amongst Church-Men, and other Great Personages. You attained then (if I be not mistaken) to Possesse the Good you wot of. In the 29. yeare, the Part of Fortune com∣ing to the Sextile Dexter of Venus, and the Mid-Heaven to the Sextile of Mars, brought an Encrease of Goods, and a happy and spee∣dy successe of your Affaires. In the 30. yeare Current, the Horoscope came to the Body of Mars, and the Sun to the Square of Saturne, which caused that Alteration of Humours whence the Quartan Fever pro∣ceeded, which invaded you the Following yeare, but turn'd to a Tertian. From this ma∣nifest Accident, (truly agreeing with the Sig∣nificators thereof,) the present Figure of Hea∣ven
was Corrected. And therefore no scru∣ple is left of the following Directions, because they are Diligently and Faithfully enough Calculated, and made manifest in their Signi∣fications. Venus to the Sextile Sinister of the Sun in the 31. yeare, will spread your Name farre and neare especially in Forraigne Parts: And soon after you shall Commence Doctor in V. I. and obtaine some other much Honoured Privi∣ledges. In the yeare of Christ, 1592. May 16. (Old Style) The Profection of the Mid-Heaven comes exactly to the Sextile Sinister; and Venus to the Trine Dexter of Mercury. In the 34. yeare, the Mid-Heaven coming to the Trine of the Sun, will augment your Fame in Forraigne Countrys. But because the Sun is not very strong, the Effects of this Direction will be the obscurer, and as if they were Private. Of the same nature is the 23. Direction falling out in the 39. yeare of your Age, for this will Amplify the Celebrity of your Name and Learning in the Courts of Princes and Noble-Men, and in other Places. In the 38. yeare of your Age the Horoscope comes to the Scorpions Heart, which usually brings some Evill to the Eyes, otherwise it af∣flicts with a Wound, or Excites some short but vehement Fever, or Ague. Mars comes
by Transite to the Square of the Horoscope, a∣bout the 27. and 30. of August (according to the Old Calendar) in the yeare 1598. and soon after to the Horoscope it selfe. To wit, Oct. 13. Againe Quadrangularly from Aquary, January the 8. 1599. The Direction of the Horoscope to the Op∣position of Saturne falls out also in the 39. yeare of your Age, (almost Complete,) 1600. and threatneth you with a dangerous Disease, [viz. a totall Dejection of the Powers of the Body, Poyson, a perillous Plague, the Pestilence, suddaine Catharrs, &c.] The Profection, or Revolution of the Sun, comes to the Opposition of Mars, in the yeare 1600. about the 20. of November: The Direction of the Horoscope, to the Quartile Sinister of Mars, about the 21. of September after the Old Calendar: In Transite, you shall observe the 1, 7, and 8. of Ianuary, the Feasts of Epiphany: As also the 22. and 24, of September; the 24, 25, 27, and 30, of November, the 2, 4, and 6, of De∣cember: For on those dayes Mars afflicts the Horoscope by his Transite. QUESTION. Whether you shall escape this Disease? I Answer: Indeed that yeare shall be grie∣vous, and dangerous enough: But because
the present Direction is celebrated in Benevo∣lent Termes, and that Iupiter followes with his Triangular Beames, I positively conclude, that this yeare shall not be Distructive unto you. Ptolomy and other Astrologers have a Rule approved of by Experience, which is this: Benevolent Starrs beholding the Degree of a Dangerous Direction by the Mediety of their Orbes, doe Refraene the Malignity there∣of, and make the Cure of the Disease Easie. Therefore the Trine of Iupiter herein Be∣nignely Irradiating the Directionall degrees of the Horoscope, sufficeth: But let not Humane Prudence be wanting, the which if it doe not totally avert an Imminent Evill, yet so much it Declines it, that it proves neither so grie∣vous, nor yet so hurtfull as otherwise. He that is knowing may Divert many Effects of the Starrs, if he know but their Natures. Ptolom. Centiloq. Aphorisme 5. Let such Me∣dicines be applyed before-hand, as may both purge the Body from all Filthy Humours, and likewise comfort the Principall Mem∣bers, strengthen the Vitall Spirit, and Native Heate, which are of another Quality. The Scorpion (as also the Serpent) deduced from Heaven (I speak with Virgill) preserves him safe that carries it about him, from Fevers, Poison, and Pestilence. These are Secrets. In the same yeare of your Age, the Mid-Heaven
coming to the Trine Sinister of Sa∣turne, presages Goods to ensue by meanes of the Dead: Ancient Possessions, the Gift of some Aged Man. The 42. and 43. yeare of your Age will be Honourable and Prosperous: because the Mid-Heaven comes to the Virgins Spike, and Venus her selfe to the Body of Iupiter. By this meanes they bring some Notable good in the Encrease of Dignities and Wealth, & that by the occasion of a certaine Great Personage. You shall observe the 14. day of Iuly, An. 602. and then the 11. and 16. of August: Also the 3. of September. In the following yeare 1603. the 22. and 23. of Ianuary; the 7. and 8. of Iune. Here the Profection of the Sun succeeds the Trine Sinister of Iupiter: There the Mid-Heaven shall come to Venus herselfe. In the 45. yeare of your Age, the Mid-Heaven coming to the Opposition of Iupiter will Intercept, or subvert the Friendship of some Great Lord: at which time take heed how you Mannage your Affaires with Noble∣men, &c. In the same yeare upon the Sun's receding to the Trine of Mars, you shall fall into the Friendship of some Martially disposed Per∣son, not without some Advantage. Use his Benevolence, and Friendlinesse, prosperously. In the 48. yeare of your Age, An. 1608.
The Horoscope coming to the Trine Dexter of Iupiter, gives you a most Thriving Constitu∣tion of the Body, and makes you Conversant with Great Men, whereby Great Good is to be Expected. Of the same Nature is the subsequent Di∣rection, [to wit, the Sun to a Proper Sextile in the Termes of Venus,] falling out in the 49. yeare of your Age, in the year of Christ 1609. In this yeare the Part of Fortune coming to the Antiscia of Mars, will adde unto your Expences occasioned by the meanes of Kin∣dred and Journeyes: Beware also of some Theeveries of your Servants, or Messengers. In the 45. yeare of your Age, Ann. 1614. The Sun coming to the Sextile Sinister of Mercury, and the Dexter of Saturne, shall en∣large your Authority and Esteeme with or by the Learned. For seeing you are unweariedly carried by a certaine Naturall Violence, both to the Sciences of Mighty things, and also to the knowledge of Hidden Secrets, I easily foresee What a one, how great a one, you shall suddainly be! Goe on Couragiously, that you may Act things Answerable to your Ingenu∣ity, that you may advance and further your Fortune. The 57. and 59. yeares of your Age will be very Honourable, and the most Acceptable of any: you shall therein finde a Signall Increase
of your Possessions, Renowne, Dignities, and Authority: For then Venus will come to Her Proper Sextile; The Mid-Heaven to the Trine Dexter of Venus: And the Sun to the Body of Iupiter. The Profection of the Mid-Heaven to the Sextile of Venus, falls out in the yeare of Christ, 1617. the 14. and 15. of Ianuary (Old Style:) But the Profection of the Sun to the Trine of Mercury, and the Body of Saturne will happen, about the Vernall Equinox. There are also Fortunate Profections in the yeare 1618. about the Winter Solstice. Also Ian. 21. &c. Saturne in is the second Degree of Gemini Adverse the Mid-Heaven, whereby he shall in some sort indeavour to protract an Event by the meanes of some Mans Death. In the 6. year of your Age, An. 1620. The Horoscope coming to the 26. Degree of Sagi∣tary, the Contiguous Terms of Saturne and Mars, shall occasion a Feaverish Disease, which will easily be removed by the help of a Physi∣tian: Or if the yearly Medicines and Evacu∣ations were not (as is requisite) for borne contrary to Custome, it could hardly be, that any Disease should trouble you. The Profecti∣no of the Horoscope and the Sun are removed from the Society of the Malevolent Planets. The Transite of Mars (in Taurus,) by the Point opposed unto the Horoscope, shall hap∣pen the 15. of Aprill; then in Leo, by the
Point in Square thereunto, the 22. 23. and 24. of August: which are more to be ob∣served. In the 61. yeare of your Age, An. 1621. The Progresse of the Part of Fortune, to the Body of the Sun, shall multiply your Treasure, by the Rewards of Kings, and some other Great Personages: The like for your Ho∣nours. In the 63. yeare, the Mid-Heaven coming to the Southerne Lance of Libra favours you with no meane Dignities. In the 64. yeare, the Horoscope arriving at the End of Sagittary, threatens you with a Disease attended especially with Lascitudes of the Body, Filthinesse of Defluxions, and with Paines in the Feete above all other parts, &c. Ptolomy Affirmes, That the Termes of the Signes are Iuterficient: the which I have of∣tentimes found to be true. But because that here, Venus most powerfully beholds this Place, by an approaching Sextile Aspect, I boldly Affirme (Humane Providence assist∣ing) You shall not Dye this yeare. In the 65. yeare of your Age, An. 1625. The Part of Fortune coming to the Body of Mercury, and the Trine of Saturne, confers upon you a Large Inheritance; Or Faire Possessions by the meanes of some Deceased. For Saturne being so Fortunate, it is Impossi∣ble
this Direction should be Fruitlesse. So in the yeare 1627. The Sun coming to the Trine of the Mid-Heaven, will againe occasi∣on all manner of Good to befall you. In the 70. yeare of your Age, An. 1630. The Sun coming to the Sextile Sinister of Venus; The Horoscope also to the Sextile Dexter of Venus, point out a most Honoura∣ble time in Dignities, Possessions, and Renown in all manner of Benefits: The same almost is discern'd by the Progression of the Part of Fortune to the Sextile Dexter of Iupiter, fal∣ling out in the 72. yeare of your Life; for that also Presages Kingly Rewards from For∣raigne Countreys. But enough, and more then enough concerning this your most Fortunate Geniture. Farewell. In the yeare 1593.
A Briefe DISCOURSE OF The Soule of the VVORLD, AND The Universall Spirit thereof. THe World is a Systeme of Cele∣stiall, and Terrestriall Bodies, constant in Order, Number and Measure, but Living, Ani∣mate, Intellectuall. The former Part of the Definition is cleare from the Holy Scriptures: The latter is Proved of Plato, and that by manifest Rea∣sons. Where we say A Living Systeme, we in∣tend a certaine Naturall Life, diffused through the Bodies of the world, extended and Mo∣vably Acting together with the Body of the World. Where we call it An Animate Systeme, we meane the substance of the Soule of the
World whose Essence indeed is both Indivi∣sible, and Immutable, like the Intellect, yet it may in some sort be tearmed Divisible and Moveable, because it is the Proper Fountaine of some Powers that are declining to Divi∣sible and Moveable. Vertue also and Action) is partly Individuall and Immoveable, so far forth as it agrees with Divine things, & stead∣fastly worketh: and Partly Divisible in some Respects, both because it is Manifold, and also for that it Declineth to a Manifold and Divisible Body: And Moveable, because it worketh Temporally. Where we tearme it Intellectuall, we meane the Angelicall Intellects, which are properly Perfect and Indivisible (according to Place,) in their Government of the Spheres: and Immutable in respect of time, the Naturall Life, and Forme Corporeall be∣ing Opposite thereunto, [Divisible. and Mu∣table.] That even these Angelicall Intellects be in the Body of the World, necessity requires it, because the Body of the World is through Life made fit for the Intellect. Therefore, looke how it is in regard of Life, and the like it is in respect of the Intellect: And as it hath not onely a Naturall lying hid in the Matter of the World, but an Animall also, that is, A Soule existing in it selfe: So hath it not
only an Intellectuall Quality infused the Soule; but also an Intellectuall Substance therein re∣maining. For certaine Qualities are every where reduced, to certaine Substances: As a Vitall Quality to a Vitall Substance; so also an Intellectuall Quality, to an Intellectuall Sub∣stance. But as touching these things, we shall explaine our selfe more at large. The whole Body of the World, is a cer∣taine Body composed of all the Foure Ele∣ments, the Members or Parts whereof are the Bodies of all Living Creatures. For the small Body of every Animall, is a Part of the Worlds Body: Neither is it composed of the whole Element of Fire, Aire, Water, or Earth, but of some Parts of these Elements. By how much therefore the Whole is more Perfect then a Part thereof: by so much is the Body of the World more Perfect then the Body of any one Living Creature. Hence were it absurd to thinke, that an Im∣perfect Body should have a Soule: But that it neither hath a Soule, nor can live Perfect: None will be so mad, as to say, the Part Liveth and not the Whole. Therefore the whole Body of the World Liveth, whilst the Bodies of the Animals therein Live, which are the Parts thereof. And now seeing there must needs be One Soule of the whole World, we will in the
next place enquire, in what Part thereof this Soule may Reside, whence she Distributes her Spirit through all things, and preserves the same so Distributed? Shee fixeth not, her Seate, and Pavilions, in Bodies subject to variety of Change, and Manifold Corrupti∣on, as are the Elements and Elementary Bo∣dies: wherefore seeing that in Heaven, there is no Corruption of Bodies, there certainly is her Place of Residence. And although those Elements also may be in Heaven, (but most Purely or Spiritually:) yet is it mani∣fest, that the Element of Fire hath therein Dominion: Even as here in this Inferiour Part of the World, where the Soveraignty of the Elements remaines in the Power of Fire. And this we are sensible of in our owne Bo∣dies: But much more, if we doe but consi∣der, how the Fire by no meanes Putrefieth, nor is any way Corrupted, notwithstanding it often Corrupteth other Bodies, where it gets Preheminency. Moreover, Nature affords it Earth, Water, and Aire, as a certaine Subject Matter, where∣on to Exercise its Power: The Aire it selfe, (as also the Earth, with the Water surround∣ing it, whence we are Nourish'd, and draw our Breath,) is indeed so Affected of the Fire about it, that sometimes Heate doth therein predominate; otherwhiles it is so Extenuated,
that for want of Heate, it leaves its owne Qua∣lity, and is forsaken of Cold. In like manner we see such Impressions conveyed from the Fire above us upon the Earth, and Water, that sometimes the Na∣ture and Quality thereof is capable of some Excesse, otherwhiles of Defect, the Celestiall Fire it selfe remaining Entire: Wherefore seeing the Soule of the World hath its Resi∣dence in Heaven, of Necessity it must live in a Fiery Substance: For Heaven is a Fiery Essence, but withall most Temperate, Pure, Lucid, and Incorruptible. Nor shall they Trouble us, who deny the Fiery Heaven, in regard the Motion of the Heavens is Circular, the Fires Motion Per∣pendicular. For, because our Fire is Peregrine, and Impure, therefore it tends directly up∣wards, and (by a kind of Veneration) Covets the Place of the Proper and Naturall Fire▪ yet is it not to be supposed such a Fiery Hot Heaven, as that 'tis burning or Heating. By how much lesse Fire is mingled with strange Matter, by so much the lesse it Burneth: The which is seen in the Flaming of the Purer sort of Oyle, but especially of Oyle Artificiously Extracted from Gold: the which True Al∣chemists doe Witnesse, and as these Mrall Eyes of mine have sometimes Tryed. There∣fore seeing there is not any matter in Heaven,
estranged from the Celestiall, no Adustion, no Heate is made there: We see no Adustion in Comets running through the Celestiall Spheres; but onely some Illustration; for that doubtlesse the matter thereof much par∣ticipateth of the Nature of the Celestiall Bo∣dies. But TYCHO BRAHE, A Dane, A Noble-Man, An Astronomer, and a most incomparable Philosopher of this Age, shall anon more plainly unfold to us this matter farre different from the Madded Nursery of Peripatetiques, and that not without the Infal∣lible Curiosity both of Observations, and Demonstrations. Now because some Matter Opposed is Heated and Burnt by the Rayes of the Sun, contracted by a Glasse, that is, a sud∣daine generation of Heat, and Fire, increasing by the Flagration of the Collected Rayes in the Glasse, and applyed to Fit Matter, which are of another Disputation. Some will have the Matter of Heaven to be Aereall: But for that Light is a Propertie of Fire, enlightning even the Aire it selfe; in my Judgment wee doe better, in supposing it to consist of a Fiery Matter. Besides, Heaven is next to the Divine Seate, and God himselfe: yet not so, as that God is not every where. God is called The Fa∣ther of Light, with whom there is no Change, by whom the Light may be Extinguished, or Diminished: neither an overshadowing of
Change, whereby sometimes he either is turn'd into Night, or suffereth an Eclipse. GOD is Light, in which there is no Darkenesse, that is, Forme, wherein there is nothing Informe: Beauty, in which there is nothing of Defor∣mity. As therefore GOD is Light invisible, Infinite, the Truth it selfe, the cause of every truth, and of all things: So the Light of Hea∣ven is the splendour, or rather the shaddow of Heaven, visible, Finite, the cause of visible things: For, the whole Universe receiveth Light and Life from Heaven. Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and 70 of the Elders of Israel, saw the God of Israel, and under his Feete as it were a worke of Saphire-stone, and as the very Heaven when it is cleare, &c. Exod. 24. 10. Whence we shall not speake Absurdly, if we say that GOD shineth upon us by his Light from Heaven, and the Sun as a Candle shineth through Glasse, and Windowes made thereof: otherwise, we can hardly explaine this matter, because of his Inscrutable Majesty. That therefore the Celestiall Bodies are Ani∣mate, is hence rightly concluded: For, it were absurd to deny a Life and Soule to be in Heaven, and the Starres, the which Inspire both Life and Soule even in the vilest of these Inferiour Bodies. They give Life unto Plants, which grow without naturall Seede, as we see in the Mountaines and Places untill'd:
so likewise to the Earth: For, if a Lumpe be taken out of the Bowells thereof, and for some time exposed to the Rayes of the Sun, it yieldeth Grasse, or some Herbes, oftentimes the twiggs of Little Trees. The Starres also bestow Life upon Animalls not generated by Copulation: nor can we be so stupid, as to imagine that Plants, Trees, &c. are of a nobler Condition, then the Celestiall Bodies, This manifest perpetuall operation cannot come but from a Pure, and Cleansed Body. These things (I suppose) are sufficient to prove, the World hath a Soule, pla∣ced in Heaven, as in the most noble Part thereof. But perhaps you desire it may be further Proved, that these Celestiall Soules are Rati∣onall, and participate of the Divine Mind. The Matter is not obscure. For if the World (as Plato saith) be the Best effect that could be of goodnesse it selfe [That is, of GOD, for wee Germans so expresse it, because (Got) sound nothing else with us then Gut, if we rightly enquire the Reason of the Idiom] it must certainly participate not onely of Life, Sense and Reason, but also of Intelligence. The Soule is the Perfection of the Body. And that Body most Perfect, which hath the Perfectest Soule. Wherefore if the Celestiall Bodies be most Perfect, they must of necessity enjoy the most Perfect Soules. The Heavens
therefore doe Participate of the Intellect and Minde: which very thing the Platoniques plainly approve by Musicall Concords. For, seeing that Musicall Concord is, as it were, Living, Rationall, and Efficacious; what Re∣semblance hath it unto Life it selfe, how Pleasing is it to the Mind, and even Ravisheth the whole Man! And which is more, the Mind and all things else are made by the Soules by her they are preserved, by her they are Moved. And therefore Plato did not amisse, when he Described the Soule, to be shee that made, Preserved and Moved all Naturall things, especially by Musicall Numbers and Proportion; constituted (I say) by numbers, not Mathematicall, as some Calumniate, but by Ideall and Metaphysicall Proportions of Numbers. This Harmony consisteth alto∣gether in Motion, because that by an Aerall Nature (posited in Motion) it moveth the Body, by a Purifyed Aire, it stirres up the Aereall Spirit, (the Chaine of Soule and Body:) By affect it at once disposeth the Sense and Affection: By signification it operates upon the Mind. Lastly, through this Motion of the subtile Aire, it penetrates vehemently: It floweth sweetly through the Contemplation: and (by its conforme Quality) powreth out it selfe with a wonderfull Pleasure. By its Nature aswell spirituall as Materiall, it at once
Ravisheth, and Claimeth all that is Man. Wherefore let us seriously consider, how the Sounds of most sweet Musique elevate, and as it were double and treble our Minds. And in like sort judge the Melody of the Celestiall Bodies, who now by a slower, but anon by a swifter Motion, produce a tone that is Grave or Acute: whereunto agree (in these sublunaries) Gravity and Levity, Cold and Heat, Moisture and Drynesse of Elements: so likewise Matter and Forme in the Gene∣ration of things, Meeknesse and Magnanimi∣ty, Temperance and Fortitude in Humane Affaires. Seeing therefore that Motion is every where Free in its own Nature, it might easily prevaricate, and wander, unlesse it were Ruled by the Intellect, and Minde: the which wee cannot further enquire of in this Place, according to the Exigence of the matter. Besides, it is absurd for us to have Reasons of our own workes: for the Celestiall Soules, and so the Soule of the Universe, have no Reasons of theirs, of whose spirit even wee our selves are generated, and live conti∣nually. If the Lesser World enjoy an Intelligent Soule, such also enjoyes the greater: But wee will cease to prosecute this any further; con∣cluding, that the World is a Systeme of Ce∣lestiall
and Terrestriall Bodies, constant in Order, Number and Measure, but Living, Animate, Intellectuall. Whence wee safely gather, that the Soule of the World is a cer∣taine singular Life, filling all things, vivifying all things, producing and connecting all things that it may accomplish, and preserve one Fabrique of the whole-World; and be as a Monochord sounding out by the threefold kinds of Creatures, Intellectuall, Celestiall, and Corruptible, at one Blast, one onely Life. [The Mystery of Unity, is but known of a few.] Now can wee here passe by the Authority, both of the Holy Scriptures, and also of the most approved Philosophers. Deut. 4. 19. Thou shalt not worship the Sun, Moone and Starres, which God hath Distributed to all Nations under Heaven. Deut. 28. 12. God shall open unto thee his good Treasure, the Heaven, &c. Deut. 33. 13. Concerning Joseph: Thy blessing shall be of the Pretious things of the Sun, and of the Pretious things of the Moone. But above all let us consider those things which are in Levit. 26. 19. I will make (saith God) your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Brasse. The same is repeated Deut. 28. 23. and also in Osea 2. 21. And I will hear the Heavens, and they shall heare the Earth, and the Earth shall heare the Corne, and the
Wine and the Oyle, and they shall heare Israel. [Therefore we hereby see, that God doth set the Root of World∣ly Benedictions in Heaven as it were in the Soule of the Uni∣verse, so that the Beginning of Blessings is from Heaven, as the Beginning of Motion from our Soule; which are of them∣selves perspicuous enough.] To this also belongs that in Job 38. 33. Knowest thou the course of Hea∣ven, or canst thou dispose the Rule thereof in the Earth? [The Rule of Heaven proceeds through terrestriall and all inferiour things as the Rule of an Emperour or King, through∣out his Empire and Kingdome: as therefore a King is the Soule of his Kingdome: so the Heaven and the Starres are the Soule of the World.] Likewise that of Job 26. 13. His spirit hath Garnished the Heavens: Psal. 33. 16. By the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and by the spirit of his Mouth the whole Army thereof: [In whatsoever Body the Spirit of God dwelleth and shineth, that Body without doubt shall be Animate and Intellectuall.] Psal. 19. God hath set his Tabernacle in the Sun: One Day telleth another, and one Night teacheth another knowledge: there is no Speech; nor Language, in those (Heavens) yet under∣standeth he their voice. Their Line is gone forth through all the Earth, and their words into the ends of the World, in them hath hee set a Tabernacle for the Sun. Psal. 89. 5. O Lord, even the Heavens shall con∣fesse thy wonderfull Workes!
Iohn 3. Our Saviour saith to Nicodemus: I have told you of Earth by things, and you be∣lieve not, how would you believe if I should tell you of heavenly things? as if hee had said, I now propound the Comparison of the Gene∣ration of Earthly things to spirituall, which are obvious to you all, and yet you believe not: much lesse therefore would you believe, if I should dispute of Heavenly things, which are not so obvious to your senses. Christ is called by the Prophet, The Sonne of Righteousnesse: how farre wee might hence Philosophize, concerning the Sun, and Celestiall Fires, can hardly be expressed. Very notable is that place of Gen. 37. in the Dreame of Ioseph, who saw himselfe worship∣ped of the Sun, the Moone, and eleven Starrs, therefore his Father Iacob, expounding this Dreame Magickly, saith, Shall I and thy Mother, and thy Brethren come and worship thee? Therefore that holy Father knew that he had the Sun in stead of his Father, the Moon in stead of his Mother, in the World, and Worldly Generations, and 12. Starres (for Ioseph was as the 12 Starre, in that he was the 12. of the Brethren) to stand in stead of the 12. begotten Sonnes. You may understand by those 12. Starres of Heaven, the twelve Signes, constituting the 12. Moneths by 12 Conjunctions of the Sun and Moone in them,
by whose Congresses, the Year is compleated, and its Annuall Generations finished. There are other things to be seen among the Cabalists; notwithstanding wee have per∣spicuously enough enucleated the present matter. We write not these things to vaine Men, [that is, such as are Ignorant and Proud,] but to the truly Honest and Ingenious, who constantly love the Knowledge of God and his Workes, and such as have Learned That Divinity is True Philosophy, and True Philosophy Divinity (to wit, mystically) which is, (that we may yet be more plaine,) By the Workemanship of the Heavens and the Earth (touching which all approved Philosophy teacheth) and the inscrutable Systeme thereof, to know God Himself as in a Glasse, that he is the most Wise, Ineffable and Eternall Good∣nesse. The other Authority is that of the Great Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Pithagoras Or∣pheus, Trismegistus, Theophrastus, Avicenne, and the like: But wee will here follow Plato especially, (a Philosopher most full of Piety, and the knowledge of God) and his Inter∣preter, the never to be too much Praised Marsil. Ficinus, of Florence, then whom whe∣ther Italy ever afforded a greater, I shall not easily determine.
If any man doubt (saith Theophrastus the Peripatetique) whether the Heavens live or not, let him not be accounted a Philosopher: And he that denyes Heaven to be Animate, so as that the Mover of it is not the Forme thereof, destroyes the Foundations of Phi∣losophie. Neither are the most noble Poets to be Despised of us. M. Manilius in his Proeme. WHen every species of the glittering Sphere, (The Stars returning) Ranked did appear In their own Seates; and by the Fates Decree Each had restor'd its Formall Potency; Experience framed Art, by various use; Example Guiding where it was Abstruse; And (though at a vast Distance) plainly saw The Starres All-Ruling by a Tacit Law, The whole World Mov'd by REASON Alternate. The same Manilius Cap. 2. GOd and the vertue of the Divine Soule Doe by a Tacit Law, and sacred Course Inspire, Turn Round, Guide, Govern, and controul This Immense structure of the Universe: And all its Naturall Parts which Framed be In Different shapes of Aire, Fire, Earth, and Sea.
Lucan Also. HE that sustaines the earth Pois'd up with Air Is a Great Part of Jove.— And Boetius. THou in consenting Parts disposed hast Th' All-moving Soul, 'midst threefold Nature Plac'd, Which cut in Parts, that run a different Race, Into it selfe returnes, and doth embrace The Highest Mind, and Heaven doth wheel about With like Proportion— And Virgil not the last of the most Excellent Philosophers, 6. Aen. By Mr. I. O. AT first the Heaven, & Earth, the liquid plain, The Moons Bright Globe, and stars Titanian, A spirit fed within, spread through the whole, And with the Huge heap mix'd infus'd a scrowle. Hence Man, & Beasts, & Birds derive their strain And Monsters Floating in the Marbled Main. These seeds have Fiery vigour, and a Birth Of Heavenly Race; but clogg'd with heavy Earth.
But enough of the Soule of the World. And now seeing it is manifest the World hath a Soule, it will be no lesse apparent, That the same World shall consist also of a Spirit: which is called the Spirit of the Universe. Where the Soule is, there also is the Spirit: The Soule groanes in the Spirit, the Intelli∣gence in the Soule. The Spirit also of the Uni∣verse, is the vigour of Divine vertues, dilated through all things, whose continuall Excita∣tion resides in the Soule of the World, and the Celestiall Bodies. Democritus, Pythagoras, Orpheus, and such others called these vertues, Gods: Zoroaste, Divine Allurements: Sy∣necius, Symbolicall Inticements: But some called them Lives, others also, Soules. Nor that indeed undeservedly: For seeing the Soul is the Primum Mobile, and truly of its own accord, or by it selfe Moveable, but the Body or Matter of it selfe Ineffectuall for Motion, and much degenerating from the Soule: Therefore we have need of some more Excel∣lent Medium, that is to say, such a Medium, that may be (as it were) not a Body, but yet as if it were a Soule; Or as no Soule; and yet (as it were) a Body whereby the Soule may be united to the Body. For such a Medium is the Spirit of the Universe it selfe, which other∣wise we call the Fifth Essence, because it is not wholly subsisting of the Foure Elements,
but a certaine Fifth over and beside them. Therefore such a Spirit is necessarily requisite as a Medium, by whose Intervening, the Ce∣lestiall Soule may be in a Grosser Body: and this Spirit is of such a Forme in the Body of the World, as is ours in the Humane Body: be∣cause that as the Powers of our Soule, are by the Spirit communicated to the Members; So the vertue of the Soule of the World, is dilated by that Fifth Essence, throughout all things; So that nothing can be found in the whole World, which wants a vivifying sparke thereof. Through this Spirit every occult Propriety is propagated unto Herbes, Stones, Metals, and to all living Creatures, by the Sun and Moone, by the Planets and other Starres of the Eight Orbe. And those things that con∣taine a more plentifull and excellent Spirit of that Nature, shall perfect a more manifest and swifter Operation in our Bodies: if so be it be duly seperated from the Body and Feces: for, the Feces profit nothing; yea, they plain∣ly Impede and oppresse the Penetrating ver∣tue of the Spirit. And indeed all Physitians should have a speciall Regard, that they Artificially segregate the Medicinall vertues of things from the Body, and the Elementated Impurities thereof, and not so Foolishly hasten to their Patients, the Medicines and Feces
together. But the most part either wholly o∣mit that Labour, or account it in a manner Dishonest; Leaving that separating Art to the Diseased Body. Neverthelesse these Men make too huge a Progresse in Philosophy, they shall often dispute against Astronomy it selfe, not knowing indeed that they can nothing say, or Dispute, without that Syderiall Spirit communicated to them, (as also to every Man, yet more or lesse,) from above, by the Heavens and the Starres. Truly the Lote (which shutteth its Leaves before Sun Rise, but when he Ascendeth openeth them by de∣grees,) will be accounted more Just and Charitable towards the Celestiall Princes, then these so Rationall Men. And so we believe shall the Cock, who applauds the Rising Sun, as it were with a Hymne, from his Inferiour Rousts. But these are from the matter. We formerly told you, There can nothing be found in this Lower World, that wans a vivifying Sparke of this Spirit: but yet to know, under what Starre, and in which signe of the Zodiaque, every thing Perceiveth its Spirit, This is the Worke, here the Labour is. Neverthelesse, there hath so much of this nature bin Manifested to us, by sedulous and skilfull Men, as is sufficient for Humane In∣genuity and Paines, to find out greater things. Gold hath in it the Spirit of the Sun, and there∣fore
is, (in value,) the most pretious of all Metalls: It also nourisheth every Spirit of all things Growing: So that the Sun possesseth the vertues of all the Starres. No marvell then the Spirit of Gold (skilfully extracted, or seperated from the elementated, or Metal∣lique Body) should extirpate all Diseases of the Body. The reason is manifest by Astronomy it selfe. But that there is Gold of the Solar Spirit, (to omit other Reasons) the purifyed signe thereof sufficiently testifies, where you shall finde Incense Burning with perpetuall Fire: which thing true Alchemists know very well; and there yet remaines such a thing to be found in some Sepulchers, that hath con∣tinued its Ardour and Fire for more then 100. yeares; Even as the Sun enjoys Perpetuall Light. The same Metall is not unfitly called the Terrene Chaos: because if the Spirit of the Universe residing in it, should at a set time be reduced to a competent Forme with the Body, plainly produces the same, or even greater things, then that Essence of the Sun, so ear∣nestly sought for, by Covetous Persons. So also to other Metalls, there is a Proper and Perpetuall Seed-plot in Heaven. The like for Trees, Plants, Stones, &c. If therefore any thing growing nourisheth in it an Astrall Spirit, wee account the Incen∣sive matter of the Generative and Seminary
vertue much more such, and indeed more Perfect in Man himselfe. Those Philosophers who know not any such thing in Man, can pro∣nounce nothing certaine as touching the In∣genuity of Man, his Inclinations, Antipathy, Sympathy, of the Magnetique vertue and o∣peration, and such other things as are hither∣to appertaining: Whence it is they so Foolish∣ly and Filthily heape up Reasons of Philo∣sophizing, which are no better then volatile Aire. We must not forget that there is a twofold Spirit in Man. One infused from the Heavens and Starres, at the time of Generation: the other Inspired by GOD; This was the breath∣ing-hole of Life, in Adam; and that indeed Per∣fect, but afterwards Lost. The First Man was made of the Slime of the Earth, that is, of the Greater World, of the Sydereall Creatures and Elements: whence he received a certaine A∣strall Soule resembling the Soule of the World. The Object whereof, is, The Universall World, and the things contained therein, that is, Worldly Wisdome, generally comprehend∣ing all manner of Arts and Sciences within it selfe: some such thing was Anciently called in Man, the Proper Genius, or Demon of every one. Hee is not wholly Ignorant of the Na∣turall Law, (that is, of the Divine Will, com∣manding and approving the Good; but ab∣hominating
and Condemning the Evill done unto us) because the World was the First I∣mage of God: and Man himselfe the next Example of any thing Possessing the Reason of the Word. And although Man have Free-will, yet so it is in him, that what a one soever the Predestination of the Mundane Soule made him: such a one also every Man would (and desireth to) Die, by a naturall instinct. Thus we more plainly conceive how Man is subject to the Starres. Hence likewise we will not de∣ny, but that very many Diseases, and conse∣quently the terme of Life proceed (especially in a flourishing Age) from the Starres, touch∣ing which we have elsewhere produced mani∣fest Reasons, and a manifest Experience in Examples. Hereunto belongs the whole Ge∣nethliaque Part of Astrology. Theophrastus Paracelsus hath most Plentifully and Learn∣edly explained the Foundations of this very Matter, in his Volumne of Wise Philo∣sophy. There was another Breathing Hole placed by God in Adam, (beyond this Rationall Spirit, and operating Soule, deducing its Originall and Branches from the Starres,) which was the Breathing Hole of Life, in which regard he was said to be the Image of GOD: the Beauty of this Image was lost by the Fall of our First Parents, (a very small spark thereof
surviving in us:) But may be reduced to its pristine Condition by a Regeneration in Christ. This Sparke (Christ being Mediator) shall grow into a Flame of Celestiall Wisdome; It is the proper spirit of those that Believe in Christ. Joh. 7. Rejecting, Despising, Deriding all those Worldly things, not as that they are the Workes of GOD (for they testifie of GOD, what he is) but in that they are Corruptible, unstable, and draw a Man from the presence of GOD, and from Eternall Joy in Him. This Wisdome is that sorrow with the Flesh, and its Concupi∣scences, at last overcoming, Christ being Con∣querour. Of this is that vulgar saying, Sapi∣ens Dominabitur Astris. A wise Man shall Rule the Starres. By this very Rule we are led from the Love of Corruptible things, and brought into the Love of Eternall. By this we take the Crosse of Christ upon our Shoulders, and Follow him, that is, we shall hereby Purge out the Old Leven, crucifying our Flesh with Evill Affections and Concupiscences, studying to learne abundantly the Fruits of a Christian Spirit, without Hypocrisy, as Charity, Faith, Peace, Joy, Liberality, Meeknesse, Temperance, Gal. 5. In a word: This Celestiall Spirit is no other thing, then Faith triumphing through Charity, without which none shall Prevaile before GOD, although (as it is in 1 Cor. 13.) He should speake with the Tongues of Angells,
and had all Faith, so that he could Remove Mountaines out of their Places, although he had all Sciences, and knew all Mysteries, though he should give his Body to be Burnt, and were full of Prophesie. GOD is CHARITY: we were Created and Redeemed of Charity, in Charity, and by Charity. Charity Preserves in us the Command of GOD. Charity is the Bond of Perfection, Col. 3. Charity is Long suffering and Bountifull: she Envieth not, she maketh no Tumults, she is not puft up, she doth nothing whereof she is ashamed: she seeketh not her owne: she Provoketh not, she thinketh no Evill▪ she rejoyceth not at Ini∣quity, but the Truth: she beareth all things; she believeth all things: she hopeth and sustaineth all things. Charity Buildeth up, knowledge puf∣feth up: Charity is greater then Prophesies, Sciences, Tongues; Prophesies shall be abolished, Tongues shall be Silent, Sciences Perish: Cha∣rity remaineth for ever: He that remaineth in Charity remaineth in GOD, and GOD in him. Now we must know, there is a Two-fold Man: One Astrall, Externall, or Carnall, which is called Animall, (nor perceiveth he the things which are of the Vivifying Spirit:) The other, Spirituall or Internall, busied in Renuing the Corrupted Image of God, Rom. 7. In like manner, there shall be a Two-fold Wis∣dome; One, Worldly or Astrall, the Wisdom
of Arts, Sciences, Dignities, Possessions, and of Corruptible things, wherein the Gentiles are alone Busied, Mat. 6. The other Celesti∣all, consisting in the knowledge of GOD, in the consideration of his Ineffable Mercy, in the Desire of Eternall Happinesse. This Wisdome acknowledges no other Governour, then the Holy Spirit, operating by the word of GOD: That, the Heavens and Celestiall Influen∣ces: Both which may be Joyned in a Man that Pleaseth GOD. But in whom the Cele∣stiall Wisdome Raigneth, that other is onely a Hand-maid; she seeks for nothing at all, but the Glory of GOD, and the welfare of her Neighbour: which indeed is as much as is granted in this Life to the Elect, or those whom the Father hath given unto Christ. Now where the Astrall raigneth, (suppose that alone,) There are Dogs, and Swine, un∣to whom we are forbidden to cast Pearles, or that which is Holy. Lastly where the Celestiall and Astrall, doe Conjunctly Rule; that is, when we indeavour to serve Two Masters, There is True Hypocrisie, very displeasing unto GOD. No Man can serve Two Masters: such were the Pharisees in the time of Christ, whose Righteousnesse if ours exceed not, we shall not enter into the Kingdome of God, Christ him∣selfe hath spoken it. It was but requisite that we a little touched
upon those things, lest Ignorant Detractors, (who are either far out of the way, or abhorre this True manner of Philosophizing) should take occasion to mingle Holy things with Pro∣fane, or Profane with Holy, whilst perhaps they might take upon them to Disprove these Realities. Furthermore  hitherto we have Treated of the Soule and Spirit of the Universe, and of the Syderiall Governour in Man: So now we may possibly be informed concerning Foure Senses in the Universe, accommodating them∣selves to the Four-fold Vertue or Power of the Soule of the World. There are Foure Elements which contribute Matter to the Body of the World: and there are also Foure Powers in the Soule of the World. The first is, the Intellect of it selfe Immovable, the Mover or Governour of the Sphere; instituted by the Author of all things Governing the Spheres. The second is the Soule of the Sphere, A Mover indeed that is Moveable, yet so of it selfe. The third, a Certaine Intelligence, excellently placed in this Soule by GOD, and the superiour Intellect. The fourth, is, Nature, that is to say, A Se∣minary and Vitall vertue, every way infus'd into the Matter, by the Soule. The Intellect and Soule are indeed Substances: But the In∣telligence and Nature are Qualities: Those
of the Soule, these of the Matter. The Foure Images, of these are the Foure Elements: For, Fire resembles the Intellect; Earth, the Water; Aire, the Intelligence; And lastly, Water, the Soule. And as there are three things Proper to Fire, three things also opposite to Earth, and that the Mediums a∣gree with Mediums by a certaine Proporti∣on, so there are three things proper to the In∣tellect, and their Opposites are proper to Na∣ture: The Mediums also to the Mediums. For the Intellect is Individuall; Uniforme, Eternall; Nature, Dividuall; Multiforme, Temporall: The Soule (amongst these Mediums) looks indeed (through the Intelligence) more parti∣cipating of the Intellect it selfe, then of Na∣ture: But through the Animall Power, the rather agrees with Nature, then the Intellect. Wherefore it is called Partly Individuall, partly Dividuall: Partly also Uniforme, and partly Multiforme: Againe, partly Eternall, and partly Temporall. From Substance, Vertue, Action. Fire Subtile Acute, Moveable. Aire Subtile Obtuse Moveable. Water Grosse Obtuse Moveable. Earth Grosse Obtuse Immovable.
The Intellect, Individuall, Uniforme, Eternall. The Soule by theIntelligence, Individuall, Ʋniforme, Eternall. Animall, Power, Dividuall, Multiforme, Temporall, By Nature, Dividuall, Multiforme, Temporall. Hence also are the Foure Lives Delivered and Beleeved of Plato. The life of Saturne admireing (in the Intellect) Heaven the Father thereof, that is, God the Father of Hea∣ven. The Ioviall in the Intelligence declining to Action yet Moveable. The Venereall, in the Animall Vertue, yet Affecting Matter: And the Dionysiacall, as if Drunk in Nature, that is, of a Drench'd, or Drown'd Matter. And by a like Reason, there are Foure Sen∣ses in the Universe. The First, in the Soule of the World, Commune (I say) and one Sense: that is, a certaine Imaginary Vertue so accom∣panying its Intelligence, and touching the Par∣ticular Formes of things, as the Intelligence doth the Universall: Touching (I say) In∣trinsecally, and therefore it wants no Instru∣ments, neither proceeds, or suffers it any where without. The Second, is, in the Soules of the Spheres and Stars Commune indeed, and Im∣patible also, but proceeding without. The third in Particular Soules, distributed through all the Instruments, beyond Common strength, and spreading it selfe without, but
ending in the Judgement. The Fourth, (and last) Sense is (according to the Pythagoreans) allow'd to Plants, yea, a certaine Image of Sense, and that indeed Stupid, having no Judgement of Quality, but Posited onely in the Passion of some Pleasure or Griefe. The First Sense represents the Intellect: The Second the Intelligence; The third, the Ani∣mall Vertue, and the Fourth, the Naturall: wherein we must remember that the Matter of the World, doth not otherwise enter the Soule, then by Nature, nor otherwise the In∣telligence then by the Soule, nor otherwise the Intellect, then by the Intelligence: Even as it receiveth Water by the Earth; by the Water, Aire; and by the Aire, Fire. But at length to come to our Matter, we must know, that the Lines of the Hands, are not otherwise produced (giving GOD in the first place His Due) then from the Imagination of the Greater World, thus, or so Affected in the Generation of Man, yet performing its Autho∣rity & Office by the Stars. It is hardly percep∣tible to our Humane Wit, how such an opera∣tion should be made in our Hands, by Lines shaddowing out the Fate of every Man. This Imagination of the Soule of the World is other∣wise called Predestination, Science, Fate: And she it is that performes her Power in the Con∣ception and Birth, by the Influence of that
Starre which then predominateth in the Hea∣vens, and thence powreth out that Peculiar Genius upon every Man: If many Starres be to doe the worke; the proper and accustom∣ed Signatures are by them distributed and Engraven, Fortunate or Infortunate, according to the Affection of the Planets, and other Starrs, in their respective Signes and Quar∣ters of Heaven. Those Conjunctions and other Aspects of the Planets, which but seldome happen, doe make the most Noble and excel∣lent Impression: such be the Conjunction and Sextile of Venus and Mercury, the Conjunction and Trine of Saturne and Iupiter: so also of Iupiter and Mars, Iupiter and the Sun, Iupiter and Venus; likewise the Trine of Mars and Mer∣cury: The Moone also partily supputated in an Angle, or begirt with the Favourable Raye of a Noble Starre, &c. yet more or lesse ac∣cording to the Quarters of Heaven, aud the Places of the Zodiaque. The presence of the more Notable Fixed Starres doe hereunto contribute very much of strength. So also they whom the Position of the Starres, shall encline to the contrary. But there is so Bene∣ficient a vertue planted in this Science, or Pre∣destination, and so great LOVE, that to for∣warne us of Future Events (the Times whereof the Directions of places in Corrected Geni∣tures, which I certainely know by often Ex∣perience,
manifest) she often premits her Sig∣nitures in this or that Place of the Hand, that if Fortunate Events be neare, a Man might happily know thereof, and by his In∣deavour Nourish and Enlarge the same to his Benefit: But if any Misfortunes, that hee would and might be carefull in Averting, at¦leastwise in Mitigating the Evills ensuing. And indeed concerning the LOVE extended in the First Creation, unto all things Celestiall and Terrestriall, (notwithstanding an Adjunct or Opposite Strife elsewhere) a whole Volume might be written: See the Golden Commen∣taries of Marsilius Ficinus, upon Plato's Ban∣quet of Love. We daily Observe how some Lines are quite Vanished, which were but even now in our Hands, and that others Arise in Lieu there∣of, with a Different Face: some to wax Pale, and others to Flourish with a kind of Ruddy∣nesse, &c. and indeed deride them all, as Vaine and Casuall. But yet now that Experience her selfe hath by severall practises reduced all to an Art, we cannot be so Impudent and Stupid, as to deny them to containe some Events. Indeed 'tis requisite that the Cause or Begin∣nings both of the Signatures themselves and the Affections therein, should not else∣where reside, then in that very Science of the Soule of the World, sending as it were her
Standard before-hand, by the peculiar Starres and Progressions of the Starres of every Man: For unlesse this Imagination, Science, Fate, or Predestination preceded by a certaine perpetuall Power, nothing could be Generated, nothing Increased: Visible cannot be made of Invisible things: Corporeall of Incorporeall: The Shapes, Magnitudes, Colours, Odours and other Signatures of Bodies will not be un∣foulded, whether the Efflux of Nourish∣ment be Plentifull, or but small: for that they have not the Foundations, Roots, or Principles, under whose Power, Protection, and Patronage they might be received into the Society of a New Republique. Hee that is oppressed with Thirst, conceives in his mind a Species of Fami∣liar Liquor: that Appetite is an Individuall Companion of this Imagination: And such an Imagination is Thirst made by such an Ap∣petite. The same is the Desired Liquor to this Imagination: because the Species that made the Imagination is the Property of the Liquor, and the Liquor by meanes of such Imagination may satisfy Predestination, Science, Fate. Therefore what is a Nutriment▪ Requisite to a Living Body, the same is the Impletion of the Events, or Impressions, the Conceptions and Signatures of worldly knowledge; whether it be for good or bad: which very thing the most Laudable Idea of Philosophicall Phisique of
Peter Severine the Dane▪ a most Excellent Man in Truth, and a very Nervous writer, doth also direct us to. This therefore, that effects so great things in the World, by a Naturall and Insepe∣rable Love, is also Imployed in delineating the Hands of Men, signifying whatsoever things a Man doth, and they for the most part are in one manner or other described in the Hand it selfe. Here wee except such things as ought to be excepted: the will of Man is not in every part subjected to the Decrees of the Starres, neither also that saying, [If to day I feed upon Flesh, whether shall I Dine to Morrow with Cole-worts or Carrets? &c.] which are here added, to remove timely the Objections of Fooles. But if you desire to know wherefore these Signatures are found in the Hand, and perhaps not in any other Part of the Body? you must conceive, that our Hands are the most Noble Members in perfecting of al manner of Actions; they are the Executors of all our Primary Con∣ceptions: Insomuch, that if wee wanted the Benefit of our Hands for a few dayes, it must needs be we should all of us Perish together: That therefore our Fate for the most part, and Our Power are very much reposed in our Hands, we (even not knowing it) openly testifie, when with closed Hands, we make them Peti∣tioners to GOD, or any Man, truly declaring,
we can doe nothing of our owne strength; we Despise and reject these Flaggs of our Fate, folded up (like those of Warre) and yet that one thing which we humbly crave, they ob∣taine and make good unto us, as if some Sacra∣ment were Interposed betwixt them. I know not of whom such things as these may seri∣ously be considered on, in their Pray∣ers. It may now be Asked, wherefore the Ex∣cellent Positures of the Starres, doe not al∣waies shape and depaint the Lines very cleare in our Hands? I have seen a Noble Man, in whose Geniture all the Seven Planets were Collocated in their Dignities: yet were not the Lines perspicuous in the most parts of his Hands: but rather Obscure. I have seen ano∣ther Nobly Descended, in whose Nativity Mercury was excellently well posited in Gemi∣ni, and in the Cuspe of the Tenth: yet the place of this Starre had afforded him at that time no perspicuous Signatures in his Hand, but such as were dark and slender, when notwith∣standing this Planet was both strong and For∣tunate in the Geniture, and also at the time of Conception: Besides, the same Planet dis∣pos'd of the Horoscope, and was moreover Lord of the New Moone preceding the Nativity. Now how the Power and Domi∣nion of this Starre, then so strong and
Powerfull should be thus Impedited, is the Question. It may bee againe Demanded, how it comes, that sometimes you finde a Di∣versity of the Principall Lines in both Hands? I have seene the Epatica of the Right Hand, adhering in some to the Line of Life; But in the Left-Hand the same Remote from the vitall by a notable space: which we have also mentioned somewhere else in our Practique part. Touching these we must know, that many times the Seed of the Parents proves a Great Impediment to the Superiour Commotions. For indeed the Seed receiveth one Condition from Parents that live in Concord, and Temperatly: but another from such as live in Discord and Anxieties; especially about the time of Conception. Besides, there is in either Parent a certaine Patterne of the Ima∣gination of the Macrocosme, both of them re∣ceiving from every part thereof sundry Im∣pressions: And therefore when the Imagina∣tion of the Greater World is one way affected about the Conception, and the Fathers and Mothers another way, it must needs be that some Discrepancy will hence arise. But the Impression of the Mothers Imagination is vulgarly known (as much as may be) at the time of the Birth. The finding out of All
Causes, is very Abstruse. Neverthelesse as touching those who have the Lines of either Hand appearing with a Different Face, wee cannot otherwise appoint and Pronounce, but that such are disposed and enclined to a double Fortune, Good and Bad. And now at length being about to put a Period to this our Tract: wee earnestly De∣sire all Learned Men, that whatsoever they know in Chiromancy, as having made some certaine tryall thereof, they will be pleased freely to contribute the same to these our Indeavours. I confesse I have not every where in my Praxis satisfyed, my owne selfe: I know what Experience I have need of, to Com∣pleate an Absolute Praxis: And other Men also may know I have Assay'd to Digge at some such thing. It was but requisite I annexed somewhat of The Soule of the World, and of what appertaineth thereunto, aswell lest some should Rashly Proclaime Incertaine things to be Explained and Con∣firmed by Incertaine: as also that wee might in some sort Admonish both the Ig∣norant, and likewise such as Deride the Le∣thargy of the Celestiall (in these Terrene) Bodies, comprehending much in a few words, from which Beginning, there may be Degrees of confirming these truly sin∣cere
things in Philosophy, acceptable to GOD, and not estrang'd from the Holy Scriptures: See the Booke of Wisdome, Chap. 7. & 13. wherein the Lethargy of Celestiall things is seperated from these Inferiours, lest they should Feed on the Tares of Philo∣sophy. I shall be perswaded, it is possible, That the Knowing and Ingenious may Favour these my First Indeavours. If otherwise, it suf∣ficeth me that I received a Sober Censure, at lest amongst those Wise and Learned Men, to whom I presented this in writing: never∣thelesse there be some of that Profession, who suppose it otherwise. I have nothing to doe with the Ignorant and Malevolent. AN END.
