R786A R230154 99895928 153516
A RELATION Of a Fight in the County of LINCOLN, BETWEEN The KINGS Forces, and the Rebells of that County. Which happened upon the eleventh Day of Aprill, Anno Domini, 1643. Neere Ancaster. And was presented to Her Majesty at Yorke, Aprill 13. Together with the Subscription of those Gentlemen whose Names follow at the end of the Relation. Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1643. By speciall Command.
A Relation of a Fight in the County of Lincolne, between the Kings Forces, and the Rebells of that County, &c. HIs Majesties Commissioners for the County of Lincolne, lying in the Garrison at Newarke, raised some Forces both Horse and Foot, and making Incursions into their own Country, and finding the Inhabitants well inclined to the King and His Government, resolved to March thither; and by Vertue of His Majesties Com∣mission of Oyer and Terminer, appointed a Ses∣sions to be held at Grantham upon the said eleventh Day of Aprill; They Marched out of Newarke upon the fourth Day of Aprill afore∣said, with nine Troops of Horse, and about 160 oot, through the parts of Kesteven, to Stam∣ford, and back again to Grantham, on Munday the tenth of Aprill. The Country cheerefully
appeared, and brought in such Arms as the R∣bels had left unplundered: At Grantham t Commissioners held the Sessions according appointment; but at eleven of the Clock the forenoone, in the midst of that service, Avertisement was given of the Enemies a∣proach. Whereupon Colonell Cavendish, w commanded in chief all the Kings Forces, dre them out into a body neer the Town, an found the Enemy (consisting of about 80 Horse, and 200 Dragoners) placed within half a Mile of the Town, but on the contrary sid of the River. The Rebels Forces were co∣manded by young Hotham, Sir John Hothan Sonne, who is now Generall over the Rebels i Lincolnshire. The Colonell first drew up h Forces in sight of the Rebels, and for about a Houre they faced each other (the River bein between;) But the Rebels not advancing, th Colonell having appointed one Troope t guard an other end of the Towne (in case th Rebels should have had some other strengt to have joyned with them from other part and leaving two other Troops to face the En my, that they might not perceive his Marc with his other Troops, Marcht with the rest
his Horse and Foot over a Bridge halfe a Mile from thence, and with a speedy March, came close up to the Enemy, who had placed them∣selves in a Lane, and among Hedges, which they lyned with Dragoneers: The Colonell then made a little stand, untill his Foot drew neere the Enemy: Upon a little Skirmish, they retreated a little further. The Colonell pur∣sued, whereupon the Enemy again made a stand, and faced the Kings Forces; the Colo∣nell advancing with his Foot, they retreated about four Miles, their Foot being horsed, and the Kings wanting Horses; the Collonell still endeavouring what he could, to draw up his Foot with his Horse, the Enemyes strength of Horse and Dragoneers being greater then the Kings Horse. But the Colonell finding the Enemie not willing to fight, and the Kings Foot not able to March, left the Foot, and re∣solved to charge the Enemie with the Horse alone, and upon the Heath near Ancaster Town being five Miles from Grantham, commanded his Horse to charge the Enemy, who there had made a Hault, and put themselves in Battalia, having divided their Horse into three Divisi∣ons, and dismounted the Dragoneers: The
Colonell having likewise divided His Horse, at once, charged the Enemy both Horse and Dragoneers, the Dragoneers all gave fire, and and slew three and hurt some few of the Kings Forces, but were instantly routed; whereupon they threw down their Arms and prayed Quarter, which was granted. Young Hotham their Generall, and all their Horse, betook themselves to flight. The Kings Forces pur∣sued them two Miles upon Ancaster Heath, and then the Colonell drew most of them in∣to a Body again, and afterwads pursued them eight Miles further, slew and took Prisoners divs of them in the chase, and totally routed the whole Body. The Prisoners of the Re∣bells taken are two Captaines, five or six Lieutenants and Ensignes, five Cornets of Horse, and one of Dragoneers, the rest were beholden to their swift Horses for their escape. Of common Souldiers, two hundred and eighty Prisoners were taken. There was in the Field amongst the Rebells, the Lord Willoughbie of Parham, who often was heard to demand Quarter, and once to Griffith his Lieutenant, with this new Generall Ho∣tham, who came into Lincolnshire but the
Night before, with foure Troops of Horse, nd about two hundred Foot out of Yorke∣hire, which they call Gray-Coates, an hun∣red of which was taken, and most hurt. The Intent of the Rebels, was to surprise the Town of Grantham, and to have taken Priso∣ers the Kings Commissioners sitting at the essions, which (as the Prisoners now taken ffirm) Generall Hotham undertooke to per∣orm. Subscribed by these Gentlemen, viz. . Cavendish. Edw. Heron, vice com. Edward Middlemore. Robert Tredray. Wil: Thorold. J. Brooke. Ger: Nevile. Charles Dalison. Edm: Thorold. Edw: Tourney. Tho: Harington. Grantham this 12. of Aprill, 1643. FINIS.
