R979 E86_18 R5787 99872899 155689
A REMONSTRANCE FOR THE REPVBLIQVE. Shewing who are the lying lips of the PRINCE. BY Many knowing, godly, well affected, and sub∣stantiall Citizens of LONDON. Presented to the high and honourable Houses of PARLIAMENT for a Reformation. Jerem. 8.11. They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people sleightly; saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace. LONDON, Printed for John Johnson. 1643.
A REMONSTRANCE FOR THE REPVBLIQVE. ALthough your zeale hath been to promote the common good, not by devising for your selves and families (as is that false aspersion) but revising the issues of for∣mer Parliaments, for the good and hap∣pinesse of this Nation. And although your vigilancy and paines, is gratified with suspition, in stead of love, and thanks, with emulation, for reward, &c. Be plea∣sed to know, that nothing ever savoured of newnesse or reforma∣tion, but received great opposition, and gainsaying; as Civility, wholsome Lawes, Learning, Eloquence, Synod, Church-government; These should have been as secure from suffering, as in a Sanctuary, or City of refuge; yet have found little welcome in the world. Yea, in other Commonwealths it hath been held a capitall crime, once to motion the making a new Law for the abrogating of an old, though the same were most pernicious and hurtfull. To instance, that the best things of the worthiest men have been callumniated; C. Caesar reformed the Kalender of the yeere, according to the course of the Sun, a worke most beneficiall and rare; yet he was libelled with novelty and arrogancy. The most learned Emperour in former times, and greatest Poli∣titian, what thanks got he for cutting off the superfluities of the Lawes, and digesting them into some order and method? this,
branded with the name of an Epitomist; that is, one that extingui∣sheth whole worthy Volumes, to bring his abridgements into request. And what is cast upon your worthy selves? (who are indeed as a Physitians Storehouse of preservatives, to cure the state of the body politique, of all grievances) that ye assume to your selves the name of a Parliament, who are the few factious schis∣maticks and traytors to His Majesty, and that trust the State re∣poses in you; but it is the fault of His Majesties incredulity, to doubt of those things that are evident. And we hope your piety towards God, in the government of His Church, and reformation of this State, will be the weapons that will defend you and us, and offend your enemies and opposers. And surely men (yea our fellow Citizens) should not judge your actions by your persons; and therefore not to trample upon your credit the publique Faith. We know Catiline was no ho∣nest Citizen of Rome in seeking to bring it into combustion; nor Nero a good Prince, which did indeed set it on fire. Here are too too many malignant traiterous Catilines that would undoe the civill government of this City. And we would His Majesty had none of this to answer for. He useth strange expressions in words to this City, Is there any thing now left, but the liberty to rebel, and to destroy one another? And in divers Proclamations and Declarations, His Majesty invites us to an insurrection, and re∣bellion one against another, and notwithstanding His Majesty refuseth to come to His faithfull and greatest Councell, therefore His Majesty sendeth these Fire-bals (and even as Nero did to Rome) to destroy it and you, by disswading us from obeying your Ordinances. And indeed so we should, if we were sure His Ma∣jesty had all lawes lockt up in his brest, as Pope Paul 2. brag'd, he was as free from errour by speciall priviledge, as the dictators of Rome, were made by law inviolable. True it is, if we consider His Majesty, as he is vir, a men a vir∣tute, He is more Excellent then us all; 1. In His Person, for that is Sacred, He is Gods anoynted. 2. In His Office, He is Gods Vice∣gerent. But if we consider him as he is Homo, a man, ab Hume,
from the earth, He is but meere man, and therefore he is subject to errours, misapprehensions, evill counsell, &c. Now if we shall reason as the Apostle did, with Heb. 7.11. and 8.7. for if that first covenant had been faultlesse, then should no place have been sought for a second, so say we that if the con∣stitution, government, and lawes of this Kingdome, had beene good and sufficient, there had been no need of this Parliament to make other, or to alter. Yet we hope His Majesty doth not invite us to rebellion, and to destroy one another with this City. But we say that Secre∣tary Nicholas doth in the name of the King, and doth likewise make imprecations and vowes, and Proclamations for him. And those subtill Foxes Swadling and Stone, that lie sculting in their holes, when these shall endeavour to prove by their ceremoniall doctrine the lawfulnesse of Prince Ruperts taking up of Armes in this Nation, and may prosecute to plunder and persecute, with fire and sword these our free borne brethren of England. So when Doctor Iames, the Physition (or rather bold face'd Mountabanke, with his deceits) shall wright Prince Ruperts Declaration and Vindication (a thing himselfe never thought of, nor saw till in print;) and so impudently to abuse so Noble a Lord, as the Lord Wharton, in his speech as Guildhall, and divul∣ging them in all countries for truth, as from himselfe. Who, and what are these, but as the wise King cals them, Prov. 17.7. The lying lips of their Prince? And whiles these fools lips enter into contention, for an accommodation, their mouthes cal∣leth for strokes, Pro. 18.6. And the contrivers of the Kings Answer to our humble Peti∣tion; What known falsities was therein, That the Army that gave His Majestie battell, endeavoured all possible meanes malice could suggest, to have taken away his life, and to destroy his royall issue. O horrible! why then did not that loyall subject and Noble Lord, the Lord Saint Iohn, when he had his Majesty in his po∣wer, when he had his horse by the raignes? And how carefull are your Honours, and tender of the two maiden Ladies, both of their maintenance, and attendance.
And the same lying lips or writer, where he calleth Our pre∣tended Lord Maior, When he had our free election, and was sworn by one of the Barons of the Exchequer, which is his Ma∣jesties authority, and in all other things as other Lord Maio are. And although that Mason and Fountaine, the one a lying Lawyer, the other one of Baals Priests, did compile a complaint in the name of our fellow Citizens, and so to wrong your ho∣nours, and us, and other readers, that might give credit to it; we disclaime any such thing from the wel-affected in this City. These lying lips are the reprobate silver, Jer. 6.30. because the Lord hath rejected them; no matter though they pretend they have a faire superscription, or stampe; yet when God shall ngh them in the ballance of his impartiall judgement, and find them such counterfeit drosse, he wil cast them in the furnace of his fiery indignation. For these are the adversaries of Juda and Jerusalem, and as Sanballat lie and mocke and rhyme at goodnesse, Neh. 4. Nor, right honourable, are these all the lyers, but there is an∣nother sort that doth much wrong your judgements, and abuse your clemency, that when these devisers of lies as players who are poets; (these are most invective because in your great wis∣domes and piety you have put downe stage-plaies) when these we say have complotted or hatched any mischiefe or abuse to the State or this City. They cause the printer to compose two title∣pages both of one matter but different in forme by flowers about the one of them, or the like; And there they set printed at Ox∣ford by Leonard Lichfield, &c. And in the other title page that they publish, they set as the other for matter and reprinted at London, so that when your Honours call them to question for these abominable lies and perjuries they produce that other title sheet as if it were printed at Oxford by his Majesties licence or- command and so make his Majestie the father of their lies; and the people the creditors of them, when we know that the wife King telleth us. A divine sentence is in the lips of a King, his mouth transgresseth not in judgement. Prov. 16.10. And when they have bin imprisoned by your wisdomes, they have tooke upon them for others the publishing Bookes of the like nature,
knowing they can be but imprisoned, these wayes are not of God therefore they cannot stand. And we know his Majestie hath complained divers times of his wrongs by pamphlets of the like nature, and that your Honourable assembly should redresse it, but we know his Majesty taketh no course for the same, and by reason of his absence it is with your honours a of the sealed booke. Esay. 29.11. They could not read in it because it was sealed, neither can you enact without his Majesties assent. There∣fore we would his Majesty who is Charles the first of England, were as Charles the fifth of France Surnamed the wise; Or as Constantine the first Christned Emperour that he would imitate him in strengthning the Kingdome and to provide so well for the Church and state, and not so ardently thirst for the destruction and dissolution, both of the Protestants here, and in Ireland. For as the case now stands with your worthy selves, it is with you, as it was with a Senate of Rome, for as one complaineth there was one or other called for an interpreter. Theophil. 2. Tom. Council. expedit. Petrus Crab. So in his Majesties Messages, Declarations, or Answers there is such strange expressions that no marvell ye cannot interpret it to any good meaning. The Lord defend you, that ye be not worse then the builders of Noahs Arke, for those Builders made that preservative for him and his family but were themselves drow∣ned in the waters, but when you shall counsell well to the esta∣blishing of good Lawes in the Church and State to Gods glory and to the building of us up to the body of his deare Sonne; and the happy flourishing of our free borne English Nation. That you and we with our Laws, lives, liberties, Religion, shall be over∣whelmed with Tiranny, Superstition, and Ignorance, and then, to have as in the Marian persecution and Bishops domination, fire, Excommunication, and Idolatrie, &c. But it will be said, have not we a good King? (not he is too good to be our King as it is in Prince Ruperts, I should say Dr. Iames's Declaration) hath not he passed many acts of his Grace and favour, &c. It is granted; and it seemes his Majesty much repenteth the good he hath done us: But as he is a God upon
Earth, so should be imitate the great God of Heaven in de∣lighting to do us good. But the judgement of Aristotle is well worthy the remembring. If Timotheus (saith he) had not bin, we had not had much sweet musick, but if Phrynis (Timotheus his teacher or instructer) had not bin we had not had Timotheus; so may we say, the King indeed hath consented to do us so much good; but if you who are the Kingdomes trust and greatest hopes (under God) for the continuance of this goodnesse to us had not counsell'd his Majesty to this we had not received this good from his Majesty. Therefore we pray for his Majestie honourable and flouri∣shing prosperity with yours, and say not to his most Excellent Majesty as the Gergafites did to Christ depart out of our Coasts. FINIS.
