S1707 R229992 99895761 153319
A PROCLAMATION, Appointing the Heretors to be in Readiness upon Fourty Eight Hours Advertisement. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, to Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greet∣ing: Forasmuch as, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to put the Countrey in a Posture of De∣fence, against any Invasion from Abroad, of French and Foreign Papists, or o∣ther Enemies; Or against any Insurrection at home, from unnatural Countrey∣men, threatned to this Our antient Kingdom, whereby it may become the Seat of a Bloody War, and for that end, have appointed all the Officers of Our stand∣ing Forces within the said Kingdom, to attend their Duties: And considering that the chief Defence of this Our antient Kingdom, lyes in the Affection and Arms of the Nobility, Gentry, Heretors, Wodsetters, and Liferenters, who owe to Us and their Countrey to be in readiness, and to shew all Alacrity for the De∣fence of Religion, Laws and Liberties, and these, and all dear to Us, and Our Subjects, being now at the Stake in the Cases foresaids. Therefore in Order to Our Defence, and the Defence of the Nation, We with Advice foresaid, do Command and Require, all Heretors, Wodsetters, and Liferenters, of whate∣ver Quality within this Our antient Kingdom, to put themselves presently in readiness with their best Horses, (being good and sufficient) Arms, and Provi∣sions, and that according to their respective Qualities and Estates, to meet and conveen on fourty eight hours Advertisement, and attend Our Host and Stan∣dard, as they shall be called by Order from Our Privy Council, for resisting the said Invasion and Insurrection, if the same shall be Attempted, under such Com∣manders and Officers, as shall be notified to them respectively from Our Council-Table, and at such times, and places as shall be by them appointed, and there to receive such further Orders as shall be given by Us, or these Commissionat by Us; And we do hereby certifie all herein concerned, who shall not attend such Rendezvouzes to be appointed, and obey these Presents in manner above ordained, that they shall be punished as willful Absenters from Our Host and Standard. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we Charge you strictly, and Com∣mand, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, and remanent Head-burghs of the several Shires within this King∣dom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance; And ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twelfth day of January. And of Our Reign the fourth year, 1693. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCREIFF. Cls. Sti. Concilii. God save King VVilliam and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno Dom. 1693.
