S3455 E522_34 99865393 117633
Twelve strange PROEHESIES, Besides Mother SHIPTONS, Predicting wonderfull events to betide these years of danger in this Climate, whereof some have already come to passe well worthy of note. Most of them were found in the Reignes of Edward the fourth, and Henry the eighth, Kings of England, and are these which follow: Viz. 1. Mother Shiptons Prophesies. 2. The Blind mans Prophesie. 3. Ignatius Loyala 4. Sybilla's Prophesie. 5. Merlins Prophesie. 6. Otwell Bins Prophesie. 7. M. Brightmans Prophesie. 8. M. Giftheils Prophesie. With five other Prophesies, never before Printed. Whereunto is added the Predictions of M. John Saltmarsh, to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and the Councell of his Army: As also the manner of his Death. Now Printed and published for the satisfaction of those who have been abused by false and imperfect Copies; with Marginall Notes on Mother Shiptons Prophesies. Yorke. Mother Shipton. Wolsey. outside the walled ciy of York, Mother Shipton holds a staff in her hand, and indicates with the other towards Cardinal Wolsey and another man, who look out from a tower LONDON, Newly Printed for Francis Coles at the signe of the Half-Bowle in the Old-Bayly.
The Prophesie by Mother Shipton. VVHen she heard King Henry the eight should be King, and Cardinall Wolsey should be at York,Note, that this Prophesie was never exactly Printed before. she said, that Cardinall Wolsey should never come to York with the King: and the Cardinall hearing, being angry, sent the Duke of Suffolke and the Lord Darcy to her, who came with their men disguised to the Kings House neere York: where leaving their men, they went to M. Besley to York, and desired him to go with them th Mother Shiptons house; where when they came, they knocked at the doore; she said, Come in M. Besley, and those honourable Lords with you, and M. Besley would have put in the Lords before him: but she said, Come in M. Besley, you know the way, but they do not: this they thought strange, that she should know them and never saw them. Then they went into the house, where there was a great fire, and she bid them welcome, calling them by their names, and sent for some Cakes and Ale, and they dranke and were very merry. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, if you knew what we came about, you would not bid us so welcome; she said, the messenger should not be hang'd. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you said the Cardinall should never see York; yea said she, I said he might see York, but never come at it: but, said the Duke, when he comes to York thou shalt be burned; we shall see that, said she, and plucking her handkerchiefe off her head, she threw it into the fire, and it would not burne; then she took her staffe, and turned it into the fire, and it would not burne; then she took it and put it on againe: then said the Duke, what meane you by this? she re∣plyed, if this had burned, I might have burned, Mother Shipton (quoth the Duke) what thinke you of me? My Lord, said she, the time will comeThe Duke was afterward beheaded. you will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed. My Lord Piercy said, And what say you of me? My Lord, said she, shooe your horse in the quick, and you will do well, but yourThis proved true, for he rose in Rebellion in the North, and by not flying when he might, he was taken and beheaded at York, where his body was buried, but his head was stolne away, & carri∣ed into France temp. Eliz. R. body will be buried in York pavement, and your head shall be stoln from the bar, and carried into France; at which they all laughed, saying, That would be a great lope betwixt the head and the Body. Then said the Lord Darcy, And what thinke you of me? she said, you have made a great Gun, shoot it off, for it will do you no good; you are going to warre, you will paine many a man, but you will kill none: so they went away. Not long after the Cardinall came to Cawood, and going to the top of the Tower, he asked where York was, and how far it was thither, & said, that one said he should ne∣ver see York; nay, said one, she said you might see York, but never come at it: he vowed to burn her when he came to York. Then they shewed him York, and told him it was but eight miles thence; he said, that he would soon be there: but being sent for by the King, he dyed in his way to London, at Leicester, of a Lask. And Shiptons wife said to M. Besley, Yonder is a fine Stall built for the Cardinall in the Minster, of Gold, Pearle, and precious Stones, go and present one of the Pillars to King Henry; and he did so. M. Besley seeing these things falling out as she had fore-told, desired her to tell him some more of her Prophesies: M. Besley, said she, before thatThis came to passe; for Tri∣nity Steeple in York was blowne downe with a Tempest, and Owes, Bridge was broken downe with a great Floud; and what they did in repairing the Bridge in the day time with the stone of the Steeple, sell down in the night, untill they (remembring this Prophesie) laid the bishest stone of the Steeple for the foundation of the Bridge, and then the work stood. And by this was partly verified another Prophesie of Mother Shipton, (viz.) That her Maid should live to drive her Cow over Trinitie Steeple. Owes Bridge and Tri∣nitie Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it shall fall in the night, untill they get the highest stone of Trinity Church to be the lowest stone of Owes Bridge.
Then the day will come when the North shall rue it wondrous sore, but the South shall rue it for evermore: When Hares kennell on cold hearth Supposed to be meant by the suppression of Abbyes & other Religious Hou∣ses: And at the Lord William Howards House at Naworth, a Hare came and kindled in his Kitchen upon the Hearth. stones, and Lads shall marry Ladies & bring them home, then shall you have a year of pining hunger, & then a dearth without corn, a wofull day shall be seen in England, a King and a Queen. The first comming of the KingThis was fulfilled in K. James his com∣ming in; for such a multitude of people stood at Holgate-Bar to behold him, as that to avoid the presse, he was forced to ride by another way. of Scots shall be at Holgate Towne, but he shall not come through the Bar; and when the Kingwhen K. James was at London, his children were at Edenborough, preparing to come to England. of the North shall be at London, his taile shall be at Edenborough. After this shall waterThis is veri∣fied by the con∣ducting of wa∣ter into. York-streets through boared Elmes: And the Conduit-house hath a Wind-mill on the top that drawes up the water. come over Owes Bridge, and a Wind-mill shall be set on a Tower, and an Elme-tree shall lye at every mans doore; at that time women shall weare great Hats and great Bands. And when there is a Lord MaiorA Lord Maior, whose house was in Minster-Yard in York, was killed with three stabs. at York, then let him beware of a stab. When two KnightsSir Tho. Wentworth & Sir Joh. Savil, in chusing Knights for the Shire in the Castle-yard in York, did so fall out, that they were never ascer well reconciled. shall fall out in the Castle-yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives after. When all Colton HagColton Hag in her time was a Wood∣land, a ground full of Trees, which bore Corne seven yeares, and the seaventh yeare after that was the comming in of the Scots and their taking of New-Castle, hath borne Crops of Corne, seven yeares after you shall heare newes, there shall two JudgesIn the yeare 1616. two Judges of Assize went out at a gate in York, where never any Judges were knowne to go out before or since. go in and out at Walmgate-Bar. In 1039. King Charles raised an Army in the Spring, When warres shall begin in the Spring. Much wee to England it shall bring: Then shall the Ladies crie well away, That ever we liv'd this day. He that had any thing, knowes this to be true by ex∣perience.Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most: you shall not know of the warre over-night that you shall have in the morning; and when it comes, it shall last three years: between Cadron & Air shall be great warfare; when all the world is as lost, it shall be called Christ crost. When the battell begins, it shall be whereNeere Lei∣cester, where Richard the Third was slaine in battell, there Colonell Hastings was of the first in Armes, endeavouring to settle the Commission of Array, in opposition to others that were then setting the Militia. Crook-back Richard made his Fray. They shall say, To warfare for your King for halfe acrowne a day, but stirre not, They will say, To warfare for your King on paine of hanging, but stirre not;How many Welch and Irish hath the K. lost in this Warre? very few have re∣turned to their old habitations. for he that goes to complaine, shall not come back againe. The time will come when England shall tremble and quake, for feare of a dead man that shall be heard to speak; then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the one is down, they will go to London Town: Then there will be a great batted between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time; and when they come to Brammamore they sight, and are again pacified for a time: Then there will be a great battell between England and Scotland
at Stockmore, then will Ravens fit on theIt is to be noted, and ad∣mired, that this Crosse in the North in Mother Shiptons daies was a tall Stone Crosse, which ever since hath been by degrees sinking into the ground, and now is sunk so low, that a Raven may sit on the top of it, and reach her Bill to the ground. Crosse, and drink as much bloud of Nobles as of Commons: then woe is me, for London shall be destroyed for ever after. There will come a woman with one eye, and she shall tread in many mens bloud to the knee, and a man leaning on a staffe by her, she shall say to him, What art thou? And he shall say, I am the King of Scots: and she shall say, Go with me to my house, for there are three Knights; and he will go with her, and stay there three daies and three nights: Then will England be lost; and they will cry twice a day, England is lost. Then there will be three Knights in Petergate in York, and the one shall not know of the other: there shall be a child borne in Pomfret with three thumbs, and those three Knights will give him three horsesThere was a Child not ma∣ny yeares since, borne at Pom∣fret, with three thumbs. to hold while they win England; and all noble bloud shall be gone but one: and they shall carry him to Sheriffe Nuttons Castle, sixe miles from York, and he shall dye there: and they shall chuse there an Earle in the Field, and hanging their horses on a thorne, rue the time that ever they were born, to see so much bloudshed. Then they will come to York to besiege it, and they shall keepe them out three dayes and three nights, and a penny loafe shall be within the Barre at halfe a Crowne, and without the Barre at a penny and they will sweare, if they will not yeeld to blow up the Town Walls. Then they will let them in, and they will hang up the Maior, Sheriffes, and Aldermen, and they will go into Crouch-Church: there will three Knights go in, and but one come out againe, and he will cause Proclama∣tion to be made, That any man may take House, Tower, or Bower, for 21 yeares, and whilst the world endureth there shall never be warfare againe, nor any more Kings or Qeenes, but the Kingdome shall be governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after this, shall be a white Harvest of Corne gotten in by Women. Then shall be in the North, that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I have seene a man to day; and for one man there shall be a thousand women. There shall be a man sitting on Saint James Church hill, weeping his fill: And after that, a Ship come sayling up the Thames, till it come against London, and the Master of the Ship shall weepe, and the Mariners shall aske him why he weepeth, being he hath made so good a Voyage? And he shall say, Ah, what a goodly City was this I none in the world comparable to it, and now there is left scarce any house that can let us have Drinke for our Money. Unhappy he that lives to see these dayes, But happy are the dend, Shiptons Wife saies: In the Worlds old age this woman did fore-tell Strange things should haep, which in our Times have fell. A Prediction of King Richard the Third. IN the Reign of King Richard the Third, his Majesty with his Army lay at Leicester the night before the battell at Bosworth field was fought. It happened in the mor∣ning as the King rode thorow the South Gate, a poore old blind man (by profession a Wheel-wright) sate begging, and hearing of his approach, said, That it the Moone changed twice that day, having by her ordinary course changed in the morning, King Richard should lose his Crowne, and be slaine: and riding over the Bridge, his left foot struck against a stump of Wood; which the old man hearing, said, Even
so shall his Head at his returne backe hit on the same place; which so came to passe: And a Nobleman, that carried the Moone for his Colours, revolted from King Richard; whereby be lost that day his life, Crowne, and Kingdome: which veresied the presages of that poore old blind man. The Prophesie by Ignatius. IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive Thou may'st, till thirty foure or five. After the E. is dead, a Scot Shall governe there: and if a Plot Prevent him not, sure then his sway Continue shall till many a day. The Ninth shall dye young, and the first Perhaps shall reigne: But oh accurst Shall be the time, when thou shalt see To sixteen joyned twentie three; For then the Eagle shall have help By craft to catch the Lyons whelp, And hurt him sore, except the same Be cured by the Maidens name. In July month of the same yeare, Saturne conjoines with Jupiter. Perhaps false Prophets shall arise, And Mahomet shall shew his prize, And sure much alicration Shall happen in Religion: Beleeve this truly, if then you see A Spaniard a Protestant to be. The Prophesie of old Sybilla. WHen Scotlands hundred and ninth uncon∣quered King, The sixteen hundred thirty and ninth yeare, Into his age of thirty nine shall reigne, Then shall the Papall overthrow appeare, Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire, For Scotland shall that blessed worke begin; Then shall the Whore of Babel we had here, Be banisht quite, which Bishops did bring in. Then thou brave England, which wast led so bland By their perverse Episcopapall pride, And Irelands shamelesse superstitious sin Shall be supprest, which cruelly have cry'd; So that, that sacred Prophetesse Sybilla, Shall shortly come to passe, she tells Tom Millae And Tom tells me, and I must tell't againe, Through Scotland, England, Ireland, France, and Spaine. Merlins Prophesie. ON Boreas wings then hither shall be borne Through Week ore Tweed, a Price Uni∣corne, Who brought into the world his own fairè Crest, A rampant Lyon figured on his brest, And to his Armes six Lyons more shall quarter, With six French flowers inviron'd with the Gar∣ter, Joyning by Fates unshangeable dispose The Northern Thistle to the Southern Rose; He shall the true Apostolick Faith maintaine, shall be, With pious zeal during his blessed reign. That Lincoln was, that London is, that York Brave London praies those daies she ne'r may see. The Prophesie of old Otwel Bins, kept by Mr. Smith, Vicar of Hudderfield 40 yeares. THen James shall seke a second Crowne, In pulng Pope and Papists downe; But James shall vanish from their face, At halfe Enzabeths Royall race. Then using forraigne Policies, Grudgings and discontents arise: Yet shall they assemble at the Seat Of Parliament, for a Worke most great: But strange Opinions there shall sow Dissention, that too high shall grow; And Laodicea's Englands Church Of grace ad beauty some shall lurch: And Smths of Policy shall invent, To cast new Moulds of Government; While vulgar Brds of weakest wing, Grow stout against the Eagle King, Whose just integrous heart shall prove The Adamant of Subjects love: Then Pride shall some in Prison lock, And lop a head off from a Block; By honest Power they shall bring downe An aspirer that assum'd a Crowne; That he whose Power did Lawes contemn, Might find a Grave, no Diadem. Some Comick Scones shall then be acted, By vulgar Players much distracted:
Another. ENgland! thy proper Native thee betrayes, Because all Nations hate thee and thy wayes: Spaine doth undermine thee, France doth gnaw, Wales threats, the Irish thee by snares doth awe. Thy bravest men do on a sudden dye, And thou thy selfe dost wholly rnin'd lye, Yet seest it not; but under feigned Peace, Dost thine owne misery still more encrease. M. Saltmarshes Predictions declared to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and the Councell of his Armie; with the Motives that occasioned it: and the manner of his Death. HE being at his house neere Yilford in Essex, Decemb. 4. 1647. told his Wife, that he had received a Command from God, to make knowne to the Armie what the Lord had revealed to him: The like be said to Sir H. M. Knight, a Member of the House of Commons, as soone as he arrived at London. The next day (being the Lords day) he found some difficul∣ty to procure a Horse, but after Dinner he got one, and rid alone towards Windsor: but missing his way, lodged that night 7 miles short; where he declared. That the great and dreadfull Day of the Lord is ner, when all men shall be judged by Jesus Christ, and then shall the waies and actions of all men appeare, &c. Early the next day, Decem. 6. he again miffed his way in a Forrest, but espying a house, rid to it to demand his way, and there made known, That God was purposed to destroy the wicked, and draw the Saints to himselfe, with much more: after which he departed, and about 9 of the clock came to Windfor; where M. A. an Adjutator, saluting him, he said, M. A. Depart from these Tens lest you perish with them, for the Lord hath revealed to me, that he is angry with this. Army because they have forsaken him. Another, a Captain, asked him how he did? To whom he replyed, That he had nothing from God to say to him, because he had alwayes been a seeker of himselfe under specious pretences. Then seeing one C. D. another Officer, he said, He could not owne him, for he was for destruction. Then going to the Generall Councell, where many Officers were met in expectation of the Generall, he told them, That he was come thi∣ther to reveale the Lords Command; That though God had done much for them, and by them, yet he had left them and their Councels, because they had forsaken him; That God would not prosper their Consultations, but destroy them by Divisions amongst themselves; That formerly he came like a Lamb, but now God hath raised in him the spirit of a Lyon because they had sought to destroy the people of God. Some said, that he lookt-like one distracted, and that he had been sick, and was not well recovered; to whom he replyed, That he had been sick, but well in health then, and sensible of what he said, and that should be the last time that ever he should speake to them. After∣wards he went to the Generall, not moving his Hat, and told him, That he had no command from God to honour him, That he had honoured him so much, as he offended God in doting on his person, and that God would no longer prosper him, &c. Then going to the L. Gen. who asked him how he did? He (without any respect) answered him, That God was very angry with him for abusing the Godly, and that the Armies falling from their first Principles, would occasion their ruine and destruction, &c. After which he departed, and on Tuesday, Decemb. 7. went againe to the L. Gen. and declared, That he was sorry to see such obstinacy in him, and wished him to be mindfull of what God had declared to him. Afterwards he tooke his leave of the Armie, and said, He had done his Errand, and must leave them, never to see the Armie more. On Wednesday, De∣cemb. 8. he came to London, and tooke leave of some friends, to whom he recommended his Wife. On Thursday, Decemb. 9. he went from London to his house at Yilford, not sick at all. and told his Wife what he had done. On Fryday Decemb. 10. he said, He had finished his course, and must go to his Father. In the afternoone he said his head aked, and laid himselfe upon his Bed. On Saturday, Decemb. 11. he was taken speechlesse, and about foure or five a clock that afternoone dyed. FINIS.
