S3591 E852_3 R207436 99866485 168267
A short DISCOVERY Of His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR'S Intentions Touching The Anabaptists in the Army, and all such as are against his reforming things in the CHURCH; which was first communicated to a Scotch Lord, who is called Twidle▪ but is now come to the ear of the ANABAPTISTS. Upon which there is propounded 35 QUERIES for his Highness to answer to his own CONSCIENCE. By a Well-wisher to the Anabaptists prosperity, and all the rest of the Separates of England. To His Highness the Lord Protector. My Lord, THere is some Intelligence abroad, which I desire to communi∣cate in a private way, lest I become a prey to the malice or envy of the ramping Lion. But to the matter intended; and that is this: It seems your Highness being discoursing with a Scotch Lord, who is called the Lord Twidle, you were pleased to say, That there was something amiss in the Church and State, which you would reform as soon as may be. Of those that were amiss in State, some were done; and the rest were a doing: and as for those things that were amiss in the Church, you hoped to rectifie by degrees, as convenient opportunity presented it self; but before you could do this work, the Anabaptists must be taken out of the Army; and this you could not do with sharp corrosive Medicines, but it must be done by degrees. From which there
are two things observable: 1. The Work. 2. The Way you intend to take to do this Work. First, to the Work; and that is Church-Work: It seems you in∣ten to follow the steps of them that are gone before, which could not be content to meddle with State-affairs, and to make Laws for the Body or Persons of men, but for the Conscience too; and to make Laws and Statutes, and impose them upon the People, as Rules of Divine Wor∣ship. And this is the work you intend to be at, under pretence of cor∣recting Error, and so to destroy Truth. But who could have thought, when you made your last Speech to the Parliament, when your Tongue was so sweetly tip'd for the Liberty of Conscience, reproving the Parliament for having a Finger on their Brother's Conscience? who could have imagined, that then heard you, That you would have been so soon at the same Trade, unless he had sup∣posed, A Fountain could have sent forth sweet Water and bit∣ter? But secondly, The Way you intend to take to bring about this de∣sign, is twofold: 1. To purge the Army of the Anabaptists. 2. To do it by degrees. But (Oliver) is this thy design? and is this the wa to be rid of the Anabaptists? and is this the Reason, because they hinder the reforming the things amiss in the Church? I confess, they have been Enemies to the Presbyerian Church Government; and so were you, when you were at Dunbar in Scotland, or at least you seemed to be so by your words and actions: for you spake as pure Independency, as any of us all, then; and made this an Argument why we should fight stoutly, Because we had the Prayers of the Independents and baptised Churches. So highly did you seem to love the Anabaptists then, that you did not onely invite them into the Army, but entertain them into your Family: but it seems the case is altered. But I pray do not deceive your self, not let the Priests deceive you; for the Anabaptists are men that will not be shuffled out of their Birth-rights, as free born People of Eng∣land: and have they not filled your Towns your Cities, your Provinces, your Islands, your Castles your Navies, your Tents, your Armies, (ex∣cept that which went to the West-Indies, which prospers so well) your Court? your very Councel is not free; onely we have left your Temples for your self to worship in. So that I believe it will be a hard thing to root them out, although you tell the Scotch Lord you will do it by de∣grees, (as he reports.)
May it please your Highness seriously to consider what hath been said, and answer these ensuing Queries to your own Conscience. 1. Whether your Highness had come to that height of honour and greatness you are now come to, if the Anabaptists (so called) had been as much your Enemies as they were your friends? 2. Whether the Anabaptists were ever unfaithful, either to the Commonwealth in general, or to your Highness in particular; and if not, then what is the reason of your intended dismission? 3. Whether the Anabaptists be not as honest now, as in the yeer 1650, and 51, and 52, &c. and if so, why not as useful now, as then? 4. Whether the Anabaptists are not to be commended for their integrity, which had rather keep Faith and a good Conscience, although it may lose them their employments, then to keep their employments with the loss of both? 5. Whether the Anabaptists may not as justly endeavour to eat out the bowels of your Government, as your Highness may en∣deavour to eat them out of their employments? 6. Whether the Anabaptists did not come more justly into their emplyments in the Army, then your Highness came into the Seat of Government? 7. Whether, If the Anabaptists had the power in their hands, and were as able to cast you out as you were them, and they did intend it to you, as you do to them; whether, I say, your Highness would not say, They were all Knaves? 8. Whether this be fair dealing in the sight of God and men, to pretend a great deal of love to the Anabaptists, as to Major Pack, and Mr. Kiffin, and a hundred more that I could name, when at the same time you intend evil against them? 9. Whether the Anabaptist will not be in a better condition in the day of Christ, that keeps his Covenant with God and men, then
your Highness will be, if you break with both? 10. Whether a hundred of the old Anabaptists, such as march'd under your command, in 48, 49, and 50, &c. be not as good as two hundred of your new Courtlers, if you were in such a conditi∣on as you were at Dunbar in Scotland? 11. Whether the cause of the Armyes defect in Hispani∣ola, was because there was so many Anabaptists in it; and if so, whether that be the onely reason, that they are so much out of date? 12. Whether your Highness hath not changed your former intention, to have an equal respect to the godly, though different in judgement; and if so, whether it be from the better to the worse? 13. Whether you Highness Conscience was not more at peace, and your Minde more set upon things above, when you loved the A∣nabaptists, then it is now, when you hate their Principle, or their service, or both? 14. Whether your Highness Court is not a greater charge to this Nation, then the Anabaptists in the Army; and if so, whe∣ther this be the case that you promised the people? 15. Whether there be any disproportion betwixt the state of things now, and the state of things in the dayes of old; and if there be, shew us where it lieth, how, and when? 16. Whether the Monies laid out, in the making of the new Rivers and Ponds at Hampton-Court, might not have been better bestowed in paying the publick Faith, or the Anabaptists Arrears before their dismission? 17. Whether it is not convenient for the Anabaptists to pro∣vide for their own safety, seeing from you they can expect none? 18. Whether it will be any more Treason to fight for our Liber∣ties and civil Proprieties in these dayes, if they be denied us, then it was to fight for them in the dayes of the King? 19. Whether The Instrument of Government be as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, that alter not; if so, how is
it that Mr. John Biddle is now a Prisoner? 20. Whether your Highness may not as well violate the whole Instrument of Government, as the 37 and 38 Articles? if so, what security have the people for their Liberty? 21. Whether our Liberty doth not wholly depend upon your will, and the will of a future Protector, seeing The Instrument of Government is so little useful? if so, whether our condition be not as bad as ever? 22. VVhether you may not as justly suffer all to be put in prison, that differ from the Church of England, as to suffer Mr. Biddle to be imprisoned? 23. Whether it will not be more aminable to the Anabap∣tists, or Independents, or Mr. Biddle, or any other professing Faith in God by Jesus Christ, and are not Disturbers of the civil Peace, nor turn their Liberty into licentiousness, to suffer for their Consciences under your Government, that promised Liberty to such, then it was to have suffered under the King, that promised them none? 24. Whether your Highness will not appear to be a dreadful A∣postate and fearful Dissembler, if you suffer persecution to fall upon the Anabaptists, or Independents, or them of Mr. Biddle's Judgement, seeing you promised equal Liberty to all? 25. VVhether this will not prove your Highness's ruine, if you joyn with such a wicked Principle, to persecute for Conscience, or to turn men out of the Army for being Anabaptists, or for any such thing, as differs from the Church of England, seeing God hath confounded all such as have done so? 26. Whether the old Parliament was not turned out, for leav∣ing undone that which they ought to have done? and if so, whe∣ther those things be done since? 27. Whether the little Parliament was not turned out, for do∣ing that which the other left undone, or taking away of Tythes, and other Grievances? And if so, then 28. Whether you did not intend your own ends more then you
did the Nations good, in breaking the first Parliament, and calling the second, and dissolving of them again? 29. Whether The Instrument of Government was not preparing eight or nine dayes before the breaking up of the little Parliament; and if so, whether you did not intend their dissolv∣ing? 30. Whether you did not tell a shameful untruth to the last Parliament, saying, That you did not know of their dissolv∣ing, that is to say, the little Parliament, till they came to deliver up their Power to you? Whether your Highness did not put a lur upon the Lord Lam∣bert, when he should have gone Lord Deputy of Ireland, in tel∣ling the Parliament, It savoured too much of Monarchy; and so sent Fleetwood with a lower Title? 32. Whether your Highness do not intend to put another slur upon the Lord Lambert, in sending for the Lord Deputy to come into England, to make him Generalissimo of the Armies in England, Scotland, and Ireland? 33. Whether it is not convenient for the Lord Lambert to consider of these actions, and to have an eye to your proceedings, lest by by degrees you eat him out of all, as you intend to do the Ana∣baptists? 34. Whether the excessive pride of your Family, do not call for a speedy judgement from Heaven, seeing Pride never geeth without a fall? 35. Whether the six Coach-horses did not give your High∣ness a fair warning of some worse thing to follow, if you repent not, seeing God often forewarns before he strikes home?
The Conclusion. My Lord, MY humble Request is, That you will seri∣ously consider of these few Lines: although you may dislike the way by which they are com∣municated, yet let the matter sink deep into your heart; for these things should have come to you in another maner, had not your Highness cast off all such friendly communication, (by word of mouth) and the persons too if they did but tell you plainly their mindes▪ And take  of casting away old Friends for new ∣tance, as Rehoboam did, 1 King. 12. 8. who for look the counsel of his good old friends, and consulted with his young Courtiers; which caused the ten Tribes to revolt from him. And it is a deadly sign of a speedy ruine, when a Prince or a State casts off the Interest of the People of God; as you may see in 2 Chron. 24. 17. how Joash forsook the people and house of God,
and then his host fell before a few of the Asiyri∣ans, as you may see in vers. 24 of the same chap. and at last his own Servants conspired against him, and slew him. And therefore, O Cromwel, leave off thy wick∣ed design of casting off the Interest of the Peo∣ple of God, and let my counsel be acceptable to thee; and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity by shewing mercy to the poor, and it may be a lengthning of thy tran∣quillity: for it is not strength united with policy, but righteousness accompanied with strength, that must keep alive your Interest with God and the People: and when both these die, that is to say, righteousness and sincerity, then adie to thy greatness here, and thy eternal happiness hereafter. From him who wishes your Highness happiness, so long as you do well. Printed for the information of all such as prize the iberty of their Con∣sciences, for which so much Blood hath been spilt. FINIS.
