S3954 E84_26 99858948 111008
Excceding certain and true NEWES FROM Munster. Lemster, Waxford, Ulster, Conough, Tiperary, AND DVBLIN; Otherwise called the English Pale. Being the true Copie of a Letter sent From a Marchant in Dublin, a man well knowne in London, one Captaine Scout, a Dutch-man, living on the Marchants Key, neer Sir William Parsons, one of the Lord Iustices of IRELAND To his worthy friend Mr. VAN HOOKER. Bearing Date, January 2. 1643. January 9. Printed by T. Fawcet, for J. B. 1643.
The last true Intelligence from the Kingdome of IRELAND; THe Distractions of England hath bin and yet is so mighty dangerous, and so horrid fearefull, that we have nei∣ther Eares to receive Calamities of our afflicted poore Bretheren the Protestants in Ireland, nor searce Christian hearts to pitty them, being every man fearefull to endute the like here, if not worse, with∣out the infinite meey of God be pleased to stop it, with the setling of his true Church in order, I mean the reformed Protestant Religion, with abollishing of Papists, Atheists, and other vild Sects, that choak the true Gospell, and the peace of these Kingdoms, the which poore Ireland hath, and still lives in, with that continuance of griefe, that is insensible to any but those which lately have. to give a feeling relati∣on
of the same, for those Protestant Gentry that through good hap hath escaped to Dublin, from the barbarous cruelty of the murthering Rebels, men both well landed, and Moneyed, yet have they bin in Dublin, (after their moneys have been gone) glad to fell their Plate, such as some by stealth could get thither, for halfe a Crowne, and two shillings an Ounce, yea, and for eighteen pence an Ounce, Gold Rings of two and twenty shillings weight, for seven shillings, and glad any man will so befriend them, Pewter three-pence, and two pence halfe penny, and two pence a pound, and the best Brasse the same, Bedding and other Houshold stuffe worth nothing, so that English Protestants that have a long time been livers in the Kingdome, Citizens of Dublin, who have by gathering all their lise times a compe∣tent subsistance for them, and for their Children, hare by the lessing of Souldiers put upon them, for pay they have not had, nor their Commanders to give them, by which meanes they have been eate and drunke out of all monies and goods to relieve them with, as by the sad relation of an Englishman, a Cooke who kept an Ordinary at the signe of the Bell, as many here can witnesse, was a man very able onely by his paines taking and trade, yet be had such a Company seast upon him, that it utterly undid him, for by his owre confession now in London to many of the Parliament, had but renne layne upon his charge, he could have maintained both him, them and his Houshold well enough, likewise so all the Ci∣ty
more and lesse doe thus complaine, Markets they have, but flesh very poore, sqashey. and unwhol∣some, which hath as many conjecture, bred fluxes, and diseases among them, Bread scarce and coorse, Butter very little, and as deare, and that place so plen∣tifull heretofore for Egges, one sould for a penny, yet is that Towne by the strong supportrance of the Castle, impossible to be taken, and for treachery they have and still take a good course to have no dealing or commerce with the Irish or Papist, though Eng∣lish, is there are some, yet thakes be to God for it, they have had good reliefe by the Sea for Fish, as from Rulloch the onely Herring-place six miles from Dublin, have ben sent up by Boates, infinite of Cod, Haddocke, Place, and like Fish, Herrings thirty for a penny, for the porer sort that have no∣thing to doe, but their paines (may have them for fetching) as for the Rebels in all parts of the Coun∣try, as namely the Prvices of Munster, Connough, Limstar, Vlster, and the lie by reason of our distrac∣tios here in England, (hping tht it will have no cessation of Armes) or unnaurall Warr one with the other will be still, have in all those parts, being lest alone by the English, Plowed, Tild, and sowne great store of Corne, as Wheae, Rye, Oates, Bar∣ly, Beanes, Pease, and Fetches, but the most part is Oates and Barly, in hope of a plentifull Crop, and enjoying the Harvest to themselves, with Summars Aide from Spaine and other places, for some of their Commanders have stole away, since the Earle of
VVarwicke left his Charge upon the Sea, to come unto the Parliaments imployment on the Land, now the Rebels being there, intend to raise Forces, and transport them out of Spaine, into Ireland, if they can get them over. But God I trust as he hath still will ever fruster∣ate their ill intents and make the sea their grave that thinks to kill and bury us on land, who as they sup∣pose have all save Dublin in their possssion, who come not nere it, nor hath such intent, because their Devilish Preists of antichrist, that were the sitst incendiaries of this evill, still fats them up with pro¦mise of their land and all shll be their owne and they to live happy, I feare happier then when their patron blest Saint Patrick made all almost in com¦mon in their Land, and did so holy sanctifie the same, that all ill moving Creatures from that earth as Frogs, Toades, Adders, Snakes. blud-wormes, Mules, and Asses, he charmed downe from a moun∣taine to the sea, and as their ill tutard ignorance re∣ports, he sent them into England, Scotland, Wales, and the Isle of man, Shepey Garusey, and other Ilands seated in the sea, but had saint Patrick bn worthy of that name he would a banisht them into the Sea being worsr vermin and the evill natured, who since there wildernesse of wolves have bin destroyed, they have drawne their natures and conditions from them and are the same themselves, and now live in that selfe security, as they were Israels Children and that Land were their promise, and poore Roges,
that alwaies naked lived on mountaines, or on moores halfe starved, and eaten up with lice, which vermaine their Saint Patrick left enough off, now play on Tabers and on Drum beds for handfulls, and for purses fild with silver and with gold, which they have robd and murdered English for, and vows as it is credibly reported, before the English ere should reposesse thir owne again they would chocke themselves with it, or throw it in the sea, or bury it in the earth, so mighty is their hate to those that have reformed them from bad, as beasts into huma∣nity, tell now they lost it, and now them selves in midst of all their welth doth even no more but tan∣talise vpon it, for in all parts is sedition raised a∣mongst them round. There friers in their disputattons Iarr with each other. Father against Father, Doctrine against Doc∣trine. And many of the wisest and the noblest of them have drawne forth heads and meetings with each other, cursing the first begetters of this Rebelli∣on for they them selves terme it no better now. Togeather with their sad Relations, of their su∣ture happy lives, both they, their fathers, and their granfathers, before them, and how with peace and plenty, they were blest, each Raining as a King o∣ver his owne. This in all parts is tooke into consideration of
their wisest, who thinks to find favour by sup∣pressing the rest. Some Skirmishes they have had, and as it cre∣dibly reported, they are very like to destroy them∣selves. Which if God of his mercy send a true and firme uniting betwixt the King and Parliament, they have but short continuance, or time to raine in these cruell outrages. Your Friend to Command J. Skout. FINIS.
