S5016 E697_11 99863520 166528
A WARNING-PIECE DISCHARGED: OR, Certain Intelligence COMMUNICATED To His Excellencie the Lord General CROMVVEL, With all the real and cordial Officers and Souldiers under his Command. Wherein the present tempers of each Society of People in this Commonwealth, under each Degree or Notion whatsoever, are inserted and con∣troverted, in relation to the election of a New REPRESENTATIVE. As also, A brief and full Parallel betwixt the History of Israel and our late and present Series of Affairs. In which Simile, Our present General is compar'd with Moses, as he was their Deliverer, Judge, and General. By John Spittlehouse, a late member of the Army. London, Printed for Richard Moone, at the seven Stars in Pauls Church-yard, neer the great North-door. 1653.
A Warning-piece DISCHARGED: Or, Certain Intelligence for his Excellencie the Lord General, with all the cordial Officers and Souldiers (of Jesus Christ) under his Command, &c. My Lord, and Gentlemen, HAving lien as it were Perdue since the 24 of April last, (that I published a Vindi∣cation of your then-late thrice-noble acti∣on in the dissolution of the Parliament, so called) to the end I might either see or hear how the same would be resented a∣mongst the generality of the people of this Commonwealth▪ as also to know the tem∣pers of each Society of persons in the same: And having now in some measure obtained such my desires,
I shall hereby presume the boldness to communicate it to your Ho∣nours, viz. the various Opinions and Judgements of the aforesaid persons (so far as they tend to the present purpose;) being digest∣ed and distinguished under each degree of Notion which the said persons do now bear in the Commonwealth: whereunto I have an∣nexed some Animadversions, for the clearer illustration of the same. The Van of which persons and opinions I shall present you with, are the Grand Royallists, commonly termed Cavaliers; who are a people (as far as I can possibly gather) that do very well resent, that the Government of this Commonwealth should be managed by those persons who have the present power in their hands; it being (say they) the most conducing to Reason, for that they have so gal∣lantly fought and obtained what they now enjoy. 2. In that they think it impossible that worse Governours should succeed, then were last in possession thereof, (as to the generality of them.) Which, to my apprehension, appeareth to be an Heroick and gallant resolution in the aforesaid persons; yea, so gallant, as that I fear there is not any other Notion of people in all the Common∣wealth that doth parallel them, (as to such a condescention) and for which their civil and discreet deportment, I judge them worthy of as much favour and respect from the present Governours, as with safety can be granted them; inasmuch as from being the most turbulent enemy to the quondam-Parliament, &c. they are now the most peaceable friends to our present Patriots. The second sort of Persons and Parsons I shall communicate in∣telligence from, are the Demy-Royallists of this Commonwealth, viz. the Clergie and Laytie of people under the Notion of Pres∣byterians: whom I so term, because they are such a sort of people that would very gladly have a King, but to no other purpose, then that they might ride upon his back, as the old Strumpet their Mother doth yet upon the Beast, Rev. 17. 7. (viz. that he might be unto them in stead of an Ass, to bear the title of Supremacie, but they themselves The Power.) And this they do, in imitation of their elder sister Prelacie, who in some measure had done the like before, as in preferring their own Titular Honours before such persons as had it really by descent; instance the Prelatical Cler∣gie, who ranked the Lords Spiritual before the Lords Temporal,
but durst not attempt the same upon the King, but that he must be Supreme Head and Governour, both over things Spiritual, as well as Temporal. Which gross presumption and palpable con∣tradiction, I do very much admire the Nobility and Gentry of the Prelatical party could endure, or be insensible of, had they ever looked upon Matth. 23. 8. and 1 Pet. 5. 3. which two places are very worthy the serious consideration both of the Prelatical Lay∣tie, as also the Presbyterian: for if they duely consider the same, they will clearly see, that their aforesaid idol-Priests ought not in the least to assume any such title unto them, no, not so much as of Rabbi, or Master; and that both by the command of Jesus Christ, and the Apostle Peter himself, whom their old Mother-Harlot pleadeth succession from; but I know not in what, un∣less in imitation of the aforesaid Peter in following his Ma∣ster afar off, Matth. 26. 58. or denying his Master three times, (viz.) 1. As he is Pope: 2. As he is a Prelate: And 3. As a Presbyter; the two later being lineally descended from him, as he is the Adulterer, or Man of sin, 2 Tim. 2. 3. and like∣wise of Papacie, Prelacie, and Presbytery, as the Adulteress, or Mother of Harlots, as in Rev. 17. 5. so that the aforesaid daughters are as well Harlots as their Mother, and that by una∣voidable consequence; as all that are rational must needs confess; as in the constitution and ordination both of their Church-mem∣bers, and Church-Officers; viz. by Rantizing Infants, and so making National Churches; as also by making Priests▪ that are enjoyned to maintain and uphold the same: instance the Prelatical Service-book, and Presbyterian Directory; clear contrary to the precepts and practice of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, as the Scri∣ptures do clearly declare to all that have an eye to see, and an heart to understand. But such of late hath been the craft and subtilty of the young Strumpet of Presbytery, that since she perceived her self to be taken notice of by her elder sisters customers, and that many of them began to be enamored of her (the other being grown stale) did in a very short time grow so proud, as that she could not brook her elder sister to be in the House with her, but endeavoured every day to get ground of her, by her Dalilah-like garb, whereby she incensed such her lovers against her.
By means whereof, there grew a fierce and cruel contest betwixt the Clients of the daughters of the foresaid old Bawd of Rome: but such proved the event, that the younger Harlots Clients pre∣vailed: which no sooner done but she her self endeavoured the old trick of her predecessors, to advance her self into their Saddle, by the same means, and to the same purpose; as by clawing her elder sister's chief Supporter to become her favourite: but such was his inclination, that albeit he could not preserve his own Con∣cubine from ruine, yet (had he not been prevented by a third per∣son) he would have play'd his game so cunningly with her, as to have given her a fair fall. My Lord and Gentlemen, I crave pardon for this digression; which I took upon me, not that it doth any way concern you, but that I might (if possible▪ shame the people of God under the afore∣said Notions, out of the adulterous estate and condition they are in, and that they would now at length take notice of the many calls which they have had, out of that Antichristian or Babylonish condition, inasmuch as it now more neerly concerns them then ever. But to the thing intended. viz. The aforesaid Demy-Royallists as far as I can possibly discover, have not the least reason to offer, why any that is under the Notion of a Presbyterian ought to have any hand in electing a new Re∣presentative, during the time that he adhereth in the least measure to uphold that Hierarchie▪ either in its Constitution or Ordination, as aforesaid: so that all they can say for themselves, is onely to rail at me, as if I had wronged them by saying they had done their ut∣termost endeavour to advance Monarchie again in this Common∣wealth after the death of the late King. For (say they) had we done so, we could have raised half the Nation against the Army and their adherents. Resp. And could you so, Mr Pres-byte-er? Truely I must tell you, I think it was neither for want of affection or endeavours that you did it not; witness the private Juncto whereof your Love-ly Darling was both Secretary and Treasurer, as he found to his cost; as also by several other like endeavours, as is notoriously known by all that have in the least taken notice of your deportments, both be∣fore and since the death of the late King. Yea, I have that confi∣dence
in you as you are the people of God, (though yet in Babylon, Rev. 18. 4.) that you have a conscience that justifieth me in what∣ever I said of you in my late Vindication &c. It is therefore my earnest request, that you would rest satisfied, and not expect the least share or interest in a new election of persons to represent this Commonwealth, for the reasons mentioned in that my aforesaid Vindication, &c. And so I leave you in the other sense to stand or fall to your Master; onely this be assured that so long as you refuse to come out of your present Babylonish conditi∣on, you will yet more and more be made participants of her plagues; which I hope you either are, or shortly will be made sensible of: for, albeit (as the Prophet saith) you will not see; yet the time will come, yea and now is, that you shall see, and be ashamed. The third sort of persons are certain members of Gathered Churches, (but I hope there are not many of them) and their ad∣herents, viz. certain persons under various Notions, which I shall at present forbear to particularize, inasmuch as the Spirit of God is pleased to conclude them all under one general denomination, as in Revel. 9. from vers. 1. to 12. they being the very persons there mentioned, for that they have no more foundation in point of a setled or Church-like decencie or order of Religious Worship a∣mongst them, (albeit, in their own esteem, Christians in the highest degree that ever was) then the afore-mentioned pit hath a bottom. This small hint I thought fit to declare, (by the by) to put them in minde of their present condition, to the end they may not be henceforth any longer high-minded, but may rather fear, inasmuch as Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light; as also in that God is yet the God of order, and not of confusion; as also in that it is a vain thing for them to think themselves more spiritual then Jesus Christ whilst he had his abode on earth, who albeit it is said of him, that he had the Spirit without measure, yet was he pleased to give presidents and commands to such as should be his disciples to believe and practise, as the doctrines of the Principles of Religion (which he termeth a foundation) mentioned in Heb. 6. and not to build themselves as castles in the air, without the afore∣said foundation. But inasmuch as there is to every thing an appointed time, as
also inasmuch as before the opening of the seventh Seal, there is to be a silence even in heaven it self, for the space of half an hour, Revel. 8. 1. as also in that all truth is not to be declared at all times; as also in that it is not prudence (as one faith) to follow it too neer the heels, lest it should prejudice the pursuer; I shall for∣bear any further prosecution of their Opinions, as to a Spiritual re∣lation. Onely this further, let them be sure that the Scripture must be fulfilled, which saith, that the Beast which was, and is not, and yet is, shall go into predition, Rev. 17. 8. it being the eighth, and is of the seventh, and goeth into perdition, vers. 11. But to the present business. It is evident that many of the aforesaid persons are very unwil∣ling to intrust the present Governours with their Civil relations; their reasons for which, I shall insert first, in general terms, and af∣terward in particular. To each of which, I shall return an an∣swer. But lest I should fail to answer what they at present do, and also might say at the utmost in point of Objection, I shall (under favour) assume the boldness to plead the case in their behalf, so far as it is possible for them to do; as by these following Asser∣tions, viz. Object. 1. That since the death of the late King, all the Civil and Military powers of the Nation ought of right to have had their recourse to their first ubi, viz. to the persons who first in∣trusted him to make use thereof for their safety and welfare; which when he had violated the trust they so reposed in him, they took him from it, as a Malefactor. 2. That the aforesaid persons are part of the men that have contributed all their assistance towards the prosecution there∣of; so that they think themselves injured, in that they are not per∣mitted to have an equal share of the priviledges that do now ac∣crue thereby, being disappointed thereof by some person or persons who have assumed the same unto themselves, without their consent or approbation, and, for ought they can perceive, do still resolve to retain and dispose thereof, according to their own wills and plea∣sures. Resp. In Inswer to these your Assertions, I shall oppose the story of Israel's deliverance from their Egyptian bondage: in which Si∣mile, I shall compare our present General to Moses.
Object. That parallel cannot agree, inasmuch as the afore∣said design was managed by Moses only, whereas all men know that we have had several other Generals before the present Gener∣al; yea, such as he hath been commanded by. Again, victories are properly ascribed to him who commandeth in chief, and there∣fore such victories are not to be applyed to him. Resp. I appeal to any knowing man, friend or enemy, whether the Lord hath not honored our present General with treble vi∣ctories to any one Champion before him whatsoever? (Not that I go about to flatter the present General, or in the least to derogate from the worth and valor of the other, but only that I would sin∣gle him forth, as the daughters of Israel did David from Saul; in which sense, I am confident I may truly ascribe him his ten thou∣sand for the others thousand.) For besides all his memorable victo∣ries, as in his conquest of Ireland and Scotland in general, had not he the chief hand in all the former and latter ones in Eng∣land? Where can you almost name any one considerable victory, where he bore not the Bell from all the field besides? for the truth where of, I appeal as aforesaid, in that I abhor to flatter the man, as much as he can to be flattered; but meerly as there is a con∣straint upon mee, in relation to that I have taken upon me to make good; viz. That our present General ought to be esteemed the same to us as Moses to the Israelites, as he was their Deliver∣er, Judge and General. Object. We do acknowledg that God hath made him very in∣strumental, in turning of the great wheel of Providence, but not to be compared with Moses; for he was immediately sent from God with direction, both what he was to say and do before his brethren the Israelites, as also in the sight of Pharoah King of E∣gypt. Answ. Pray shew me where the Lord did acquaint Moses be∣forehand, with any more then three signes of all which he was to shew before the aforesaid persons? which if you cannot, then it must needs follow, that Moses himself was led as much in the dark, in the management of that great transaction, as our present General hath been in that which hath passed through his hands, during the whole Series of the war, and the counter-change that
hath happened therein, whether in relation to Church or State. Object. It is cleer that the Lord told Moses, that he intended to smite Egypt with all his wonders. Resp. But did he particularize any more then three? can you conceive that Moses did plainly know of the plague of Frogs, be∣fore the plague of turning the water into blood was over? Or of the plague of Lice, before the plague of Frogs was over? Or of the plague of Flies, before the plague of Lice was over? Or of the murrain of Beasts, before the plague of Flies was over? And so consequently of all the insuing plagues. Again, after the death of the first born, can it be in reason im∣agined that Moses knew he was to divide the Sea, when they were pursued by Pharoah, or that he had knowledge thereof, untill he had sent up his ejaculatory prayers to heaven for a speedy deliverance from the imminent danger they were then in? Exod. 14. 15. Durst he advance forward untill the Lord commanded him? was it not in his minde to have them stand still, yea, did he not command them so to do? Object. Doubtless Moses would not have commanded them to stand still, but that he had some fore-knowledge that the Lord would deliver them, as the following words of that verse do de∣clare; for he doth not only bid them stand still but biddeth them that they should not fear, and they should see the salvation of the Lord, which he would shew unto them that day: for, (saith he,) the Egyptians which ye have seen to day▪ ye shall see them again no more for ever. The Lord will fight for you, (saith he) and ye shall hold your peace. Resp. All that can be collected from that his expression, is that the Lord had in some small measure given him satisfaction that he would help them in that their perplexity, that he that had brought them so far, would not now leave them or forsake them; but that he would work some wonderful deliverance for them: But what it was, or how it should be effected, certainly he did not know: For had Moses known the manner of their deliverance, he would not have bid them stand still, but rather have bid them march forwards, which he did not do untill the Lord had so or∣dered him; as also what he was to do, and what should be the effect thereof.
Again, after that their miraculous deliverance, who can con∣ceive that Moses knew either how he should either feed or cloath so great a multitude, for the space of forty years in the wilder∣ness? Again, was he not constrained to cry unto the Lord at Marah, where the water was so bitter that they could not drink it? did he then know how to sweeten the same, until he was shewed a tree which should effect it? Again, when they wanted bread, did Moses know beforehand how to furnish them, untill the Lord had told him he would rain them down bread from heaven, as also in relation to flesh? Again, when they wanted water at Rephidim, Chap. 17. did Moses know before-hand what to do in that case? no certainly, for then he would not have concealed the same so long as he did, (viz) untill he had been like to have been stoned by the people: but contrariwise it is manifest that he was again necessitated to cry unto the Lord, and to ask him what he should do in that great strait. And is it not there said, that the Lord directed him (after he had so prayed) what he should do? Quest. What will you infer from what you have said? Resp. That Moses was altogether as ignorant of Gods intend∣ed proceedings in that enterprise he had then in hand, as our pre∣sent General hath been in the management of those things he hath been carried forth to do, which I am confident hath been far be∣yond his first thoughts, or imaginations. Yea, I do verily believe, that had our present General known before-hand the several trou∣bles and hardships he hath passed, he would have been as hardly perswaded to have undertook the same, as Moses in the case a∣foresaid; he would not easily have been perswaded to have pur∣chased his honor at so dear a rate, especially had he known he should have been envied for such his honor being so obtained. So that the Lord hath been most evidently seen in carrying forth our present General through all the difficulties, wherein many have formerly fainted & lagged, because they could not see to the end of the Lords intentions, in his great work, which he hath done since they left off, and is yet to do; which thing hath also been the cause of all the murmurings at the apparent hand of Providence in sever∣al particulars: as at the expulsion of the 11 Members; the second
purge of the Parliament; the bringing of the King to justice; and now the late dissolution of the Parliament. And therefore under God we are the most ingaged to the pre∣sent General of all the men in the Nation, because the Lord hath e∣very way fitted him with the strength, courage and valor of the a∣foresaid Moses; in that, I say, it hath not been in the least abated, but hath rather been renewed, as the Eagle at the casting of her bill; (viz.) at every of the aforesaid changes, (notwithstanding the several desertions and murmurings as aforesaid) to the praise of the Lord of Hosts be it spoken: so that by the good hand of God upon him, he hath born us up as it were upon the wings of an Ea∣gle, and hath been unto us as the good shepherd that feedeth his flock in green pastures, by the waters of comfort. Even he, I say, hath (under God) been the chief man, that hath with the aforesaid Moses, taken us from under the power of our Egyptian Pharaoh, and from the iron furnace of Tyrannie, and from the Brick-kilns of Papacy, Prelacy & Presbytery, those three dayes journey, to serve the Lord in our present wilderness-conditi∣on; he it is (I say, &c.) that hath brought destruction upon our Pharaoh, and all his host and that hath led us through the red sea of a bloody war, which we have by Providence passed, and in which our aforesaid Pharaoh and all his host have been destroy∣ed. He it is, I say, that with David hath pluckt us out of the claws and paws of the Lyon and the Bear, (viz) from tyranny and sp∣ritual idolatry, which we were subject unto; as also from the late bosome-vipers which with Paul he hath shaked off his hand into the fire, where they have perished with the faggot out of which they arose▪ which neither he nor we did once think there had been such danger in. He it is that hath conquered our Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og▪ the King of Bashan, (viz) Charles the first as King of England. Scotland and Ireland; and Charles the second, as King of Scotland. Object. To what purpose have you cull'd out these expressions? Answ. To the end all the cordial members of this Common∣wealth may henceforth look upon our present General, as the afore∣said Israelites did upon Moses. Object. As how? Resp. As the chief Ruler appointed by God over us.
Obj. Moses did not usurp Authority over his brethren. Resp. Pray shew me where or when Moses received either Commission or Honour from the aforesaid people of Israel, either as he was their Deliverer, General, or Judge. Object. It must needs be acknowledged that Moses received not his Commission from the Commonwealth of Israel, in any of the aforesaid respects: but he received the same immediately from God; which the present General hath not. Resp. From whom hath our present General the Authority and Power he doth exercise? hath he it from Man, or from God? Object. We cannot say he hath he it from Man; for that he can∣not have, until it be given him by a new Representative. Resp. If he have it not from Man (as you have truly said he hath not) then it must consequently follow, that he hath it from God, viz. by the hand of Providence, as had Moses: so that, as I said be∣fore, we are now put into the same estate and condition with the aforesaid Israelites in their wilderness-condition: and if so, can we say that the people of Israel did assume such a power unto them∣selves, as to turn Moses out of that condition the Lord had so pla∣ced him in, as you now thirst to do? Did any of them I say▪ unless that enviovs Corah Dathan and Abiram with their accomplices, ever attempt such Pride & Arrogancie as in the least to question his then-Power and Authority over them, and which the Lord had been pleased to bestow upon him? And what was the reward the Lord gave to the aforesaid persons for such their insolence? Read that story therefore, & consider it seriously, I beseech you▪ lest you be found such persons as are risen up out of that pit which swallowed them up for such their presumption or lest the heavie wrath of God fall upon you as it did upon the foresaid Corah & his accomplices. Again let the several other murmurings of the like ingrateful peo∣ple be a warning to you lest the like punishment befal you; lest the Lords destroying Angel be sent amongst you: for be assured, the Lords hand is not shortned in point of Justice, more then in point of Mercy; for the like sins will certainly produce the like punishments. Obj. To whom should we appeal, in case of injustice &c. if the General, & so consequently the Army assume still the Supreme Pow∣er & Authority of the Nation unto themselvs, as at present they do? Resp. Have you any cause to complain of his or their present car∣riage
towards you, since they so took the same upon them? if not, what cause have you to complain, either of him or them? Obj. He hath not dealt justly with us, in that hee hath usurped our interest in the supream power, it being as properly our birth-right as his own, in that we have been found as faithfull and real through∣out the whole Series of Affaires as himself. Resp. Have you been more to him, then the Israelites were to Moses? did not they as well aid and assist Moses in that enterprize, as you have the present General? did Moses fight the Amalekites alone? did not the Israelites assist him therein? And if so, what pri∣viledge ought you to claime in the supream power more then they? Consider seriously with your selves, I beseech you, and see what you do in effect say less then (the aforesaid Corah, &c. viz.) Oliver Cromwell, thou hast taken too much upon thee, inasmuch as we ought to be equal sharers with thee, & the Councel which thou hast chosen of thy own head without our consent or approbation, who are as holy & as much in favour with God as thy self, it being our birth-right as well as thine own, inasmuch as we have engaged our all as well as thee, or those thou hast taken unto thee as thy assist∣ants. What if some of us were but the keepers of the stuff whilst you fought the field? ought not we to have an equall share of the spoil as well as your selves, viz. of all the benefits that have accrued by the victories you have attained? besides▪ have not many of us ha∣zarded our lives as well as your selvs in the high places of the field? Again, what legal power hast thou of thy self, to do as thou dost or hast done since the death of the late King? was not all the Re∣gall power cut off from the power from which thou hadst thy power, by that one blow which separated his head from his bo∣dy? who had a just right after that blow to give thee a Commission? or what Commission hast thou for the present, since thy late disso∣lution of the Parliament? if thou hast, who gave it thee, or when was it given thee? hast thou not put thy self in possession of all the power of this Commonwealth meerly by thy strong arm and long sword? what then is this thou hast thus taken upon thee, except thou intendest to make thy self altogether a Prince or King over us? Numb. 16. 13. Resp. Hearken and consider, O ye stupid and ingrateful people! Are not these your present thoughts against the General? And if
so, hath he deserved them at your hands? Have you been like minded hereto∣fore? Have your hearts been formerly possest with such prejudices towards him, whilst ye were under the Egyptian Pharaoh, whilst ye were suffering in the aforesaid Iron-furnace, or labouring in the aforesaid Brick-kilns, whilst he was chiefly instrumental in working all the Miracles upon Pha∣raoh and all his servants and host, whilst he turned their Babylonish sun of Monarchy into darkness, & their moon of Church-Government into blood; whilst he plucked their stars of Honor from their Orbs, and their planets from their Spheres; whilst he was the instrument of God to strike thorow Kings in the day of his wrath; whilst he was as Judge amongst the Heathen; whilst he filled the places where he came with dead bodies; whilst he woun∣ded the heads over many countries; whilst he trod upon the Lion and the Dragon, whilst he trod the young Lion and Dragon under his feet, viz. Charles 1. and Prelacie, and Charles 2. and Presbytery; whilst he brought you thorow the aforesaid Red-sea of blood; whilst he went thorow the many straits and hardships in England, Ireland, and Scotland; whilst he was put to make his several addresses unto God by prayer & supplication, in his many great straits and hardships? was it so with you, I say▪ during those times? Nay, was he not contrarywise looked upon by you as a Prince and Deliverer indeed? Did not you then court him at every turn with con∣gratulatory Petitions, magnifying him beyond what I am confident he de∣sired from you? And is the case now so altered with you? How is it, I say, that you can harbour the least jealousie of such a Noble person, who hath not spared to venter his dearest blood, to bring you into the condition you are in, and which you so much desired? Consider seriously whether you have not just cause to repent of such your fond imaginations, as to have the least symptome of an evil conjecture of such a right worthy Patriot? What can such your vanity be compared unto except with the wanton carriage of the aforesaid Israelites, who when the aforesaid Moses had put them into a condition of fulness, they presently waxed fat, and (Jesurun-like) kicked against the Lord and his servant Moses. And what is the present General, that you should murmur against him? is not your murmuring against God, who hath so honored him in the midst of you, as your eyes have seen? yea, hath it not for a long season been your daily complaint, that he was the only means of obstructing the work of God, in that he had all the power in his hands & might do what he would? were you not then offended he did not put his power in execution, as by displacing such as were then in present power, and would not manage the same as you thought they ought and might have done? And are you now angry with him, that he hath done according to such your desires?
Object. He might and ought to have acquainted us before he had done it and not to have done it so rashly upon his own accord, without our pri∣vity and consent in the least. Resp. Were you not in such haste for the execution thereof, as that you seemed to think every day a year until it should be done? witness all your several meetings at B. F. and elsewhere to hasten the execution thereof: and were you not by so doing in a great measure made agents in the same viz. by your many invocations to God, that he would give them courage and boldness, whom you deem'd fit instruments to accomplish the same? but it seemeth your fingers would be dabling in every dish, being neither well fasting nor full. Hath not the honest man, think you somewhat to do with you that he is thus necessitated to take himself off from what he might otherwise have done by this time, to publish declaration after declaration, to give you sa∣tisfaction as to that he hath done? for otherwise what reason hath the con∣queror to court the conquered into obedience? Are they to be looked up∣on in any other qualification, (viz. in the condition they are in) then the mixed multitude that came along with the people of God out of Egypt? Such as are indeed in the Common-wealth, but not properly of the Com∣mon-wealth. Object. We look upon him at present as a very honest and cordial man; but such a place of singular eminency, as he hath now voluntarily taken upon him, will be a very great temptation unto him; for experience hath taught, that those that were sometimes famous for their Countrie, as the Earle of Strafford whilst Sir Tho. Wentworth, whom when once poison∣ed with the aforesaid delicious bait of honor, became presently as bad, as ever he was before good, &c. Resp. And what of that? must therefore the Government lye destitute of governors, because good men are subject to become evil by such-like advancements? or would you therefore have no good persons to under∣take the present burthens of the Nation. Again? what degree of honor doth the honest man desire more▪ then he hath formerly had from you? Nay, I am confident▪ would you call him Mr. Crumwel, or Oliver Crumwel Esquire, he would not be offended with you. Again, suppose this thrice-Noble Gentleman, (as he hath been the chief instrument under God of subduing or conquering. 1 England, 2 Ireland, and 3 Scotland; and hath now out of his deep affection towards the pub∣lick good, so courteously taken your burthens upon his own shoulders) should have refused so to have done, after he had dissolved the late Parli∣ament, &c. what course would you have taken for the management of the same?
Had he and the other secret Manigers of the aforesaid A∣ction, made us acquainted with what they intended to doe, wee could then have prepared a new Representative, against those then in present Power had gone out. Indeed had they done so, they had shewed themselves very excellent Statesmen indeed. O that Men are so stupid to speake so absurdly, and ridiculously, was it not cleare that the Actors for recruting a new Representative was driving it on as furiously, as Jehu his Chariot, which when once fini∣shed, and directions sent for calling such persons whom they intended unto them, had it then been a fit time, thinke you, for the Generall to have published those his intentions, to all the world, viz. as that on such a day he intended to dissolve the present Parliament, &c. I wonder any wise Men can have such fond imaginations, for by so doing you had been voted traytors every Man of you, before you could have accomplished your designe, and what would have been the event of such an enterprise, if not another warre, I know not? In as much as they had so linked the Rabi Priests unto them by their continuation of their tythes, and the Lordly power they had given them to choose Pastors, as they call them, as that doubtles they would not onely have fitted them with fit Members for their supply, but also have blowne the bellows of dissention in every Pulpit, by magnifying the one▪ and ni∣hilating the other, untill they had kindled another flame in the bowels of this Common-wealth, which how easily they might have done amongst so much combustible matter, I leave to all rationall Men to judge. Hee needed not to have done it so publickly as you speak of, but privately to some few persons. And must not those persons have published it privately to others, untill all the reall party had been acquainted there∣with; for why should not all have been made privie there∣unto as well as some, and that through England, Scotland, and Ireland? For if not all, why any, but such as must of ne∣cessitie, which was accordingly done. And therefore without dispute, it was the onely wise course that could have been taken, had Seneca himselfe been living, and had had a hand therein.
Againe, Suppose they had made you privie to such their designe, what sort of persons would you have made choice of for the Management of the aforesaid imployment. Such as wee were confident are both able and faithfull Men to the interest of the Common-wealth. Doth not this your Answer secretly imply, that the per∣sons now in present Power, are neither faithfull nor able. And if such be your construction of them, are they not very much beholden to you for such an Opinion, after such their so long and ample demonstrations of their reall and Cordiall affections towards you; but I hope better of you, though I thus speake. Againe; Did you judge them able and faithfull, why should you not rather encourage them to goe forwards, then in the least to dishearten them; for can you have fitter persons then able and faithfull Men to governe you. Wee acknowledge we cannot, but by suffering such per∣sons to govern us as at present, wee shall for ever be cut out of all our birth-rights; for not onely this Generall, but all that shall succeed him will claime the like priviledge ad infi∣nitum. Can you say the present Generall claimeth more power and authoritie then did Moses; and was Moses reputed by the Israelites as their King? No surely; for such was the envious expressions and suggestions of Corah and his Rebellious Ac∣complices; for otherwise hee was onely esteemed as a Deli∣verer, Captain, and Judge. Had he not the same power as hath a King? No; for wee see there was a vast difference betwixt the Judges and Kings of Israel, as appeares by 1 Sam. Cap. 8. For Samuel telleth the Israelites there of no old matter or manner of Government, when he describeth unto them the nature and qualities of the Kings of the Nations, whom the said Israelites then thirsted to imitate. By which discourse it ap∣peareth that the Judge did not exact one tenth of the State or Power which the said Kings claimed as their Prerogative Royall. Which the said Israelites found to their cost in Solo∣mons dayes; as by wofull experience they told his sonne Re∣hoboam, 2 Chro. Cap. 10.
Wherein consisted the chiefe difference betwixt Moses and a King? The Prophet Samuel telleth you in the aforesaid Chapter, where when the Israelites had desired a King to judge them (Mark) Like all the Nations, viz. the Heathen. Which must unavoydably be the Consequent; for if Israel was the onely peculiar people of God, then all the rest of the Nations must needs be Heathens (at that time when them words were spo∣ken) the partition wall not being then broken downe. But wherein lay their sin in desiring of a King, like all the Nations? In that by such their desires they did in effect forsake God, and become Heathen; as, 1. In desiring a King like all the Nations, was plainly to be∣take themselves to be governed by the Lawes of the Nations, and so consequently in a desperate manner to forsake the Law of God; and so consequently God himselfe; as in 1 Sam. 8. 7. & 10. 19. And hence it was that the Lord to signifie his detestation to such their desires, inforceth them by his judgements to confesse, (and that before their King) that they had added to all their sinnes this evill, to aske them a King, Cap. 12. 19. 2. The evill of having a King like all the Nations, was to put themselvs into the condition of the Nations, who were accu∣stomed to attribute all their victories & deliverances to their Kings (as the Scriptures doe plentifully declare) and that without ascribing them in the least to providence. And hence it was, that when they had a King, the Lord doth upbraid them for their Idolatrous humor to Monarchie, as in Hosea 13. where he useth these expressions to the aforesaid Israe∣lites, viz. When Ephraim (saith he) spake trembling, he exalted himselfe in Israel, but when he offended in Baal he dyed, &c. Yet (saith he) I am the Lord thy God, from the Land of Aegypt, and thou shalt know no God but mee: for there is no Saviour besides mee. I did know thee in the wildernesse, in the land of great drought. According to their pasture, so were they filled, they were filled, and their hearts were exalted; therefore have they forgot mee. There∣fore will I be unto them as a Lyon, as a Leopard by the way will I observe them. I will meet them as a Bear that is bereaved of her
whelpes, and will rent the cowle of their heart, and there will I de∣voure them like a Lyon; the wild beasts shall tear them. O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy selfe, but I will be thy help. I will be thy King; where is any other that may save thee in all thy Cities? And thy Judges of whom thou saidst, Give mee a King and Princes. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath. For the fuller illustration of this, read 1 Sam. 8 & 15. & 16 Chapters, so that Israel is chiefly said to have undone it selfe by asking a King to judge them like all the Nations or Hea∣then. 3. The evill of having a King, &c. was to change them from being the people of God to become Heathens, as to imi∣tate them in all their licentious courses, for certainly, a King like unto the Nations, must needs Act in all things according to the Kings of the Nations. Or otherwise, hee degenerateth from being such a King; for to be like them is by imitating them, and not otherwise. And commonly where such a King is, there will be like Subjects, without the great restraining power of God to prevent the same. So that the good Kings of Judah acted rather like Judges, then Kings; as by making the Lawes of God the rule and square of all their actions. Whereas they that ruled, as did the Kings of the Nations, (viz. according to Samuels description as aforesaid) were all Idolaters, as were the Kings of the Nations. Yea it is evident that many of them in∣deavoured as farre as in them lay, to out-strip the Heathens in wickednesse; instance Manasseh, &c. So that as I said be∣fore, the consequence of desiring to be ruled by Kings, is to de∣sire to be made Heathens. And that to all ends and purposes, which I desire may for the future be seriously considered, both by the present persons in Authoritie, least they should assume to be looked upon, or adored as Kings of the Nations, as also to prevent the like desire for the future in such our wanton and unadvised Israelites, viz. those of the prelaticall and Presbyterian judgements, who thinke that if they have not a King, they cannot be Al a mode-de frans &c. as formerly they have been, to their cost, and will be more if they persist in the like rebellious thoughts against God, who is now ten∣dering himselfe to be their King, as he was to Israel in Moses dayes, which should they refuse, the Lord will undoubtedly
bring seven worse evills upon them, then hath yet befallen them; but a word to the wise is sufficient; for they cannot but know, that whilst the present Conservators hath the least cause of jealousie, that they hanker after such an hea∣thenish Idoll (as hath been cleerly proved) which they can judge no lesse, whilst each of the aforesaid parties continueth vassals to, the two aforesaid daughter Harlots of Prelacie and Presbyterie, as formerly mention'd) they cannot expect ey∣ther to be made free denizens of this Common-wealth, but contrariwise to be esteemed onely as hewers of wood, and drawers of water to the Israel or people of God, who abo∣minate such Heathen-like practises. Againe, neyther can they expect to be eased of their taxes and burdens which they seeme to groane under; which by abandoning: such their Babylonish and Heathenish principles, they may easily pre∣vent. But let mee tell them this one thing more, that they cannot desert the one, unlesse both; for the whore sitteth so fall upon the back of the beast, that she cannot be dismoun∣ted, but by the ruine of the beast, they being inseperable Concomitants, as the Patrons thereof very well know when they said; No Bishop, no King, and now, No King, no Presby∣terie. This your discourse hath been some-what off from our present businesse, howbeit very usefull to such as you have applyed it unto, whom indeed it properly concerns. But to begin where we left, we say you doe mistake us; for all our aime is out of the intire affection that we have to the per∣sons in present Authority, to admonish them to beware, lest they run themselves into dangerous Temptations; lest being lifted up with their honour, they forget what they have been, and so consequently what have undertaken, and inga∣ged themselves to do. Truly friends, if that be the ultimate of your desires, I judge the present Conservators of this Common-wealth are very much engaged unto you, for such your friendly, and brother-like Admonition, there being much affection ex∣pressed in what you say, as can be uttered, as will thus ap∣peare. For what greater expressions of Affection can be made,
then for you to hazard both your bodies and soules, to pre∣serve your friends from danger, which unavoidably you must doe, by taking the management of the Affaires of this pre∣sent Common wealth upon you; for the same danger which you are fearefull the present Conservators are subject unto, the like will you, or such your friends whom you would so in∣trust. Have you more excellent Armour of proof upon you, then those in present power? Is there such imminent danger in the present Patriots to be poysoned with their present pre∣ferment; and are you, or your friends such Medridatuses, as that it will have no such operation upon your bodies? have they been so long accustomed thereunto? Are you fear∣full that our present Patriots should with the Fig-tree loose its sweetnesse? or with the Olive-tree, its fatnesse? or with the Vine, its Wine? and are you not possessed with the like feare in reference to your own selves? Certainly friends, there must needs be a Snake lurking un∣der these green herbs; there must needs be something in such your Expressions, more then you have a mind to discover at present. And truly you give mee some cause to thinke you would prove the bramble, or else you would certainly have greater care of your selves; and therefore let us search out the truth of the matter. Consider, I beseech you, what you would undertake (viz.) a whole yeares temptation, rather then these in present power six weeks, for so J. W. the donor of the Mite, Alias, the Master of Sentences, would have it. But good Mr J. W. deale really with me herein, for such affection is like a black Swan upon Earth. Is it not because you think the Table of this Common-wealth lyeth not levell e∣nough for your desired Comrades to play their game upon, which the removing of our present Conservators you thinke would wholly effect. Or is it not out of an ambitious desire to mount your selves into the great Horse-saddle, because you have been so long Keepers of the Stuffe. Or is it not be∣cause you thinke your selves more able Pilots to guide the new rig'd Ship of this Common-wealth, betwixt the Scilla and Caribdis (of a tyrannicall Monarchy, and a Baby lonish Hi∣rarchie) then they that sit now at the Stern. And if so, have they not great reason to look to themselves, how they part
with the staffe out of their hands? Certanely they may be justly as jealous of you, as you of them. You force us to tell you in plain terms, we thinke the Ge∣nerall hath taken more upon him then he is able to beare. Hath he taken more upon him then Moses did, before Ie∣thro gave him counsell? Besides, if he have, hath he not ta∣ken unto him ten men that are both able and honest to his as∣sistance? I question whether ten such persons be a competent num∣ber to manage the present Affairs of this Common-wealth, viz. to receive and answer Adresses, heare and relieve Complaints, and do other things which may be just and requisite for them to doe, untill about the first of Iune next, by which time an equall Representative may be chosen. Pray once more Mr. I. W. Are not the present tenne as competent a number as the seaven you mention in your last Querie, which you would have reserved during the intervails of succeeding Representatives. Againe, are the present Conservators so little in your fa∣vour, as not to be allowed by you the priviledg of the afore∣said seaven (viz.) to take in so many fit persons as they shall have need of, when and where occasion is offered: As also for such a continuance as you have there prescribed; but it seems you can afford your owne friends twelve moneths, but not above six weeks to those in present power. Againe, you thinke you have played the Man, albeit a Wilde one, by saying it is acknowledged by most Rationall men, that the power is primarily, and originally in the people, as in your Epistle, without (either there or else∣where) expressing whom you meane by the people, save by some dubious Characters, as where you propound to consi∣deration, whether any Members of the late Parliament, Lawyers or parties interested in tythes befitting for choyse, (as in your second Querie) without expressing in the least whom you meane by persons interested in tythes (viz.) free Donors of tythes, or demanders of tythes, or both. And yet to conceipt that the three aforesaid particulars, should not only be divulged, but also controverted and decided, as also a new Representative compleated in thirty six dayes,
signifies that you are either a very fleet man, or an envious man against our present Patriots. Againe Sir, Let me tell you, were you deputed to elect a considerable number of persons to represent the Common∣wealth, as aforesaid; yea, and that you had your friend J L. sent for to your assistance: I am assuredly confident, you could not finde such persons amongst all your consorts, as will parallel these ten in present Authority, for able and faith∣full men: And what is further required by any rationall un∣biassed men—But to begin where I ended (viz.) with my aforesaid parallel of the present Generall to Moses, in point of civill judicature. As to that wee reply; that should the worst come to the worst, we have upon that account a priviledge to elect per∣sons, and to present them to our Moses, if you will needs have him termed so. Pray let us peruse those Texts of Scripture that relateth to that particular: And if we find it so, then I shall not in the least contradict the same; and to this purpose wee will have recourse to Exod. 18. from vers. 13. to the last: Whence it is evident, that when Jethro saw the great toyle which Moses had in judging of so great a multitude, he dehorteth him from continuing any longer in such a condition; for remedy of which he prescribeth his sonne in law Moses these following rules. Harken unto my voyce (saith Jethro) and I will give thee coun∣sell (vers. 19.) and God shall be with thee. Be thou to the people to God ward, that thou maist bring the causes unto God: And thou shalt teach them Ordinances and lawes, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walke, and the the worke that they must doe. Moreover, thou shalt provide out of all the people, able men, such as feare God, men of truth, hating covetousnesse: And place such o∣ver them to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, and ru∣lers of tennes, and let them judge the people at all seasons. And it shall be that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but eve∣ry small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thy selfe, and they that beare the burthen with thee. Whereupon vers. 24. saith, that Moses harkned to the voice of his Father in law, and did all that he had said.
And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tennes, and they judged the people at all seasons. The hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves. Now in all this it appears, that Moses was to have the ele∣ction of the aforesaid people himselfe, as also the sole ma∣nagement of all the circumstances thereunto appertaining: And if so, where then will be your priviledg of electing men your selves. If you compare the former expressions with Deut. Cap. 1. 9. &c. you will find that the people had a vote in the electi∣ons, yea, and that by Moses owne direction, as in vers. 13. where he saith, Take yee wise men, and understanding and known amongst your Tribes. Unto which his Proposition he addeth also the answer of the people thereunto (viz.) that they did well recent the same, saying, The thing that thou hast spoken is good for us to doe. So that undoubtedly they had the priviledg of election, and Moses of approbation; as appeareth by Mo∣ses following words, where he saith: So I tooke the chiefe of your tribes, wise men and knowne, and made them heads over you, Captains over thousands, and Captaines over hundreds, and Captaines over fifties, and Captaines over tennes.—And officers amongst your Tribes. And I charged your Judges at that time (viz. at the time of their approbation by him) say∣ing, Heare the causes between your brethren, and judge righte∣ously betwixt every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Yee shall not respect persons in judgement, but you shall hear the small as well as the great; Yee shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgement is Gods: And the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will heare it. And (saith he) I com∣manded you at that time all that yee should doe: So that it is cleare the people did elect the aforesaid persons by Moses order, or appointment. Moses then by your owne confession had the ordering and disposing of all things, both as the Congregation of Israel did consist in Marshall and Civill capacity. And as to your collection from Deut. 1. 13. I must tell you that the case is now otherwise with us, then it was with Israel, for that
Congregation were at that time all unanimus, which you very well know wee are not. Againe, it is not rationall to conceive that the mixed multitudes had any hand in the aforesaid Election. Wee may then according to your former expression, reject those whom you terme the mixed Multitude, viz. the Grand, and Demy Cavaliers. And if so, what is there then to ob∣struct, but that our Moses may give order for a New Election with all possible speed that may be. Suppose wee should not admit the aforesaid mixed mul∣titude, yet there being so many various Opinions or Judge∣ments amongst our selves, and in as much as every of these interests, will endeavour to promote themselves, I therefore judge it a most dangerous attempt to desire such an Electi∣on as you so thirst for, not that I doe in the least goe about for any base or sinister end (as some may deeme I doe) or any wayes in the least to stirre up strife amongst us, the Lord before whom I speake it, knoweth that I lye not. And there∣fore if any one shall judge so of my sayings, they do as much injury as Alexander did Paul, and for which the Lord will one day reward them. But meerly out of the apparent ruine that I see stands before such an Enterprise. And therefore my humble request is that the Lord would so operate by his Spi∣rit upon all our affections (who claime an interest in the benefits that doe accrew unto us by the marvellous Acts of providence) that wee would all unanimously rely still upon the same providence, as also instrumentally upon him, (viz. our present Deliverer, Generall, and Judge) whom the Lord hath been pleased to make use of, as formerly hath been re∣lated unto you. And not in the least distrust him, as eyther ambitious, or unfaithfull to us, but rather endeavour with all our might to strengthen his weak hands, and feeble knees, under so great a burthen, which out of his father-like affecti∣on he hath taken upon him, and that by incouraging him to persevere in the worke of the Lord; as also according to his late request, that we may invocate the Great and Omnipo∣tent Jehovah in his behalfe, to the end he may first be ac∣quainted, what he is to doe, and then that the same God would also give him power to put the same in execution, to the glory
of the same God, and the mutuall comfort of us his childre and servants, which that he would be pleased to grant, is the earnest request of the meanest of his and your servants, JOHN SPITTLEHOUSE. Postscript. Luk. 2. 13, 14. and Rev. 19. 1. &c. And sodainly there was with the Angel a multitude of the hea∣venly hoast praysing God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will towards men. And after these things I heard a great voyce of much people in heaven, saying, Allelujah, salvation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our God: For true and righteous are his judge∣ments; for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornications, and bath avenged the blood of his ser∣vants at her hand. And againe they said Alleluja, and her smoke rose up for ever and ever. And the foure and twenty Elders, and the foure Beasts fell downe and worshipped God that sate on the Throne, saying, Amen, Alleluja. And a voyce came out of the Throne, saying, Praise our God all yee his servants, and yee that feare him, both small and great. And I heard as it were the voyce of a great multitude, and as the voyce of many waters, and as the voyce of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluja, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoyce, and give honour to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linnen, cleane and white, for the fine linnen is the righteousnesse of Saints. And he said unto me, write, Blessed are they that are called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb. And he said unto mee, these are the sayings of God. And I fell at his feet to worship him: And he said unto mee, see thou doe it not: I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren, that have the testimonies of Iesus; worship God, for the testimony of Iesus is the spirit of prophesie. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. FINIS.
