s5255 e705_14 99872410 166620
SEVERALL INFORMATIONS AND EXAMINATIONS Taken concerning Lieutenant Colonell Iohn Lilburn, CONCERNING HIS APOSTACY to the Party of Charles Stuart. And his Intentions in coming over into ENGLAND out of FLANDERS. LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and for G. Calvert and T. Brewster, and are to be sold at the Black-spread Eagle and the three Bibles at and near the West-end of Pauls 1653.
A Perfect Narrative of what passages I observed from Lieut. Col. Joh. Lilburn, and others, touching him in Flanders. About the beginning of Iuly 1652. I was imploy∣ed on the behalf of this Common-wealth into Holland, and Flanders, and landing at Ost∣end, I found a number of very desperate enemies of all sorts to this Commonwealth, with whom I observed Lieut. C. Lilburn much to associate; and having observed before his restlesness of spirit, and that his late actions had rended him so obnoxious to this Common-wealth, that incurred an Act of Banishment upon himself; I therefore ap∣plyed my self to find out what his endeavours at present drove at: And to this purpose it was not long before I found that Lieut. Col. Lilburn had been very conversant with Cap. Ioh. Bartlet, and to whom he had imparted severall secrets, as he himself called them, the said Cap. Iohn Bartlet who told me, that there were many de∣linquents and Cavaliers of dangerous consequence that escaped out of England to that Town of Ostend, whom L. C. Lilburn no sooner heard of, but came to them, and in as gross a manner as he could, did endeavour to lessen the Justice, Honor, and power of this Commonwealth, and this in so vile and scurilous language, as produc'd rather a wonder than an affection in its chiefest adversa∣ries, as was several times confessed to me by several of them with whom he convers'd. Cap. Bartlet as well as several others further told me that L. C. Iohn Lilburn kept great correspondencies with several people in England, and that one Sanctly Mr. Prinns man he conceived did send away his letters, for which purpose the Lie. Col. every Saturday came from Bruges to Ostend, and having wrote them, on the Monday following he returned, as I my self often ob∣served
him to do. Not long after I heard Col. Charls Lloid, some∣times called Sir Charls Lloid, Engineer General, and Quarter∣master General to the late King, Cap. Luke Whitington, Agent to Charls Stuart, Cap. Iohn Tytus, Cap. Ioh. Bartlet say that L. C. Iohn Lilburn had proposed several times, sometimes to the Duke of Buckingham, sometimes to Sir Ralph Hopton, sometimes call'd the Lord Hopton, and sometimes to Col. Charls Lloid aforesaid, and several others, That if any of the forenamed persons would procure him 10000 l. he would destroy the Lord General Crom∣wel, the Parliament, and the Council of State that now sitteth at Westminster, and settle Charls Stuart (King of England as he called him) in his Throne in England, or he would have a piece of him nayl'd upon every post in Bruges. In answer to which, Sir Charls Lloid as aforesaid told me, that if he thought the L. Col. could perform what he proposed to them, it would be hard but they would procure so much money upon so good a score. I observed further from L. C. Iohn Lilburn, and others who told me of his actions, that the L. Col. did not only move with much violence and earnestness, shewing which way he would bring this his proposed design about, but went from person to person whose reputation he thought could procure so much as he proposed for (for the advancement of this his declared design) and whose af∣fections and opinions were most suitable to further him in such im∣ployments. Not long after this L. C. Lilburn took up a presumtion that I was imployed by the Commonwealth of England, which he a∣verred he was certified of by several of his friends (and named one Col. Layton as one of his friends, who now stands exil'd from this Commonwealth, and was Secretary to the Council of Warr to Charls Stuart in Scotland.) The L. C. hereupon went to the Duke of Buckingham, Sir Ralph Hopton as aforesaid, Col. Charls Lloid as aforesaid, Major General Diol a Scotchman that came and invaded England with Charls Stuart, and had lately broke out of the Tower, Dr. Nicholas, Judge of the Admiralty court in Dunkirk for Charls Stuart, Cap. Luke Whitington Agent for Charls Stuart, Cap. Iohn Tytus, brother to Cap. Tytus the pro∣fessed Enemie of this Commonwealth, Cap. Iohn Bartlet, and what other Cavaliers he could meet with, and told them that I was a Spy for the Parliament of England, and warned them to be∣ware
of me. For he had already spoiled two of the Parliament Spyes, and would in a short time ruin me also. And to this pur∣pose (as Cap. Tytus and several others afterwards told me) the Li. Col. went to Placingdol, and the said Col. Layton, where they way-laid me an hour and a half to have ruined me, as L.C. Lil. often said he would, though it pleased God in his Mercy not to let me come that day from Ostend, when I knew nothing of the de∣sign against me. Not long after this I conversed with some of the L.C. his Associats, and told them I wondred much why L.C. Lil∣burn should offer thus to abuse his own Country-man in another Nation, in so high a Nature as he had done me, since I never did him hurt, and repeating what I had heard from others, that L.C. Lilburn should say of me; It was soon told the L.Col. again, who presently presumed that it was Cap. Bartlet that had told me, and from that time forward he sought with more violence than before to have me murdered, as too plainly appeared by his after-acti∣ons, and by two witnesses that I examined by order, who gave it under their hands, and offered to depose it, That one of the L. C. his Conspirators against me, often told them, that the L. C. and this other Conspirator had hired a man to have stabb'd me, because I was employed an Intelligencer for the Parliament of England; and had not I escaped speedily away, their business had been effected upon me. But I understanding the L.C. his practi∣ses against me, resolved on my voyage for England; which being understood by the Lieut. Col. some more men besides himself with weapons way-laid me and Cap. Bartlet (as we were to take boat for Ostend) that so he might have executed what he had for∣merly spoke against me, which was for this purpose (as some af∣terwards confessed to me, who had it from his own mouth) that his carriages in Flanders should not be declared to the Parliament of England, for said he, as they have banished my person, so they will sequester my estate. But it pleased Almighty God this second time by his providence to protect me, in giving me a resolution not to go till the morrow, which the L.C. perceiving supposed himself to be discovered, and recurred into the Town, And suddenly ther∣upon came one Cap. Bret an Irish Rebell to inquire for Cap. Bart∣let, with the said Cap. Whitington, who were both privy to the de∣sign, and discovered it, after God in his mercy had prevented them. By this time it was noysed up and down the City, insomuch that some of the Citizens offered me their assistance, which some of them afterwards gave me, and brought me to the boat the next day; at which time the Lieut. C. with some more of his Conspi∣rators lay behind a hedge, near the way that I was to passe, and thus blessed be God I escaped his hands. A little before the Lieut. C. had discovered that Captain Bart∣let informed me of whatsoever the Lieut. C. told him, Capt. Bartlet said that he had told him that he the Lieut. C. had much intercourse and correspondency with Holland, by which means, he would ruin me, in causing me to be apprehended, because (as he said) I was a Spy for the Commonwealth of England, which Capt. Bartlet giving me timely notice of, hindred my journey, and so a third time I escaped his malice, which was not against me any further, than as he said I was a Spy for the Common-wealth of England. ISAAC BERKENHEAD. The Examination of Capt. John Tytus, concerning Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Sept. 22. 1652. THis Examinant saith, that the said Lieut. C. John Lilburn proposed to the Lord Hopton, that if he would procure him ten thousand pounds, he would destroy the Common-wealth of England in six moneths, or he would have a piece of him-naild upon every Post in Bruges. The Lord Hopton told the said Lil∣burn, that it could not be so facile a thing, though he believed it would be done, but not in so short time; to which the said Lil∣burn replyed, My Lord, Ile shew you how it shall be done; give me but the monies that I propose for, and Ile have my Agents (for I have enough of them) that shall give me a continual account of all the Commonwealth of Englands Proceedings: And by those A∣gents I will spread My Papers abroad, that shall instigate the people against the Parliament, and so by that Power I have al∣ready, and that Power that My Agents shall make by working upon the people, I will destroy this Parliament, the Councill of State, and the Lord General Cromwell, in half an hour. This Examinant further saith, that George Villers, Duke of Buckingham, sent for the said Lilburn to inquire which way he might make his addresses to the Parliament for his Peace; But
the said Lilburn advised the Duke from it, for that the Lord Ge∣neral Cromwell and the Parliament were so false a Company of Rogues, that it was not safe for the said Duke to put his life into their hands: And further said, that if the King (to wit Charles Stuart) would but observe what he the said Lilburn had set down in some Papers, which shew the reason why the said Lilburn would not be a Cavalier, and reform but them, he might easily do his businesse and sit in his chair. But the said Duke spurr'd him the said Lilburn on to his first request of advising him which way he might make his peace with the Parliament. But the said Lilburn would not hear of that, but advised the said Duke to the contrary, and further telling him the said Duke, that they had hitherto (naming his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell and the Parliament) broken all their In∣gagements, and particularly the Lord General, to me, who pro∣mised with all the Protestations in the world, and by what ever else was sacred, that so soon as the General had done his business in Scotland, he would then answer all their expectations and de∣sires (meaning the desires of that party which are called Levellers) and further promised that Magna Charta should be set on foot, and all the privileges of the people fully answered, according as they the said Levellers had in several papers of theirs proposed. But the said Duke still drove the said Lilburn off, desiring him the said Lilburn, that if he had any interest or party in England (as he the said Lilburn boasted much of) that he would use it on the Dukes behalf; for, said the said Duke, could I procure a pass to day to come into my native Country, I would fling my self into the Lord General and Parliaments hands to morrow; For said he the said Duke, so far as I have assisted the King hitherto, hath been but to quit my self of ingratitude, since my Family hath been raised by the King and his Ancestors. To which the said Lilburn replyed, My Lord, since you are so resolved, I would advice you not to stir in such things as yet, for that there is expected a New Repre∣sentative, at which time he the said Lilburn doubted not but he should be able to do him the said Duke service, for he the said Lil. should then be as powerful as any in the Representative. But the said Duke desired that if he the said Lilburn had any Interest that he would use it forthwith, for that he had a desire to be reconciled to his Country. To which the said Lilburn replyed, My Lord, the
General and the Parliament are so false a company of Rogues, that it cannot be safe for you to put your self in their hands.
This Examinant further saith, that at this same time the said Lil. proposed to the said Duke, that if he the said Duke could but procure him 10000 l. he the said Lilburn would have a piece of him nailed upon every post in Bruges, if he the said Lilburn did not overthrow and destroy those damnable Villains in England, I mean said he the said Lilburn, the Lord General Cromwell, the Parliament, and that Monstrous Councill of State. To which the said Duke replyed, I pray you Sir let me hear which way you will do this. The said Lilburn replyed, My Lord, Ile tell you how; First Ile set my Presse on work (for which purpose I have bought one with a Letter at Amsterdam, which cost me thirty pounds) and then Ile send my papers over into England, which by my A∣gents shall be spread all over the Nation, and by my Agents (for I have enough) my papers shall be brought into the Army there, (where I have double Interest) and now every Trooper begins to understand his own privilege, and so soon as these papers are spread theyl fly in the faces of their Officers, so that with the help of my particular interest, the Souldiery shall do all themselves, and Ile do nothing but sit in my chair and use my pen. To which the Duke replyed, Sir, you may observe that in all your attempts the General out-witted you, and broke your business in the bud; besides, you may see that on all occasions the Souldiery hath been obedient un∣to his Officer, so discreetly hath the Generall ordered his Army. Why then, saith the said Lilburn, I perceive you take the General for a wise man. Yes said the Duke, let the world read his Stories and theyl find him so. No, said the said Lilburn, I know him to be otherwise, for heretofore all his Business was mannaged by Ire∣ton, and is since by others. And for the Generall himself, he is as false a perfidious false-hearted Rogue as ever lived in the world. And I know no reason why I should not vy with Cromwell, since I had once as great a power as he had, and greater too, and am as good a Gentleman, and of as good a family. To this the said Duke replyed, Sir, if you have any Interest in England (as you say you have) I pray you to use it for me, for I have a great desire to be reconciled to my native Country. Then the said Lilburn per∣ceiving he could not moove the said Duke to any thing in relation to his the said Lilburns proposalls and perswasions, he the said Lilburn promised to use his interest in England on the said Dukes behalf, to which purpose the said Lilburn wrote to some in Eng∣land, but to whom this Examinant knoweth not. But with all the said Lilburn advised the said Duke not to stir in it yet. This Examinant further saith, that the said Lilburn said that there was one Rogers that was a Rogue, for that he was a Spy for the Common-wealth of England, and therefore he the said Lil∣burn would ruin and destroy him; And that he the said Lilburn had discovered several that were imployd in that way before. And after this apprehending the said Rogers was to come towards Bru∣ges, the said Lilburn lay an hour and a half waiting for the said Rogers his coming, at Placingdoll, three English miles from O∣stend, which was his way to Bruges. The Examinant further saith, that there was one Mr. Lambert (a man that keeps much company with the said Lilburn, who took the said Lilburn his house for him in Bruges,) that said that Lieut. C. Lilburn told him the said Lambert, that he the said Lilburn had found a Rogue out, one Rogers, that was a Spy for the Common-wealth of England. The said Lambert further said with another Papist (commonly called by the name of Paracel∣sus) as he the said Lambert was, that if the said Rogers had staid two daies longer in the Town, he the said Rogers should never have gone thence alive, for that they would have him the said Rogers knocked on the head. This Examinant further saith, that the said Lilburn said, that the Lord General had abused Major General Lambert, who when time serv'd, would be revenged on the General. JOHN TYTUS. The Examination of Capt. John Bartlet, concerning Lieut. Col. John Lilburn.
A Bout the 20. of July 1652, in an Arbor in Placingdoll, three miles from Ostend in Flanders, Lieut. Col. John Lilburn did propose to Col. Charles Lloyd, sometimes called Sir Charles Lloyd, Quarter-master General, and Egineer General to the late King, in the late warres in England, and to Capt. John Bartlet this Examinant, and Capt. Luke Whittington, Agent for the King of Scots, that if he the said Charles Lloyd, or any of the aforesaid persons, would procure him ten thousand pounds, he the said Lilburn would settle the King in his Throne (to wit Charles Stuart) in England. And this Examinant further saith, that at the same time the said Lilburn said, that the King (to wit Charles Stuart) should never come into his Throne, but by his the said Lil∣burns means; And that he further said, the said Lilburn did op∣pose the late Kings death more than any man in England besides, then durst do. And this Examinant further saith, that the said Lilburn did then boast much of the largeness of his own party (as he the said Lilburn called them) which he had in England. This Examinant further saith, that there was a Rumor in Flan∣ders, that his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell was made Lord Admiral of the Seas, and that he was to go to Sea in the Ship called the Soveraign, the which when Lieut. Col. Lilburn heard, he was very angry, saying, That the General had more commands than ever Julius Caesar had, but tis no matter said he, let him go to Sea when he will, Ile warrant him he shall never return; or words to this effect.
This Examinant further saith, That Lieut. Col. John Lilburn said, that Mr. Rogers was a Spy for the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, as he was told by Lieut. Col. Layton. And further said, that if he the said Lilburn knew it certainly, he would destroy the said Rogers; And further said, that he had warn'd the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Hopton, Doctor Nicholas, Judge of the Admiralty Court for the Scotch King in Dunkirk, and several other Cavaliers, that they should not trust him, and the said Lilburn fur∣ther said, that he had spoild two of the Parliaments Spies alrea∣dy, and would do the like to this; And further said, that he the said Lilburn, and the said Col. Layton (supposing which way the said Rogers would come) lay an hour and a half waiting for him, but though he mist him then, he would ruin him afterwards; and at this time the said Lilb. commanded this Examinant to keep it secretly, and to beware of him the said Rogers. After this it appeared that the said Lilburn had intelligence, that this Exami∣nant had discovered to the said Rogers what had formerly past betwixt the said Lilburn and this Examinant as secrets, and what is related in this Paper; and understanding that the said Rogers and this Examinant were to go from Bruges to Ostend, and so for England, that non of the said Lilburns actions might be declar∣ed there in England to the Parliament, which the said Lilburn feard, he the said Lilburn with certain others that he had pro∣cured with their weapons, as Pistols and Swords, way-laid the said Rogers and this Examinant, but by Providence the said Rogers resolved not to go that day, and prevalld with this Exami∣nant to stay till the next, which this Examinant did, though they never heard any thing of the Conspiracy against them. But their stay being understood by the said Lilburn and the rest of his con∣spirators, one that was privy to the conspiracy Capt. Ignatius Brett an Irish Rebel, with Capt. Luke Whittington, came to the house where this Examinant and the said Rogers were, and this said Brett sent for this Examinant, and asked this Examinant what was the reason why this Examinant continued not his resolution for his journey. This Examinant answered that by a friends advice he staid till to morrow. The said Brett replyed, you may thank God you went not down to the boat, for had you gone, ye had been harder put to it in fighting than ever you were in your dayes; wher∣upon this Examinant asked the said Brett, by whom? the said Brett answered you shall excuse me, I will never be a Traitor to them so long as I live, but you know them all as well as I. Then the said Whittington being in company said, I am glad with all my heart you went not down, for the persons were Lilburn, &c. who were all well furnished for this purpose. With that the said Brett said, Gentlemen, you are my witnesses that I discovered them not. And this being noised abroad in the Town, a Merchant of the Town offered the said Rogers if he pleased he would cause them all to be clapped up, which the said Rogers refused, provi∣ding themselves against them. This Examinant further saith, that before this, the said Lilburn told him that he the said Lilburn had good intercourse with Hol∣land, and would cause the said Rogers to be surprized there, for that he was a Spy for the Commonwealth of England. This Examinant further saith, that the said Lilburn was reading a Declaration of the Parliament of Englands touching the War with the Hollanders, the said Lilburn professed, that were the Parliament half so honest as they were wise they were the bravest people in the world: But the Dutch were fools; for had he their cause in handling, he would choak the Parliament in two words; which should be in telling them of their promises made to the late
King, in preserving his Person, Honour, Crown and Dignity, and how falsly they have broken them all. John Bartlet. For my dear and loving wife Mrs. Elizabeth Lilburn, these with hast, hast, post hast deliver in London. My DEAR LOVE, I Have been, and yet am in a longing Condition to hear from thee, but I confesse by this Post I have nothing to expect from thee, more than to hear that thou art safely got a∣mongst our Friends at London, where I hope your joint activity will be such (according to my full Instructions to you and my true friend that went with you) as that you will procure my expected Passe so speedily as to send it me, or a Copy of it, with my friends, encouragement, to Dunkirk, the next Post, where by Gods assistance I will be on Sunday next at night; and if it come, its more than probable I may come to Dover that Packet (or certainly send you word when by Gods gratious permission I shall) for I long to see London, and if I come so suddenly, I shall leave all my things behind me in the care and possession of Mr. Lambert, for which I can either come over my self again, or send for them. One reason that moves me to make the more hast, is because if I come over, and find things in a handsome way to my liking, I have something of very great consequence to say speedily to such a great faithfull man as I shall trust, and if I come, I shall stay at Dover a Day, 2 or 3, and by the Post let you know I am there, and expect you to send me a horse to Canterbury, where at the Post-house I intend to ly the first night, and shall not stir from thence till I receive a Horse from you.
But if our new Councill of State, or Governors, will not cast a favourable eye upon you, but either deny or delay you a Pass, so that the next Post I hear not of it, I shall then take it for granted that Major General Harrison, being, as I hear, one of your new Councill of State, is my principallest, and grandest adversarie, and accordingly I shall onely take arise from what I was inform∣ed he said in the House at my Banishment, and what he said pub∣lickly at Alhallowes (when from Dover I sent my letter to the people that meet there) to write him such a Letter which already in my brain I have contrived) as will no way please him, let the Issue be what it will. I have writ again to Major General Lam∣bert (who I hear is President of your new Councill) and enclosed him one of my printed Epistles, in Dutch and English, I have al∣so writ to Col. Bennet, which you may read the Copie of on the o∣ther side. So with my hearty and true love and affection presented to thee and all my friends in the bulk, longing above measure to hear from thee, I commit thee and my poor Babes, as my own soul, to the Protection of the most high, and rest thy faithfull and loving Hus∣band. I. L. I have herewith enclosed one of my printed Letters, which I hope are before now printed at London; I have already sent two Copies of this two several waies for fear of miscarriage. I am in hast, and cannot read this over, the Post is going, there∣fore mend the faults if there be any. The Information of Rich. Foot, concerning Lie. Col. John Lilburn. BEing in Flanders about three moneths since, I came acquaint∣ed with L. Col. John Lilburn, where among other discourse I askt him why he did not apply himself to learn some language, he being then unable to speak to any of the Country without an In∣terpreter; he answered me, that he thought himself too old to learn languages, and said he had work enough to set his adversaries by the ears. Few daies after I came into England, and about 7 weeks or 2 moneths since returning there again he told me that his wife had been there, and that he had sent her into England with a Let∣ter to Cromwell, a Copy of which he gave me in print, and that he expected a pass to go into England, he would not stay a day af∣ter it came, though he hired a boat of purpose; then one Parker a Cavalier taking his leave of him, askt if he might not write to him, he answered, no, I will receive no letters from Mr. Parker; then he askt if not by another name, to that he assented. So Lilburn went to Dunkirk with great confidence that he should receive his passe there; and few daies after one Jamot, which had been a Lieut. Col. for the late King, came Post from Paris, staying but one night at Antwerp with
is wife, and came to Bridges, and not finding Lil there, came to my lodging early in the morning & asked me if I thought he was gone for England, then presently went away to the boat, to which I hasted, & went with him to Dunkirk, & often by the way he askt me if I thought Lilburn was gone, speaking as if he extremely feared it; as soon as he had taken up his lodging in Dunkirk he went to seek Lilburn, and finding him in the street de∣livered him a Letter, and had some private discourse with him; a while after comming to them at a Tavern, Lilburn desired me to go to Bridges for a letter directed to him from Sir Henry Denix, wherein he said was a Pass for the Duke of Buckingham to come into Flanders, and to that purpose he gave me a Letter unsealed, directed to Mr. Tho. Lambert at Bridges, desiring him to enquire for the said Letter, and deliver it to me, which was accordingly done, at my being at Bridges the aforesaid Mr. Parkers wise de∣livered me a Letter directed
to or some such like name, desiring me to deliver it to Lilburn, saying it was for him, I asked why it was so directed, she said he well knew the mean∣ing of it; at my return to Dunkirk I received a letter from Jamot, wherein he wrote they were gone to Callis to meet the Duke of Buckingham, and desired me to send the aforesaid letter with the pass in it to Gravelling, and within 2 or 3 daies after returned to Dunkirk, being Sunday the 29. of May, and Lilburn and Jamot being at a Tavern called the Conserge with one Cap. Whitington and Col. Layton, both of the Kings party here in England, and two Merchants, desired me to send one for his letters to the Post house, upon which one of the company askt him what he would say if this pass came not, he said that if my pass come not, and that I find that it is Cromwell that hinders it, as it must be, for it lies in his power, I will either kill him my self, or send one to do it; then one of the Merchants askt him how he could do such a thing with conscience, he answered tell not me of conscience in this case, for if that I am banished without law, conscience or equity, & deprived of my natural air to breath in, which is every mans birth-right, (with such like expressions) I may justly right my self if I can; if I would take a hare or a deer, I ought to give him fair play, because they are beast of game; but if a fox or wolf, I may use what device I can to kill him; so if Cromwell keep himself above the Law, that I cannot have my right by the Law, I may kill him how I can. Then presently his letters came, and after he had read them, and saw his pass was not come, he said, I am resolved to have one fling more at Cromwell. Further he said, that Cromwell hath been an Atheist this seven years, and that his design is and hath been to make himself King; so having been there together three or four hours, expressing great confidence in one another, I and this Informant left them. The next day Lilburn and Layton went a∣gain for Callis to the Duke of Buckingham▪ and were not retur∣ned when I came for England, which was eight dayes after. RICHARD FOOT. The Information of John Staplehill, of Dartmouth, taken 20 June, 1653. THis Informant saith, that coming through France in his way to England from Spain, he lodged at Callis, upon Friday was Sevenight at the Silver Lyon, where was the Duke of Buckingham, and likewise some Collonels of the late Kings Ar∣my, and with them was Lieut. Col. John Lilburn and his wife, that the Informant being in the next Chamber, he heard them discourse of the Lord General Cromwell, but could not understand distinctly the particulars of their discourse, but did apprehand he spake very slightly of the General, hearing him say these words, Cromwell, what can Cromwell do? And this Informant did observe, that the said Duke, Cavaliers and Lilburn were very familiar together, and Lilburn and his wife dined and supped constantly with them; That the Informant being bound for England, hired a Boat-upon Sunday for his passage, and be∣ing upon the Key, a Boat man came to him, and told him that he need not hire a Boat, but might go over with three Gentlemen that were going over, meaning Lieut: Col. Lilburn and two Ca∣viliers in his company, and the Boatman went to them to ask them, whether this Informant might not go with them, but the said Lilburn refused to admit it, and said he should not go with them. And he afterwards hearing that the Informant had hired a Boat himself, procured the Duke to go to the Govern our of Callis to stop the Informants going over at that time, and the Informant being sent for by the Governour to that purpose, the Informant met the said Duke there, and was then prohibited by the Governour, not to depart till he had leave, so the said Lilburn went away that night about midnight, with his wife, and two Caviliers, wher∣of one was a Collonel, and embarqued all in one Boat, the Duke accompanying them to the water side.
That the next day about two a Clock, the Governour gave liberty to the Informant to come away, who arrived at Dover at seven a Clock the same night, where he heard Lilburn arrived in the morning before; and this Informant coming through Canterbury in his way to Londan, staid at the three Kings, the Post-house to dine, and there asked whether Lieut. Col. Lilburn past that way, and one of the Drawers told him he did, and the In∣formant thereupon saying, he was a great Enemy to the General, the Drawer answered, that he did expresse as much here, saying, He came into England without any Pass, and that he did not fear what Cromwell could do to him, being as good a man as he; and this was upon Tuesday last. He likewise boasted, that he had caused three Gentlemen to be stopt at Callis, which was the Informant, a Spaniard, and an Englishman, who came all in company together. JOHN STAPLEHILL. FINIS.
