T2031 E730_3 99863607 115817
The Cry of a Stone: OR A RELATION OF Something spoken in Whitehall, by Anna Trapnel, being in the Visions of GOD. RELATING To the Governors, Army, Churches, Ministry, Ʋniversities: And the whole NATION. UTTERED In Prayers and Spiritual Songs, by an In∣spiration extraordinary, and full of wonder. In the eleventh moneth, called January. 1653. London Printed. 1654.
To all the wise Virgins in Sion, who are for the work of the day, and wait for the Bride-grooms coming. IT is hoped in this day, a day of the Power of God, a day of wonders, of shaking the heavens and the earth, and of general expectation of the approachings of the Lord to his Temple, that any thing that pre∣tends to be a Witness, a Voice, or a Message from God to this Nation, shall not be held unworthy the hearing and consideration of any, because it is ad∣ministred by a simple and unlikely hand; far be that from us, who have soon the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, babes and chil∣dren to bring to nothing the Scribes and Disputers of this world, the first to be last, and the last first: far be it from us, who are and shall yet be named the Vally of Vision, to bind up the goings forth of the most free and Eternal Spirit at any time, especially in these last dayes, Within any Law, custom, order, or qualification of man, how antient or accustomed soever; or within any compass narrower then the Promise it self, Joh. 7.37. who may binde where God hath loosed? canst thou binde the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? he openeth, and no man shutteth; and let it be considered, if upon this stumbling stone of the Spirits freedom, the wise and learned Ones, both in the dayes of Christ and of the Apostles, and in our dayes, have not stumbled and fallen, and been broken to pieces? Two things are foretold by all the Prophets, shall be brought to pass, which seal up the Prophesies and finish the mysterie of God; The Lords appearing in his Glory upon Mount Sion, and the darkning of Sun and Moon, that is, the shaming, confounding and casting out of all wisdom and power, and whatsoever is but the excellency and glory of man; now
if we see these high and precious effects beginning to put forth either in sons or daughters, in handmaids or servants, let us rejoyee and be glad, for the summer is nigh at hand: It was the desire of this Maid to pre∣sent this her Testimony to you, though it is not for you only, but for all. If any may be offended at her Songs; of such it is demanded, If they know What it is to be filled with the Spirit, to be in the Mount with God, to be gathered up into the visions of God, then may they judge her; until then, let them wait in silence, and not judge in a matter that is above them. There being various reports gone abroad concerning this Maid, too many being such as were not according to truth, Whereby it comes to pass that the things shespake, do not appear to men as they came from her, but as deformed and disguised with the pervertings and depravings of the Reporters; there∣fore it was upon the heart of some that heard her, (as judging it might be a service done to many, hurt to none but such as fear the Light) to present to publick view a true and faithful Relation of so much as for some 7 or 8 dayes could be taken from her by a very slow and unready hand; whereby a fair opportunity is laid before offended and unsatisfied spirits to examine, try and judge, and happily to correct their Censures; and also the things herein related may come to the knowledge, and reach the hand of them whom they especially concern, if so be they will in meekness search and enquire, whether it be the Lord that hath spoken to them in it.
VPon the seventh day of the eleventh month, called January. 1654 being the sixth day of the week, Mr. Powel Preacher of the Gospel in Wales, being according to Order from the Council now sitting in Whitehall, come thither to give an account before them of some things by him de∣livered in his publique Exercises in London, among other friends who came thither to see what would be done with him, there came a maid, Mrs. Anna Trapnel by name, who waiting in a little room near the Council, where was a fire, for Mr. Powells coming forth, then with a purpose to return home: She was beyond and besides her thoughts or in∣tentions, having much trouble in her heart, and being seized upon by the Lord: She was carried forth in a spi∣rit of Prayer and Singing, from noon till night, and went down into Mr. Roberts lodging, who keeps the Ordinary in Whitehall; And finding her natural strength going from her, she took her bed at eleven a clock in the night, where she lay from that day, being the seventh day of the month, to the nineteenth day of the same month, in all twelve days together; The first five days neither eating nor drinking any thing more or less, and the rest of the time once in 24. hours, sometimes eat a very little toast in small Bear, sometimes only chewed it, and took down the moysture only, sometimes drank of the small Bear, and
sometimes only washt her mouth therewith, and cast it out, lying in bed with her eyes shut, her hands fixed, seldom seen to move, she delivered in that time many and various things; speaking every day, sometimes two, three, four and five-hours together; and that sometimes once a day, and sometimes oftner, sometimes in the day only, and sometimes both in the day and night. She uttered all in Prayer and Spiritual Songs for the most part, in the ears of very many persons of all sorts and degrees, who hear∣ing the Report came where she lay; among others that came, were Colonel Sidenham, a member of the Council, Colonel West, Mr. Chittwood, Colonel Bennet, with his wife, Colonel Bingham, Captain Langdon, Members of the late Parliament; Mr. Courtney, Mr. Berconhead, and Captain Bawtrey, Mr. Lee, Mr. Feak the Minister, Lady Darcy, and Lady Vermuden, with many more who might be named: The things she delivered during this time were many; of the four first days no account can be given, there being none that noted down what was spoken. For the rest of the time, from the fifth day to the last, some taste is herein presented of the things that were spoken, as they could be taken by a slow and imperfect hand. And to hold out all just and full satisfaction to those Questions, Scruples or Demands, which a Relation of this nature is apt to beget; touching the condition of the Party, where? or what she is? to whom is she known? is she under Ordinances? what hath been her conversation for∣merly? &c. Before you come to the Relation it self; Here is first offered to you an account of the Parties condition in her Relations, her acquaintance, her conversation, the dispensations of the Lord to her in Clouds and bitter storms of Temptations, in Manifestations of light and love, in Visions and Revelations of things to come; all this is presented to you in the following Narration, taken from her own mouth.
I Am Anna Trapnel, the daughter of William Trap∣nel, Shipwright, who lived in Poplar, in Stepney Parish; my father and mother living and dying in the profession of the Lord Jesus; my mother died nine years ago, the last words she uttered upon her death-bed, were these to the Lord for her daughter. Lord I Double thy spirit upon my child; These words she uttered with much eagerness three times, and spoke no more; I was trained up to my book and writing, I have walked in fellowship with the Church meeting as All-hallows, (whereof Mr. John Simpson is a Member) for the space of about four years; I am well known to him and that whole Society, also to Mr. Greenhil Preacher at Stepney, and most of that society, to Mr. Henry Jesse, and most of his society, to Mr. Venning Preacher at Olaves in Southwark, and most of his society, to Mr. Knollis, and most of his society, who have knowledge of me, and of my conversation; If any desire to be satisfied of it, they can give testimony of me, and of my walking in times past. Seven years ago I being visited with a feaver, given over by all for dead, the Lord then gave me faith to believe from that Scripture. After two days I will revive thee, the third day I will raise thee up, and thou shale live in my sight: which two days were two weeks that I should lye in that feaver, and that very time that it took me, that very hour it should leave me, and I should rise and walk, which was accordingly: From this time, for a whole year after, the Lord made use of me for the refreshing of afflicted and tempted ones, in∣wardly and outwardly. And when that time was ended; I being in my Chamber, desired of the Lord to tell me whether I had done that which was of and from himself. Reply was, thou shalt approve thy heart to God, and in that thou hast been faithfull in a little, I will make thee an Instrument of much more; for particular souls shall not only have benefit by thee, but the universality of Saints shall have discoveries of God through thee: So upon this I prayed that I might be led by the still waters, and honor God secretly, being conscious to my self of my own evil heart, looking upon my self as the worst of all Gods flock; the Lord upon it told me, that he would out of the mouth of babes and sucklings perfect his praise; then I remained silent, waiting with prayer and fasting, with many tears before the
Lord for whole Sion: And upon that day called Whitson-monday, which was suddenly after, I finding my heart in a very low dead frame, much contention and crookedness working in my Spirit; I asked of God what was the matter, he answered me thus; I let thee see what thou art in thy self to keep thee humble, I am about to shew thee great things and visions which thou hast been Ignorant of: I be∣ing thus drawn into my Chamber: after this there was a day of thanks giving that I kept with the Church of All-hallows in Limestreet, for the Army that was then drawing up towards the City, in which I had a little discovery of the presence of the Lord with them, in which day I had a glorious Vision of the New Jerusalem, which melted me into rivers of tears, that I shrunk down in the room; and cryed out in my heart, Lord, what is this? it was answered me, A discovery of the glorious state of whole Sion, in the raign of the Lord Jesus, in the midst of them, and of it thou shalt have more visions hereafter; So then when the day was ended. I retired to my Chamber, at that time living in the Mineries in Aldgate Parish, where I conversed with God by prayer, and reading of the Scriptures, which were excellently opened to me touching the Proceedings of the Army. It was first said to me that they were drawing up toward the City (I not knowing any thing of it before) and that there was a great hubbub in the City, the shops commanded to be shut up; Upon this I went down, and enquired of the maid of the house, whether there was any stir in the City; She answered me, you confine your self to your Chamber, and take no notice of what is done abroad; We are commanded, said she, to shut up our shops, and there are great fears amongst the Citizens; what will be the issue, they know not; With that I answered, blessed be the Lord that hath made it known to so low a servant as I; Then repairing to my Chamber again, I looked out at the window, where I saw a flag at the end of the street; this word I had presently upon it, thou seest that flag, the flag of defiance is with the Army, the King of Salem is on their side, he marcheth before them, he is the Captain of their Salvation; At the other end of the street, I looking, saw a hill (it was Black-heath) it was said to me, thou seest that hill, not one but many hills rising up against Hermon∣hill, They shall fall down and become Vallies before it: It was then said unto me, Go into the City, and see what is done there: where I saw various things from the Lord in Order to his appearance with the Army; as I was going, hearing of a Trumpeter say to a Citizen
these words, we have many Consultations about our coming up, but nothing yet goes on; presently it was said to me, the Councels of men shall fall, but the Councel of the Lord stands sure, and his works shall prosper: So repairing home, I had many Visions, that the Lord was doing great things for this Nation. And having fasted nine days, nothing coming within my lips, I had upon the ninth day this Vision of horns; first I saw in the Vision the Army coming in Southwark-way, marching through the City with a great deal of silence and quietness, and that there should be little or no bloud spilt; this was some weeks before their coming in. Then broke forth another Vision as to the horns; I saw four horns, which were four Powers, the first was that of the Bishops, that I saw was broken in two and thrown aside; the second horn more white had joyned to it an head, endeavouring to get up a Mount, and suddenly it was pushed down and broken to pieces; the third horn had many splinters joyned to it, like to the scales upon the back of a fish, and this was presented to be a Power or a Representa∣tive, consisting of many Men, having fair pretences of love to all under all forms; this I saw broken and scattered, that not as much as any bit of it was lest. As to the fourth horn, that was short but full of vari∣ety of Colours, sparkling, red and white; it was said to me, this is different from the three other, because great swelling words and great offers of kindness should go forth to all people from it; like unto that of Abfalom, speaking good words to the people in the Gate to draw them from honest David. I was judged by divers friends to be under a temptation, as H. I. and Io. S. to be under a temptation for not eating; I took that Scri∣pture, neglect not the body, and went to the Lord and enquired whe∣ther I had been so, or had any self end in it to be singular beyond what was meet; it was answered me, no, for thou shalt every way be supplyed in body and spirit, and I found a continual fulness in my stomack, and the taste of divers sweet meats and delicious food therein, which satisfied me, that I waited to see the issue, which was exceedingly to be admired; I remaining ever since in much health. Some years after, when the Army was designing a war with Scot∣land, I was dissatisfied, judging many that were godly in those parts might be cut off ignorantly; and upon this I sought the Lord, and the Lord after prayer directed me to the 9th of Zecharich verse 11. The
eyes of the Lord shall be seen over them, and his Arrow shall go forth as the Lightning, the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go through with the whirlewinds of the South; The Lord said, that his eye, not only his al-seeing eye, which runs to and fro through the Earth, but an eye of Gráce and Love to them as his peculiar treasure, was over them of the Army, and not only so, but they should see it; and as to his Arrow, it was that sharp dealing of his with the enemy; as to the Lightning, it was those burning devourings of those several pla∣ces that should be ruinated by the Army in those Parts; and as to the Trumpet, that the Lord would shew forth a mighty alarm to his people, before whom many high and great ones of the Scots should tumble down, and that he had raised up a Gideon, bringing that of Iudges 7. to me, to prove Oliver Cromwell, then Lord Ge∣neral, was as that Gideon, going before Israel, blowing the trumpet of courage and valour, the rest with him sounding forth their Courage also; that as sure as the Enemy fell when Gideon and his Army blew their trumpets, so surely should the Scots throughout Scotland be rui∣nated: Upon this I praised for some hours together, that God had provided a Gideon, and this I saw both by Vision, and Faith, and Prayer and Praises, that God had appointed him for the work of that present day to serve this Nation; and told me that great things should be done, and that he should take his circuit through Scotland, and the Enemy should draw neer to us, even to the gates of the City, and there be defeated. So I remained praying, keeping many fasting days in my Chamber, till six weeks before Dunbar fight; and then I had Visions given me concerning that first overthrow of the Scots, where I saw my self in the fields, and beheld our Army, and their General, and hearing this Voice, saying, Behold Gideon and the lapping ones with him! with that I was much taken, that they were likened unto that old Gideon and his Company; and then I saw them in a very ill posture for war, and much dismayed, looking with pale countenances, as if affrighted at the multitude of the Scots that were come out against them; whom I saw at a little distance from them, the light of the sky being over their heads, which prompted them the more to the Battail, seeing our Army with darkness over them and much disheartned, and they thinking that our Army was running away, they marched up with ve∣ry great fury against them, and suddenly as our Army turned, who seemed but a little while to stand before them, the light of the Sky
being drawn from the Scots to our Army, they were encouraged, and immediately I saw the Scots fall down before them, and a mar∣velous voice of praise I heard in our Army: then was I taken weak in my outward man, keeping my bed fourteen days, neither drinking nor eating but a draught of small Beer, and a bit of toast once in twenty four hours; and as soon as this Vision was over, I broke forth to the singing of their deliverance in Scotland; in which time many resorted to me of them that were for the Presbyterian Government, viz. Dr. French's Wife, Mrs. Bond, who was then Mrs. Kendal, Mrs. Smith, who all lived in Hackney, and Mrs. Sansom of Tower-hill, and they related this Vision to Mr. Ash the Minister, who waited till they saw it accomplished, and then admired. Upon the fifth of November last save one, 1652. The Lord brought that Scripture to me, Who is a God like unto thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, working Wonders? from which the Lord shewed me, that his Glory, and Praise, and Wonders he was bringing forth as upon the Land, so now upon the Seas; and the Lord again shewed me in a Vision, that many men of account should be taken away in the first great Battail; and I lay in this Vision from the first day of the week at night, untill the second day at night, and stirred not, nor spoke, but sometimes sang of a great Victory that I saw upon the Seas, Ships burning, bones and flesh sticking upon the sides of the Ships, the Sails battered, and the Masts broken, and many such dreadful things as to the Hollander; seeing many godly friends also drop∣ping into the Sea, and their bodies beaten in pieces, it remained a long while to my view, but the Victory that I saw in the Conclusi∣on, produced many Songs, crying out, oh, Who is a God like unto thee? according as thou saidst thou wouldst be, so Lord I see thee: At this time, I keeping of my bed seven whole days and eight nights in Mark-lane, at widdow Smiths, Glasier, where were many Spectators of account, both sea-Captains and others; Mr. Allen a Common-Councel-man, Mr. Smith, Mr. Radcliffe, Captain Palmer, Mr. Knollys, and several other men of account in the City; at this time for seventeen days I eat nothing but two broyled Herrings, and drunk Water and small Beer. Two moneths after this, in the twelfth moneth, called February, 1653. The Lord suffered Sathan to buffet me, yet I questioned not the truth of any of my Visions and Revelations, but said, if I shall be thrown into hell, yet they were the truths of the Lord God, and
should certainly come to pass: but I remained in grievous bitter∣ness, being hurried by Sathan, and he prevailing over me in a very high nature, moving me to blaspheme; but the Lord kept me from uttering any such thing, though I was tortured in my body, as if he had the full possession thereof, and being perswaded that he had power over my body, and natural life to make an end of it, though I believed from the seal that I had had eight years before, that I should be saved through the fire: This temptation remained with me from the first of the twelfth moneth, 1653. till the latter end of the second moneth, called April, lying in the Mineries seven days, in which time I had two Godly men, and a Godly woman watched with me every night; temptations of all sorts were so violent upon me: And at the end of those seven days, my body was freed from that torture caused by Sa∣than, and I repaired home to Hackney, to my Kinsmans house, Mr. Wythe, and there I remained till the latter end of April under very bitter storms, being forced by Sathan to walk up and down the fields, attempting to throw my self into a Well, saying, God shall not be dishonored; For it shall be thought, said Sathan, some put thee in, and so thou shalt be in happiness presently; For what can pluck thee out of thy Fathers hand, he hath made an everlasting Covenant with thee, Ordered in all things, and sure, and this is all thy desire, and all thy Salvation, which thou hast made mention of to many; and I was forced to lye in ditches frequently, till it was dark night, that some found me, and led me home; And again frequently I took Knives to bed with me, to destroy my self, and still they were snached out of my hand, I know not how, not by any Creature: I durst not eat nor drink for four days together, because it was said to me, If thou doest, thou worshippest the Devil; For in every thing give thanks, whether thou eatest or drinkest, do it all to the glory of God: but thou canst do nothing to the glory of God, therefore thou gratifiest Sathan; And do not add sin to sin by so doing; In this time still Sathan came as an Angel of light, though I was so full of terror, he still affrighted me in every thing; If I did so and so, I should sin, that I durst not speak to any that feared the Lord, nor I durst not have any prayer, because he said, I sinned if I prayed, or suffered any to pray for me; and I was exceeding affraid to sin, though he drew me abundantly by his false pretences to vow against coming ever among the Saints, or into insti∣tutions more; and said to me also, That if I did, I were the most noto∣rious lyer that ever spake; and that made me affraid, because of that
dreadful Scripture in the last of the Revelations, where the fearful are ranked with those that shall have their portion in the Lake. Many other dreadful assaults I had, and casting my self at length down on the ground, said, Lord there is no recovery, I shall surely go out like a snuff; presently there shone a light round about me, and this saying, Arise, why lyest thou upon thy face, pray and eat, this day is Salvation come to thy house, behold this is the day of Salvation, this is the accep∣table time; Ask now what thou wilt in the height or in the depth, and see whether God will not give thee the desire of thy soul; I re∣plyed and said, I would not tempt the Lord; he answered me, it is not a tempting of God, when he requires this of thee; I said, then Lord, give me an humble, broken, melting frame of Spirit, pour upon me a Spirit of prayer and supplication, which immediatly the Lord did in abundant measure, and many singings concerning the excellent nature of faith: And now having procured a very terrible ague and feaver upon my body, in locking my self up in such bitter cold weather, coming at no fire, not among any, lest they should speak to me of my former experiences, which I found did aggravate my sorrow very much; But the Lord as he had cured me in my spirit, so by faith he restored my body; and as to that Temptation mentioned, never to come among the Saints again, which was that grand temptation that drew in the other; It being first setled in my heart, I desired that the Lord would give me a Scripture to enform me that this was slain, and should no more have the least puttings forth in me: at which time, opening my Bible, this was given to me in Job, Thou hast been tied in Fetters, and holden in Chains of Affliction, and it is that the Lord might shew thee thy work, and thy transgression which hath exceeded in this time of thy Assaults; Now he openeth thine ear to discipline, and he commandeth that thou return from iniquity; Lord said I! what is my work? Reply was, to go forth to the tempted, and whatever their temptations were, I should have to speak forth to them; And also he having opened mine ear to Discipline, I should go among the Saints, and that company that I walked in fellowship with, and there I should manifest a departing from that iniquity that Sathan had led me into, in drawing me from all institutions, making me believe that I should find the presence of God in reading and praying, and in the book of the Creature, and that should satisfie me; But I found him a lyer to purpose; though he told me that God had delt all along singularly with me; and though I were not to forsake the Assemblies of the
Saints, yet if God would deal in a singular way with me, it should not go upon my account, but the Lord might do what he pleased; And so he endeavoured to bring me into those Familistical ranting Tenents, that I had almost spent my lungs in pleading against: the Lord having thus freed me, he hath kept this upon my heart to begg the life of faith, and self denyal, to hold forth these his dispensations towards me, both in Gath and Ashkelon, whom he bid me tell them unto. After my storms, I went down into the Countrey, to Hillington, near to Ʋxbridge, and so soon as I came thither, at one Mr. William At∣crosts house, the Lord filled me with many spiritual Hymns, as to my temptations, promising me that my joy should abundantly outpass my sorrow: And while I was thus singing and triumphing over Sathan, challenging now a battel, and seeing the Lord so glorious before me; I was drawn into my Visions, as the calling in of the Jews, the over-throwing and shaking all Nations; And a Vision I had concerning the Dissolution of the Parliament about four days before it was, not knowing any thing of that nature was intended, which I sung; the manner of it, that suddenly Gideon (as I called him) and M. G. Har∣rison came into the Parliament-house and desired removal of them; desiring Mr. Speaker to deliver up his Commission, and so I saw sud∣dainly a departure of them, though they were very loath thereunto; And this many in the Country can witness: the Minister of Hilling∣ton, Mr. Taverner by name, whose wise sent me word of it within four days after I had the Vision of it: In these Visions I lay seven days, and then arose, having strength as formerly. Nine weeks after this, coming up to London, Mr. Smith a Linnen-draper in Newgate-Market, at the golden Anchor, asked me what I thought of this New Representative that was then in choice? I an∣swered, that I had faith to believe that little good should be done to the Nation by their sitting. So after this I had divers Visions at times; wherein I saw their breaking up; I lying frequently, sometimes ten days together, some∣times seven, sometimes eight days or thereabouts; The time I lay ten days was at Hackney, at my Kinsmans habitation, where the Lord gave me Visions of their breaking up, and of the deadness of Gideons spirit towards the work of the Lord shewing me that he was laid aside, as to any great matters, the Lord having finished the greatest business that he would employ him in; And I singing forth their breaking up,
Colonel Bingham, which was one of them, being present, hear∣ing what I spake, as to Gideon, and to the rest of the Representative, he was pleased (as I was told) to call it a Prophesie; saying, that he was glad of that Prophesie of their breaking up, for he thought little good would be done by them; This Vision I had the third of the seventh moneth, called September, at Hackney, 1653. Then again, within one moneth after I had at Mr. Barrats house at Dowgate, more visions concerning the breaking of the same Re∣presentative, and many other Visions I had concerning the Na∣tion. And then again, about fourteen days before the breaking up of them, I had clear discoveries of the departure of those from the house, whom I had called the Linsey-wolsey-Party, which the Lord said, he would not have in his Tabernacle-work; But if those whose hearts were upright sat for Temple-work, and for the building of that latter house; which Christ saith, shall be more glorious then that of the former, if they come from among them, the Lord will make them glorious instruments for himself in those great concernments that he had spoken forth in his word; And upon it I saw their coming from them, and I sung the Passing-bell between them: singing forth an∣other Passing-bell to those that are in present power now; Nomi∣nating him that was the Chair-man, Mr. Rowse, the Lord shewing me that his heart was very hypocritical, and that he was not for the work of the Lord; So that I had many songs and discoveries from the Scripture against him, not hearing the least word, but that he was a very Godly man, as Creatures said; But what I had against him, it was from the Lord, which I spake then in the hearing of many; say∣ing, though he and the rest of them (which are now a Councel) said, let us separate from that factious Part, casting them out with the prayers of Christs poor flock; Reporting that God thereby should be glorified, according to that Scripture in the last Chapter of Isa. But I said, God will appear to your comfort, and they shall be ashamed; This Vision I had at Mr. Marsh's house at Dowgate. After this I went home to Hackney, and the first week I came home, not knowing any thing of the dissolution which was then drawing near, I had these Visions: First I saw a great Tower, and the rooms thereof were like to the Counsel-rooms at Whitehall, which I saw strawed thick with Gun-powder; And at a little distance I saw a white Tower, for whiteness and sparkling glory, I never saw any
thing to parallel with it; and looking into it, I beheld many very precious Saints with their eyes fixed toward Heaven, their counte∣nances shining as the Sun; and neer to them, between that white Tower and the other Tower, were a great many of the Colonels and Chief of the Army, with their Pistols cock'd, and lighted Match in their hands, beating the fire upon the gunpowder, endeavouring to drive it up toward the white Tower, but they could not, for the fire would not take; presently upon this, it was said to me, whereas thou seest this high Tower whereon the gunpowder is, it is a great many of men of the wise and politick, grave and judicious so called, that are drawing up together, and their Wisdom, Power and policy is that gunpowder that thou seest, and the match and Army-men, or the chifest part of the Army that shall assent and joyn with that Tow∣er, and gunpowder against the white Tower, saying, it was not to destroy the white Tower that they were come forth, but the facti∣ous ones that sat therein; Presently this Scripture likened them to those of the Old World, that said, let us build a Babel that may reach to heaven, and God came down and confounded their language; so he will do by these that were rising up against the white Tower, as it is written in the Proverbs, The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, wherein those factious ones, as they called them, sat in safety, and shall be preserved all their days. Another Vision I had at the same time, of many Oaks, with spread∣ing branches full of leaves, very great limmed; I looking to the root, which lay but very little in the ground, & look't dry, as if it were crumbling to dust, and above the ground was only a little dry bark, on which limmed and spreading Oaks were set; a few shrubs which be∣ing by, were very lovely and green, these great Oaks fell suddenly down, and cover'd the other; presently I saw a very lovely tree for sta∣ture & compleatness every way not to be paralleld by any thing that ever I saw, and before which the great Oaks crumbled to dust, and the little shrubs were raised up, growing and thriving exceedingly; then I desired Scripture to this Vision; Reply was, in the first of Isaiah it is said, They shall be confounded in the Oaks that they have desired: And as to that lovely Tree, it was declared to me to be the Lord Jesus, which I had sometimes seen in the new Ierusalem, which is spoken of in the Rev. ult. That that Tree was the very same that is there men∣tioned whose fruit should be very many and beautiful, held forth to the Shrubs, which they feeding upon, should immediately grow
up to a lovely Stature; which said the Lord to me, thou here feest, that no sooner doth this Tree appear, which represents my Son, but immediately those despised Shrubs that the great Oaks endeavored to scatter and hide in their holes, they shall come forth, and all the Oaks shall crumble into dust; this is not by Might, nor by Power, or Arms, but brought in through the pourings out of my Spirit. Two nights before the Protector was established, I had a glori∣ous sight of a Throne, Angels winged flying before the Throne, cry∣ing, Holy, holy, holy unto the Lord; The great One is coming down with terrour to the Enemies, and Glory and Deliverance to the sincere, and them that walk uprightly; hearing of this, I broke forth with much Melody, singing also Halleluiah, Praise and Honour unto thee O Lord, will I render with them that thus cry holy. Then another Vision followed, A great company of Children walking on the Earth, a Light shining round about them, a glorious Person in the midst of them, speaking these words; these will I honour with my raigning presence in the midst of them; others shall dye in the Wilderness, which Wilderness I will shew thee by and by; So that departed. A third vision followed, wherein I saw great darkness in the Earth, and a marvellous dust, like a thick smoak ascending upward from the Earth; and I beheld at a little distance a great company of Cattel, some like Buls, and others like Oxen, and so lesser, their faces and heads like men, having each of them a horn on either side their heads; For the foremost, his Countenance was perfectly like unto Oliver Cromwels; and on a suddain there was a great shout of those that followed him, he being singled out alone, and the foremost; and he looking back, they bowed unto him, and suddenly gave a shout, and leaped up from the Earth, with a great kind of joy, that he was their Supreme; and immediately they prompting him and fawning upon him, he run at me, and as he was neer with his horn to my breast, an arm and an hand clasped me round, a Voyce said, I will be thy safety; he run at many precious Saints that stood in the way of him, that looked boldly in his face; he gave them many pushes, scratching them with his horn, and driving them into several houses, he ran still along, till at length there was a great silence, and suddenly there broke forth in the Earth great fury coming from the Clouds, and they presently were scattered, and their horns broken, and they tumbled into Graves; with that I broke forth, and sang praise, and
the Lord said, mark that Scripture, Three horns shall arise, a fourth shall come out different from the former, which shall be more Terror to the Saints then the others that went before; though like a Lamb, as is spoken of in the Revelation, in appearance a Lamb, but pushing like a beast, being not only one, but many and much strength joyned to∣gether. Thus far it was conceived meet and requisie to represent the spirit and condition of the party; Not from thence to borrow the more esteem, or belief to the Relation following, let that adventure forth upon its own score, and stand or fall in that spirit that gave it being; But that the truth may shine forth, as to the particular state and con∣dition of the Party, through that cloud of unchristian condemnings, odious censures, and black defamations of unsatisfied, interested, envi∣ous, and unbelieving persons which are gone forth; whereby, that in this dispensation, which to many that were witnesses of it seems to be the Glory and Beauty of it, may be confounded and darkned, and the eyes of them that would see, be blinded in judgement. Now concerning her speaking in Whitehall, this account we have to Offer of the state and condition of her spirit in that work; which was received from her own lips in the hearing of some then present, in answer to the Questions which the Relator moved unto her; One Question was asked her some weeks after she left Whitehal, and was this. What frame of spirit was upon you in uttering those things in Whitehall, was it only a spirit of faith that was upon you, or was it Vision wrapping up your outward senses in trances, so that you had not your senses free to see, nor hear, nor take notice of the People present? She answered, I neither saw, nor heard, nor perceived the noise and distractions of the people, but was as one that heard only the voice of God sounding forth unto me; besides her own word, the effects of a spirit caught up in the Visions of God, did abundantly ap∣pear in the fixedness, and immoveableness of her speech in prayer, but more especially in her songs: notwithstanding the distractions among the people occasioned by rude spirits, that unawares crept in, which was observed by many who heard her, who seemed to us to be as one whose ears and eyes were locked up, that all was to her as a perfect silence. Another Question was, what moved you to silence at any time when you ceased from speaking? was it with you as with other good men, Ministers, &c. who cease at discretion, either having no
more to say, or having spent their strength of body, or having wearied the people? She answered in these words, It was as if the Clouds did open and receive me into them: and I was as swallowed up of the Glory of the Lord, and could speak no more. To give you the Re∣lators observation for the further perswading him of the truth of this; He took notice twice in her ceasing from speaking; Once she ended with prayer, wherein being sweetly and highly raised in her admirings of the glory that she saw, she uttered these, or like words: Oh what brightness! what glory! what sweetness! what splendor! which last word she hardly expressed in a full sound, and said no more; Another time ending with a Song, in three or four of the last words, in the last verse, her voice sunk into her breast, that they could not be understood, like the words of a man falling asleep. Now follows the Relation of so much of her Prayers and Songs, as by a very slow hand could be taken for eight days.
VPon the Tenth day of the Eleventh Moneth, 1653. The Rela∣tor coming into the Chamber where she lay, heard her first making Melody with a spiritual Song, which he could not take but in part, and that too with such imperfection, as he cannot present any account of it to the understanding of others: After her Song, she without intermission uttered forth her Spirit in prayer, wherein among many other, she expressed the passages following. What is marvellous or can be in the eys of the Lord? the resurrecti∣on of Jesus was marvellous in our eyes, but not with the Lord, for no∣thing could keep down a Jesus; thy people could never have come out of their graves, had it not been for the Resurrection of Jesus; as thou risedst, so should they, as thou dyedst, so should they, thou wilt make all things death before them; what endeavourings were there to have kept thee in the Grave? oh, but what fastness, what locks, what bolts that could keep in a Jesus? oh, but they thought that the Lord Jesus was but a man, they understood not that the Divine Nature was wrapt up in him in the Humane Nature; when thy time came the Sepulchre was open, and the Lord Jesus came forth with great Power and Majesty; oh blessed be the Lord that brought forth the Son, the Heir, him that was victorious over his enemies; so shall there be a Declaration against all things that would keep thine down; faith is that Victory; how so? because faith brings into the bosom, and it draws forth the Death and Resurrection of Jesus upon us: thou art a bringing forth a great Resurrection: Jesus Christ is upon his ap∣pearing; there are some do think so, but they say it is not yet be∣gun, God will bring it about another way, and another time; but the Lord says, he will cut short his work in Righteousness; thou knowest who are the Babylonians that are now about thine; as thou didst to thy people of Old, thou wilt come forth speedily,—thy thoughts are so exceeding high and glorious that none is able to reach them; Man cannot bring forth his own thoughts, they are so tumultuous, and run unto the ends of the Earth; oh then what are thy thoughts O Lord, —though the Enemy begin to jeer them con∣cerning those blessed songs; well says God, are my people jeered concerning their Excellencies, their Songs, their Hallelujahs that are of my own making, that are before my Throne? the Lord cannot endure that these Excellencies of his Saints should be trampled upon, which are so perfect, so pure; how pleasant are the songs of thine,
when they are brought forth out of the Churches of thine Enemies: —Tis not all the force in the world that can strike one stroak against thine, but thou sufferest them to come forth to try thine; oh that thine could believe thee for thy breakings of them, as well as for thy bindings up; all things under the Sun, all things before you, in you, shall work for your good; when they come to understand more of the Mysterie, and of the entrals of Scripture, how will they praise thy Highness? The Enemies are strong, Satan is strong, Instruments are strong, Temptations they are strong, what Strengths are against thy flock! They cannot be without the Lyon, and Lyon-like creatures: Oh if thy Servants suffer, let them not suffer for passion or rash words, but as Lambs; there is a zeal which is but from Nature, a mans own spirit may prompt him to, but the zeal of God is accompanied with meekness, humility, grief for Christ.—Since thy Handmaid is taken up to walk with thee, thy Handmaid always desired that she might be swift to hear, slow to speak; but now that thou hast taken her up into thy Mount, who can keep in the rushing wind? who can bind the influences of the Heavenly Orion, who can stop thy Spirit? It is good to be in the Territories, in the Regions, where thou walkest be∣fore thy Servant; oh how glittering, and how glorious are they, what Sparklings are there!—Thou hast a great gust to come upon the Earth, a great wind that shall shake the trees that now appear upon the Earth, that are full of leaves of Profession; but they have no∣thing but outward beauty, an outward flourish; but thy trees O Lord, they are full of Sap: A great number of people said, oh let our Oaks stand, let them not be cut down: oh but says the Lord, I will make you ashamed in the Oaks that you have chosen; and because you will have these Oaks, I will now give you other Oaks, and what are they? A first, a second and a * third Power, and thou breakest them one after another; oh thine own have had a great hand in these things; thine have said, we will have Oaks and Gardens, how have they run too and fro! says the Lord now, I will give you Gardens, but they shall have no springs in them, they shall be as dry chapt ground, they shall be as the falllow ground: what loveliness is there to walk upon fallow ground? you shall have stumbling walkings upon them, you shall have no green grass in these Gardens; what have all the Gardens of the Earth been? they have been to thine places of stumbling: O thou wilt by these thy strange ways, draw up thine into thy upper and nether springs: thou hast deceived thy
Saints once again about these Gardens: let them now run after them no more, but be ashamed and abashed: we have hankered from mountain to hill, we have said salvation is in this hill and in that, but let us say so no longer: when we shall thus be drawn up to thee, then we shall prosper, and thou wilt give us Vineyards, and Gardens, and Trees of thine own, which shall abide.—Thou calledst thy ser∣vant to come sometimes neer this place, to witness against some, who said that the Kingdom was already given up to the Father, and con∣temned the Man Christ: but now hast thou sent thy Servant again to witness for thee, for the Kingdom of thy Son.
Having uttered much more in Prayer, which the Relator, because of the press of people in the Chamber, could not take; She delivered the further enlarge∣ments of her heart in a Song, so much whereof as could be taken, is presented to you as follows. WHen Babylon within, the great and tall, With tumults shall come down: Then that which is without shall fall, And be laid flat on ground. Oh King Jesus thou art longed for, Oh take thy power and raign, And let thy children see thy face, Which with them shall remain. Thy lovely looks will be so bright, They will make them to sing, They shal bring offerings unto thee, And myrrhe unto their King. For they know that thou dost delight To hear their panting soul; They do rejoyce in thy Marrow, And esteem it more then gold. Therefore thou hearing their hearts cry, Thou sayest, Oh wait a while! And suddainly thou wilt draw near, The worlds glory to spoile. Oh you shal have great Rols of writ Concerning Babylons fall, And the destruction of the whore, Which now seems spiritual. Come write down how that Anti-Christ, That is so rigid here, Shall fall down quite, when Christ comes forth, Who suddenly will appear. Come write down how those spark∣ling ones, Which Antichrist are too: Those Notioners, Oh do write down, How he will make them rue. Come write also that great Powers shall, From off their thrones be cast: Oh the Lord he will batter them, Though they mount up so fast. Oh write that those great Counsel∣lors, That now against Christ agree, How Christ will never own at all, Nor give them any fee. Write how that Protectors shall go, And into graves there lye:
Let pens make known what is said, that, They shall expire and die. Oh write also that Colonels And Captains they shall down, Be not affraid to pen also, That Christ will them cast down. Because they have not honored God, They have not paid their Vows: But only blustring Oaks have been, Great tall branches and boughs. Which have no spirit nor moisture, then, How can they longer stand, Though a while they have active been: Yet they must out o'th' Land. The Lord will reckon with them all, And set their words before: They have not brought forth Righ∣teousness, Nor relief to the poor. Which they said they would chiefly eye, But their words do not speak: But all unto their own Nets, they Do stretch themselves and creep. Pen down how all their Gallantry, Shall crumblè into dust: For the Lord he hath spoken, that To dust they vanish must. Come Serjeants, what wil then you do; When your Masters are cast, What will become then of your pay, Which you run for so fast? Oh Serjeants, some of you I have, Look't on to be such which Would not have taken such a place, Your hands forth for to reach. Poor Serjeants that were honest men Oh how are you fallen, Oh how are you now taken with The vanity of men? Oh Serjeants leave off this your work, And get some other thing, Your pay'l be sweet to follow him, Who is your Lord and King. Oh bread and water is more sweet, Then Reastmeat of this sort, Oh meat of herbs betters for you, And of better Report. You come and crave pardon of them, While you dissemble in heart, Oh call for pardon from a Christ, When to his bar you come. And leave those other wayes, which will Prove injurious to you; The Lord doth hate such practises, And he will out them spue. Oh keep thy poor Saints, that they may Not run away from their Lord, Oh let them be contented with Th' morsells thou dost afford.
Oh that they may not now set hands To engagements that come, But rather engage for the Lord, Who is the onely Son. Oh mind the Saints, how engage∣ments Have become to them a snare, That others they may not them take, But up to thee repair. Let them know tis but a short time, That men thus shall abide, Tis but a while that these stormy winds, Shall bring forth such great tyde. Though winds and waves they boistrous are, Yet Christ them will rebuke, He will speak to them to abate, And they'l go at his look. After she had breathed forth this Song with more enlargement then could be noted by the Relator; She proceeded in Prayer, which for the press of people crowding and darkning the Chamber, could not be taken; She continued that day in prayer and singing four or five hours together, and was then silent. The next day, being the eleventh day of the moneth, the Relator came in and heard her in prayer, wherein she delivered many things: some whereof being of publique nature were taken: And are presented in the account following.
Must thy Servant that now is upon the Throne, must he now die and go out like a candel? Oh that thy servant could mourn day and night for him! Oh that he might be recovered out of that vain glorious Counsel, out of their Traps and Gins! Oh his soul is in bon∣dage, he will not hear New Jerusalems Sermons if thou convince him not! Oh that he might be laid in thy bosome, that he might not re∣fuse to come among thy people! Oh that he might hearken to a pray∣ing people, rather then to a wicked Counsel, rather then to a Poli∣tique crue about him! Father, that he might Lord God come out of those Fetters and Chains; And then do thou shew him his work, and his transgression wherein he hath exceeded, and open his eyes to re∣ceive instruction; He is in Chains by reason of that outward-glory and pomp that is round about him: Oh he thinks he is taught by thee thus to go and to act! Oh, but blessed Lord, let thy handmaid intreat thee to perswade him; For thy perswasions are more then the per∣swasions of all the great Doctors and Rabbies that are about him! Oh that they also might consider what they do, they have been Preach∣ers of free Grace to thy people: Let them not now come forth with the voice of Haman, but with the voice of Mordecai; let them be faithful, and say unto him, thou art but a man that doth thus; let them not joyn with that that thou art breaking in pieces, Thou wilt not have thine to sit upon thrones now, till all thine shall sit together upon those twelve Thrones; Is it not better that he shall pry into the Laws of King Jesus, then of those that are about him? he little thinks that they would bring him into jeopardie; Let him not entertain any upon the account that they are grave, wise, judicious men; But let him look whether Godliness be in them: Oh, but he will say, they are Godly too! Oh, but let him look at actions, whether these actions do speak them Godly! Oh, this is a day of Jacobs trouble, thine looked for refreshment, and behold greater trouble, they looked for a birth, and behold it is yet in travel; Many of thy children are put to a stand, and know not what to do; though he doth repulse them, yet let them tell him of his sins, and tell him with humility, and with tears; not as those deluded spirits, that go running about the streets, and say, we have such Visions and Revelations, who come out with their great speeches of vengeance, and judgement, and plagues: Oh, but thine that come from thee, thou givest them Humility, Meekness, Bowels and Tears. Pluck out those of the Counsel that are thy Children, tell
them that thou dost not love linsey wolsey garments, linnen and wol∣len mixed together, neither in the thrones, nor in any building, or Temple, or Concernment of thine. It is true, Authorities and Powers are by the permission of the most high; He gave Commission to the Assyrian to be a rod to Israel, till he had accomplished his work upon Mount Sion; But here is the difference, that was an enemy, whom God would destroy with eternal fire, and perpetual burning; But these come forth as brethren, as thy children; and therefore thine do not know how to bear it from them: Oh, it is a grief to the heart that they should smite and grieve thy Saints; Besides, the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus is at hand, all the Monarchies of this world are going down the hill: Now is a time that thine should look off from these things, and lift up their head, for their Redemption draws near; Now thou requirest a greater going forth of the Spirit; What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation? we are not to be for our selves but for Christ; Now the treasury is open, and every one is to cast into it; now all is spread open, for all to come, to cast in something: Oh come forth thou great Builder in thy glory! Oh what sheddings of blood have there been in order to this work! Let there be days of Glory; Hear the voice of thine, yea, thou dost hear them, though thou wouldest have them to wait, they shall not be ashamed; they that tarry and rest upon thee, thou wilt come and lead them with thy sweet spices: Oh that the souldiery might now come forth out of their bravery, and say, shall there be some that shall come up to that glorious building, shall they reign in that day, and shall we that have gone forth for the Lord thus far come short thereof, and be laid aside! Oh help them to entreat thee that thou wouldst not spue them out of thy mouth as luke-warm ones, nor let them not be cast out of thy Temple; Now is a measuring time that thou art measuring thy own Temple, not the world, but thine own Saints, there is a little silence from Trumpets and Battels, and now is a time of silence: Oh but there is a time of the shooting of bullets, and they will come forth again! Oh that thy Temple might not fall to pieces, the stones that are joyned to the Corner stone, that they may not have the hammer come upon them; no, nor any Iron tool come into thy work. Oh let him be willing to part with such things as may hinder the prosperity of his soul; make him out of love with the wine and feasts below, and bring him in love with thy liquors and flagons from hea∣ven! Oh but their vains are so full of blood before, that they have no
room, but do thou cast the overflowing blood, and then what can hinder thy work! Oh but can these dry bones live? give thy hand∣maid leave to tell thee that thy children are like dead bones now in the Valley; But thine say Lord, thou canst make them live, thou canst bring nerves and bones, and knit them together again; Let thy servant never be silent till they be brought out of the Valley, out of the slimy pit! Oh do thou fill their pools, thou causest rain to come and fill the pools! Oh fill all places, all things with water from above, that thine may drink thereof; bring forth that water, that may make them Warriours for thee, and not any longer for themselves, and let them know that thy servant doth abundantly tender them! Oh let all that thy servant hath go for Sion; First, Second and last breath; Were it not for thine, thou wouldest send the Nations into this Nation; thou hast a people in this Nation, who have thy name upon them, therefore thou wilt not let out the boars, and the wild beasts against them, for they would spare none; Thou hast a few names that are cloathed in white, whom thou dost abundantly delight in, and they delight in thee; they commit their way unto thee, and thou wilt not destroy them, though they live in Sodom; thou hast many precious lights in this Nation, in this City, or it would be suddainly burnt with fire: Oh how beholding is this tumultuous City to thine inheritance!
OH sing for Sion Songs my soul, And magnifie that Grace, Which will bring Sion back again Into the glorious place. Oh I will pray while that he doth Appear here on the Earth, The sparkling glory of those that Are thy most lovely flock. I will rejoyce while I do breath, Because I do believe, Thou wilt some of the Souldiery Again to thee receive. Oh Lord when that thou comest forth, Scales shall fall off their eyes, And then they will look unto thee, And still they more shall rise. When th' hast brought them into thy sweet ways, And Paths of pleasure too, Where they may recreate their Souls, And behold ioys most new. Oh Lord it is delight to me To hear thy pleasant voice, Concerning some of the Soldiery That their Pikes up shall toss; And go forth shall fully against All foes they have within, As well as against those without, And Canons they shall bring. Their Armour shall most lovely look, In those thou dost appear, Thou art their Colonel indeed, Every troop for to chear. Oh every Regiment of thine Thou sweetly wilt them speak, And oh all eyes shall then run down, They shall eke mourn and weep. That they have disobeyed the Lord In bravery so rich, And in their dainty dishes that They have with them inrich'd. When others would have been glad of Crums that fall from their board, Many do say still they must have, Oh these thine will record Against themselves, and mourn for it, The Lord will then pass by, And he will draw them forth again And speak them graciously. Oh when thou comes, with shame∣fastness, Oh ye Colonels great, And Captains too, do ye fall down Before the Mercy seat. Then he will welcome all of you, And say, oh here is that, Which is more costlie food for thee, And far more delicate
Then all thou hast of that thou stol'st From the Commonweal-poor, For to feast thy carkass with∣all, Which is to be no more. Oh Souldiers shall I tell you of Great Victories indeed! Oh come and hearken unto it, For t'will supply all need! You shall no great alarms then, Nor drums hear from your soes, You shall not see their spears nor bullets fly, At all you to oppose. If you will hearken to the Lord, Which calleth for your hearts, If you will say, oh take them, then You shall not feel foes darts. Oh when Christ speaks to you, as well, If soon you do reply, Not with a flattering speech, but with Sound words to his Glory. Then oh he will give unto you That which will be much more; Oh the pay that shall come from a Christ, It will throughout thee store. It will weigh down all flesh surely, It is heavier then you think, It is more precious then your Oar, Then do not from it shrink. O Soldiers all, that now you were Ʋpon the Mount with me, That so your Songs they may be heard, When that you come to see. Oh it will be well worth your time To follow the sweet Lamb Whereever he goes, oh after him say, Oh Lord we come, we come. Oh here is a Genervl, and he Is a King of them too, A Protector, Conservator, Oh draw neer him up to. He will be all things to Souldiery That their hearts can desire, Oh he will be weapons to them, He will be their match and fire. Oh hee'l be also Cannons great, Granado-pieces too, O muskets he himself brings forth, To put your hands into. Oh he will be Pikes for you, to Go after enemies strong; Oh he will be a Sword for you Against such would you wrong. O he will beat your drums for you, And your Alarms sound, He will give watchword unto you, That none shall you confound.
Oh he will also trumpet out An harmony so sweet, VVhich shall make you on geldings mount, And walk upon your feet. He will be for Souldiers that stand And cleave to Israel, With the horsemen he will go forth, And open wide their breach. It is better to side with him Which is a King for ever, Then to the earthly Kings below, Whom pale Death shall soon sever. A Soldier he will remain Till all Nations are cast, And til the Remnant doth come in, Which soon shall draw full fast. VVhen he calls them then they shall run, And draw neer unto him, He speaks the word, oh come you forth, Then do you answer; when? His voyce it is most powerful, They cannot it gainsay, But must reply, oh we come forth To thee our brightest Day. Oh Soldiers do you love alwaies Him which will go before, And slaie all Giants in the world, And make them roll in their gore. You have not only to Scotland gone, But to Holland also, He sounded forth his voice so high, And whirlwinds made to blow. And on the Seat oh there he hath Most gallantly appear'd, VVhen you were struck with sor∣rows great, He then your heart upbear'd. For he then undertook the stroke, And smote those foes so high, Though they did brag, and boast, and say, They were great Almighties. But oh the Mighty which is true Did their might then confound, He sunk their ships and slew their men, Much treasury he drown'd. Oh t'was the great God on that Land A General was, before The same Highness did go on seas, And did appear much more. A Pilot he went in the Ships, Stil did remain and staie, And turn thē about for this Land, Much kindness to convey. O he it was that drew them on, And fought for us before, Oh he it was that broke their masts, And humbled the great ships all. O he it was that made them run, And made them hide their head,
It was thy strokes, oh thou great God That laid their bodies dead. Oh twas the Lord himself I'm sure, That stopt the Holland's ships, That did maintain our Land-ships, when Those Hollanders he split. And is not these things for to be Declared, and writ down. When th' hast on our Nation so shone, And them how hast thou crown'd? With mercy and deliverance, Which is exceeding great: The loss of many precious ones, And splitting of great ships. Oh but the loss of thy dear ones, Oh is not that to be Thought on by you that are great ones, And of the Soulderie. Oh think! oh remember these things, Oh, again call them to mind, That you may fresh have Gods goodness, And feel his rushing wind. That so more of you may be wise, Here in this Nation great, That so you may no longer stretch Your selves, and lye and sleep. Our Father, wilt thou bring to mind, And fasten it on their hearts, That they may not themselves, that they Harden not to thy smarts. Who have been brought along the work, By thee the Lord of Glory, That they may get up to the Lord, And to his territory. Oh thou dear General also, I would fain have thee to hear, The Lord Jesus does speak to thee, Oh come therefore and hear. Oh hearken unto Christ and hear, Let not his sound go forth: But oh do thou gently receive What he will thee counsel. Do not hearken to vain Spirits, Nor to Counsellors great, Which wicked are and false ones, which Did drive thee to thy seat. But hearken to sound words which come, From him that is so rich; Oh listen what the Lord holds forth, And what he thee doth teach. That thou shouldst not assume to thee Higher Power then Christ doth give: But thou shouldst say unto all Saints, Oh come let us here live
In honor and great Dignity, Which Christ here doth afford; Oh let us have one only King, Alwaies t'write our Record. Oh do not thou aspire, for to So high a title have; As King, or Protector: But oh Ʋnto Christ that do leave. Oh let him be advanced, and You he will then up raise; Oh he will give unto thy soul Most comfortable dayes. THerefore Father teach him, let him know that he may reign as one of thine: Oh, is it not a sweet thing to be crowned by thee? and that is sweeter then to be crowned by man: Oh says Gideon! I will not be your King, the Lord shall reign over you: Oh, it is enough for him to be one of thy Kings! Oh let him now deny, and cast it down, and say; Without these Dignities, and great Titles, I will serve the People and Commonalty; and then wilt thou say to him, thou art my Gideon; Let him consider that thine shall rule over all Nations; and let him say, why may not this be the time that it does draw near? Let not him say as they said of old, who put the day far from them, that the Vision was for many days; for a time yet afar off; But let them accept of the day and time that thou hast put into their hand; The Lord is building his Temple, it is no time now for them to build Tabernacles; Now thou art upon thy Temple-work, shall they be building great Palaces for themselves? The Souldiers slight thy hand∣maid, but she matters not, they shall and must consider in time; they say these are Convulsion-fits, and Sickness, and diseases that make thy handmaid to be in weakness; But oh they know not the pouring forth of thy Spirit, for that makes the body to crumble, and weakens nature; In these extraordinary workings thou intendest to shew what is coming forth hereafter; something is a coming forth, there is so Lord; and oh how does thy handmaid bless thee!
Having Prayed for, and made much mention of the Merchants, she Sings the following Hymn to them. OH merchants! oh turn to the Lord! What he to you reports, Look into the written word so sure, And see what he brings forth. Oh do not grieve at losses great, Though all your ships do split, Oh look to that bottom wherein Cannot come any leak. Oh take up now your time for that Which is precious and most sweet, And shall be given forth to you, That will receive meat. Oh Merchants! I fain would that you Might have true gold indeed: Oh I desire sweet preserves, which Christ unto you doth leave. The sweet preserves come from the Seas, And from those forrain parts, Which are made up by those Indians That are so full of Arts. You have your Canded Ginger, and Your Preserved Nutmegs too: That so you may delight therein, And your mouthes overflow. But! oh there's canded things in∣deed, Which is covered with Gold, There is not such preserves as they Which shall be turned to mould. But these preserves continue shall, No mouldy skins shall be At all of them; But the longer You keep them, you shall see They are as fresh and lovely as They were when first he brought, They do not loose their tast at all, Oh that you would have sought. These things indeed as pleasant, all That you would feed upon Them which will streng then you always And lead you to mount Sion. Oh Merchants cloath your selves with robes, Which will never be wore Not that which will to raggs be turn'd, Nor that which can be tore. But here is Cloathing substantial; Oh it is costly too! Oh it is white! Oh it is that Which Christs blood bought to you! That you might be cloathed here∣with, And herein still may go, No nail nor splinter can these tear, Nor can remove the show. Tis glorrious and substantial too, And it abides for ever, No enemy can rent it from, Oh none can it you sever.
Oh merchants thē lift up your heads Though losses you may have; Oh the more of Christ do you now beg Which will make you most brave. Oh you that are proud, and with stout necks, And mincingly do go, With your black spots and powdred locks, Thinking to make a show. And so you go unto those which Are carnal hearts with you, But oh the spiritual do see, They do hate it, and spue. They cannot endure your company, Oh cover then your skins: Remember when that Adam fell, He covered was leaves in. His nakedness with leavy skins, At length must be his cloaths; Oh therefore all you naked ones, Oh do not Scripture oppose. Oh you that sport it forth with that Which is jesting most vile, The Lord himself does to you say, That he will you rob and spoil. Oh you that think to do that which Is injury to Saints: Oh the Lord he draws them more unto His lovely open gates. Where he takes them into himself, When others are shut out, Then Mordecai must be cal'd in, Haman must hang without. Oh thou dear Lord, they chains would do Thine injury therein, They cannot, for the Lord their God He is their only King. Oh sing! oh soul! that I am fain, And do lift up my heart, Ʋnto thy beloved so high, VVhich is exceeding great. Hallelujah unto Jehovah, I will without fear sing, Ʋnto him which creatures al brings forth, Oh! thou art the great King. That store and plenty art to thine, Rivers and streams are there, Oh thou dost so much love unfold, That does the heart so chear. VVhile it sings songs to others, and At the mentioning Of the perfumes and costly things, VVhich are esteemed dear. They must esteem; and count them dear That receive from a Christ: For it cost his most precious blood, To bring forth interest. Into these Royalties it was, A Saviour led therein, Thy going to the grave oh Lord, And rising up a King. Oh he was willing for to be Crown'd with a thorny one, That crowns unto his children might Be brighter then the Sun.
Oh he was willing to drink gall And vinegar so sharp, That so his Saints might drink sweet wine, For to revive their heart. He willing was, that they should with Their spears that then were sharp, Run into his own sides, that so His children might not feel smart. But that water and blood might come, For to cleanse, and throw out All their defilemets that came whē Man he was driven out Of that old Paradise, before A Christ a new one brings, Which shall abide for evermore, Where thine shall in it sing. Oh how greatly then are those Saints Established by thee, That hast a rest brought forth to them, Where they shall alwaies be. Oh it is much more better, sure Then Adams state before; Oh here is one that is so strong, None can it rend nor tore. Oh Saints, love Christ, love him dearly, That hath for you thus shown Great dignity, and his power, Which set you on his Throne. Oh Saints rejoyce! Oh take your harps Down from your willows now: And play your tunes unto the Lord, For none shall make you bow. Great Babylon it shall not mock, Nor injure your sweet songs, In the enjoyment of a King, That cast out hath those throngs. Oh you Saints that Christ tarry on, When he hath taught you play, His melody shall you sound forth, In the sun-shiny day. Therefore desire, and wrestle too By faith and prayer, while The Lord hath brought you forth from al That endeavor you to spoil. Oh fear not! do not tremble, but Go on couragiously. Let Prayer, let Faith, let Zeal go out, And through your tongues let flye. Oh Prophets all, do you speak out, With bold courage for him, For unto you he shall draw near, And appear even when That the rotten walls are thrown down, And the great Chaos falls, A fabrick then that you shall have, That by faith on him calls. Oh he will not be slack, though men They shift and put you off, Yet he will suddenlie relieve, And let his Cannons of, That shall all forts and bulwarks here, All foes that do upstand, Shall be laid flat upon the ground, And thine shall enter the land.
O, Canaan, Saints you are gone into Oh that is the pleasant Land, Where you shal eat his grapes most sweet, and that in his due time. Oh they are fruit that are most sweet, they are not rot within They have no blemish, in them all, he will fill you to the brim. You are my Joshua's, and are my Calebs, that I love, And you also do shew to me that you climb up above, Oh unto you I now do speak they shall go on apace, And enter into Canaans Land, and dwel in those sweet rayes. Therefore take heed oh Israelites, how you do speak and pray Ʋnto the feeb lest of the flock, to keep them from the way, Wherein they shall green things be∣hold, and milk and hony eate, Oh therefore awaken them not do not the sickly beat. But like true Calebs do go forth with courage bold and stout, And speak well of Gods Canaan which other seek to rent. Oh do go tell the goodnesse of the place, and might therein, The fortifications thereof which are made by our King, Oh speak well of your Canaan, and of its Bulwarks there, Oh tell of its most glistering wals, and tell what can compare. What rooms, what wals, what hang∣ings can set forth of what is there, What meat & drink can be to that which is so sweet and clear? I tell you, God will take it well, when well you do report, Concerning his sweet Canaan, and his salvation cups. Another Hymne. OH blessed Lord be thy great Name, that Prisoners shall go free, Out of the prison-house thou brings redemption comes from thee. Oh those that are thine Enemies and Rebels were also, Thou hast captiv'd captivity, that forthwith they may go. Though in that inner prison yet thou sarest oh come you foes, For here is redemption spoken, by Jesus is broke out. Oh come to him though you have been slaves and vassals to sin, Yet his Fathers free grace he doth unto your souls eke bring.
And saith Oh Rebels I came forth that so you might be chang'd, And of rebellious made such which shall with Christ ever reign. Oh come saith Christ, you captives bin that Satan hath held under, Oh if you look upon a Christ your foes shal not you plunder. That he to his enemys should come and make them his dear friends, Calling them not his servants more, but choice and onely friends. Oh report of your Saviour, that is a Prophet too, And hath treasures provided with for every moment new. Oh speak well of your Saviour which as a King appears; Go declare him that is the Lord, and wipes away your tears. Oh goe forth Saints, expresse your love to this dear Jesus Christ, Though some may despite show to him yet open wide your eyes Ʋnto him, for to you hee'l come, and also shall to others, That with temptations are scorcht, and are so full of smothers. O that thy Saints that are cleansed would to others the oath Publish of grace & goodnesse which in person he breath'd forth Oh notioners they shall go down, at the sound of him which Wil not them fail who do him love but he to them will reach His arme for their salvation, and puts them in his bosom, Though sin and Satan would most fain yet they cannot there come. For thou hast hedged thine about and thou hast lackt them in, Oh none can fetch and drive them forth from the most mighty King Oh the longings of poor Souls sure to see thy countenance! Oh if the world did him behold oh they would prize his glance. When creatures are in Dungeon dark they prize one beam of light, Much more do thine when they do see beams of thy lustrous light. Oh they that have a while been & pin'd with hunger bins starv'd Oh they will prize any relief from it they will not fling, But eate it gladly, and will praise, and then what may they do, whom thou hast brought frō chains & from satan who would them rue? Oh Lord then thy spirituall ones, the more of thee they eate The more of thee they do desire thou art so excellent sweet.
Such hony and such wine as which does drop from thy sweet spring Oh they desire to reach forth, and most kindly take it in. Oh they Lord, that have felt the cold and in the storm have bin, Oh how they will breath after thee and crowd under thy wing! And thou their Lord wilt cover them from all the bitter storms. They shall be kept under thy wing and freed from the worlds harms. Oh it is Lord, Oh it is sweet to draw thee forth at length, It is thou Lord that must draw out thy self, thy height, and breadth. For when thou hast drawn up to thee oh the large field thine is in And the many paths wher they may walk hand in hand with their King. Who lovingly doth walk and tell of things that shal break forth, And of the new Jerusalem, gloriously thou dost afford. Oh when thou takest such from be∣low to thee that art so high, Hallelujahs, must go forth thorow the Heavens and the Skies. Hallelujah when the sentence shal come forth of dread against al those That are against such a lovely God and do thy Name oppose. These were uttered and sung the twelfth day of this eleventh month. Upon the thirteenth day she uttered many precious things in Prayer and Songs, which the Relator could not for the press of people write down. Here followes some short account of some things she uttered the 14th. day, as the Relator could take them in some scattered expressions. LEt thy Servant beg high springs for Saints; come in with full springs in such a time as this, when that the waters are brought so high, that thy poor children are ready to be overwhelmed by them, in their snares and entanglements; they say these waters are very clear and sweet that come from men, but at length they make the Soule very muddy; Why is thy Handmaid so long with thee upon the Mount, seeing thy sparkling glory, and those reviving springs, but that thy Handmaid may plead with thee concerning thy Saints, thine Inheritance, and that her heart may take in the things concerning thy Saints. There is now a great deale of provision for a poore man, and yet hee will wi∣ther and come to nothing; certainly folly will be writ upon his labour, Thou wilt not commend it as a peece of wisdome, Thou wilt not give it a badge of honour, Thou wilt rather put a blot upon it, Thou
wilt never write faire concerning it; Thou art coming to write faire concerning the Palace of the Lord Jesus, and the Glory of that Kingdome; oh, but they have a veil over their eyes that they can∣not see it; Oh, but saies God I have a Jacob, a dew, a Lyon, and they shall know it: I have but a few names among you, in whom my Name is found, though I have a great many soules; Thou wilt find. Lord, but a few that have kept themselves undefiled from the world, that are pure Religious ones; there are may fleshly, nationall, formall religious ones, but the poore, fatherlesse and widow are the companions of the pure religious ones. They think it scorne if one should tell them they are not Religious, they will say you are censori∣rious, Oh, but thou wilt tell them, that they doe not doe that which is pure Religion, that is so before God; who is such a burning and shining light as John was, who gives forth such a Testimony of Jesus as John did? Is it not said, that they who faint in adversity, it is an ar∣gument that their strength is small? When they are in prosperity then they can speake large and high things of Jesus Christ, but then to hold out in time of temptation, that hath a good report with God; God saith, I will judge righteous Judgement, I will not judge what you doe, when you meet, and speake and pray together, but I will follow you into your secret places, your Houses, your Callings, your Offi∣ces, &c. those that breath after thee Lord, they are searching after their secret sins, for thou commest into the heart; they cannot prosper that co∣ver their secret sins; there is such a covering of secret sins, that prosperity flyes from us, and takes wings and flies away.— It is not a time now to raise States, and Names, and great things, for thou art now pulling downe, they will set up their Beacons upon their owne hills, when thou sayest thou wilt have thy Beacon upon thine own hill, and thy Standard set up there; oh how do men set up their posts by thy posts?— When thou dost make Bars and iron gates they will endeavor to break them open, and beat them down, that the enemie may come in among us; they think if they have armied men about them, it is well with them; O, but to have thy armed men which are Chariots of fire about them that were safe indeed: When thou commest with thy hand, what are all these before thee? they are crushed on a sudden. Take away Lord all that sowre leaven that is upon the earth, it savors all the meal, that it has a brackish taste; though many of thy children in their affections and judgements may bee sowred by this leaven, yet thou hast some
into whom this sowre leaven cannot enter: Take it out of thy Chil∣dren that are in the midst of the earth, and keep thy lump that it may not be infected; many are infected, their language is infected, it was sweet before, but now it is confused, it had an harmony, but now it hath no rellish.— Thou hast declared the comming of the Lord Jesus, that he shall come suddenly, so the transactings of things here below do come sudden∣ly, and poore man, how is he confounded, he is in a smoother in his own judgement, he is in the smoak, and cannot find the door! Let not thy Children be blinded and blood-shed, oh take them out, and let them take heed that they do not return into such smoaky houses againe; oh, let thine blesse thy Name, that thou hast proved a cleare flame for their eyes, a burning flame, that shall burn up all smoaking things, as crack∣ling thorns under their feet Oh, that thy Children should drink up inflaming Wine, not like thy inflaming wine, for that's a beautifull inflaming, but an inflaming to rednesse and burning.— Thine that thou keepest from such things, they shall walk with thee, thou wilt make them partakers of glorious Priviledges, thou wilt bring them into thy Territories above, into thy sweet Walks, how wilt thou hang them about with Hony-Suckles? not like the hony that is of the earth, that is clogging, but pure hony that is reviving; thy Ezekiels that behold thee by the River Chebar, Oh what sights, what glories, what rivers, what springs do they enjoy! and yet thy chil∣dren are affraid to suffer; Oh what a spirit of slavish feare hath seized upon thy own children! though thou hast said the Lord will be with you in the fires and in the waters, yet what pale faces are there amongst thine, oh, is this to professe Jesus!— Thou wilt make the whole earth to be thy children, and wilt make them to be the honourable ones, and yet they will not know, nor confider it; Oh this is a time not for man to reign, but for the Lord Jesus, and this voyce sounds out here and there by a Son or a Daughter; Oh, but when shall all the Sons, and all the Children cry for King Je∣sus? the Reason is, Because of the infirmities of the flesh, and be∣cause thine are of a stammering speech, and of stuttering tongue, but thou hast premised that the time shall come that there shall not be a people of a deeper speech then thy people, and they shall not be of a stammering tongue. Come O all you Disputants, Monarchs, Scribes
and Rabbies of the world, come forth now, and let us see what Ar∣guments you can bring forth against the Spirit, the pourings forth of it, the rising of the Sun of Righteousnesse upon the world, against the influ∣ences of the heavenly Orion; oh, you shall be the men that shall be of a stammering lip and of a stuttering tongue.— Oh what a doubting is there now among thine, what disputing, what reasoning what they shall doe, whether they shall cry up a Man or King Jesus! let them take the engagements of Man, and lay them under their feet, and take the engagement of Jesus, and lay that to their heart; Let thy servants now be of a publique spirit, let them now flie high above the Skies, not into vaine conceits, vaine speculations, and high notions; oh but thou callest to an exalting high through Jesus unto thee; they that have kept to a crucified Jesus, they are thine: Oh, here are good words, great allegories, and high expressions, oh, but they that honour thy Sonne, thou wilt honour them; they that honour the Son honor the Father; Oh, they that say they will honour the Father alone, and live in the Father alone, and lay aside the Son, they are deceived, thou wilt have them keep within thy bounds, and not to stretch the Point beyond the Compasse. Oh, let thine take a thorow view, and not rashly take up any thing: Thou wilt have thine try the gold as well as the drosse; thou wilt not have thine take up any thing, while they know not the life of it. Oh, But who is he or she that admires the Lord Jesus through all, in all, and above all; He is all in nothing-Creatures, the Creature is nothing, but thou hast said, thou dost great things through nothing: Oh, that thine were taken with Truth for Truths sake, that they would seek into the bottome, and goe into the golden Mine, and not onely gather up the shavings thereof, let them not take up the sparks but the fire it selfe. That a poor Creature should subsist without sustenance, what a ga∣zing is there at this poor thing, while you forget the glory that is in it, go into the Marrow, what matters it for the bone, let them have the Spirits, it is no matter for any thing else,— Oh that thy poor servant should thus long converse with thee, and so long sit at thy fire, and feele the warmth thereof, and so beare te∣stimony against all false fires, and all things that are against King Je∣sus.
Then she uttered forth this Song, the greatest part whereof, as much as the Relator could take, runs as followeth. OH, it is that light that burneth bright, a flame that is so clear, The Soul and tongue, yea every part unto thee shal draw near, And praiseth his free grace for all, and sets out Jesus too, Who came forth from the Fathers seat to bring that love unto, Which is a fire so hot, and which its warmth gives forth most clear; Oh, it is a fire that is brought forth by him that paid full dear; Oh, when thy love sent out thy Son, he sweetly did reply, That he would hasten through the earth, and on the Crosse would dye. Oh, when love did warm his bosome there was no stay at all, But the Lord Jesus he did reach forth that which was royal, And saith, that love had sent him forth to dye for Rebels great, That they might come that enemies were unto this Mercy-seat; And be did fulfill his great work with courage that was bold, That there might come forth unto his that pure and beaten gold, Which was for to inrich them that before were poor and mean, Who hath bestowed here on them a glory pure and bright. Which none can purchase by their worth, nor treasure that is here, For Free Grace it is to them rich, and bids them come full near, Where they may have that which will make them rich for evermore, And will be alwaies unto them, a bright and golden Oare. Where no drosse shall at all it reach, nor cover it from sight To those that Christ do, bring it for, who tels them 'tis their right. And therefore saith, receive of him who purchased hath for thee, Redemption out of all thy filth and from thy slavery, Rather then all Crownes or Palaces wherein you do delight, Oh covet more the brightnesse of him which doth make us white. Oh 'twas indeed great love that such which are so black below, Full of the spots of filthinesse, that thou shouldst them love so.
He that was God-man understood the love was in the Father, Whom none can see, nor can shew forth but he that was his Lustre. O thou most deare and only Lord, that lookest down below, Who in thy love thy Spirit brings forth, and it doth on us blow. Oh, it is it which doth maintaine all vitals that are within, Oh, it repairs all parts throughout, and filleth to the brim. Then raising her note she pro∣ceeds as followes. O King Jesus, King Jesus, thou in apparrel art rich, A Diadem about thy neck, and forth it thou dost reach; Of thy rich Diademt to thine, and of thy Crowns of Pearl, And thou sayest unto thy poor Flock, Oh, I will make you Earls, Oh, I will make you Potentates, and then beleeve my word; For it is true sayes Jesus Christ, looke into my record, And see whether I have not declar'd what you are unto me; Also what I am for your sakes, and that you shall me see; And look into the written Word, and there you shall behold How I have beautified, and have made you as bright as gold. O look into the written Word, and there drink you of me, For I am flagons of Wine, and you shall partake of me. O sit down at my Table, sayes the Lord who is so high, And I wil come and fill you, and I'le open wide your eyes, That you shall me behold therein, in all my Counsels here; You shall see how I am the chiefe, and your most choycest deare. O looke into the written Word, and see the blessings there To Servants, that doe waite for him, that is so high and deare. He sayes he wil come forth to them, and gird himselfe about, And set him down on them about where none shall cast them out; O when that Christ he forth doth come, at a Servant he doth speake, That he will waite upon them, while they eate upon his meat; He'l fill their Cups and Flagons too, he will say, Drinke O friends, O drinke, O drinke abundantly, for oh, I will you shend:
Oh draw, draw near says Jesus Christ, and come and now reply, Oh say unto the loving Lord, that up on high you'l flye. You are my rare ones, and you are the Darlings that I love, Oh come, oh come saies Christ the Lord go up with me above. Come hither, come hither saies Jesus to the Regions that are high, Oh draw up to the Mount of God to Jesus Christ on high. And you shall see devouring fire upon your enemies, But I will be a light to you and up you shall straight rise. Oh you shall rise, indeed you shall, when others they shall down, Then you shall be raised up with me when I my selfe shall crown. Did they beleeve what in thy word, reported is and penn'd down, They would not then to men forth run, and cry them up and crown. Oh if they did beleeve the Lord, what he doth them declare Concerning the coming of Christ, oh then they would him fear. Oh if they did beleeve the Lord, what thou dost say to them, Concerning that true holinesse which shall appear as then, When thou comst out then holinesse abundantly shall flow, Sincerity and righteousnesse, oh they then up shall go. But now here is great transgression in men, they are corrupt, Oh they are taken with flesh-pots and with their sinful cup. Oh blessed Lord do thou draw near, do thou speak to them that Which may now raise them up againe, and may lay all flesh flat. Having uttered forth this Song (as she did all the rest) with melodi∣ous voice, she proceeded to prayer without any intermission, somethings wherein were, as followes. It is not now as it was in times past, that a Kingly Progeny should reigne, for that was but for a time, and then after they should be judg∣ed, destroyed, and taken off, and be no more, and then should the Kingdome of the Lord Jesus come forth, and all the Kingdomes of man throwne downe before it; And how has thy Servant disputed, declared, remonstrated and appeared in the field against Antichrist, and how is his language now confounded? it was the language of Canaan, but now it is the language of Ashdod.— Oh thy Servant (speaking of her selfe) must now come forth a∣gainst
the great Rabbies of the world: Oh, thou knowest that thy Ser∣vant hath often wrastled with thee that thou wouldst employ some other, but thou hast over-ruled her, and hast put her to silence? and shall I not be willing to do or suffer thy Will? And thou givest strength unto her, and bearest up the Spirit of thy servant to go thorow with the Work, thy servant is not an enemy to these men, thou knowest, but a friend; Oh, it is for thy sake, and for thy servants sakes, that thy Servant is made a voyce, a sound, it is a voyce within a voyce, anothers voyce, even thy voyce through her; Thy Servant knew that she was beloved of thee, and that she lay in thy bosome from a child, and there she might have lived without the con∣demnings or reproaches of men, or of this Generation; but since Fa∣ther thou wilt have it so, thy Will be done. If the body suffer never so much, if it be for thy Selfe, thy Saints, thy Kingdome, it is better for her then to be in her own Habitation, and in pleasant Gardens; and when thy Servant has done thy work, she shall be willing to lock up her selfe in her Closet againe, and not to be seen of men; Oh Lord, thy servant knows there is no selfe in this thing. Having further in prayer made mention of the University-learning and the National Clergy (as they are called) she proceeded unto singing, seven or eight of the first verses of the Song could not bee taken by the Relator, it being Evening, and no light in the Chamber: The rest were as follows. FOr human Arts and Sciences, because you doat on them, Therfore the Lord wil others teach whom you count but Lay-men. For you have set too high a price upon your Learning here, Oh that makes Christ for to come out and from you it to tear. Because you have the honour re∣ceiv'd, so much fleece from Christs flock, Therfore now you shal be by Christ oh made a stumbling block. Christs Scholars they are perfected with learning from above, To them he gives capacity to know his depths of love Oh you because have not kept in within your bound and Sphear, Therefore the Lord hath declared he'l put you in great fear. Though learning it be very good, when in its place it stands, But when it gaddeth forth there∣out it looseth its great bands. For in the Chimny the fire is useful and precious, But when the rasters it doth reach, it sets on fire the house.
And so is Learning, when you keep it within its true bound, But when you joyne it unto Christ he wil then it confound. O you have been so gallant, and you have in silken walk'd, O you in dainty food have been, that hath made you to talk; But when that they cease putting in to your wide mouthes that gape, O then you'l cease speaking that, which before you did relate, Concerning the sweetnesse of Christ, your studies had drawn out, O Christ I'me sure he wil you try, whether you truly spoke out. For your triall wil be, when that your Revenues shal goe, Then it shal be made manifest whither your wind shal blow; But I wel know that those that are true Prophets of the Lord, Wil live upon that pay which he declared in his Word; And if they'l trust and venture him O he wil them provide, They shal not wait, nor be athirst that swim within Christs tide. Oh, is it not better to have your pay from Iesus Christ, Then from those which do rome unto the poore his interest. The Lord Christ doth against them speak, they shal not long endure, The Lord wil set his fire to them, and it shal them devour, And shal upon them fly about, and unto ashes goe, And by the flouds it shal be washt, flouds shal it over-flow. O doe not then, O rest not in your greatnesse you have here, For every one that's high wil Christ, he'l put into great feare. She proceeded againe unto Prayer, and among many other, expressed these following passages. They that are thy true Seers shal stand, when they that are false Seers shal fall, and wither, and dye; the true Seers they shal goe on and prosper, thou wilt provide for them sufficient mainte∣nance; Oh, let not men thinke that thine doe cry downe the Mi∣nistry of them that are full of the Ministerial Office, and of thy Spirit, and doe speake from thee; but there are that are called Ministers, that doe deny Jesus Christ his coming to set up his Kingdome, O thine would have them throwne downe before thee, the Lord wil not let there be a famishing of the Word in the Land, and he wil take care of them; let there not be a cry a∣mong
them, that if maintenance goe downe, the Ministery wil downe; let them know that thy servants are not enemies to them that are truly taught of thy Spirit; let them looke into the Scrip∣ture, and there see what is the true Ministry, and what is their pay; let them see what those were who were thy true Ministers, were they such as did pamper their bellies, and their backs? were not thine willing to feed upon any thing, to goe in Skins, to bee any thing for the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Has not their fulnesse brought blindnesse upon them? Oh, where has been that mar∣row and fatnesse flowing forth from them? Oh, let there be more of that, thou wilt delight in such as delight in thee, they that delight to serve Tables more then thee, and thy flocke, thou wilt not serve them, what ever judgement or opinion they are of.—Is not the Narrative come from Heaven con∣cerning what thou art a doing? Oh, let all thine know it in time; they that are such as are true Students, doe thou fill them more and more, let them come forth as Trumpeters with a ful sound, for if they give forth an imperfect sound, how shal the Horse pre∣pare to the Battel? let them not goe forth with the sound of their owne mindes, and their owne carnal studies, but with the sound of thy Spirit, and that is a right sound, and such wil follow thee with Timbrels, and with Musick; O let such rejoyce evermore, and let them pray continually; oh, they love alwayes to be pray∣ing, they can never be weary; not that Prayer that is called a Gift, or an Habit, but it is a spirit, it is the out-goings of thy Spirit, it is an Harmony that they that have only a Gift cannot understand, and it is but like a beating of brasse; true Prayer is an excellent talking to the most High, it kindles up the affections, and sokes into the judgement; for thy people are accounted by the world a people of much affections, but of little judgement; but by this thou dost try thy People, for they that have little affecti∣ons doe soone change their note; but they that have sound judge∣ments, soaking judgements, and then the affections right set, they Center then in thee alone, every way the Soule is raised that is indeed wrapt up in thee; there are raptures in the Tongue, and in the Braine, but the raptures of the Heart no flouds can drowne, no fire can quench; the Tongue, and the Fancy, and the Natural life may be taken away, but the Spiritual sense that returnes into the Sun; oh what is the Carcasse, the Vessel? they are
nothing, but when these are gone, then where am I but there where I am made perfect in thy selfe; thou wilt bring thine into the Grave before thou raisest them up to live; til thou com∣mest and puttest a sentence of death upon all things here below, they wil not look upon that which is glorious. Here she passed off from Prayer to Singing, some, or most of the Song was taken, and was as followes. O That they may say unto Death, O Death, where is thy sting, O Grave, where is thy victory? over them thine shall sing. When they doe thorow death up mount unto eternall life, O then their hearts and speeches too shal run to thee most rife. O till they see grim Death before, and its most gastly lookes, They would not mount up unto thee, to see thy pleasant lookes. Till they doe feele his biting teeth, their tongues will not sing to thee, O therefore let them it behold, Pale-faced death let them see. They wil then pray to thy rich grace, thereto they then wil fly, They wil to the most high then mount, and that with open eye. They shal look on the Sun so bright, and on its beames of grace, Which doth appeare, and cometh forth, and on them casts its rayes. The foure last words of the last Verse are added by the Rela∣tor, who could not take the Maids owne words, her voyce as it were dying, and sinking into her breast, with which the closed for that time. The fifteenth day being the first day of the Weeke, she began with Prayer, the principall things whereof are noted in the fol∣lowing account, in the Language they were delivered by her, though much more largely then the Relator did, or could take them from her. He that is entred into rest, hath ceased from his owne workes, as God did from his. Where Lord dost thou take up thy rest? O Lord, doest thou take up thy rest in man? thou art the Center of rest, yet the out-goings of thy rest were upon man; man must have thy Breath breathed into him, other Created pieces must have thy Name, but he must have thy Breath; O how great is his Fall, and thou hast showne kindnesse to him, yet he doth not consider, he doth not take notice what he fell from, and what thou hast restored to him; Oh, thy Servant loves to travel with
thee in these created Pieces, to see thee the Alpha and Omega, the great beginning, and the end; O what sights of the world, what fashioning of curious Wits can compare with that infinite Wis∣dome! O that thy Breath should be life to Man, that thou shoul∣dest come and breath upon him, that thou shouldest give forth substance about a poor shadow, and take counsel about a poor shadow. Oh Father, what disputes there are about the Souls mor∣tality and immortality? Oh, it is because they do not thorowly search into things, they do see no more then the breath: Oh, who can set it out, who can give a definition of mans soul, which is the breath of God? Thou Lord alone knowest what it is! Thine that have conversed with thee in it, do see it is a most ex∣cellent out-going of God into a poor carkass: It is a most excel∣lent breath of God into a poor creature: Mans life as confidered as the breath of God, and the work of the Counsel of God, Oh how watchful should they be over their breath, that they do not breathe against their Eternal Breath, against the Work and Lan∣guage of God. When thou hadst made Man, then thou saidst thou hadst finished thy work, and wouldst take thy rest: Who was this Rest? why Jesus was this Rest from the beginning; he was the prepared Rest from the Creation: Thou broughtest forth a Se∣venth-day, wherein thou saidst thou restedst, and a work where∣in thou restedst, and all to shew that Jesus Christ is the true Rest; who is the true Sabbath-day, the prepared Rest, the Eternal Rest; Oh, that there might be no more wallowing in Satans fires and quagmires! Oh they do miss of their Rest; they do not enter in∣to their true Sabbath; they do not see their first-day: Let them see Jesus Christ to be the true Rest, the true first-day: Thou first appeared as the first day to poor contemptible Creatures, to poor Women. Oh Mary, I am thy Rest, and she answered, Rabboni. When thou appearst to be Rest, then how do they take thee into their bo∣som, then they see no Peace under the Sun but in thee? if he be gone, Rest is gone, Sabbath is gone, Peace is gone; that bright day of the Resurrection which is brighter then the rising of the Sun, does not then appear: When a poor soul knows not what to do, temptation weighs them down, corruption sinks them; they know not what way to turn from Bryars and Thorns. Oh, then, thou appears and gives Rest, and makes them go forth with joy- and leads them forth with peace, and then thou makes all me∣lody
before them. Tempted souls can tel what it is to enjoy their Maker, they can say he is their onely Rest. Oh, who would not make thee their Rest? Thou singledst out a Day, because thou knewest mans cruelty, and covetousnesse, that he would not give rest to Man or Beast; but whatis a day, if thou in a day wert not the Rest? The time will come that the whole Creation shal have a Rest and Redemp∣tion which shall abide not for a day, but shall continue. Lord it is a Fasting day, indeed when thou art a Rest, when thou commest out with a sparkling rest; if thou hadst given a rest in thy Ordinary way, that had been very sweet, oh but a rest in the Mount with thy selfe, a transfiguring Rest among Angels with the brightest sun, oh can there be eclipses upon this Sun, the Sun of Righteousnesse? who is the same, and there is no alteration, no cloud can cover it. Who can mix Water and Oyle together? will not the Oyle be always above? so thou dear Jesus wilt stil be above upon the top; if trouble come, thou sayest begone; Surely Lord, I will make men∣tion of thy Rest for ever; thy Rest hath so many Companions with it, Peace, and Quietnesse, and Regulation throughout the whole Man, all is put to silence before it. Thy Servant wondered at those words, the Lord is risen, let all the earth keep silence; What art thou a coming forth? art thou putting a stop to all the Nations of the earth, their designs and projects, all enemies both by Sea and Land? But I will put to silence (saith the Lord) all enemies within; O arise against all inward Enemies, and let them be put to silence; Let there be no more the voice of the Earth heard in thine; thou hast put the earth in thy poor Servant to silence, thou hast made thy Heavens to come down into her Earth.— Whom the Son makes free, they are free indeed; Oh freedome indeed, other freedom what is it? a poor freedom; but this free∣dom within is through the resurrection of thee rising in the soul; there is such an harmonious company, there is such an abundance of thine, when thou putest the earth to silence: Oh put the earth to silence, that so they may come to the glorious stature of the Lord Jesus, which none can fathom nor reach the depth thereof:— Oh that poor creatures might not heare of a Jehovah of Righte∣ousnesse, but that they might also receive thee; thou sentest down
a Ladder to the earth, the humane nature of Christ, to gather up our Nature to the Divine: Oh how did that humane Nature ap∣pear at the bottom of the Ladder upon the earth? oh what steps did he tread, what steps in the Divine Nature to gather up Humane Nature into it? thy poor shall lead up to the top, you are kept by the mighty power of God unto salvation. Oh it is good to walk up that Ladder, where there is such pre∣cious Aire, and such sparkling Stars, where there is not only seven daies light, but seven thousand such as none can number; Oh how can any get near unto thee, if they will throw away the Lad∣der? poor hearts, they marvellously mistake, you cannot come to the Father but by the Son, you must take both together, therefore this Rest came forth, that so there might bee a com∣pleatnesse, that there might bee nothing wanting; every way what a perfect rest is the Lord Jesus? Oh dear Christ, dear Christ, can any that have taken thee in, hear thee vilified? couldst not thou keep silence concerning them, and can they indure to hear thee contemned, to hear thee to be called onely a Form, and to cal themselves a Christ? How can they chuse but say wee will have a Scripture Christ? O dear Rest, the declaration of thee is marvel∣lous sweet, the Declaration tels of thee that thou art the true rest in the power thereof. Here she seemed to have 'over-flowings of joy and delight in spirit, and poured out her heart in a Song, as follows. OH thou art Rest, eternal Rest unto thy chiliren dear, Yea through the great Creation thou brings thy Rest them near. Thou wouldst have all things have a rest that in the earth do breath; Yea, also a Rest unto Fishes, thou dost to them bequeath. Oh see and learn of Plants and Trees, of Gardens and the Fields, A rest there's from the mighty Lord which he unto them yeelds. The Creatures they have rest, much more such that have sense & breath, Their rest is higher then the other, cause they are th'Commonwealth; That they might be maintained for the Sons of men herein, Therefore a rest thou dost provide and quietnesse thou bringst in;
Calling the earth and all therein to be in silence, and To stay from gathering up the field to accommodate the land. O, what an increase through a rest there is in the wide sea An increase is in every thing, brought forth out of the clay: O land, thou doest through rest come forth, with great increase unto, Of strength, and otherwaies from such that thou bringst men unto: What are the birds and cattell there, whereon man is fed? Thou art a rest to weary man, who forth and in is led. O shall all things that here do crall, and beasts that hang their head, Be more in praises to the Lord, then those whom Christ is head. For they after their kindes doe praise, much more then shall ensue, When that the Lord makes kindness come thorow all he will renew. Love he doth multiply indeed, upon the sons of men, That he might screw them to the top of his glory in heaven That they might not like muckworms be and like such creatures which Have no sense for to reach to him, which is their king and liege. O he is a rest that requires, all his to draw him neer, And they shal have ful sights of things which in Creation are; For he will shew that Sabbath and first day he will bring out; Vnto his Saints, and he onely shall draw the quintesence out Of all things they shall draw the sap, that runneth from the root, And get up into the high tree, where none shall go and pluck. No, none shall be above to see thine, when th'are in thy nest; For they are closed in so round, they lodge within that breast, That none can scar, nor them afflict; no musquet shot can come: There is not any can draw their spears or at all shoot their Canon. Though nests in trees may shaken be, yet thine shall e'r remaine; They rest and nest in Jesus Christ, his hand shall them sustain. Here closing her song, she proceeded without any pause to prayer, therein uttering here and there as the Relatour could take them, the things following. The poore carcasse shall moulder be∣fore thy being, through a fight of thy bosom thine are dazled; in thy nest they see none of their own feathers, but a new nest of thy own making: the very victualls dye before thee, that eternall life that is sweeter than naturall life, than all strength, all naturall parts, what are these to it? Father, when thou withdrawest thy glory from thy handmaid, thou shalt leave so much heat as shall refresh the body, and her health shall return again from thee to her, thou wilt give her strength to persevere to the end. Oh when shall men speak forth from the demonstration of thy Spirit?
when shall they go forth in thy garments, not their garments, not with their Surplices and Tippets; Oh no, they say, these they have abhorred and put off, Oh but they speak their University language, their head-piece language, their own sense: Oh but where is the voice of the new Covenant-teaching, are not they hid and concealed: the Beast hath got in his foot, and hath mud∣ded the waters; men are mudded, they speak a little of the new Covenant, a little of thee, and a great deal of themselves; but thine have hope in thee, they have confidence that way shall be made that shall be brought to light, which is thine indeed, men shall not alwayes be content with the outward relation of the word, without the whisperings of thy spirit. Oh saith Christ, when I come forth with my power, and spirit, and Majesty, then there shall be more converted: now they think they have done a great matter, if they have spoken twice a day, Oh but have they had spirituall appetites? is there quicknesse in them? is the Lord Jesus more drawn and set forth by them: let them wait that the Lord will come forth more than he did upon the Primitive Saints, that there were longing and panting after thy coming. Here she closed for that day; upon the 16 day the Relatour came in and found her in prayer, wherein she uttered among o∣ther things, these which follow, the chamber being, as at other times, full of hearers. If he were not (speaking of the Lord Cromwell) backsliden, he would be ashamed of his great pomp and revenue, whiles the poore are ready to starve, and art thou providing great Palaces? Oh this was not Gideon of old, oh why dost thou come to rear up the pillars, the stones which are laid aside? tell him, Lord, thou art come down to have a controversie with him; Oh sin will lay thee flat to the earth; Oh sin will bring down a dark smoke into thy judgement, oh sin will hinder that judgement thou intendest to bring forth in the earth oh Gideon, is it thy Statesmen shall carry on the work of the Lord, when they are together in brain∣work. What is an head-piece to an heart-piece? O dost, thou think to joyn hand in hand with head-pieces? Oh thou thinkest, (because I cry out for heart-pieces for thee) thou thinkest hardly & jealous∣ly of me, Oh but thou art deceived, I am for the Lord Jesus alone, it is neither advantage nor disadvantage to me who is set up, or who is thrown down here below, for thy servant O Lord, is for that pure interest of Jesus. Who would care a rush or a straw, for
the interest of man? What are they that are of his chief Coun∣cell? they are the chief men in the places of Judicature, but saith the Lord, I have said, that the Righteous, who are choice, who are dead to all outward things, they shall be my Judges: but they will say, oh but they are godly too, but saith the Lord, they are such godly as I will none of, for they are ready to joyn with any corrupt party that comes forth, they will own any thing, and say unto any, you are my King, so they may have their fat and Fleeces, and all bow down to them. Oh but know, the Lord is the great Redeemer in Israell, and he is risen now, and will break all yokes as fast as they can put them on. Because the Pastors of Churches some of them do own thee; will the Lord therefore own thee. Oh no, the Lord will own such only, who are true in heart, and in his sight; some of these have made as great an Alarum as others, and have appeared as much as others; but now if they must suffer a little, they will flie, oh, this is a base frame of spirit, sayes Christ, where is a spirit for me; thou art going up and down the earth to seek where is a spirit for thee that will cast down the Jezabels, there are but a few such, but they are beautifull ones; Oh, thy servant hardly knows a volunteere that will go forth, though they be slashed in the first going on; but thou knowest where such are, oh fetch them out of their Cottages and holes where they lie in obscurity; they have kept their gar∣ments clean.—Israel would have a King, if you will have a King, saies God, you shall have him in my wrath; so it is now, people are of such a mad frame of spirit, when the Lord sayes, do not do thus, they say, they will do so, like old Israel, who were murmuring upon every occasion: because thou hast declared con∣cerning the coming of the Lord Jesus, and wilst give them Judges as at the first, therefore because thou doest not give them presently, therefore they will not stay, but will have their own first: when the Resurrection did appeare, presently the very Disciples were doubting and begun to scruple; so it is now, thine have hardly faith to believe the second coming of the Lord Jesus: Oh say they, we thought it had been by this time, but now we see it is not yet, but for a longer time.—Lord, let it be sounded in their ears, and let them mark it, there will be as great superfluity, as great lust and filthinesse, as great wickednesse and enmity, yea and greater than were before, oh they are all for themselves and Sathan, does not he appear in their Feasts, in their garments, in their locks, yea, O
Gideon, when in thy own family there shall be that shall go naked and wanton; Oh this is found in thy family! David had not such in his family as thou hast, so many of these: and must thou rule a whole Nation, and canst not rule thy own family: Oh, thou sayest, I cannot rule them! canst thou not, sayes God? but I will make thee know what I did, to Eli of old, because of his sons.—How can any go and cry out for King Josus, if they have him not in their own bosome? Oh, he is a sealed one; and they that are sealed ones can go forth for him! Oh Gideon, art thou one of those sealed ones? Then how beautifull would thy walks be? O, but he hath taken away thy glory here from among thy people? Oh Lord, help him to search into his own family; let him consider to have such evil doings, & actings in his own house, and shall he be afraid to reprove in his own family? Oh then, where is his courage? will he blinde his eyes, and bawlk as to them? then he will blinde his eyes as to other things; if the Lord Christ doe not raign in his soule, he cannot raigne for Christ; therefore you doubting Chri∣stians, have a care that you have courage given into your hearts from the Lord, and that the Throne of Christ be set up there, before you go out to plead against the Throne of Antichrist, and the Devill and wickednesse.—I hou wilt not have thy son so despised, therefore come you mockers, your bands shall be made strong, you that mock at the goings forth of the spirit of the Lord, at the wisdome that comes forth through fools; I tell you O ye mockers, your bands shall be made strong, the bands of filthinesse, flesh and carnality made strong upon you. Oh is it not better to have the bands of man, than to have the Lord put bands upon you? Can you break the bands of the Lord from off you? O you that have given your strength to the Delilahs of the earth; every thing shall overcome you, every threed shall bind you, every thing shall close your mouths, you shall be as weak as water, but they that have kept their garments clean, they shall have strength and might, and they shall stand up for the Lord, and shall have liberty, Oh but you will say, you were free men, and we were in bondage, oh but if so, where are then the works of zeal? of love and courage? the works of Abraham? Abraham was for five righteous ones: oh he breathed after such as had deeds not words of righteousnesse, oh to be wrapt up in that glorious Royalty, to have that compleat garment, oh the effects of that are precious, quietnesse and assurance for ever.—Come, acquaint your selves with Jehovah. You great Professours and
Army-men, have you not acquaintance with God? then all you have is nothing: oh do Justice, and do it for Justice sake, and thou Gideon, that hast assumed the highest place to thy self, thou art not onely to do Justice thy self, but thou art to see Justice done in all places, Committees and Judicatures abroad, that they may not feed upon the poore; thou art not to wallow in pleasures at home, but thou art to be labouring for the Lord; are these like to be thy Judges that take any into office whomso∣ever; thou art to go forth, thou counsel (as thou art called) go and see that the flock of Christ have Justice done them, oh look to the whole Israel, to the earth, to the whole earth, for the earth is theirs, and so manifest that you love Justice and Mercy, as you would seem to do; oh remember Absalom, who was of a very fair carriage, and of good words, take him to thee, for thou shalt not have David, Absalom he was of a lovely nature, that he might steal away the people from his father David, oh do not thou bring in that rubbish now, that thou hast cast out before; they have cryed down the King, the Court and such things, and how are your tongues now tipt with their language, if your hearts had not now turned you aside? Oh Gideon, in Scotland thou didst read what great things were going forth against Jacob, and thou wast afraid, that thou wast that Jacob, but in the latter end thou didst take in, that Jacob was to overcome, to be a Conquerour; why? the Lord sayes, if thou be the true Jacob, thou wilt do then as he did, act, and glorifie, and sanctifie the Lord; he was not for great revenues, great increase, though the Lord gave him great increase; if the Lord gave in to your increase it were well, oh but you take it in from the poore, and from Gods Israel, oh that you would take up Jacobs practice, as well as you are willing to take in his comforts when you were in the fields. Having added many other things, she uttered forth a large song, some part and parcells whereof, the Relatour, as he could understand her words, did take, and they are as follow. Oh you that are Gods diadems, wherewith you here do shine, Oh you shal sparkle through the world, in his most glorious clime. Oh Gideon would that I could sing a triumph here for thee, Oh would I could behold thy work to be glorious indeed. Oh that I could thee trembling see before the truth indeed. Oh that thy mouth most willingly, On righteousnesse would feed.
Oh that thou wouldst drink draughts which is pure Wine also: That thou wouldst of the truth so pure of that, drink, and thereby might'st grow. Oh that thou wouldst be like to him that was the Ninivites king: For to confesse thy sin to God, and to abhor thy sin. Oh do not rage, doe not thou fume! when th'art plainly dealt with, But rather embrace them then al those that brave it in their silk. And tell thee that thou shal do well, they do but flatteries speak, For be sure the Lord hath said that he will spoil thy Gallantrie. Oh he will cut it off from thee, therefore do thou come up, And beg of him that he should take, and with his hand thee pluck Thee from that which displeaseth him that forth it thou mayst go, And walk in those regions where thou mayst not feel's heavy blows, Oh desire rather a dish of herbs, than this thy stalled ox With those rather desire t' sit down, that strength may be in thy Locks: That no Delilahs so great & strange with speeches fair and sweet, May take thee from that wch is true, and exceeding compleat. O wouldst thou have a chaire of State, and have love from a God, Oh then cleave unto that which is recorded in his word. Let him not imitate those Kings, which knew nothing of God, They did not regard what they saw or read within thy word, But he hath a great tone thereof, he hath his tongue there tipt, Oh he hath many Scriptures which come thorow those his lips. Oh let not him do as those, but other things him show What doth belong unto one that hath overcome his foes. It is not his great chaire of State, that shall secure from thee; When thou, Lord, pluckest him from thence thou sayes, it shall not be: Oh the Lord then will say to him, he must not have such food, Which Queen-mother, as they did call did drink up as a floud, That swallowed up all in the pulpe; shall he such juyce here take? Or shall he have such gellies as those, whom thou didst for sake? And take him Lord, and show him it; now that he thus begins, Acquaint him that these flowings wil increase his flame of sin: Oh, make him like to wise Agar, not too much for to crave, Least that he be drawn from the Lord, and his glory deprave: Poore Gideon I did pray for thee, when like Jacob so clean, Thou hast been valiant in the field, and there thy foes hast flame. Oh then! the flock of God lov'd thee more than their earthly lives, They could have given their all for thee that in the world did rise.
Their priviledges here below; yea all they said oh take! So thou wilt keep thy Gideon then, and him wilt not forsake: Yea Lord thou knowst thy servant did, Lord, let her life go for The life of that deare one abroad, who is a man of War. Thy servant said, Lord, that she would lay a side her interest, And plead for him on his sick-bed, that he might see the breast, Where he should be restor'd to life, and walk again on earth, And manage the affairs for thine: thy servant said, Lord pluck, Pluck him out of the Canon mouth, and out from the sharp spear, Oh, take him from all musquet shot, Oh, is not he thy dear? Thy servant said further to thee, oh, raise him from the grave, And take away his feaver strong which makes his body rave. Thy servant said, oh Lord give him Cordials from thy dear self, That he may come and drink of thee who art his saving health. Thy servant little thought, oh Lord; when to Worcester he did come, Where he did vows & promises make for the most blessed Son; And for the flock of Jesus Christ, he would soon here draw forth; But when he came, he did forget his Promise and his Oath. Oh that he should see such a rout, at Worcester that last war, And should not mind what he did see from thee who art so rare; And when from thence that he did come thy flock about his heels, And they reach out their wedge of gold, and brought their.— Then into the City he must come among the great ones there, And their great Royalties of food which, Lord, thou'l from him tear Oh this food and these dainty things, these pleasures him did smother: Oh they did darken his spirit, when that he was brought over From ruine & from that great stroke, from red-shanks that were there, When that a while he was at home, he did forget his tears. Oh you great Aldermen and Sheriffs, you Lord Mayor also, That have been in the City, you have Gideon overflown: For your entertainments and your baites his spirit have so smoother'd That he cannot go for a Christ whom before he did honour: O Aldermen, O, that you had considered he was flesh, You would not have so nourisht him and brought forth your relish, Which was a relish to proud flesh, which shall crumble to dust, For truly it hath in him and you, raised up fleshly lust: Oh tremble yee therefore, for you have roasted meat so dry; His Wines you did mingle, whereby you have blinded his eyes.
Much more she uttered in her song, which the Relatour could not take, the presse and noise of people in the Chamber swallow∣ing the voice of her words, that they could not be distinctly un∣derstood: After which she proceeded to prayer, wherein were de∣livered, besides, many other, the passages following, O poore Souldiers, take heed that you never draw your sword against the Saints; do not smite with your tongue, as they did a∣gainst Jeremiah! oh poore souldiers, why do you appear against those, you have had their breath, their tears, their prayers! do you think they are against you, when they would take you out of your quagmires, when they tell you, you are upon slippery places; they would not rest night nor day for you; and will you now mock them, who are for the designe for the Lord Jesus? Will you now speak that against them, which you would have bit your tongue in the field, rather then to have spoken? Do not the hearts of those pitty you, that you think are against you? If you draw spears a∣gainst them, they will draw nothing but Faith and Christ against you, and can you then stand? Oh no, you will fall backward. When they came to seek Jesus and take him, they could not look upon him, but fell backward: Jesus Christ set his face like a flint a∣gainst his enemies for you, that he might take you up and crown you, that so you might stand for him: Oh, the Lyon of the tribe of Judah calls upon you, will you not heare the voice of the Lyon? do men affright you to make you stoop and bow to them, oh here is the voice of the Lyon of the tribe of Judah, he will lend you pri∣viledges, your golden cups and brave things you have in the earth; Oh Lord Jesus come quickly. Do thou tell them what a Lyon thou art; Oh, Lord thou wilt not honour them with the great things thou hast for thine that shall raign with thee. Oh that they would repent, that they would look with pale faces upon him.— Thy servant will leave a Testimony within these wals, this Palace against them, for that they have jeered against the kingdome and raign of Jesus Christ. Oh you Serjeants! then your hearts shall tremble to put forth your hand against one of the Prophetss, or people of the Lord; must you Serjeants, that have prophesied and prayed with the peo∣ple of the Lord, now put forth your hand against them? come Lord Jesus and fill them with trembling, and let them rather feed upon crusts, than to hold their places under these men: Know
that the glorious time is coming, when that blessed Tribe of Ju∣dah shall come in, what will become then of the swift motions of your feet, where you have run for them that build calves in Bethel. Oh when the Glory of that thy People shall appeare, what Lan∣guage shall then come up; Oh! you will say, if that were coming it were well, but will you make no preparation for it? If you will not stand up for the deliverance of the People, deliverance shall come, though we know not from whence: If thou art afraid to goe into the Kings Palace; thou shalt be ashamed when that day cometh: The Lord is bringing about a glorious Freedome, let them know that the time is drawing on, that your staffe of beauty and bonds that have been broken, the Lord will bring them toge∣ther againe, and they shall be stronger than they were before— Lord, thou wilt suddenly come to thy Temple, the foolish Virgins shall then cry, but saies the Lord, I have an open gate onely for mine that have oyle in their Lampes. You great Professors, you who are but lamp ones, you shall not enter in, when he comes; he will not come as a torn, battered, crusht Jesus, but as a lovely king, as one full of favour; though many say, Io, here is Christ and there, but these are deceivers? but oh the children shall by thy spirit know the countenance of the true Christ, his true breath; his looks from all painted looks that are upon the earth. Jesus Christ will not come flashily, but with such a light as shall endure, such a light as you shall see that all other lights are counterfeit to him; though never so many languages utter their voices; but when thou com∣mest, thy language shall be discerned: Many are come forth into the world, but thou sayest try the spirits, my Saints; it is not they can try the spirits that have read many volumnes: University men have great knowledge, but they cannot try the spirit; can those that have the form without the power, that have great ar∣guments? No, they onely can try the spirits that are children in∣deed; the other by virtue of their literall knowledge, their own understanding, their own apprehensions, their own light, oh such are taken with flesh, and say, this is Christ, and that is Christ: but thy people will not onely try Ranters, for they are known in the face of the Sun, but they will try whether men be for a crucified Christ that suffered upon the Crosse, or a Christ within? thine in∣deed are for Christ within them, and they doe love Christ as he suf∣fered
at Ierusalem, and manifest within them; Oh, but thine are too apt to run away from the simplicity of the Gospel! though things be high, yet if they have not a footing in a crucified Christ, in God manifest in the flesh, then let not thine embrace them. Having with these uttered many other things, she sung of the glory of the new Ierusalem, which escaped the Relators pen, by rea∣son of the lownesse of her voice, and the noise of the people; onely some pieces were taken here and there, but too broken and imper∣fect here to relate: After her song, she proceeded again to prayer, wherein she uttered the words following: It is now much, that great Ones do not tremble, that they have such greedy mindes after things here below, if they did take things into their understanding, least they should not be entertained at thy Table: How do they think, that are in high places, to manage their proceedings aright, if they have not the presence of God with them, if they have Prayer and Faith against them? O, saies Ioshua, I will rather have all the Armies of the world against me, than want the presence of God! oh, if they were jealous, that they had many enemies within, then they would doe as Ioshua did, they would set themselves to seek the Lord, they would say, come soul∣diers, let us seek the Lord: thou hast now put them to the trial, now let them examine whether their former prayers, promises and de∣clarations came from a legal and slavish or a Gospel-fear, a fear that they should be smitten down to the earth, or a filial fear, a feare that the name of the Lord would fall upon the ground! O, what will become of thy great Name? had you had the name of God in your eyes, then you would have it still; if the true fear of God wrought in you such effects before, why does it not so now? why are you now so little for the name of the Lord, and so much for your own name? If you had acknowledged my supremacy then in truth, you would acknowledge it now? O, the Lord cannot en∣dure hypocrites! Rational men themselves abhorre that which is flattery and dissembling, and what is not from an ingenious frame of spirit, and will not God much more? Now that you come to have fine houses, warm beds, sweet meats, doe you now pay your Vowes unto the Lord? Oh, let them not side with the croo∣kednesse of this Generation; let them draw nigh to meet their
God; Oh, come, come, when you were trembling Ones, praying Ones; then Israel exalted you, and delighted in you, and went to God for your sakes: and now you have offended in Baal, you are dead, your spirits are dead; will you not be told of it? You shall be told of it— Come, O you, that are in any Authority, in any Office, study what you are to doe for the Lord? wherein you might redeem the time? wherein you might serve the Lord? though you have given up your members to serve sin and vanitie; let the day suffice that you have recreated, sported, filled, feasted your selves: Now say, Lord, we will be for thee, and he will re∣ceive you: If they now set to Temple-work, thou wilt say to them, thou though test to have taken them away in the Wildernesse; because they have done thus, and have gone back in the wilder∣nesse; Yet the Lord will say to them, as to David, I accept of it at thy hand, of the thoughts of thy heart, yet thou shalt not build my house: Pray for your children, that they may not be taken with crowns, nor with the summers increase, as their Fathers have been; O let them not die without a repenting frame of spirit: Oh thou lo∣vest them that confesse their sinnes; true confession of sin will go with an endeavour against it: Or as David said, I have made the hearts of the righteous sad, and to mourn, and grieve; Oh, that they might say so; Lord I have been a back-slider, but I will yet return: Let them not har∣den themselves, and become accusers against thine; let them not think much to be accounted Revolters, when you are so, you shall be called Revolters when you are so, when you act like De∣mas, doe you think you shall go untold of it; the Lord will make you to know it by a witnesse within you: Doe thou recall them, they have been a pleasant voice to thy people, but now they have a confused language, and chill and cold spirits, thou wilt make them to know it, Lord; If they sin openly, then reprove them o∣penly: Let not thy people feare to reprove them to their face; Let them do that which is just, Father; Shall they run into fiery Temptations, and shall we not tell them? They cast out thy peo∣ple, but thy people will not cast them out; thy people pray that they might see thy kingdome, and partake of the breath of his nostrils, and of the brightnesse of his comming: Is it not pure Gospel for thine to tell them, that they are grosse finners against
free Grace, against the Lord Jesus, the Sorr. Oh, the Sun disco∣vers all things: that which is thrown up against the Sun, that ap∣pears most clearly; the sun will make you known what you are in secret? can you stand it out against the Lord himself? let not them that have given up their names to thee, be found flighters a∣gainst thee; Shall thine, oh Lord, be swallowed up? O no, thou wilt but hisse, and Armies shall comeeven from heaven for thine, and then those that do task and seek to lay on the burthens what shall they doe? Having uttered these with some other things concerning the new Jerusalem, she sung forth the further enlargements of her heart in the song following. He that did wait these things to know that penned was within, That book concerning thy coming, as Potentate and King, Oh he did mourn till that the Lamb did come with chearing there, And said he would open that book, and those seals he would tear, Aud lay it wide open before, that he might read therein, Concerning songs of Hallelu jah, which shall fill to the brimme, And that he should read there also the downfall of the Whore Of Babylon which sure shall fall, and sink within her gore: And that he also there should read, the downfall of the great God, Gog and Magog, how they shall go, and by Christ down be pluckt, And he must read also how thou wouldst search all Nations wide, And gather in thy remnant there, and others wash with Tide, With floods that should rise upon them, and make them sink for ever, That so thy Sion might thee praise, who art that High one, rather Then that they should exalt the praise of men and things on earth, For they know what thou dost deelare and what thou dost discover, And John he read long since thereof concerning the great fall Of those that stood out against him who is the chief of all.
Oh he read here, thou wouldst dry up Euphrates that river, And make dry Land for thine to go, and thither to appear Before thy Throne where they should be and abide for evermore: Therefore John read how that thou the earth again restore. None shall hinder them from those wouldst wch John there did declare Oh a Sea of glasse there chrystal was thrones which none could it compare: But oh your standing on the earth, on glasse that brittle is, Which shall crumble under your seet when that there come forth this, This Sea of glasse which is indeed, that where thine thee behold: Oh they may look up unto thee, and thorow it extoll Thy love that did a book write sweet, and many things there in store Of Royalties which should come out, and be given more and more, Ʋnto those that deny thy foes, and Antichrist also, They that go forth to strike at him, thou wilt upon them blow, Thy spirit upon them shall come forth and Antichrist shall fall Both in person, and also too, in his coming principall. Oh it is Lord, then sweet surely, to read of such things here, And John he mourn'd abundantly, that th' mystery might draw near, That new Jerusalem above, might come down here below, And that they might see their High, when that forth he doth go. Here she ceased and lay silent for the space of some two or three hours, untill about eight of the clock in the evening, the company being all departed, excepting about four or five persons, she coughed, and being asked by a friend or two with the Rela∣tour how she did, with two or three such like questions, she an∣swered in a very few words (this being the first time the elatour had speech with her) and suddenly was carried out in singing, and after wards in prayer, wherein the Relatour left her about ten a clock in the night speaking to God. The day following being the 17th day of the Monethand the last day she spake, in White Hall, she begun with prayer, wherein she was very large, and amongst many other, she uttered the things following. Though they (speaking of the Souldiers) may build Tabernacles, and may strengthen their cords, yet thou art risen. O poore crea∣tures
that they should have no heart to hear. O Lord, they are given up to blindnesse, they will refuse to hear, they will turn a-and go away. Blessed father, wilt not thou follow them and shake them? Though they may shake off faith and prayer, yet they shall not shake off thee: oh when the hand-writing is come up in their veins, will not their knees smite together? They shall see that an evill heart is in them, and that godlinesse is another thing, than they thought on, though they speak of light, yet they shall know that they are darknesse, for they act nothing but darknesse, discover nothing but vilenesse and evill, that such creatures should live in a time of so much Mercy, and trample them under seet, wilt not thou reckon with them? Dost not thou reckon with the Nations throughout the whole earth? and wilt thou suffer them to go unreckoned with? it is not every one that hath a tongue to speak great things of thee, that are thy friends; for if it were so, this Nation would be full of excellent ones, oh but their heart is de∣ceitfull. When Ananias and Saphira did ly against the Holy Ghost, they were struck dead; oh but how often have they lyed a∣gainst the Holy Ghost, and yet thou forbearest: oh thy servane will not let thee alone till thou risest. Up in thy glory and thy Majesty, thou wilt make some to rise that are feeble, poore, low creatures to utter forth against the wise ones of the world: oh they have not thy sap, thy spirit, what ever they pretend. Wilt not thou come forth and confound their language? Oh! thou wilt say, what have you to do to take the name of God in your mouths, when you act for your bellies? If all thine should hold their peace, thou wilt come thy self and appear against them: Oh they shall be called the Jeroboams of the earth, they have made I srael to sin: oh they would not be called Jeroboam, but the Israel of God, and therefore poore Israel is bowed under them, and drawn under their skirts, when Ephraim offended in Baal, then he died in spirit, in the affections of thine: oh then they will come off with a great deal of dammage and rust oh that they might now be ashamed, now whiles they are peeping in at the crevice, let them see their abominations; oh take them aside and tell them they ought not to do so; let them not go and assume that to them, which belongs to God; tell them thou wilt make them to (mart and seel thy rod for it: if they had stooped to
the powers before, the sin would not have been so great; but to stoop to those Powers that have appeared against the Lord Jesus; Oh, who can be filent and hold their peace at this? Thou wilt poure out thy spirit upon sons and daughters, and they shall wit∣nesse for thee against them: Thine may be Lambes and Sheep, meek and lowly; yet they shall be, as thou hast said; as a young Lyon, and shall teare all that rise up against them— Oh, where is thy voice, Lord, thou that speakest with a mighty alarum, and thy voice breaks the Cedars; oh, thy voice comes forth with much power! oh, let that voice come forth concerning Restauration, and Generation-work; Oh, thou hast put a price into the hand of thine, and they have no minde to it! You shew your selves to be very low; the Prophets of old were willing to look to the Lord, and he sent siery chariots round about them: Oh, if thine would go forth, who should be able to stand before that wisdome and spirit, by which they speak— Everlasting burning shall come forth in righteousnesse against you that have put your shoul∣ders to a power that is against the Lord: Shall they go about to reare up that, which thou hast said fights positively against the crown of the Lord Jesus; It is not like the other, for them thou hast taken out of the way: but oh, these have raked up their ho∣nour out of the grave; If you will have a Resurrection of it a∣gain, you shall have prayer against you; and the voice of the Lord shall come forth against you: They think if they could get Nati∣ons on their side, then they were well enough! Oh but thou wilt scatter the Nations, thou wilt overturn them? and do they think they can hinder thine overturnings? Thine can rejoyce, though they mourn to see poore Israel cheated and cozened by them; the spirit blasphemed by them, they can mourn for the sin of the daughter of thy people; yet they can rejoyce, for new Jerusalem is coming forth through all this: Thou wilt go on, Lord, and strike down all their inventions, though they have a great com∣pany of great head-pieces together; yet a little true wisdome shall break down all their Policy: What is all their wisdome, if they have not thy feare, thy spirit among them? Thou hast told them plainly, but they cannot abide to heare it, that the wisdome of the wise shall perish; and thy poore and contemptible ones
shall carry on thy work for thee in the world; the time is coming that they shall be fruit, that they shall bring forth no more fruit for thine; They pretend they will doe great things for thee and thine: Oh, but if the eyes were not blinded, they might see the partiality that is in them! Here is one, no sooner were the Po∣wers put to him, but he took them: Oh, poore creature, how hast thou deceived us? if thou hast free grace, that must be ad∣mired indeed in thee! oh but thou shalt have no more, for he will honour thee any more. The people of the Lord cry to the Lord a∣gainst thee, though thou was a sweet perfume and a lovely song to the people of the Lord; yet they doe not know how to speak for thee; and if all should come forth, and own thee, yet thy servant will never do it, she cannot do it, for the work is on foot, and it is not men nor Devils can stop it: when thine take a view of thy great works in the Nation; how thou hast taken away them that made the Nation nauseous and stinking, and did build up Babylon, shall now refined ones come & build up Babylon again? oh thy love to thy handmaid wil not let her alone, but she must cry unto thee, if thou lovest thy Saviour then stand up, it is no matter if that be laid aside and cast into the Dungeon. There are a great many whose God is their bellie, and they are willing to be filent; oh but you Saints, do you go and speak to such as would shut this open door, as is open to the sheep.—Do you thus requite the Lord who laid down his life for you? O Souldiers, you said you acted for Christ and his flock, oh but your heart is deceived, and hath turn∣ed you aside. Come you mockers, you Army-men that are mock∣ers, the Lord saith your bonds shall be made strong, you do adde to the strength of that promise and vow-breaking which went be∣fore: you sometimes said, let us have the prayers of poore Saints, and now you can take turns in your Galleries, and say they are yours, you have fought for them? is it so? who gave you your life and fought for you? was it not the Lord Jesus? it is not yours, but the poore's and thy peoples, the Lord will cast you out, and whereas you were expected to be Oaks, full of shelter, of fruits and of refreshing, Oh but you have beene but blustering Oakes without root, without Sappe.
Oh let thine be ashamed, that they have so much looked upon man, which to day is, and to morrow withers; Oh thy people suffer even for their own sin; for they have made Idols of men; and thou sayst, thou wilt not give thy glory to graven Images, and now thou wilt make thine to smart for it, and to smart a while; were it not for thine, that they shall be purged and purified to make them asha∣med, and lay them in the dust, to mould them into thy fashion, and to take away their sowre leaven, were it not for this work, thou wouldst make these to crumble ere a day come to an end; the Assyri∣an must be burned, when thou hast done thy work upon Mount Sion. All you great Ones, you shall not at all fare the better for these ma∣nifestations of Grace which the Lords people shall have; oh that you might be humbled at the last breath; was there ever any laden with so many mercies, and yet so much tin and dross found in them? Oh poor Soldiers, your errour was here, that while you did strike down the Philistin without, you have not been watchful to draw your swords against that that is within; here you were not inquisicive, and this hath made you to fal so flat, and this hath deadned you: thou wouldst have thine full of eyes: poor Souldiers, you have had eyes without, but not as those creatures recorded, have you had eyes within?—Lord, they can resist the holy one of Israel; come, can you resist the Lord? you may shoot against the creatures mud-walls, but can you batter the Towers of the Lord? oh poor man, wilt thou contend with thy Maker? how wilt thou contend against so glorious a King? Dost thou think to come with thy brazen face, and jeering countenance against the Lord of glory? though Christ when he came at first, was willing to become weak, and to be thrown into the Grave, but he will come in flames of fire; you Soldiers, he will come as the Messen∣ger of his Temple.—Oh poor creatures, this wine of the Earth will enflame your blood, but oh that you might have the wine from above, then would you be beautified, and then would he say, well done good & faithful servant.—O thy servant is come neer that Council, and thy servant will pray that they might see and hear, and be delivered from that great fury that is coming forth. Oh souldiers, can you stand against the sword of the Lord, that great shield? can you pierce the Breastplate that is from on high? Oh, the Saints are able to fight with you, not with material weapons, but with the sword of faith and the Spirit; oh where is the sword of Goliab that can come and fight against that? oh poor Souldiers, the Lord hath sent his servant
to tell you of your wickedness, and to tell you what hath been done in Scotland, Ireland, and elsewhere: if you keep not Chronicles, others do; the Lord hath written them down, and he will bring them forth. — Thou hast a controversie with all languages, and they only that have the language of Canaan shall be taken into thy Canaan, and shall have the honey drops there; They cannot be∣lieve such great things are coming out, as the raign of Jesus Christ; that thou art staining the pride of all Glory, and that thou wilt have no more Monarchies till the Monarchy of Christ come forth: it is be∣cause they are so much seeking one from another; they are so taken up and wrapt up in their own mantles, that they have no eyes to look up for Elias his Mantle: They have the spirit of Man, and the cou∣rage of Man, but what is all that courage? says Elihu, I have seen that for all that, Ages should teach wisdom, and Years give under∣standing; yet you could not bring forth an answer in wisdom to the condition of Iob; so I waited for others, and was afraid my self to speak, untill the Spirit came upon me, then I was carried forth to speak beyond my own courage; Oh thy Spirit is above the spirit of man; thy Spirit informs and teacheth, and brings forth new things, and declares old things; thy Spirit brings forth what the ways of men are, it doth declare the great overturnings and disappointments that men shall meet with; when thou openest, who can shut? it is not all their jealousies and surmisings concerning designings, and this and the other thing, it is not all these things that can stop the pipes of Christ that are golden; can you hinder the oyl that runs so sweet? Blessed be thy Name for that glorious Priviledge that thine have, they are made partakers of thine Annointing, and he calls them fel∣lows; oh they are poor Mortals that he should call them fellows! oh some poor creatures call themselves Christ: because of this oneness with Christ, they will have no distinguishing, thou wilt make them to know that there is a difference between Head and Members: there is a wicked Generation that are risen up about this place that do say so, that do pretend many spiritual things, who are enemies to Jesus; others come out more openly, others more secretly, how are they ready to joyn their evil spirit with the Spirit of the Lord Jesus? thy Servant sometimes contended against them neer this place, and now she is come to bear a greater testimony against them; when thy sweet wine comes forth, and thy Spirit is poured out, then they being in their false wine: oh but it shall never enter into thy treasu∣ry,
where thine are; they say, they (speaking of some rude spi∣rits which came to hear her) are one spirit with thy servant, but thy servant abhors it through the Spirit of that crucified Jesus. — This that thou hast now done upon thy servant, they will not under∣stand that it is an intimation to them of the pouring out of thy Spirit upon thine own, wherein they shall go forth against the world: thy servant was one that was simple, an Ideot, and did not study in such things as these, and must thy servant now float upon the mighty and broad waters? [meaning of the Spirit] thou saidst indeed that thy servant should declare in Gath and publish in Askelon: They will say the spirit of madness and distraction is upon her, and that it is immo∣desty; but thou knowest Lord, that it is thy Spirit; for thou hast cast thy servant where she would not, and hast taken her contrary to all her thoughts; surely thou shalt be glorified and advanced by it; it is the Lord that comes, and enlarges, and fils with his Spirit, and lays his foundation with precious stones and sparkling colours; thy servant would not have any take it in without tryal: let them try whether it is from thy Spirit, or from what it is; Oh thy servant knows it is from thy Spirit; let them know that it is so too, by the language of it, by the Rule through which it comes; how is the written Word carried forth in it! thy Spirit takes the Scripture all along, and sets the soul a swimming therein; oh, those things that are concealed are made manifest, when thy Spirit comes forth; oh that they might know what is the true sountain, and what is pudled water; wilt thou dip them Father in the spiritual Baptism, this Baptism of Fire cleanseth: Zeal is another thing then a passionate humour, where true Zeal is, there the flame of the Lord is; there is much in nature that may de∣ceive; A fine curious nature may seem to be Grace, which is not: an amiable carriage and good words, these are all nature: Tell the sons of Issachar that go forth to the work of the Lord, what qualifi∣cations, what manner of conversations should be in them, and in the World, sutable to such a day as this; this is a day wherein thou callest up thine to glorifie thee in the fires: or that the names, Courtier and King should never come up again; and though there be now a finer name yet there is the same thing, the same superfluity and vanity as was among the Kings of old; they come forth in sheeps clothing: you Councel, you think you have done well in this, but surely the pas∣sing-Bell shall ring for you: this is the saddest day that ever poor England had; formerly their Children had their black patches, and
naked necks, and powdered locks, and so it is now; Kings must then sit alone, and so they do now; What David! thou whom I have raised up from the lowest of men, from the dust, wilt thou do this? these are crying things that are come up in thine ears oh Lord; how can they be fit to Rule and Judge a Nation, to reprove sin in a Nation, when they cannot Rule, and Judge, and reprove their own Families? they that will not hear of their sins, they shall feel of the smart thereof, That is, the sins they are galled within their Conscience; but it was not so with David; For when Nathan told him of his sin, he struck upon his brest and mourned.—Though the name of Gideon was upon him (speaking of the Supream Magistrate) in the field, yet now it is taken off from him, thou shalt no more be called Valiant, because thou canst not be contented with the name of thy righteous ones; therefore thy name shall not be long: As to the name General, thou hast Lord, been with him, and hast shewed him thy presence; But in thy other name, where is thy Victory, thy Righteousness, thy Zeal, thy Love, thy Conquest now? Will not the Lord shut thee out, thou that goest about to shut out the Saints? the Lord will shut out thee; It is a King, not Saints, but King Jesus that thou hast sought to shut out; hadst not thou better to have died in the field, to have fallen in thy Tent, then to come into this great Pallace which the Lord will rent from thee? Oh that he might be wrung out from among them, that he might not seek the living among the dead; He seeks to do living actions, and says he is not against us, but for us; How can he do any living things among dead men, dead things? Does not he confound himself in his own Language? do not his actions flye in his face? does not his conscience say, thou tongue, thou saiest not right? tell him Lord God, though he thinks he is so wise, and others about him; Yet tell him they are taken in their own wisdom, they do not think what a Poison it will become unto them? Art thou a rati∣onal man, a wise and a valiant souldier? how can the Commonalty be relieved, and thou hast such great things for thy Table? Wars shall come out against other Nations, and what will you do then for pay, Souldiers? Oh you old Prophets! that you should applaud him, and be Chaplains to him! I tell you the Lord God will Ecclipse your Glory, he will put a stammering speech into you, you shall not suck from Gods Wine-cellars, the Lord will not bring so much as a taste of his Wine to you: You have turned his Wine into water, will you sow your downpillows of flesh under his Elbows? Hast not thou a
great deal to reckon with them for that greatness they have had a∣bove all other men? he hath now a greater controversie with you then he had before; you amended the matter well indeed, when you gathered up a Magistracy that might uphold you, when you must both fall down into the ditch; The Lord hath said, That both Prophet and Priest, and all that have cleaved together, they shall fall; You will say, why do you call us Priests? Indeed thy servant would not call you so, it is a grief to her heart; but you do their actions, and will not you be likened to them? You will not hear; you will say, do you think to contradict us who are wise, great Schollars, and University∣men? Yea Lord, thou wilt make a poor silly Creature to come out against them, because they have acted so sillily, and thou Lord wilt now take away their glory out of this Nation: You will say, you are not to meddle with the Powers, but who meddles more then you, who have provoked the Magistrate to this, and have helped to lead them into the Pit? If you were the Daniels of the Lord, you would not care for the Kings Portion, as you do: Oh poor Clergy! you have put off the outward badge of Antichrist, and you have retained the inward: What is become of your Zeal and Exaltations of Christ, have you ever a New-Covenant-Sermon to bring to your great Ru∣ler? you will mud it before you come; the Lord will have it set out in the freeness, and fulness, and Glory of it in all the tendency and fruits of it; Are they like to the Sermons of the Saints formerly, to the Apostles Sermons which the Lord Jesus brought forth? more of their own heads and fancies are in it, then of thy dainties; of their flowers, then of thine; Thou doest not, Lord, look at the curious decking of the dishes; No, thou lookest at the meat in it: Flowers will soon wither, and their fine adornings will come to nothing, but the true meat, that will abide for ever: Lord, rowse the poor Clergy; thy ser∣vant is perswaded some of them are thy dear ones; wilt thou bring up them as thy great Alarm to battel? Let their Trumpet sound forth, not with such an uncertain sound as they do, but with a compleat sound, that we may prepare to the Battel, to stand, appear, and go forth for the Lord; If you bring forth true salt, then all unsavory salt shall be discovered by it; the unsavory salt now comes in, which is fit neither for the Land, nor for the dunghill.—Hear oh house of Israel, you Clergy, and oh house of the King! Why is thy servant come forth in thy Spirit to proclaim your sin, and lay open your ini∣quity, and is not this to be considered by you? Oh, you cannot abide
to think it comes from God; for then you would tremble; they say, we will not own it to be from God, but from some evil Spirit, some Witchcraft, some design or hiring of men; But oh! says God, though you would not acknowledge it, yet you shall acknowledge it, Says the Lord; I would have it come against you at your first entring in; those of the Clergy that are about you, they do not speak plain∣ly, and faithfully against you; therefore the Lord hath sent a poor handmaid into the Pallace, and there she shall declare it, and though you will not come your selves, yet your Servants shall declare it to you, and it shall be left upon the beams and walls of this house against you: I have brought my word into thy place, thy very Pallace, and it shall enter the very walls and hangings thereof against thee; and at such a time, Lord, as now, if not now, it would not have been suf∣fered; For when they had got in their great body, then she must not have spoken here, that they might see, that it is thou Lord, that makes a cry to come out against their transgression; The Lord would have your Protestations, Vows, Covenants and Narrrations brought into your Pallace against you, this shall be bitterness in your dishes; You shall have plenty and fulness, but without comfort.
Here she begun and continued her Song, much whereof the Relator did take, and was as follows. BLessed be thy name oh thou Lord, Which wilt break forth herein, Thou wilt declare thy glory bright, Against all them that sin. Enemies shall know their folly great, Which Prayer and Songs do show, When Songs and Melody come forth, Thy wind shall on them blow. A wind Lord, that shall enter in, Into their Pallaces great, A blustring wind from the great God, A whirlwind that's compleat. That will tear them up by the roots, And cast them on the ground, Where they no greenness shall have here, No sap shall be there found. Oh Clergy that you should so wrong, And extenuate your joy, By bringing forth unto proud man That which God doth not covey. Oh that you should so Nurture them, And chear them in their sin, I tell you that Christ for this will Not make your souls to sing. You shall not hear Sions songs so sweet, Nor their mirth which draws nigh, But when it cometh forth to light, You suddenly shall dye. Oh when that harmony comes out, In the Reign of a Christ, Oh then you Clergy shall go down, And in it have no Interest. Oh when those dear streams from on high, Come running out so clean, They shall not enter into you, Who in the dirt have lain. But they shall float and spring forth on The grounds that lovely are,
Oh they shall have the sweet springings From the Lord who is so rare. They that would not any bawlk here, But openly declare, Oh it is they shall come to him, Whom nothing can compare. For they that Zealous have been for A Christ as Lord and King: He will himself open their mouth, And make them for to sing. Oh therefore come! Oh come thou Christ! Oh shew thy self now here, Oh come! come King Jesus, de∣clare How thou art drawing near. And that thine may from Sodom go, And follow thee throughout, Thir travels in those pleasant plains Do thou compass about. And that flesh may thine flye be∣fore, That darkness may go out, And that King Jesus he may come, And there himself set out. The Lord is gone forth mightily, He all might doth appear; Oh come, Oh come you enemies, The great God for to fear. Oh tremble and astonish'd be, To hear that he draws on, Against you he comes forth apace, The Oppressors of the Land. Oh he hath said that he will reign, Therefore Rulers shall flye, Oh he hath said that he'l cast out The fourth great Monarchy. Oh he will shew unto the pure, And such that are upright, To manifest to these proud walls, That now to you are in sight. Oh therefore Clergy, and you State, Nothing at all you shall, When that the Lord Christ he doth speak, You utterly shall fall. What will you do then that have not That wisdom which is good, And how will you abide that stroke, And that eternal flood. Oh how can you then say you stand For those that are Christs flock, When that you do so much de∣clare, So much for this great Oak?
Oh can you then stand out and say, Oh will you not then stammer, To hear the Lord, and also to See hit most glorious banner? Oh but when he cometh, and when You feel his stroke indeed: Oh then you shall have no supply, To comfort in your need. Many of you shall only have The earth to feed therein: But you shall have no sights of him Which is that mighty King. Oh he will rend you throughout, That Lyon which is strong, He will you trample under foot, Who is my joy and Song. Having Sung this Song with some enlargment, She breathed forth in Prayer; A short account of some things therein you have as follows.
YOu will say, have not our eyes seen this before, and have not our ears heard this before? Oh but when thou pourest forth by a vessell that is altogether unlikely that any such liquor should en∣ter into it: though you that are the Great Ones, whom it concerned, would not lend your ears, yet the Lord hath accomplished his design in this work; and thy servant will leave this in the bosom of them that have heard these beatings of thy Spices, and have their senses open to feel the smell thereof: let thy servant request this of thee, that when she is at a distance, they would hold up a hand of prayer for her, that nothing may betray or enslave her; let them pray for the preservation of thy poor worm, that she may be delivered from all Satanical delusions and evil beasts: thy servant can as sweetly solace her self in thy bosom among the still-waters, as upon the great Seas.—Now any thing is taken for holiness, any thing is taken for the shining of the Sun, which is but the shining of a Glow-worm; these are but the shells and outsides, and the storm is coming, and where will all these be? — The Life of vision here is excellent, and precious, and glorious, when it is according to the Scripture, and comes from thy Spirit; but thine for their life of Faith can forgo vision, and live sweetly in that bosom that the Lord Jesus leads them forth unto; Vision! the body crumbles before it, and becomes weak: men are mistaken when they think that the great things of God will puff up; no, the more thou givest of thy self, the more they are humbled; they that have the flowings of thee, are self-denying; humility shall make a difference between that which is not, and that which is; let then thy servant to the end of her dayes be an example to all round about her.
Having uttered some more words, shee concluded for that night with the Song following, and therewith finished her testimony she bore in White-hall. OH glorious Lord, thou dost break forth Ʋnto thy servant here, Oh the glorious shine of the great God Most lovely doth appear. Oh the Seal of God is glorious, It is a Seal abides, Oh, it doth seal the soul to thee, That art its runing tydes. Oh a Seal of the mightie Lord, When others are gone, there comes The fresh discoveries of that seal, Given forth by thee the Son. A broad seal sure, oh Lord it is, Which none can break in sunder, Yet is a seal that is within, No foe can come it plunder. A seal that is not by men here, To be melted at all, But it is a seal which thou dost keep, It never here shall fall. Thy servant Lord shall be pre∣serv'd By this thy seal of Love, Which over and over thou bringest down, From the Eternal Love. Oh that all thine may know what tis, That so they might up mount, To magnifie the Lord their God, And give of this Account. For who can Lord, shew forth, but those To whom thou doest it bring, Oh, who can with language set forth The sealing of their King? Oh, thou dear Christ, first sealed was, That sealed One indeed, And through the thine they do par∣take, A sealing in their need. When they are in great despairings, And in great temptations lye, Oh then comes forth the seal to them, And draws them through the skie. Through all Clouds they most swiftly fly Ʋnto their Saviour great, Which bids them welcome unto him, And to his Mercy Seat. Where they shall see his loving heart, And his embracing arms, Where they shall be forevermore, Take up from all thee harms.
Herewith she closed, having layn in bed eleven dayes and twelve nights together; in all or most of which time her weakness of bo∣dy was such, that after she had kept her bed the first two dayes and nights, being raised up while her bed was made, she was not able to go, but as she was carried in a Chair to the fire, and was ready to faint in the place, though they made hast to make her bed ready for her; notwithstanding this weakness, after she had kept her bed 11. dayes together, without any sustenance at all for the first five dayes, and with onely a little toste in small beer once in 24 hours for the rest of the time, she rose up in the morning, and the same day travelled on foot from White-Hall to Hackny, and back to Mark-Lane in London, in health and strength. FINIS.
