T2076 E180_8 99859316 111390
TREASON Discovered: OR THE IMPEACHMENT Of Daniel Oneale Sergeant Major, one of the Commanders in the last expedition against Scotland, and now Prisoner in the Gate-house. Wherein is exprest all his trecherous en∣deavours to bring the Army in dislike of the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament. With all the Articles exhibited against him, and his Answer to every Article. Likewise his Accusations proved by these Honora¦ble persons. Sir Jacob Asbley Sir Iohn Connyers Sir Fulk Hunkes Captaine Legg. LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.
Falsities in DANIEL ONEALES last Examination. Mr. Oneales Examination to the 2. Interg. THat he delivered to Sir Iacob Ashely in complement from the King to this e∣ffect, That he knew him and Sir John Conniers to be so gallant men, that hee never intended to place above them a∣ny man that was then vnder their command, and more this he said not to him of any thing that concer∣ned the King. Disproved by Sir Jacob Ashley Jnt. 2. n. Contrary to this see Sir Jacob Ashelys Examina∣tion Interg. 2. that at Mr. Oneales comming down, he told him, that things being not so well between the King and the Parliament, he thought a Petition from the Army would doe much good, and asked him if a draft of such a Petition were brought to him whe∣ther he would set his hand to it. Mr. Oneale. 2. That he had no discourse with Sir Jacob Ash∣ley for bringing up the Army to London. Disproved by Sir Jacob Ashly, Int. 7. a. Contrary to this see Sir Jacob Ashleys Exami∣nation Int. 7. a. That Mr. Oneale telling him of the dislikes betweene the King and the Parliament, and of those things which were done to the disad∣vantage of the King. I replyed, I wondered that Councels above should be so sayd as had bin spo∣ken
of, of marching of the Army to the South, for they must fight with the Scots first and beat them before they coud move Southward, and that done, they must spoyle the Country all along as they goe, and when they come to London they would find resistance by the Parliament, and the Scots might rally and follow them. Mr. Oneale. 3. That he delivered the like Message to Sir Iohn Conniers as he had done to Sir Jacob Ashley, with this addition that the King had sent him word that he would have particlur care of his fortunes and o∣ther Speech, then this he had not with him of any thing that concerned the King, nor delivered him, nor Sir Jacob Ashley any other message or Letter from the King. Disproved by Sir John Conniers 1 Examination, Int. 4. Contrary to this see Sir John Conniers 1 Exami∣nation, Int. 4. That Mr. Oneale used perswasions to this Examinant, that he would serve the King, and that if he did not he should be left alone, & would but ruine himselfe, for that all the Troopers vnder him, were that way inclin'd, That therefore hee should adhere to the King, and goe those wayes that the King would have him. Sir Iohn Conniers 2. Examination, int. 4. See likewise Sir John Conniers in his 2. Examina∣tion, int. 4. That Mr. Oneale said vnto him, that if he this examinant had bin well knowne to the King would have written, nnto him, and that there∣fore he conceived that this Examinant should doe well to write to the King. To which he replyed, That he could not serve the King in that point, and
therefore thought it would be of no use to trouble the King with this Letter. Mr. Oneale. 5. That he never heard of any motion or inten∣tion to bring up the Army to London. See this disproved before Sir Jacob Ashley Jnt. 7. a. See Sir Fulk Hunkes Jnt. 2. a. That Oneale dealt with him to have the Troopes move. Mr. Oneale. That he never had Communication with any about the procuring a Newtrallity from the Scot∣tish Armie, nor ever heard of such a Proposition. Disproved by Sr. Jacob Ashley Jnt. 7. 7. Contrary to this, See Sir Iacob Ashleys Exa∣mination, Int. 7. That Sir Jacob saying that he won∣dered that Councels above should be so layd as had bin spoken of, of the marching of the Army to the South, for they must fight with the Scots first and beate them, before they could move Southward, and the Scots might ralley and follow them; To which Oneale replyed, what if the Scots could bee made Newtrals. Sir Jacob said, That the Scots would lay him by the heeles if he should come to move such a thing, for they would never breake with the Par∣liament. For the time of Mr. Oneales returne to the Army. Sir Jacob Ashley Jnt. 1. William Legg. Jnt. 1. Sir Charles Lucas. Jnt. 1. That Mr. Oneale went from the Army about
the time that the King came from the North and returned not till Iune or Iuly, and stayed there a∣bout a fortnight or 3. weekes. Sir Fulkes Hunks. Int. 1. That Oneale returned not till about the time that Mr. Wilmot and the other Souldiers were commit∣ted by the Parliament. Mr. Oneales Examination. That the same day he was examined the last Sum∣mer, he went out of this Towne, towards Yorke, be∣ing on Wednesday as he remembers, and came to Yorke on Friday or Saturday. The day of Mr. Oneales first Examination was the 9. of June, as appeares by the Examination it selfe. The time shewes that this was no part of the for∣mer designe for which, Wilmot, Ashpurnam, and Pollard were committed, but for the designe to bring vp the Army against the Parliament. To prove Oneale guilty of the second, the Heads a∣rising out of the proofes are these. 1 That he published false Rumours in the ar∣my to the chiefe Officers, That there were dislikes betweene the King and Parliament, and that things were there done to the Kings disadvantage. See Sir Jacob Ashleys Examination, Int. 2. t 7. 2. That thereupon hee perswaded some of the Principall Officers of the Armv to take part with the King, against the Parliament. Vide. Sir Fulk Hunks Int. 2. Sir John Conniers his xamination, Int. 4. and his 2. Examination, Int. 4.
3. That he laboured to procure a Petition from the Armie, to the Parliament, containing in it divers Scandalous, and Seditious matters against the Parliament, and to get the hands of some of the cheife officers thereunto. Reade Sir Iacob Ashley. Int. 2. Sir Fulk Hunks. Jnt. 2 totum Sir Iohn Connyers. 1 Examination Int. 2. 4. That he endeavoured to make the Scottish Ar∣mie Newtrals, Read Sir Iacob Ashley. Int. 7. Sir Iohn Connyers, Examination Int. 7. Sir Iohn Connyers 2. Examination Int. 7. Sir Fulk Hunks Jnt. 7. To prove that there was a direction for a second Petition, or declaration, to be sent up from the Armie to the Parliament, and the contents thereof dangerous, and the time was about Iuly last, which directions Captaine Legg received here, and carried downe to the Army. Reade Captaine William Legg Int. 10. totum Sir Iacob Ashley Jat. 5. Sir John Connyers his 1. Examination Int. 5. and his 2. Examination Int. 5. That it is sufficiently proved, That Mr. Oneale upon a second designe did goe downe to the Army, and publish false Rumours
to the chiefe Officors of the Army of differences betweene the King and Parliament, and about the moneths of June and July did end eavour, plot, and practise to bring up the Army against the Parlia∣ment, to awe the Parliament, and interrupt the pro∣ceedings thereof. FINIS.
