T2449 E119_25 R6730 99873031 125478
A true and exact RELATION OF THE KINGS Entertainment IN The City of Chester. WITH The Recorders Speech at His entring the City. ent from a Citizen of note in Chester, on purpose to be printed, to prevent false Copies. LONDON, Printed for C. M. October 4. 1642.
A True and Exact Relation of the Kings Entertainment in the City of Chester. THe King came to Chester from Salop upon Friday about five of the clock, but He brought in with him no great com∣pany; The Lord Rivers, Lord Cholmley, and Sir Thomas Ashton came each of them with a Troop of horse to wait on his Majestie into the Citie; besides those that came with him, there went out of the Citie to Boughton about forty that had been Sheriffs, and some others on horse-back and foot-cloaths, and rid before Him into the Citie, and at the Hony-stayrs there was a Scaffold made for the Alder∣men to stand, and receive him (as they had done his Father before time) and they kneeled down, and the Recorder made a Speech or Oration to the King, not such a one as is conceived much to his credit.
Your father promised to send you a Copy that you may print it to his shame, for I take it, he is so full of malice and pride, and but an ignorant man in his owne profession, and so for present leave him. After the Oration, our Major gave the King the Sword, the Mace, and his Staffe, and the King gave them again to him, and the Major got on his horse and carryed the Sword before the King unto the Bi∣shops Pallace, where He stayed till Tues∣day, and departed towards Salop, taking Rexham in his way, and there dined with Master Lloyd a Lawyer and the Kings At∣turney for Flintshire, and thence to Salop where he is. Our Maior and his Brethren presented Him with 200l in Gold, and to the Prince 100l: It was well taken; but by the report of some, a greater sum was expected, but those know not our having; for I perswade my self, before it be collected amongst the Citi∣zens, it will be thought a very great sum. His stay amongst us was very peaceable, and his departure very cheerefull: The
Maior and Aldermen brought him out of the Liberty on hose-back: It is re∣ported He left a Garrison amongst us; but He left none, but onely commanded that 100 of the Countrey Souldiers were put into the Castle; but what we shall have put upon us I know not; but all those that are not of the Array are observed; for some of our Coun∣try Gentlemen, as Sir Richard Wilbraham, Sir Thomas Delves, M. Manwaring of Bdely, M. Wilbraham of Darfot, M. Berkinhead the Premotory and his son, are all commanded to wait upon the King, and went with him to Salop, where they are all yet. And I am informed that some have a Commission to search our houses in Chester, what for, as yet I know not; but I hear my house is set down for one to be searched; if they plunder not, I do not fear them. We have great store of souldiers billetted round about our City, what for, I know not; but they are very un∣ruly, & came into many honest mens houses, specially into Ministers houses, & take away some all, and what they please of their good. Since the Sabbath day last, Manchester hath
been besieged by my Lord Strange, now Lord of Derby; for his father lieth dead at his little house under St. Johns, but we do not know nor heare that he hath taken the Town as yet, neither they yielded. This is all the passages that we have at present: so I end with my prayer to God to bring all these troubles to an end. So comitting you to God and rest. Chester, Octob. 1. 1641. Out of SHROPSHIRE. IT is certainly informed by a godly Minister not far from Shrewsbury, That in one great house which the Cavaliers have plundered and pillag'd, they did plainly and openly pro∣fesse, that they had little to live on, but what they took from others; and that when they went to bed (being about 60 of them) divers of them had Crucifixes hanging about their necks. In another great house where they were, they drank a health to the good successe of Sir Pbelim ô Neal in Ireland, of the Gentlemans own Beer, and in presence of himself, and di∣vers of his servants. These Relations are certain, and will be proved by divers faithfull eye and ear-witnesses: By which we may see how likely these men are to maintain the true Prote∣stant Religion, the Laws of the Land, and lawfull Liberties of the Subjects, whatsoever they pretend. And though they pre∣tend they search only for Armour, yet they break up, and take away whatsoever is worth, or can well be carryed away, and spoyl many other things, cutting them to pieces; and many of them (especially in out-towns and villages) where they are billetted, pay nothing for what they have.
Mr. Recorder Brierwood's SPEECH AT The Entertainment of the King and Prince at CHESTER, Sept. 23. 1642. Most gracious Soveraign; WE Your Majesties most humble and obedient Subjects, The Maior and Citizens of this Your most ancient City, do in all humility crave leave to take the boldnesse to bid Your Majestie and our most noble Prince, our ho∣ped Earl of Chester, welcome to this place; The ancient seat of Your Majestie, and Your Majesties Royall progeni∣tours, Earls of Chester. This ancient City, the Metro∣polis of this ancient County Palatine, though it hath been sometimes honoured by the residence of senior Earls thereof within it; yet it hath seldom (ever since) been so highly honoured, as to lodge a King and Prince of this Realm at once within it, though but one night; The honour then, with the accesses of Your Royall person, and of the person of our noble Prince at this time unto this City doth bring
such, that it doth transcend all former of this kinde, and doth fill our hearts at once with a great deal of joy and secu∣rity: For we are in great fears in regard of the Rebellion in Ireland; as also, in regard of a Malignant party that hath lately appeared amongst us: But we are as sensible, that Your Majesties presence expells all dangers, and ren∣ders us secure from the dangers abroad, and distractions at home: And it is, most mighty King, the satisfaction of all our hearts, that Your Majestie hath already sufficiently testified to all the world, Your Majesties indeered love unto all Your Subjects, and to the Protestant Religion, whereof Your Majestie is justly stiled The great Defender; and we in this place, in thankfulnesse to the same, will be ever ready to adventure our Lives and Fortunes for the defence of Your Majestie, in whose safety rested onely our se∣curity. And Mr. Maior of this City humbly prostrate upon his knees, doth according to his duty, surrender and yield up to Your excellent Majestie all the Authority and Iurisdiction he holdeth under Your Majestie, and with it the Sword of this City, the Ensign thereof: And he and we all of this City shall ever pray, Long live King Charls victori∣ous over all His Enemies. FINIS.
