T3034 E438_18 R204762 99864224 161658
A true RELATION Of the reducing The City of Naples To the OBEDJENCE Of the KING of SPAINE, WHICH Happened on the 5, of April 1648. Being Palm-Sunday. TOGETHER, With the Imprisonment of the Duke of Guise, and liberty of the Duke of Tursis. WITH The Resolution and Declaration of the Spanish Generall, concerning the French Fleete, and their proceedings thereupon. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for I. I. MDCXLVIII.
A true RELATION OF The reducing of the City of NAPLES to the obedience of the King of SPAINE. THe troubles of the City of Naples, be∣gun and continued for these tenne moneths space, with so great a destru∣ction & revolution of almost the whole Kingdome, to the great distraction of the King of Spains forces, and prejudice not onely of that peace of Italy, but e∣ven of the universall peace so necessary to all Christendome, which troubles were fomented partly by the French, who in all diligence were preparing a succour of foure thousand foote, and eight hundred horse; partly by the private intelligence and practi∣ses with the Turke to invite him to the ruine of all Jtaly. It pleased his divine Majesty, to end in a happy and much desi∣red peace, and this with so much cas and speed, that he whose understanding is not blinded, cannot chuse but con∣fesse, that Kingdoms, and States, are onely his gifts, who is the God of Heasts, I may not omit to relate unto you, the
glorious catastrophe of this Tragedy; for though a more elo∣quent pen may undertake it, none shall tell it more ingenu∣ously, and truely then I will do. His Excel. therefore the Coud d'Ognate Viceroy of Naples, having been advised that the French Fleete, was preparing in all diligence to come and succour the people, and that the Spaniard was not in a sufficient forwardnes to prevent it, and that the leavies made at Rome, marched on but slowly, and that even great part of them was of necessity to stop in the way to reinforce the cheif holds in Abruzzo, supposing the perpetuall invasions the French made in that province, having already taken some places, and still reinforcing with new sup∣plies of Souldiers, Commanders, and ammunition. And fur∣ther perceiving that the men he expected from Milan came not, he was extreamly aflicted, apprehending that he shoud not manage his Majesties affaires with that happynesse as he had promised unto himselfe. Yet desiring at least to make his service appeare remarkable by some glorious enterprise; having visited all the fortifica∣tions & works the Spinads had, & the Castle of Saint Elmo, providing each with all sort of ammunition; on Thursday the second day of Aprill, he imbarqued wi h the field Master Generall, Dionysio d Gusman, and other Commanders to goe visit the Island of Nisita, where he made accompt the French fleet would cast Anchor; leaving there two peices of Artille∣ry, and fifty Spanyards; a sufficient provision, as was esteemed, for that time. This served as an issue to draw thither the bad humors, and so to free the more noble parts of the body, for the Duke of Guise resolving to secure that place where the Fleet he so much longed for, was to an∣ker, hastned with 300. Horse to the Captaine of Pussilipo, right against the aforesaid Island, that he might there build a Fort which might command it. This absence of the Dukes out of Naples, seemed unto his Excellencie a most fit opportunity to put in execution the enterprise hee had designed. Wherefore not confiding in the weaknesse of his armes, but in the assistance he expected
from heaven; he resolved in the meane time to give an as∣sault upon some of the Fortifications made by the people. According to which resolution, he gave order, that the Com∣manders should be furnished with necessary provision, and he demanded a list of the Spaniards, which could be spared for this purpose; the which he found to bee farre inferior in number to what was necessary for such an enter∣prise. On Sunday at night, the fifth of the said Moneth, his Ex∣cellency acquainted his Highnesse, Don John d' Austria with his designe, who much approving so generous a resolu ion, sent for the Nbility, and laid before them their obligation, and the example his Excellencie gave them, who was come to Naples, out of pure obedience, to serve his Catholik Ma∣jestie, at a time it seemed to every one impossible to reduce that people, and part of that Kingdome to their duty, expo∣sing his life to so many dangers, for his King and his subjects, who were there present. And he represented also unto them, the want he had at that time of men, and other provisions, for such a businesse; wherefore in correspondence of their af∣fection towards him, he required of them all to meet againe secretly in the same place, at midnight, with their Armes, and such trusty men, as they could lead on an enterprise, where his Excellencie would appeare in the head of them. They all ffred their lives in his highnesse service, as be∣came loyall and faithfull vassals of his Majesty. And though in regard the number was so small, the Enterprise seemed not only hard but Rash; yet the Duke of Guises absence gave him hopes of a prosperous successe. But he did most of all rely on the assistance he expected from his Divine Majestie, whose helpe he commanded all to implore, and for that purpose or∣dered prayer to be made in all the Chuches; forbidding all his Souldiers under most grevious and exemplar punishments all sorts of excesse, and deboistnes. At midnight, the Nobillity met togeather, with those they brought along with them; and they disposed them∣selves for the attempt, and marched quietly along
to Iesus Church; and his highnesse would needs accompany them, who togeather with the Count and other Comman∣ders entred into the said Church, where after that they had prayed a while, the Count went forth to see whether all was ready for the assault, according as he had appointed, his high∣nesse remaining till in the Church. And his Excelencie having found all things in order, he told them the signe at which they were to begin their assault, and so returned back into the Church, and soone after he gave the signe, to fall on the trenches and other workes. The on∣set began at the gate called Porta Alba, where they found some resistance of the People, & some blood was spilt on both sides. But finally ours brake through, and Marched on to the other gates, which they gain'd without any resistance; and then they heard them cry out from within the City, Viva Spagna▪ At which acclamation, his Excellencie entred the Ci∣ty with his men, and his Highnesse expected at the Gates, guarded by the Nobility unto whom he gave expresse com∣mand not to enter without his Order. Upon his Excelences arrivall, the same acclamations en∣creased, and many of the more civill sort of people accom∣panied him with their swords drawn, crying out all in one voice; God save the King, our Soueraigne. Then the Cardinall, Archbishop Filomarino, mett him in Coache, and his Exelencie also lighted; But presently both of them got up againe on Horsback. And soone after came the chiefe man amongst the people, called the Elect of the People, who casting himselfe at the Condes feete, crying out with a loud voyce, that in the name of all the people, he came to tender him obedience, as to the Kings Vice-roy, whom God preserve. His Excellency understanding who he was, bade him rise, and get up on horse-back. And passing by the Prisons, he commanded all the priso∣ners to be set free, except onely the French, the cause of whose imprisonment he would first know, before he would let them enjoy the favour. Being come to the Market-place, his Excellency found such
a multitude of people, that he could scarce break through, and it seemed a rashnesse to adventure it. But His Excellency made his way, the people crying out with acclamations of joy and praise, upon the King and Count. And so he came to the great Tower to the Carmelites, where Iennaro Annesse, the Peoples cheife Commander, made a shew of resisting; but presently demanded that three of the Nobility whom he asked for by name, would come. But these being absent, as remaining still with his highnesse, the Arch-Bishop went up first, and then the Count; and after a short time, those within came all down; and they presented to His Excellency the keys of the Tower, who gave them to keep to Don Alvaro della Torre. His Highnesse was now acquainted from His Excellency of the happinesse of the successe, and that he might freely come forward. He did so: and being arrived, with the Nobility nigh the Tower, Gennao Annese, as he was instructed by the Count, cast himself at his feet. But his Highnesse having set at liberty, the Duke of Turci and his Nephew, who were Prisoners, entred with all his treasure into the Carmelites Church, and caused the Te Deum to be song. After which, his Highnesse mounted on Horse∣backe, and accompanied with all the Nobility, he rode about the Citie, with an incredible joy to all the people, who cried out, not onely in the streets, but also out of the windowes, Viva Spagna, bestowing freely on the Souldiers a refresh∣ment. The Ceremonie ended, the Archbishop went home, and his Highnesse, and his followers retyred to the Palace; still accompanied with the signes of a common joy, and acclama∣tions of the people, which lasted for divers dayes, crying out, God save the King of Spaine, and the Count of Ognale, who hath brought us this Peace. Before his Highnesse was come to the Duke of Guises house, the people had sacked it, without doing any further harme to any creature. The notice of this happy successe being brought to Capua, Luys Roderico, Governour of the Armes in those parts, mar∣ched
out with 1500. Foot, and tooke S. Maria de Capua; where having understood, whither the Duke of Guise was fled, he gave order to Don Prospero Tuttvillo, and D. Toma∣so Guiriaso to lay wait for him with some Troops of Horse, who lighting on the Duke, tooke him Prisoner, ond brought him to the Fort of Capua, with 25. of his followers. Vpon the newes, many Cities round about returned to their Kings obedience; and it is hoped the rest will do the same, even in Abruzzo where the French have most footing, and have strengthened some places, having taken 2. daies be∣fore the City of Aquila, from whence they battered the Fort, the which was otherwise well provided except of men, foure thousand together with the Governour being marched out to succour Pescara, a Fort of very great importance. This is the story of an exploit, which may be accompted miraculous, not only in regard of the aforesaid circumstances, but also for hapning on Palme-Sunday, the day of our Savi∣ours Triumph; by whose particular protection, the Catho∣like King hath obtained this favour. Together with the imprisonment of the Duke of Guise, and libertie of the Duke of Tursis. THis Relation was sent from the Vice King of Naples, to the Spanish Embassador, now Resident in England. FJNJS.
