W1573 E129_33 99860060 156293
The Lord Whartons Speech, To the Petitioners for PEACE: On the eighth of December, at Habberdashers-Hall, in LONDON. VVith the true relation of all their proceedings therin. Also the Lord Maiors Message to them, concerning the delivering their Petition to the Parliament. VVith many more remarkeble passages. London Printed, for J. H. Decemb. 12. 1642.
The Lord Whartons Speech to the Petitioners for Peace, on the ninth of December, at Habber∣dashers-Hall, in LONDON THere hath (it is apparently mani∣fest) a great party which have joyn∣ned privately to∣gether, and framed a Petition, with in∣tent to present it to the High Court of Parliament, (the particulars whereof I shall for the pre∣sent forbeare to mention) onely, the car∣riage of it in some speciall particulars, I shall remonstrate unto you
On Thursday last in Cornwall, a man of a considerable fortune was taken ga∣thering hands to the said Petition, which being discovered by an Officer, (know∣ing that if such things were suffered, it would go neare to breed a Commotion in the City) therefore he carried the a∣foresaid person before the Lord Major, who after examination, tooke the said Petition from him, and gave the Officer command to carry him up to the Par∣liament, but after a little time spent in consideration of this businesse, his Lord∣ship altered his former intention, and gave Command to restraine the said per∣son till night, intimating that at night certaine Lords would be at Habbar∣dashers Hall, and then he should be car∣ried before them. The Officer having received this com∣mand, went from the Lord Majors, and having gone a little way, the man began to consider with himselfe, and demand∣ed whether the sayd Officer would car∣ry
him, he replyed, to remaine in custo∣dy till such time as the Lords should come into the City, he demanded where his Warrant was, answer was made, that he had no other warrant then my Lord Majors Command, he replyed, that he would not then obey him, the Officer commanded him them to go backe to the Lord Majors, he denied that like∣wise, and would neither go forward nor backeward, insomuch that the said Of∣ficer was inforced to command the pas∣sengers to aid him, which was according∣ly done, and he carried to some place of restraint. This was noysed about the City, e∣specially among that faction, for in a short time there were assembled neere 300. with Torches, and Linkes, who in a Tumultuous manner went to Hab∣berdashers-Hall, every man thinking himselfe happy that could get in first, being come in, they began to call out with loud acclamations, A Petition, A
Petition, the Lords having had notice of their intention, and the chiefe cause of their Assembly, (namely the Lord Whar∣ton,) applyed himselfe unto them, and spake to this effect. That they had received information of of their intentions, but for their parts they were sent upon a Message from the House, which according to their duties they now came to discharge, but for the receiving of their Petition, they could not do it; therefore they must apply themselves to the Houses of Par∣liament, from whom Doubtlesse they should rceceive sufficient saisfaction concerning their desires. This for the present satisfied them, so that then they cryed out, To their first Resolution, to their first resolution, then away they went toward my Lord Ma∣jors, but before they could get thither, a Trained-Band stood at the Lord Ma∣jors, Gate to entertaine them, which they seeing, presently altered their reso∣lution, and went to the Guild-Hall, com∣ming thither they found the Gates shut
up, but after some small time the Gates were opened, and they went into the great-Hall, where being arrived, they went up to the end of the Hall, where one of the chiefe of them read the Peti∣tion with a loud voice, so that all that were there present might heare the same. After the reading of which, there was a great Humme, and applause, by their owne Faction, then a generall cry was made, that all men that stood affected to that cause, should draw neare and subscribe. During this businesse, there was a Troope of Horse came into the Yard, and two Companies of the Trained-Bands, which they seeing, began to seperate themselves. At which time one of the chiefe of their Company came from the old Ma∣jors with this Message. That for their Petition, he would deliver it to the House, and if it were
relished, and approved of by them, they might then lawfully proceed, but if not they must expect the issue. They having received this answer, de∣parted every man to his Habitation. What the event will be, is not yet knowne, but it is greatly to be feared, if these factions be suffered to grow to a head, London will become a second Je∣rusalem, and be destroyed by her owne children, which God of his mercy avert and let all those that wish the peace of Sign, say Amen. FINIS.
