w1685 99831989 153753
A DISCOURSE OF THE Decay of Trade, The Necessity of Recovering: The Danger of Neglecting: The Advantage of Effecting: With the proper Means to Ac∣complish the same. Whereby the War it self will become as certainly Advantageous, as a Peace will be Destructive. Humbly Presented by James Whiston. WHilst England had few or no Rivals in Trade, and the Ri∣ches of the World flow'd into her Lap, she Lived at Ease (slumbring in the Downy Bed of Peace) wallowed in Pleasures, and had no other Unhappyness, but in being too happy; Her Abundance begot Idleness, and that a Stupid Security; so that she was not at Leizure, either to Improve her own Advantages, or Countercheck the Designs of her Neighbours, who Aggrandize them∣selves at our Expence and Impoverishment. But now 'tis high time to awaken all the Vital Powers of State, and rouze the very Soul of Government from this slothful Lethargie, to see the Danger of our Condition, and provide for a Remedy; For if the Kingdom consults either her Safety or Greatness, the only means of acquiring those Signal Blessings, is, by making her self Mistress of the Seas: That, once obtain'd (which with Submission) by these Me∣thods humbly offer'd, and effectually pursued, (by Divine Assistance may undoubtedly be accomplished) she has a fair Assurance, (without
the horrour of much War, hazard of Mighty Armies, and Charge of Numerous Garrisons) of gaining the Chief Trade of the World, which we above all Nations upon Earth, have at this time, not only the fairest opportunity, but the greatest Necessity of Endeavouring to ob∣tain. Forasmuch as the Strength or Weakness, Wealth or Poverty of this Kingdom wholly depends upon the Good or Ill Management of Fo∣reign Trade, into which (as into a wide Wilderness) Thousands are En∣ter'd, yet few or none (though of the largest Experience) are able to comprehend the vast Advantages thereby accruing to the Publick. For oftentimes the Merchant may get when the Publick looses, and as fre∣quently the Publick may get when the Merchant looses; both which ought to be Joyntly provided for, since it is not Just that either should be prejudiced; in regard the Publick must be taken care of, and the Merchant is as it were the Steward of the Kingdoms Stock, which by his Good or Ill Management, proportionably either Languishes or Increases. Therefore how highly is it the Indispensable Concernment of the Go∣vernment, to make it their utmost Care and Labour to Understand, Pre∣serve, and Improve this one thing necessary, which since Trade hath been known, hath never been rightly managed, and without which amend∣ment we can never be happy: But if we gain the Ascendant over her (who is now the Worlds most Celebrated and Courted Mistress) we shall without undertaking much of the Toyls of Alexander and the Caesars, make our selves in Effect Masters of the Four Quarters of the Earth, and all England become as one City of Trade, and the General Emporie of the World. Hereby the Nation will be abundantly Enriched, and Money being the very Life of War, and Sinews of all Publick Action, we shall be enabled to bring the World into a Dependant Awe, send out our Super∣fluities at what Profit we please, and also return the Richest Commodi∣ties of the Remotest Climates at our own Prices: The People will be Contented, and the Exchequer maintained in a Full Spring Tide, ready to encounter all Emergencyes; so that it can't be within the reach of the Worlds United Power to do us prejudice. Neither will the Subject only, but His Majesty also reap an Equal Advantage: It will render him a King of Free and Able Men, which is far more Glorious than to be a King of Slaves, Beggars, and Bankrupts: And it is an undeniable Maxime in all States, That 'tis less dangerous and dishonour for the Prince to be poor, than his People; Rich Subjects can make their King Rich when they please: If He gain their Hearts, He will quickly be Master of their Purses. This would exceedingly raise our Reputation abroad, and enable His Majesty to keep his Ene∣mies in Fear, his Subjects in Peace, and his Confederates in Security. For, Since the Introduction of the New Artillery of Powder Guns, &c. and the Discovery of the Wealth of the Indies, &c. War is become rather an Expence of Money than Men, and Suc∣cess attends those that can most and longest spend Money: Whence it is that Princes Armies in Europe are become more proportio∣nable to their Purses than to the Number of their People; So that it un∣controulably follows that a Foreign Trade Managed to the best Advan∣tage, will make our Nation so Strong and Rich, that we may Com∣mand the Trade of the World, the Riches of it, and consequently the
World it self; especially now a dayes, since no Obligation either of Re∣ligion or Allegiance, so much prevails upon Military Men as the certain prospect of Reward, being chiefly Influenced by their Pay, as the Price of their Blood. Neither will the persuing these Proposals, augment the Nations Wealth and Power only, but that Wealth and Power will also preserve our Trade and Religion, they mutually working for the preservation of each other, and vastly Increase Industrious People: And since those who live by the Arts, are far more in Number than they who are Masters of the Fruits, we ought the rather to Maintain the Endeavours of the Multitude, in whom doth consist the greatest Strength and Riches both of King, and Kingdom. Where Trade is, there will be Imployment: Where Imployment is, thither People will resort: And where People resort, there will be a Con∣sumption of Commodities, and thereby the Publick Revenue will be raised, so that would we once make Trade flourish, we need not doubt, but People from all parts of the Globe, would resort hither to enjoy them∣selves, and Improve their Stocks: For Trade is the Life-Blood that runs through the Veins of the Nation, that moves, maintains, and enlivens the whole Body of the People from the meanest Cottage, to the Royal Throne; So Bountiful is it, that it would extend it self to all Sorts, and Conditions of Men. And though most Nations are sensible of this great Benefit (particu∣larly the Dutch and French) who owe their Strength and Greatness to the Favour of Trade, yet neither of them are able to compare with us, either in Quantities of Native Commodities, Manufactures, and Artists, or of Neighbourhood to the Sea, Convenient Ports, Goodness of Ship∣ping, great Numbers of Rich Merchants, and Tradesmen (who have beyond others a Natural Genius of Understanding the Mistery of Trade,) Able Marriners, Provision of Victuals, &c. All which happily concur in our Dominions (divided from all the World besides by a Wall of Wa∣ter) as if God and Nature had designed this Island for the Grand Mar∣ket of the Ʋniverse. Not only the Increase of Seamen, and Shipping (those Bulwarks of the Brittish Empire,) the Incouragement of Manufactories, but the In∣crease of Industrious Inhabitants, (which if duely Imploy'd can never be too many, their Multitudes being always the Original Riches, as well as Strength of this Nation) and the raising the Value of Land, and Improving of Rents, the Products of good Husbandry, and in fine, all the Happyness and Glory of England depends upon the Encouragement and good Management of Trade; which for want thereof (being out∣done by our Neighbours) is so far declined, that it now cries aloud for all the Art and Industry of the Government to Regain and Preserve her from utter Ruine: For except the Breaches made in her, are timely Repair'd, the Nation must unavoidably sink into Chaos, and Con∣fusion. Wherefore since Schools, Ʋniversities, Inns of Court and Colledges have been Erected for the Advancement of Arts and Learning with Regula∣tions and Inspectors for the better Government of their several Facul∣ties, which are out of all Comparison with the Fruits of a duely regu∣lated Trade, by which they are all maintain'd: And withal considering that this Great Lady (affecting Freedom and Security hath no Inclina∣tion
to continue under the Arbitrary Power of some Princes, nor the uncertain Fate of others; with whom she hath resided only as a Sojour∣nour) (notwithstanding she hath been very highly caress'd and em∣brac'd by them) is ready to espouse both our Interest and Nation, and with her self bring in Dowry the Treasures of the World, if we would but vouchsafe to give her a speedy and kind Entertainment; being very sensible of the great Advantage we give her▪ not only by our Free En∣joyment of Civil Rights, and Properties, but by knocking off the Shackles upon Conscience, the Continuance of which so long Depopu∣lated this Nation, both by discouraging Ingenious Persons from Repair∣ing hither, and by forcing those of our own Countrey to seek Freedom elsewhere, and Cramping the Industry of others that remain by rendring them a prey to each other: Which deadly Wound did not end here, but Debauchery and Prophaneness were encreas'd to such Degree, that the Nation was dissolved in Luxury, and Intemperance, whilst the French had the Wit to take the Advantage of our Negligence, by En∣couraging Industry and Commerce (which all the while we were La∣bouring to overthrow and undervalue,) By which means chiefly he is become so troublesome to us, and so dreadful to some of our Neighbours. How absolutely necessary is it then that all possible endeavours be made (as the Examples of our Neighbours Successful Industry, and our own Sloth and neglect sufficiently warn us) to study the ablest Means and Methods for Improvement of Trade, to be considered and discussed by proper Judges of the Case, (Viz. a Select Society or Committee of Traders accordingly Skill'd and Experienced:) By which means we should soon feel the warm Beams thereof extending their Bountiful In∣fluence over the whole Kingdom. Upon the Fitness of Persons chosen depends the Good or Ill Success of this Great Design, For, the Arts-Man is ever the best Councellour in his own Profession, and every Honest Able Man is safest to be Credi∣ted in the better Improvement of the Mistery he professes. If the bu∣siness of Salvation be in Debate, we apply our selves to some professing the Ministry: If the Dispute be concerning the Title to an Estate, we disire the Judgment of a Lawyer: If Sick, we Consult a Physitian: So when the Trade of a Nation is to be Secured or Advanced, the Mer∣chants and Tradesmans Advice is questionless best able to accomplish the same: For let any Vers'd in Trade but reflect, how many Interfering Accidents belong to that Mistery, and how many various Shapes every Branch of it hath taken before it arriv'd to Perfection; and they will conclude it impossible for Noblemen and Gentlemen not Educated in Trade, ever to Arrive at a perfect Understanding of the Matters in Question; for want of which their Judgments are Abus'd by Clamour, Importunity, Prejudice, Partiality, or some other prevailing Bias; and seldom or never if the Matter be of Importance enough to require De∣bating, come to a right Decision; to the manifest Abuse of the People, Dammage of the Nation, and Disparagement of that Council or Com∣mittee. Therefore that the Predominancy of that many headed-Monster Pri∣vate Interest, that hath spun so fine a Thread, and twisted it self in∣to so many Disguises, may not insinuate any Prejudice against this Proposal: This Establishment will be no wayes an Infringement of Royal Prerogative, nor any Intrenchment upon the Priviledges, or Invasion
of the Province of our High Court of Parliament. On the contrary, it will be an useful Assistance and Ease to both, more especially to that great Council, necessarily Subministring to them, in the due Inspection and Inquiry into Matters, and Things, which cannot so fully fall under their Cognizance and Examination, and accordingly be more Reputa∣bly and Commodiously handed up to them for their Approbation: Their Doors and Ears being always open to the Poorest Person, that shall offer any thing of Publick Advantage. This Committee must be Capable of opening a yet much fairer Light, and Insight into Trade, (with Submission) even to the Wisdom of Par∣liaments themselves; who may thereby be the better enabled to Redress all those Male-Administrations, and non-Improvements of Trade, which through the difficulty of Access, and the Multiplicity of their other Affairs and Fatigues, cannot so easily fall under a sufficient Parliamenta∣ry Inquiry. It is an Infallible Truth that we cannot long continue as we are; And that we can never Meliorate but by this, or such like Method as here proposed: Without some such Helps and Succours as may be drawn from hence, we must go from one Distraction to another, till we come to be utterly destroyed. So that if the Earnest Expectations of the Peo∣ple be disappointed, by making use of Unsuitable Expedients, the Ship of this Common-Wealth (which by Embracing the Proposed Methods may be in a fair way of entring into a Safe Harbour) on the contrary will be driven to Sea again in a Storm, and must expect another favourable Wind to save it, and God knows whether ever that may come. For the Poize and Ballance of Affairs is not now as in former Ages. The Bulk of France is grown too unweildy for the rest of the World; And we have (morally speaking) no hopes of Redemption, from being Crush'd by her, if any yet greater Weight be added to her Scale. It is humbly propos'd that an Order be Issued forth to the Sheriffs of each County, Commanding them to give Notice to the several Mer∣chants and Traders (as hereafter mentioned) to meet at a certain time to chuse Annually Representatives, By a Ballating Box, according as the afore said Order shall Direct, To sit at the Guild-Hall, or some Convenient Place in London, as a Committee fully Authoriz'd and Impower'd to Inquire and Examine into all Matters Relating to Trade. In London, 2 East India-Company 2 African Company 2 Turkey-Company 2 Italy 2 Spain 2 Portugal 2 Barbadoes 2 Silk Manufacturers 12 Masters of Ships chosen by Trinity-House. 2 Nevis and Antego 2 Montserat and St. Christophers 2 Jamaica 2 Virginia and Mary-land 2 New York and New-England 2 East-Countrey 2 Hamborough and Holland 2 Canaries and Madera's. 2 Sipwrights.
2 Northumberland for Coals 2 Darby-shire for Lead 2 Cornwall for Tinn 2 Devonshire for Cloathing 2 Somersetshire for Cloathing 2 Wiltshire for Cloathing 2 Yorkshire for Cloathing 2 Norfolk for Fishing 1 Glocester and Worcester for Cloathing. 2 Norfolk for Stuffs 2 Birmigham and Sheffeild for Iron-Ware 2 Devonshire for Fishery 2 For Colchester, with some other Places as shall be thought fit may be added, &c. Suppose the Number be a Hundred (or more) Persons in all, there will never meet one time with another above Forty, who may divide into Sub-Committees for the quicker dispatch of Business, as they do in the East-India and African Companies; which at Ten Shillings A piece for each Time, and Meeting twice per Week, is Forty 3000 Pound per Week, which for Fifty Weeks is— 3000 The Chief Clerk and his Servants per Annum— 0500 And for Coach-Hire, Letters, Fire, Candle, and other necessary 0500 Expences— 0500   l. 4000 That they have power to Receive all Overtures relating to Trade, and to Grant Rewards suitable to those Discoveries or Services that shall be rendred by any Person, out of the profit of their sundry Discoveries, or otherwise, according as the Nature of such Discovery shall be. To which Effect there are Thousands who would offer considerable Mat∣ters of vast Improvements did they know once whom to apply to. That there be a Register of their Votes for, and against every Matter. That whatever Proposals are offered to the Committee, shall be read three times before they be Rejected, and their Reasons for such Rejection shall be Annexed. That the Committee shall have power to Choose their Officers, and to allow Sallaries (as before-mention'd) which they shall signifie by Certificate to the Lords of the Treasury, who shall be Authoriz'd and Oblig'd to pay the same, together with the Ten Shillings apiece for the Commissioners, and such Rewards as can't be taken out of some Proposals. That the said Commissioners shall be oblig'd to give Their Maje∣sties (and Parliament when sitting), and Account from time to time, of the growing Emoluments of Trade, and of the Obstructions of the Ge∣neral Improvement; That so from such Reports Their Majesties and the Parliament may the better be Advis'd how to make Laws sutable for the Encouragement of the Publick Benefit. Innumerable and almost Infinite are the Benefits which both King and People will reap from such a Committee: And this Proposer is ready to Impart to the said Committee several Proposals of Considerable Im∣portance,
whereby he doubts not but they will be Enabled to Accom∣plish all the great Designs here mention'd too Voluminous for him par∣ticularly to insert, or indeed to make Intelligible without mature De∣bates before Persons experienc'd in these Matters. Here we have at one View the Diseases of our Languishing State re∣presented to us. Their Progress Trac'd through the Variety of their Fits and Paroxisms, and the most suitable Medicines for our Recovery plainly pointed out, and set before us: The Embracing whereof will as undoubtedly Ascertain our Happiness, as the Neglect Ensure our Ruine, and Enhance our Misery. 'Tis true indeed, that Peace is the greatest of National Felicities, and ought to be our most desirable Blessing, especially if we look back to that Effusion of Blood and Expence of Treasure has already been made. And therefore to sound the Trumpet for the Encouragement of War must be somewhat ungrateful in our Ears. However, when those Two most Potent Motives, Honour and Interest lay that unavoidable necessity upon us, That 'tis impossible we can Sheath our Swords with any thing less than giving up our Necks to a most certain Slavery, War and only War is our Common Security. Peace made up with an Enemy, whose Power is too strong, and his Fidelity to weak▪ is only a Cobweb-Lawn to break through at pleasure, and a Reconciliation of Friendship with such a Prince, is the only means to Impower him to be a more dangerous, because then a more Surprizing Enemy. Should France in her present heighth of Greatness give a Cessation to her Hostility (as undoub∣tedly her Circumstances as formidable as now they are, would gladly Embrace, and possibly her self make the first Court for a Peace, how Inglorious a one to us I will not determine) 'tis certain She can never give a Cessation to her Ambition: And 'tis as certain that War is only Rak'd up, not Quench'd, when the Coals of Ambition are still Glow∣ing, that at any Convenient Rupture may set it fresh a Blazing. To that Aspirer that so visibly aims at Universal Monarchy, Universal Peace can be no more than Disguise and Stratagem. The Snake in the Grass is but too notoriously to be suspected under so false, how seemingly fair Bed of Flowers. In short, in any present Accommodation with France, her holding her hand will be no other than to take Breath to enable her to make a stronger Blow. These Unanswerable Truths considered, all Thoughts of present Peace with France carry that pernicious Face, that the Consequences must be fa∣tal For any such Peace will be more grievous than a State of War. For our Necessary and Continual Watchfulness and Caution under such a Peace would put us to such a Charge, such a Lingring and Continued Expence, that must be Infinitely more Frightful than the whole Load of a Vigorous and Pushing War. 'Tis true, we may Flatter our selves with a short hope of Rest, but then we must sleep in Armour, if we think to wake safe Thus far appears the Visible Necessity of Continuing the War with France, as to our Safety. Now let us consider the Motives for Conti∣nuing that War, as to our Profit and Advantages we shall receive from it. If it were possible a present Peace could be made with France, even without the foremention'd Frights and Hazards, That Safety and Secu∣ity should so hemm us round, that that Turbulent Monarch should give us
no Terrours nor Alarms; and consequently give us some small Retrench∣ment of our Cautionary Charge and Expence, yet what will be the Issue of this Peace? First, We restore him the Free Trade with England; In which France receives Immense Sums per Annum of our Money more and above our Commerce in Goods Exchang'd with them. Next it will restore him all that free Commerce again with the rest of the World, which during the War, has been so considerably Curtail'd, to the Intire Ease of all his now groaning Subjects, to the heartning his Tir'd and Fatigu'd Armies, and to the full Replenishing of his own (at present Ex∣hausted) Treasures: and if at this Ebb of his Exchequer, with all those Encumbrances, he is able to stand against the United Forces of Christen∣dom; What will several Recruiting Years of Peace add to his Power? but the rendring him so much yet stronger, as to start out again into some new War, and pour that Torrent upon us, (when least suspected, and when we are least provided) which all Europe may not be able to stemm, And what then follows, Let our most dreadful Apprehensions imagine. Now under our present indispensible Necessity of War, the Publick Benefits and Great End of this Committee of Trade will be this, That besides the Impoverishing, and consequently weakning of France, by Their care of Securing our Navigation from the French Rapine, &c. They will likewise be able so far to Improve our present Trade, That our Additional Advantages thereby Gain'd to the Nation, shall more than pay for the War to the Easing of the greatest part of our Burthen, and thereby the Chearing our Cause, and Edging our Swords, whilst England has moreover this further Priviledge above the rest of the Con∣federacy, that whilst the War is within their Bowels, we have the Hap∣pyness of seeing it removed from our Doors. Our Purses only feel the Pain of it, and this Remedy is the only Means to Cure that Pain; to∣gether with many Unvaluable Helps this Committee will be able to supply the Government withal. Here it not too Vngrateful a Theme (for what is more distastful than the Remembrance of past Glories, and the Upbraidings of present shame?) The bare Recollection of our former Honour, and the Reflection on our present Remissness, would be sufficient to awake our Drowsie Le∣thargy, and Exalt the English Genius into the Noble Sphear of Antient Grandure. Can we pretend to have English Blood in our Veins, and suffer the Insulting Monsieur to Ravish our Darling Mistress under our very Noses! To Commit a Rape upon our Trade in our own Channel, and on our own Coast? Have our Fore-fathers with Expence of their blood and almost insupportable Toyl past through an Ocean of hazards to Esbalish our Title, and Assert the English right to the Seas, to extend our Trade and Commerce beyond our Plantations, and joyn'd the most distant parts of the World in a Correspondence with us? Have they done thus much for us and shall we disparage their Labours and Reproach our selves by a Stupid and Supine negligence? Have we not formerly been the Envy, as well as Terror of our Neighbours? else why have they of late so industriously Labour'd to bereave us of our peculiar Advantage, Trade, except they believ'd their Interest to Consist in our Loss, and that the Acquisition of so Rich a Prize alone, would in reality place them as much above us, as we heretofore Esteem'd them beneath our selves? Is a Jewel of such Estimation not worth
the looking after, whose Beauty has Engaged the Hearts and Eyes of all that ever saw it? Whose single Value is of that Importance, That whosoever possesses it, has laid the Foundation of a Lasting and Con∣tinued Greatness? Let us Reflect now among our selves, how much it would redound to our Dishonour, to be blind in those Matters wherein our Ancestors have ever had the Glory of Prudence and Foresight. Infinite is the Re∣putation this Little Island hath formerly atchiev'd abroad, upon as ma∣ny several Accounts as she has had occasion to Employ her Subjects in Foreign Actions. But the Great Knowledge and Success of her Inhabi∣tants in the Mistery of Trade hath set her so much upon the rising Ground, and from that Eminence presented her with so charming a Face, that they who neglected Courting her, were at the same time in Re∣venge upon themselves compell'd to envy her. And can we now suffer such a Beauty to be Ravished; Such a Glory to be Sullyed, by the Vain∣glorious attempts of that very Nation, that hath so often trembled at the sound of English Arms, and must of necessity (had they not forfeited all pretence to Justice) own their past and future Success alone to our Carelesness and Imprudence! Let us therefore acquit our selves like Men, and Convince the Doubt∣ful World that the English Lyon is awake, and that our Councils at home, and our Armies abroad are able still to make good the Reputa∣tion of our Records. The sole Settlement of Trade would in Effect do our business: The Establishment of That is an inexhausted Spring of Happyness. It would make War it self more Elegible and Easie than a Dishonourable and Constrained Peace. The General Inconveniencies of it would hardly be felt, and that which to others is an Improverish∣ment and Calamity, would to us be an Augmentation of Riches and Security. Nor would our Souldiers then be less terrible in the Field, than our Merchants thrivingly Glorious in the City: The one Depends on the other, and if the latter be substantially maintain'd, the former can never fail of Success. Especially at this time, when they have the best Cause upon Earth to fight for, and the Most Gallant and Skilful General Living to Head and Command them. For as the Case stands now, there are but two wayes, Victory or Slavery. We must either make the French stoop to us, or be forced to submit to them. Whatever the Confederates may obtain from them, when they see their Opportuni∣ty, I don't know, but this I am sure of, There remains no Terms of Peace for us, but what would fix an Everlasting Infamy upon the En∣glish Name. In short, the Greatness of England and France is incom∣patible. If they rise, we must fall; and the Richer they Grow, the Poorer we shall be. Their Glory will be Erected on our Ruine, and their Honour founded on our Shame. Let us Assume then a Noble Resolution, like that of the Old Romans against Carthage, who resolv'd never to lay down their Swords till they had Humbled that City, till they had left her never a Fort at Land, nor Ship at Sea. Why stand we still then, are the French more Couragious than the Carthaginians, or their Generals more Invincible than Haniball? Have we not a Royal Scipio at Land, and an Admiral at Sea who have given unanswerable Proof that the French may be beaten. I would not be thought a Boutefeu and Incendiary, by perswading to continue the War, Did I not from my Soul believe, that the Embracing the Method
here proposed would abundantly Enable the Government to support the Charge of it, and that a Peace at this time, would Introduce far grea∣ter and more certain Calamities. For if the French King, either by Force or Fraud (for he's for any Game rather than be Idle) Extends his Conquests through the Confederacy, we can expect no other favour but to be the last Devour'd, or Basely Impos'd upon. Let us therefore pursue our Resolutions, and take the Advantages that are now put into our hands. We may if we please make the War it self Subminister to Trade, and be a Means of Enlarging Ours, whilst at the same time we beat the French out of Theirs. Besides, Can we boast of any thing we ever got by a Peace with France? 'Tis to be Attributed to our Improvi∣dence alone, they have got so much by the War: Had we prevented their taking our Merchant-Men, France had been Beggar'd before now, and War had ended. They have supported themselves at our Expence: Had we been more Careful, they had been less Powerful. The very Ships he hath taken from us hath served to Equip his Royal Navy, and so much Encouraged his Privateers, that they are become the Nursery of all his Seamen, without which he had never been able to send his Fleet to Sea. Nay, so haughty is he grown by these Successes, that he hath often threatned to Land an Army upon us, and Invade us with our own Ships. In short, our Losses maintain a very great Charge of his War: For if those Merchandizes he hath taken from us, as Sugars, Tobacco, &c. had been sent to Holland and Hamburgh, The Product thereof would more than have paid our Army in Flanders. So that if these Miscarria∣ges are provided against for the future, It is impossible but that War must be more Beneficial to us than Peace: Seeing it is beyond Contradiction evident that our Commerce There, is as Mischievous to us, as Advanta∣gious to them: Whether we respect the Open or Clandestine Traffick. First in the Quantity, by the vast over-Ballance of their Commodities, and next in the Quality, Those which they receive from us, being alto∣gether Necessary and Useful for them whilst we Import nothing thence; but what we had better be without, and such, which if our Vanity did not consume for them, must in Effect perish on their hands to the Infi∣nite prejudice of that King and People. But if there be a Necessity that our Luxury must be indulged, there is nothing to that purpose that France could afford, which the Industry of our Friends and Confederates cannot supply us withal: Having of late in their several Countreys set up the same Manufactories; which if the War continues, will be so Established, that neither we nor they shall ever stand in need of being beholden to France for them again, to the Utter and Irreparable Damage of that Kingdom. And thereby we shall vent greater Quantities of our own Commodities in return for what we receive from them: Whilst our Trade with France did nothing but furnish us with Trifles in Lieu of those vast Sums of Sterling they have drawn from us. And though we shall in a great Measure Enrich several of our Confederate Neighbours, as well as Advantage our selves, yet it will ne∣ver put them into such a condition of doing us hurt, as our Trade with France hath done.
Let us then embrace the offer'd occasion, which by Improving our Trade, and Enriching the Nation, will afford us fresh, and almost cer∣tain hopes of Victory, under the Conduct of a Daring and Couragious King, who seems to be a Blessing from Heaven bestow'd upon us to re∣advance the English Spirit, which the Luxury and Effeminacy of the Late Reigns had Stifled and Debauched, and not suffer our selves to Slum∣ber in a Dangerous Indifference, till Invincible Mischiefs awake us, to see our Neighbours Subdu'd, our Trade Expir'd, and a Triumphant Enemy at our Doors. And then I doubt not but that since the Safeties both of Us and our Allies are floating in one Common Bottom, and Fortifi'd by Mutual Interests, our Joynt Designs being vigorously push'd on, the Ballance of Christendom, will soon be reduc'd to it's proper Standard and England once more be able to hold the Scales of Europe. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley, next Cornhil; 1693.
