W2239 E1039_1 99863786 116001
Three Decads OF SERMONS Lately Preached to the VNIVERSITY at St MARY'S Church in OXFORD: BY HENRY WILKINSON D. D. Principall of Magdalen Hall. Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: for there is no worke, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the grave whither thou goest. 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the Love of Christ constraineth us. ACADEMIA OXON IF. SIS. OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Thomas Robinson. 1660.
Almae & Venerabili Matri ACADEMIAE OXONIENSI TRES CONCIONVM DECADES in Templo S. MARIae haud ita pridem habitarum, In perennis Obsequii & Gratitudinis Testimonium, D. D. D. Q. L. M. Q. HENRICUS WILKINSONUS.
The AUTHOR'S Preface to the unprejudiced Reader. BE pleased (Reader) with patience to take notice of, and give Credence to this true (though brief) en∣suing Information. As for my part, being consci∣ous to my self of manifold Failings, (perhaps more then others can, or will acquaint me withall) I should have stood in more awe of a Press, then (in such a Critical Age to have exposed even the best of my Labors to publick view: Had not some both eminently Godly and Judicious incouraged me much by their Approbation: Amongst whom the Dr. J. Conant. Vice-Chancellor, and Dr. Edw: Rey∣nolds. Dean of Christ-Church, (whose Judge∣ments I highly value) approved what now comes forth. Likewise those several Sermons which I formerly Printed in another Lan∣guage, for the most part were communicated to a * Reverend and Dr. Harris, Pre∣sident of Trini∣ty Coll: Oxon. Judicious Divine, lately gone to Heaven (with whom I had intimate acquaintance, and always found a faithful Friend) by whose Advice they were committed to the Press. For Apologies, and such like preliminary Discourses, I purposely wave as superfluous altoge∣ther. I have often thought (not without great detestation) of a proud vain-glorious speech of one (not worth the naming) Trajectum plan∣tavit, Lovanium rigavit, Caesar dedit Incrementum: Whereupon an∣other made Answer, Hic Deus nihil fecit. I shall acknowledge Ad∣wickium in Agro Eboracensi plantavit, There I was born: Oxonium ri∣gavit, There I had the greatest part of my Education: Christus au∣tem dedit Incrementum, The increase and blessing of all I ascribe un∣to Christ alone: Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God a∣lone 1 Cor. 3. 6. giveth the encrease. I have read, that a Philosopher accounted it as his honor, That he was a Man, a Citizen, and lived in the time
of Socrates: Much more do I account it my honor to be a Christian, and born in a Land where Christ is known: And (through riches of Grace and Mercy) to be born again: And to be accounted worthy (even such a worthless Instrument as I am) to be a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for whose sake to spend and be spent, I ac∣count it a far greater honor then to be the Emperor of the World: And if the Lord be pleased to make me more Instrumental to gain souls to Christ (through Mercy I have already heard of some brought in, to my comfort) This Mercy I shall value at a higher rate then all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them. Neither may I pass by in silence (for which I cannot be thankful enough) Gods gracious dealings with me in my younger years at Glocster, where Mr. John Work∣man. Mr. John Lang∣ly. the Lord blest to my soul the Ministry of a * Holy man of God, and likewise the Labors of a * Worthy School-master. Further, The Lord in mercy afforded unto me great advantages, after I was placed in Magdalen-Hall, under the Government of Dr. John wil∣inson, Princi∣pal of Magdalen Hall 43 years. my Honored Uncle, the vigilant Principal; one (as I conceive) endowed with the spirit of Government, where likewise I was well accommodated with a Dr. Henry wilkinson, now Cannon of Ch: Ch: Religious, Learned, and Diligent Tutor, now an eminent Professor of Divinity in this University. These I mention with thankfulness unto God: And with Pliny I conceive it, Ingenuum confiteri per quos profecrim. As for many of my Brethren who have more Talents entrusted to them, then my self, I envy not any of them, but heartily wish a diligent improvement of them, as remembring where much is given, much is required: For what (through Grace is given me) I am obli∣ged to be thankful, and not hide in a napkin. Those Scriptures are as Frontlets before mine eyes, and frequent Monitors unto me, viz. Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to doe, doe it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou goest. Joh. 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: The night cometh when no man can work. And 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constraineth us. Upon these Princi∣ples I desire to manage all my undertakings, and act accordingly. Now in an especial manner I present these Sermons (as Duty and Gratitude bindes me) to the University, before whom I Preach'd them. I cannot conceal (what my heart is so much affected with) but must acknowledge with all thankfulness those signal Mercies from Heaven of late extended even to a Miracle, that the Ministry,
and maintenance due thereunto, the Universities and their Privi∣ledges are yet secured and rescued from the malitious projects and attempts of unreasonable men, who cry with a Stentorean voice against an Universitie, as the children of Edom did in the day of Je∣rusalem, Psal. 137. 7. Rase, rase it even to the Foundation thereof: These are of John of Leydens and Wigelius his Faction, lately consuted by a * Learn∣ed Dr. Arrowsmith in Orat. Aqti∣weigl. Professor. It's sufficiently known that men of this Leaven have an evil eye against all Schools of Learning, and therefore bespatter and calumniate them, that they may more easily make a prey of their Revenues. This was the Divelish design of Julian the Apostate to overthrow Schools of Learning, and rob them of their maintenance; and this was a subtle Stratagem used by him to hinder the succession of Ministers: But all sober minded persons (who have their eyes in their heads) see, and cannot but acknowledge the singular and dai∣ly use of Publick Nurseries of Learning, Maugre all the Aspersions and out-crys of those false tongues set on Fire of Hell. From these places of Learning have come forth a Noble Army of Martyrs, viz. Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Bradford, Tindall, Philpot, &c. who have resisted Popery unto Blood, and sealed unto the truth of the Protestant Religion with their own Blood. Our Ʋniversity of Oxford can produce a large Catalogue of emi∣nent Champions for the Truth, some whereof were Bradwardin, Wickliffe, Jewell, Fox, Jo: Reynolds, Hooker, Ayry, Crackenthorp, Field, Lake, Hackwell, Benefield, Bolton, Pemble, &c. Our publick Professors have been an Ornament unto that Chair, and have oppo∣sed Rome, Racovia, Munster, &c. Their Names are like precious Oyntment poured forth, leaving a sweet savour behinde them, viz. Peter Martyr, Humfred, Abbot, Holland, Prideaux, Sanderson, Hoyle: And the present Professor, (though I conceal his name) deserves an Honorable mention, whose Parts and Graces adorned with so great Humility, render him an useful Instrument for Publick Good. It's worth our Observation, That in former times still God raised up Men of Heroick Courage and Invincible Resolution, to lop off and fear the Hydra of Heresies, and defend the truth against all Gain-sayers. I shall onely make mention of some remarkable pas∣sages within my own remembrance: When that novel upstart Do∣ctrine of Arminius, (novel I call it) (unless Arminius be Pelagius redivivus, and upon that account may plead more Antiquity) was broach'd when some (not all) Prelates countenanced those Tenets,
and preferred those of that Perswasion to places of Preferment: How many then of the younger Students bent their Studies that way? Insomuch as I have seen a Remonstrance of Parliament above thirty years ago, declaring, That the study of Arminianism was the ready way to preferment, and the Arminians were compared to the Je∣suits. For my own observation, I have for the most part apprehend∣ed an Arminian to be compounded of a Jesuit and a formal Prote∣stant, That so by the one he may ingratiate himself thus, by broaching pleasing Doctrines of General Redemption, Free Will, &c. And by the help of the other, he may carry on his Designs with more subtlety: It cannot be deny'd, but twenty years ago Armini∣ans had a great Harvest in both Universities, yet in both God raised up worthy Champions, to oppose and confute all those rotten Opi∣nions: To instance onely according to my own Personal knowledge. In this University the * Learned Professor of the Chair, stood up with Dr. Prideaux. Courage in his Lectures and Disputations against Arminianism: Dr. Twisse put forth that Learned accurate Book, called Vindiciae Gratiae, &c. Since him Dr. Kendall wrote after the same Copy: Maugre In∣hibitions, Affrightments, and other dangers of those times; yet some there were, who not afraid of the face of men, cry'd aloud against the Errors of the Time: Two or three more I shall mention. * One Preach'd upon this Text, Numb. 14. 4. And they said one un∣to Mr. Hodges of Excter Coll. another, Let us make a Captain and return into Egypt: In which Sermon Gravenchovius was quite beat out of the Field. Another Preach'd on this Text, 2 Thess. 2. 10. Because they recei∣ved Mr. Ford of Magdalen Hall. not the love of the truth, that they might be savd: He gave Armi∣nius a deadly blow, and cry'd down Superstitious Innovations in these words, Altar, High Altars, the uncouth Language of a strange Land. These suffered Banishment, and their suffering was their Crown. A third (whom I heard Preach in Latine about 27 years agoe) Mr. Croke of Brsen-nose Colledge. charged Arminius through and through; and in conclusion, was not afraid to call a Spade a Spade. These were (as I well remember) his ipsissima verba-Postremo agendum est mihi cum Jacobo Arminio qui etiamsi non esst Orthodoxus, utinam non esset perjurus. And in the Pub∣lick Act the same year, a worthy Doctor answered: And at another Dr. Staunton now President of C. C. C. time a Batchelour of Divinity, who both couragiously and faithful∣ly defended this Truth against their Antagonists-Deus non est Au∣thor mali secundum Reformatorum Placita.
A fourth I shall mention is (about 22 years agoe) an ancient Ba∣chelour Mr.  of  ll. of Divinity, who defended the Orthodox Docne against the Arminian Faction: His Text was, Pil. 2. 12. Work out yur own salvation with fear and trembling: Being calld in question for that Sermon, he ingeniously confest, That the self-same Sermon he had Preach'd in St. Mary's Pulpit sixteen years before, and then it wa well approved of, and accounted tue Doctrine. Neither can I bury in silence (to Gods glory be it mentioned) that Oxford hath afforded many faithful and constant Preachers this la Century: What excellent Preaching was there (as I have received from good hands) at Alhollows, by the Tuesday Lecturers (for which Dr. White, a worthy Benefactor to the University, and ounder of the 5 Exhibitions in Magdalen Hall, left an allowance) Then Dr. Jh: Reynolds, Dr. Ayry, and others, supplyed that course: And Dr. Ayry for many years together Preached at St. Peters in the East each Lords Day; and his excellent Pains are made publick in those Le∣ctures on the Philippians. Within the compass of my own remem∣brance (for thirty years at least I can speak) there were many able and Iudicious Preachers in particular Parishes, who constantly labor∣ed in the Word and Doctrine: Of such were choice Ministers of the Gospel at * Alhollows, at St. * Michals, * St. Peters in the East, by Mr. Pope. Mr. Black burn. Mr. ight. Mr. Esto. whose Ministry (blessed be God) I received much edification. Other able and faithful Preachers are yet alive, who have, and do at pre∣sent take abundance of pains in the Work of the Gospel amongst us, whose Names, though I pass by, yet are no whit the less to be esteemed of. I would not willingly give offence neither to Jw nr Gentile, nor Church of God: Yet I must speak my conscience, with∣out respect of persons, that for these thirteen years last past there hath been more constant and more practical edifying Preaching a∣mongst us, then the eldest alive can remember was ever before in this University. Every Lords Day, at several hours, three or four Sermons are Preached: Likewise every Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, constant Lectures are Preached; besides many other Lectures in pri∣vate Chappels. Upon these considerations it plainly appears, what care and industry is taken to propagate Religion in the University and City. And many there are amongst us of that excellent temper of Amaziah the Son of Zichri, who willingly offer up themselves un∣to 2 Chro. 17. 16. the service of the Lord: Who give their Labors as a free-will∣offering
gratis, (I may truly say) I wish not Ingratis. It's not in my intention to make up a Nomnclature and compleat Catalogue of the Worthies of our Universities: Many▪ not named perhaps may be no whit inferior to those that are already named. My design is to stop the mouthes of Clamorous, Envious, and Malicious Persons, who asperse and traduce Vniversities as useless, and little better then Hives of Wasps and Drones (although I know no rea∣son why because of some Wasps and Drones the whole Hive should be destroyed:) But those Machiavilian Counsels take place (too too much) now adays-Audacter criminare aliquid haerebit. Neither do I in the least question but that the Venerable Vniver∣sity of Cambridge can produce a parallel number of choice Divines and Scholars, such as were Whitaker, Cartwright, Ward, Davenant, Greenham, Perkins, Baynes, Sibbs, Preston, Dod, Hildersham, Hill, Arrowsmith, &c. But I proceed no further in this Argument: By what I have ob∣serv'd from others (to whom I subscribe) that since Christian Religi∣on was profest, there was never a Collection of more Godly, Or∣thodox, and Learned Divines, then in this present Century. Yet I am far from excusing or extenuating the Animosities, Heart-divisions, un∣couth, unseemly Habits, self interests, carnal Policies, unwarrantable separations, and that Latitude which many take unto themselves now adays: The good old Puritan would not take an Inch formerly, where many now venture to take an Ell. I heartily wish a Reformation tho∣row & impartial, that what we condemn in others, we may avoid each one in himself. O that it might be the main design we drive at to ad∣vance the power of godliness, and to go before each other in a real example of Reformation. Let's all labor as one man to be found in the Faith, and holy in life, so that Heresies, Blasphemies, and all forts of profaneness, may be abominated and extirpated. And let it be our endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: So Eph. 4. 3. that according to those Prophesies (the accomplishment whereof we daily expect) We may all worship the Lord with one consent, that the Zeph. 3. 9. Zech. 13. 9. Lord may be one, and his name one: And let us never forget that the vows God are upon us, (which we ought to our power to endeavor to keep inviolably) in that Solemn National Covenant (which was made in a day of distress) with our hands lifted up to the most high God. Let not that Solemn Oath be accounted as an Almanack out of date, lest the Lord send a Sword to avenge the quarrel of a broken Cove∣nant:
Let's expostulate with Ezra, Should we again break the Com∣mandment, Ezra. 9. 14. and joyn in affinity with the people of these abominations? After Oathes, Covenants, Days of Humiliation; and after so many signal Deliverances, shall we again hancker after superstitious Cere∣monies, a formal Service Book, a Lordly Prelacy, unwarrantable Se∣parations, Schisms, Machiavilian Policies, self-seeking Interests? The Lord forbid that we should be so unthankful for the mercies received, and so unmindeful of those particular Duties which God expects from us in our several Places and Callings. But I shall not exceed the bounds of a Preface: Although this may be accounted a Digression, yet (I hope) may be of some use to the Reader. Thus much I was willing to premise (as far as I apprehend) having a single eye at Gods Glory and the Publick Benefit, Wherefore be pleased (Reader) to peruse deliberately and candidly these three De∣cads of Sermons Preach'd with much plainness to the Auditors, ac∣companied with a vehement desire to do good, and afford the Au∣thor thy Prayers, who desires a share in the Prayers of all the Israel of God, and remains, Magdalen-Hall Oxon, April 9. 1660. Thy souls servant, HENRY WILKINSON.
To the Reader. WHen it was told David after the defeat of Ab∣solom, that Ahimaaz the sonne of Zadok came running, the King said, He is a good man, and cometh with good tideings. I may truly say so of these Sermons, and the reverend Author of them, He is a good man, and therefore we may be sure that he bringeth good tydings with him. He is a right Na∣thanael, a true Israelite, without guile, an able Preacher, a vigilant Governour, a faithfull friend, a bountifull distribu∣ter, to whom much of the Character of Aristotles magnani∣mous man doth exactly agree, , who dares openly to love a friend, when others reject him, and openly to dis∣prove the faults of those whom others feare and flatter. As is the man and his Communication, such is his doctrine, sound, wholsome, savory, edifying, not meerly notionall and suited onely to the fancy, but properly calculated for the Conscience and conversation, unto which the more any doctrine is fitted, the more it is according to the mind of the spirit of Christ speaking in the Word, and to the direction of his Apostles, who used great plainnesse of speech, and such demonstration of the Spirit and power, as might manifest the truth to every mans conscience in the sight of God, who gave instruction unto others whom they had separated to the work of the Gospell, to hold fast the wholsome forme
of sound words, by sound doctrine to Exhort and Convince gainsaiers, to shew in doctrine incorruptnesse, gravity, sinceri∣ty, sound speech which cannot be condemned, to speak, to re∣buke, to exhort with all Authority, to teach men to maintaine good workes for necessary uses, to preach such things as are good and profitable unto men. Though I have not had op∣portunity to peruse all these Sermons, yet having been an hearer of many of these, and finding in those which I have read the same even and serious spirit, and withall great va∣riety of profitable matter, I may safely commend them to the Christian Reader as Sermons drawn according to these prescripts of the Apostle, and consequently very use∣full unto publick edification, unto which all our studies, labours, and writings should be subservient. Apr. 4. 1660. Thine in our Common Lord EDWARD REYNOLDS.
The contents of the first Decad. SERM. 1. 1. COr. c. 2. vers. 2. For I de∣termined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ and him crucified. p. 1. The Text divided, p. 3: and hand∣led. 1 Concerning knowledge in Gene∣rall, p. 4. 5, 6. 2 Concerning the knowledge of Christ, pag. 7. 8. And this knowledge hath 3 characters; Fun∣damentall excellent, and soule-saveing, pag. 9. 3 Cautions concerning the use of humane learning, pag. 11. 12. 3 Concerning the knowledge of Christ crucified, pag. 13. 14. Applic: what Ministers must teach, pag. 14. 15, 16. 2 What all must learne, p. 16. 17, 18. SERM. II. IEr: 45. v. 5. And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? seek them not? Text devided, pag. 22. Severall sorts of seekers, pag. 25. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. The Person seeking, p. 31. 32, 33. Applic: Ʋse 1. For exposition, pag. 34. 35, 36, 37. Ʋse 2 For direction in 4 Particulars, pag. 38. 39, 40, 41. Ʋse 3 For exhortation in 4 Con∣siderations, pag. 42. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. SERM. III. PRov. 11. 30. Hee that winneth soules is wise. The Text divided, pag. 50. 51. The Doctrine propounded. That it's a choice fruit of wisdome to winne soules unto God, pag. 51. Method propounded. 1 the proofe of the Poynt, pag. 52. 53. 2. 4 Arguments for confirmation, p. 53. 54, 55. 3. Two Characters of him that is likeliest to winne soules, pag. 56. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. 4. Applic. 1. For Humiliation. pag. 63. 3. For Direction in 7 par∣ticulars, pag. 66. 67. SERM. IV. MAtth: 13. 45, 46. pag. 68. Again the Kingdome of Hea∣ven is like unto a Merchant man, see∣king godly Pearles, who when hee had found one Pearle of great price, hee went and sold all that hee had & bought it. The Context opened, pag. 69. 70. The Text divided, pag. 71. 72. Two Doctrines raised, pag. 73, Doct: 1. That every true Believer is a Mer∣chant of goodly Pearles. Method propounded. 1. By illu∣strating the similitude in seven parti∣culars. pag. 73. 74. 2. By applying the properties of a Merchant in 6 par∣ticulars, p. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. Doct. 2. That every spirituall Mer∣chant-venturer must sell all for the purchase of the pearle of price. p. 83. Method propounded. 1 The Doctrine illustrated by exam∣ples,
p. 83, 84. 2 Proved by Praecepts p. 84. Confirmed by 5. Reasons, p 85, 86, 87, 88. 4 Applyed 1 for reproofe of ignorant, idle, covetous, profane per∣sons, pag. 88, 89, 90. Ʋse 2. For examination in 3 Queries, p. 90, 91. Ʋse 3. For exhortation in 6 Particu∣lar duties, pag. 91, 92, 93. Ʋse 4. For Direction in 5 Particulars, pag. 93, 94. SERM. V. PHil. 1. 29. For unto you it is gi∣ven in the behalfe of Christ, not on∣ly to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Text divided, pag. 96. Doctrine raised. That it's the Du∣ty of true Believers not only to believe on Christ, but likewise cheerefully and readily to suffer for him, when he cals them thereunto. Method propounded. 1. By way of illustration, pag. 67, 98, 99. 2 The Doctrine confirmed by 4 Rea∣sons, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104. 3 The Doctrine applyed. 1 For reproof and Discovery of 6 sorts of Persons which will not suffer, pag. 104, 105. pag. 106, 107. Use 2 For Exami∣nation in 6 Particular Notes of Try∣all, pag. 107, 108. Ʋse 3 For Exhrtation in 4 Preparatives, pag. 109, 110. Ʋse 4 For Direction in two cases. 1 Whn have wee a call to suffer. A. In three cases, p. 110, 111. 2 How must wee suffer? A. 6 Severall wayes, pag. 111, 112. Ʋse 5. For Consolation in 4 Conside∣rations, pag. 112. SERM. VI. HAb. 2. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end, it shall speak and not lye: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come: it will not tarry, pag. 113. The Context opened, pag. 113, 114, 115. The Text divided and expounded, pag. 116, 117, 118. Doct. That in troublesome times when the vision is darke, and seemes to tarry, then in a peculiar manner, wee should wait upon God for the ac∣complishment thereof, pag. 118. Method of handling the Doctrine. 1. What it is to wait? Ans: In 5 Particulars, pag. 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124. 2 The do∣ctrine is illustrated by examples, pag. 121, 122, 3. The doctrine demon∣strated by 3 Arguments, pag. 125, 126, 127, 128, 129. 4 The Do∣ctrine applyed. 1. For Reproofe, pag. 130, 131. Ʋse 2. For exhortation, wherein 8 Propositions are commended, pag. 132, 133, 134, 135. Ʋse 3. for Direction in 6 Particulars, pag. 135, 136, 137, 138. Ʋse 4. For Consolation, pag 138. SERM. VII. AMos. 5. 15. Hate the evill and love the good, and establish Judg∣ment in the gate: It may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious to
The remnant of Joseph, pag. 139. The context opened, pag. 140, 141, 142. The Text divided and expounded, pag. 142, 143, 144. 6 Doctrines rai∣sed, pag. 145, One handled only, viz: That the faithfull execution of Ju∣stice in a Land is a probable meanes to move God to extend mercy and compas∣sion towards them, pag. 146. Method of handling the Doctrine. 1 From scripure proofe, pag. 146, 147, 148. 2 From 3 Reasons, pag. 149, 150, 151, 152. 3. How must ju∣stice be executed, pag. 153. 1 How must a Judge bee qualified: Ans: In 4 Qualifications, pag. 153, 154, 155, 156. 2 What Rules must be observed in execution of Justice? Ans: In 6 Rules, pag. 156, 157, 158, 159. An Ʋse of exhortation to the Judge in 4 Particulars, pag. 159, 160. To the Bench, pag. 161. To the Lawyers and Grand-Inquest, pag. 162. SERM. VIII. ZEch: 13. 1. In that day there shall be a fountaine opened to the House of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sinne, and for unclean∣ness, pag. 163. The Text divided, pag. 164. Doct. 1. When the children of God are soakt in their teares of godly sorrow for sinne, then in that season di∣vine refreshing consolations come from the presence of God, pag. 165. Method of handling. 1 By Scri∣pture Examples, pag. 165. 2 By Scripture Reasons, pag. 166, 167. 3 In an use of exhortation in 6 Parti∣cular duties, pag. 165. Doct. 2. That there is a Fountaine of free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ opened to purge and cleanse his peo∣ple from all their sinnes and impurities, pag. 168. Method propounded. 1. An Ana∣logie between Christ and a Fountaine in 5 Resemblances, pag. 170, 171, 172. 2 How Christ may be said to be a Fountaine? pag. 172, 173, 174. 4 Hammers wherewith God usually knocks, pag. 174. 3 False keyes dis∣covered, pag. 175. 4 True keyes, pag. 176. 5 For whom is the Foun∣taine opened, pag. 177. 6 Conside∣rations, pag. 177. 178. 3 Inferen∣ces, p. 179. 4 What are the vertues of this Fountaine. Ans: 5. pag. 179. 180. 5. The Doctrine applyedin 5 Ʋses. 1 For Consolation, pag. 180. 181. Ʋse 2 For Examination. 7 Quali∣fications propounded, pag. 182. 183. Ʋse 3 For Exhortation, pag. 184. 185. Ʋse 4 For Direction in 6 Par∣ticulars, pag. 186. 187. SERM IX. PRov. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness. All her Pathes are peace, pag. 188. Text divided, 189. Doct. 1. All the ways of godliness are wayes of pleasantness, and full of delight unto the Children of God, pag. 189.
Method of handling. 1 Objections an∣swered, pag, 190, 191, 192, 193. 194. 2 The Doctrine prooved by particular Instances, pag. 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199. 3 The Doctrine confirmed by 5 Demonstrations, pag. 200, 201, 202, 203, 204. 4 The Doctrine ap∣plyed in 5 Ʋses. 1 For conviction in 6 Particulars, pag. 205, 206, 207, 208. Ʋse 2 For Exhortation, pag. 209. Ʋse 3 For examination where∣in are 6 Qualifications set down of spirituall joy, differing from naturall joy, pag. 211, 212, Ʋse 4 For Di∣rection in 3 Particulars, pag. 212. 213. Ʋse 5 For Consolation, pag. 213. Doct. 2. That all the Pathes of divine wisdome or godliness are full of Peace to the Sons and daughters of Peace, pag, 214. Method propounded 1 Proved by Scripture, 214, 215. 2 Confirmed by 4 Reasons, pag. 215. 216. 3 Ap∣plyed. 1 In an use of information, pag. 217. 2 For instruction in 4 Particu∣lars, pag. 218. 3 For Comfort in an Objection propounded and answered in 3 Particulars, pag. 218. 7 Parti∣cular Counsels given, pag. 218. 219. SERM. X. MArk. 8. 36. For what shall it profit a man if he shall gaine the whole world, and lose his own soul? The Text divided and explayned, pag. 220. 221. Doct. That the gaine of the world can in no wise counter vaile the lesse of one soule; pag. 222. Method of handling. 1 By com∣paring the soule and the world, wherein. 1. Consider the excellency of the soule in 7 Singularities, p. 222, 223, 224. 2 Consider the vileness of the world in 7 Aggravations, pag. 225. 226. Ʋse 1 For terrour unto 4 sorts of Persons, 227, 228, 229. Ʋse 3 For exhr∣tation in 9. Considerations, pag. 233, 234, 336, 237, 238. Ʋse 4 For examination in 6 Quaeries, p. 239. 240. Ʋse 5. For Direction. 5 Impe∣diments must be removed, pag. 240. 5 Duties to be practised, 241. Ʋse 6 For comfort, 242. ERRATA. Pag 2. Marg. r. celare. p. 5. r. Marg. Jun. in Loc. p. 21. l. 4. r. rest, p. 105. l. 30. r. which while some, p. 182. l. 33. r. sic, p. 218. l. 3. r. surely. p. 221. l. 6. del. of p. 227. l. 19. r. you.
DECAD. I. ƲNƲM NECESSARIƲM, OR The Knowledg of Christ crucified. 1 Cor. chap. 2. vers. 2. SERM. I: At St Maryes Oxford Aug. 8. 1642 For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him Crucified. IT's storyed of Heraclitus the weeping Philosopher, that when a Question was proposed to him, what was the subject of his serious meditations? He re∣turned this answere, that he was studying to know himselfe: O profitable knowledge to be thus well acquainted at home! Now the most compendious method of attaining this knowledge is then procur'd, when wee know our own ignorance: So that without Question hee's the best knowing Christian, who knowes this, that, he knowes nothing, as he ought to know. And as in point of knowledg, so also the rule hold good, in point of practice: Hee's the best proficient in the Schoole of Christ, who daily practiseth the Divine art of selfe-deniall. For then are we something in Gods account, when we are nothing in our own. For a provocation to this duty, looke upon the Archetypum: a sin∣gular
pattern of humility is Christ our Saviour, the head of his Church, and there ought to be a conformity between the head and the mem∣bers. He that was God from all eternity Phil. 2. 7. Gloriam suam non minuendo sed supprimendo in conspectu ho∣minum deposuit Calv. , emptied himselfe, became incarnate, and wore the ragges of mortality: her's a condescension indeed, even the lowest step of humility. The first lesson then which the disciple of Christ must learne, is, to deny him∣selfe: And certainly there's nothing lost in a selfe-denying way for Christ. But this is a difficult lesson, and who can learne it? Counsell a strong man, not to glory in his strength, a rich man, not to glory in his riches, a wise man not to glory in his wisdome, and they will tell you as the disciples answered Christ, This is a hard say∣ing, and who can heare it. This grace of selfe-deniall is a rare her be, John 6. 60. and growes no where, but in the garden which the Lord hath plan∣ted. O what an excellent thing it is for a man to be out of love with himselfe! that plant had need of much watring from Heaven, before it can be brought to such a maturity. My Apostle is an ex∣ample, instar omnium, When those  of Greece expected quaint composures, and flashes of Rhetorick, he treads quite Antipodes to them, drawing his lines after another and exacter copy. The sim∣plicity of preaching the Crosse of Christ, is his Apology. And to straine for sublime raptures upon such an argument, were a meere solaecisme. Here's one that's every way an accomplisht schollar, , Homer. Il. 1. and yet knowes it not, it may be verified of him, what Homer speaks of Nestor: His words were sweeter then honey. At Lystra he was stiled Merurius, the God of eloquence; yet he shakt off all these tickling inticements. He makes of all these an act of oblivion▪ Dele dehinc ex animo, . If Christ may be formed in him, hee's fully satisfyed, and will say with Jacob in another case, I have enough: now let me die, I have all, for I have the knowledge of Christ Crucifi'd. Weigh all other kinds of knowledg in the ballance of the sanctuary, and they will prove too light. This I say, even the know∣ledge of Christ will allwaies preponderate. A long time modesty kept in his own commendation, but at last it could hold no longer, least it should conceale a truth. He profest with a thankfull heart, 1 Cor. 14. 18. that he spake with tongues, more then all the Apostles, Artis est Caela∣re Artem. and yet here he takes no notice of them: It's the property of art to conceale it selfe. St Paul was an acurate linguist, and yet so low∣ly as he would not be reputed so. Nay, besides all these he had the
best helpes of education: He was trayn'd up at the feet of Gamaliel, a learned Rabbi. He hung upon this Doctors lips, ready to take every word that dropt from his mouth, and improve it to his best advantage: Yet notwithstanding, all the polite learning, which he tooke up at the feet of Gamaliel, in all humility he layes down at the feet of Christ. Peruse his Protestation, in the verse immediatly preceding my Text. Concedit sibi non adfuisse hu∣manae vel ficun, diae vel sapientiae praesidia quibus instructus ali∣quid efficeret sed ex quo se desti∣tutum opi∣bus faisse fatetur inde magis elu∣ere in suo Mi∣nisterio Dei po∣tentiam subin∣fert, quae huus∣mo li subsidius non indaguerit, Calvin, in Loc. Corinthus erat totius Graciae lamen. Cicer. pro lege Man. Calv. in Loc. Tertull. in lib. de carre. Christi. Erasmus in Loc. Divis. 1 The Apostles profession. 2. The Object. 1 Positive. 2 Privative. 3 The Condi∣tion. And I brethren, when I came unto you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdome, declaring unto you the testi∣mony of God. However others make ostentation of learning, and through an ambitious affectation of eloquence, preach themselves and not Christ: yet I that am a minister of Christ, and call'd to be his Embassador, make conscience to goe beyond my commission to adde the compositions & varnishings of humane eloquence, lest I de∣tract from the simplicity that is in Christ. You Corinthians may expect eloquence, your City (as it's attested by Cicero) was the Eye of all Graece: However, I am resolved to deceive your expectation. Here I am (saith he) Agens consilio, I doe it upon most serious advice, and mature deliberation: this is the upshot of my praemeditated re∣solution: My conclusion I retaine inviolable,  &c. Non ex∣imium duxi so Calvin. Non statui, so Tertullian, Non judicavi, so Erasmus. These versions give light one to another. My text is the determination of Paul the great Doctor of the Gentiles. In the unfolding whereof I shall not crumble the bread of life into an overcurious division, least I divide the sense.—Out of the words I commend to your observation, three remarkable particulars. 1. The Apostles profession or resolution , I determi∣n'd to know. 2. The object of his profession exprest, 1. Positively, , Jesus Christ, 2. Privatively and by way of Antithesis,  this and nothing else. 3. The Condition or Qualification of the object, , and him crucify'd. Homo naturaliter appetit scire. Every man by nature is desirous of knowledg. In point of knowledge, the cry in generall, is, with the horseleeches daughter, Give, Give. There's no satiety in it. Of all other goods, knowledge is to be set at the highest estimate. And of all sorts of knowledge the knowledg of Christ is superexcellent: and if we raise the Cli∣max higher, that knowledg which concernes the Crosse of Christ, is most excellent, sweet and comfortable. You see then that I am warranted by my Apostle, to outbid all the knowledg in the world.
The knowledge of Christ transcends all the knowledge in the Uni∣verse. This is the wisdome of God in a mystery, 1 Cor 2. 7. It's that which the blessed Angels desire to peepe into, and they use more than or∣dinary diligence. Its beyond the spheare of their apprehension. Let 1 Pet. 1. 12.  est intente t cum animi observati∣one prospicere & intucri, Gethar. in Harm. Evang. all humane learning unveyle to this. Let all secular knowledge rise up, and give up the bucklers. Let the profoundest Philosophers, those Glimmerers, and (as I may say) Night-wormes in Divinity, learne so much knowledge as to know their ignorance. All their Lamps twinckle, and cannot illuminate the soule of man. What clouds and mists are there in the most exquisite Arts and Sciences, untill they be dissipated, by the sun of righteousnesse. Extract the quintessence of the most elaborate volumes of Philosophers, (though things in themselves of precious value,) yet compared with the knowledge of Christ, they are but brutish ignorance, no better then those huskes which the Prodigall son fed on, devoid of all reall solid nutriment. In the discussion of this excellent knowledg, for my more metho∣dicall progresse, I'le resume the parts of my Text in their proposed order, taking my rise at my Apostles profession , I determined to know. You heare my Apostles determination is unalterably fixt upon 1 part Concerning knowledg in generall. this principle, to be a knowing man, He hath discovered a gem∣me in the feild, of superlative value, and therefore he digged hard in the mines of wisdome, to get possession of it. Non nisi sublato reperitur gemmula saxo. T'is no mervaile that the Apostle should be so eager in the pur∣suit of knowledge. The Minister of the Gospel as well as the Priest under the Law, ought to be a man of knowledge. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts, Mal: 2. 7. Hence Calvin con∣cludes that be ought to be a Teacher. An ignorant minister Hine sequitur a Jure Sacer∣dotii non posse divelli docendi munus prodigi∣osum est si sa∣cerdotemse esse jactet interea non sit Doctor Calvin. is none of Gods making, for God gives gifts, where he gives a calling. How then can a man attaine unto the riches of wisdome; unlesse he hath the key of tongues to open them unto him? Hence it comes to passe, that diversity of tongues are reckoned with the choycest per∣sons, and things as Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Miracles, Gifts of healing; Helpes, Governments, 1 Cor: 12. 28. How much is a Di∣vine accommodated, by the knowledg of tongues? For how can
he beate out the meaning of the holy Ghost, unlesse he understand his language? Mee thinks then, our desires should be raised, to as high a pitch as Solomon intimates, Prov: 18. 1. Through desire a man having seperated himselfe intermedleth with all wisdome. This sepe∣ration is lawfull, Qui se ab ho∣minibus sejun∣git quaerit sapi∣entiam prae desi∣derio & sludio e∣jus consequendae itaque cum om∣ni doctrin â sese immiscet, omni hominum con. sortio relicto ut liberius studiis incumbat Merc. in Loc. to leave company to study the harder, as Mercer ob∣serves. A schollar will find speciall use of Arts, and Sciences: they inrich the mind with knowledge, and helpe to unty many knotty Controversies: Let me then perswade you to compasse these spoyles of the Egyptians, to leave no paines unattempted, in the pursuit of learning. Arts and Sciences caught a fall in Adam: How prudent a course would it be for us, to raise a building out of those ruins, and to have that part of Gods image restored? Solomen excelled the learned'st and put downe the skillfullest in their owne Art. 1 Kings. 4: 30. There's made up a catalogue of his knowledg in natural things, And they passe under the seale and signature of the holy Ghost, as being subservient unto Religion, and therefore of great price, dignity and value. Moses who (as they say) lived in Hermes Trismegistus time, was learned in the Mathematicks, and all things that appertayn'd unto humane learning: The Text is cleare: And Moses was learn'd in all the wisdome of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds, Acts: 7. 22. If any be enemies to University learning, I conceive with St. Jude. v. 10. They speake evill of those things which they know not. Their ignorance (as Incivile & i∣niquum est sin vero quià respu∣unt malitiâ & impietate vacare non potest Ium. in Loc. Junius observes) is uncivill, unjust malicious and impious: They may fitly be compared to the fox in the fable, who say'd, the grapes were over bitter, because they were above his reach. None but an Ignoramus is an enemie to knowledge. Thus you see how we ought to prize knowledge where ever we find it. But let us conferre our principall paines for the attaining of that knowledge which onely, will make us wise unto salvation. Throughout the whole booke of Proverbes a wise man and a godly man, are convertible termes. Religion is therefore called the way of understanding, Prov: 9. 6. And it is the high commendation of a wise man, Prov: 1. 5. That he will heare, and increase learning: and a man of understanding shall attaine unto wise counsels. This is the end of Christs coming into the world, to be a light un∣to it. Ioh: 1. 9. . The Clem. Alexan. strom. 6. Lord is our illumination, and that true knowledg into which we are trans∣lated,
so Clemens Alexandrinus, By his knowledge, shall my righteous Clem. Alex: strom. 6 to. servant justify many, I say: 53. 11. And it's Davids prayer, O continue thy loving kindnesse, unto them, that know thee, Psal: 36. 10. Know∣ledge is the foundation of all other graces: Faith, Hope, and Love, are grounded on knowledge. It's Gods first worke to illuminate the understanding: The seales fell off Pauls eyes before he became a preacher of the Gospell. The promise is to those whom the father drawes, Ioh: 6. 45. that they should be , all taught of God But this Promise excludes not the preaching of the Gospell, as lear∣ned Hoc verbo abu∣tuntur hi, quiv∣calem praedicati∣onm & exter∣num verbum vel scripturas con∣temnunt &c. Rollocus in Joh. 6. 45. 1. Divine knowledg is humble. Rolloc observes on the place: And that you may know, where this knowledge resides, let me assure you, That, it ever lodgeth in an humble breast. The knowledg taught of God is an humble knowledge. But when God opens a mans eyes and gives him the spirit of understanding, he then discernes in himselfe, more ignorance and folly then knowledge. After that he hath studied this domum interiorem, his own conscience (as Bernard sties it) he knowes more ill by himselfe, then all the world can ac∣quaint him withall. As the consideration of his primitive integrity may be scientia inflaens, so the review of his originall praevarication, may be scientia humilians: As that may pusse up, so this may hum∣ble. It's the greatest honour of the learned'st Rabbies, to be men of the humblest spirits. And the more humble they are, the greater proficiency they make in knowledg. Let them consider; what they have is derivative: Quid habes, quod non accepisti? Their abilities are not their own, but so many talents concredited unto them, of Quinto quis decrescit in de∣spectione sui, tanto amplius proficit in cogni tione Dei, Bern. 2. Its a refor∣ming know∣ledg. which they must stand accomptable unto him, who is their Lord and Master. It's undoubtedly true, that, the most ignorant are apt to think best of themselves. The Laodiceans were well conceited of themselves, and the reason was, because their eyes were not opened. Neither doth divine knowledge float in thy brain, but secondly it workes a reformation, upon thy heart, and life: To depart from evill is understanding, Job. 28. 28. Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keepe his commandements, 1 Joh. 2. 3. this is a  indeed, of a man of knowledg: Hath thy knowledg an effectuall influence upon thy life and conversation? Doth it quicken thy love to Christ and inkindle thy zeale for his glory? When the spirit of wisdome breaks in upon thy soule (just as when the spirit of God came upon Saul) it makes thee another manner of man, this spirit is a fire, to
purge thy corruptions: It's water, to allay thy passion: It's a winde to blow and scatter thy swelling thoughts of vanity. May that po∣pular rumor never be verify'd of our age, that, never was more knowledg, and never lesse practise. Now, when knowledg abounds, as the waters cover the seas, where's the returne of a sanctify'd conversation? Hee's truly the knowing man, who reduceth his knowledg into practise. Knowledg and practise should goe toge∣ther in a mutuall equipage, being conjoyn'd in an indissoluble union by the Holy-Ghost. If then God hath advanced you to places of higher dignity, God expects from you more duty and obedience. If God hath bestowed greater gifts on you, he expects better fruits of holinesse to be manifested throughout your whole life and con∣versation. For where much is given, much is required. Hee's a man of learning, that is a man of a sanctify'd conversation. I remember Berr: Suber . 37. that Bernard gives a direction or two for knowledg, ut scias, quo ordine, quo studio, quo sine. For order, that must be known in the first place, which most nearly conduceth unto thy salvation. For study, that must be studied, which is most worthy of thy love: and as for the end, that must not be curiosity, but the edification of thy own, and thy brothers soule. These directions in my Text, meet as lines in the same center. Christ Jesus is first to be known, wor∣thiest of our love, and the end of all our knowledg. This puts me in mind of my second particular, the object of my Apostles resolution  to know Jesus Christ. 2. Part Concerning the Knowledg of Jesus Christ. In these Epistles, St Paul useth the name of Jesus, above 500 times, and no wonder, for in this name there are above 5000 treasures: Yea, in it, all the treasures of wisdome and knowledg are reposited. If you would Anatomize all Pauls Epistles, you should find the sa∣cred name of Jesus written in the heart of them in golden cha∣racters, as truely, as they falsly report, it was seen in the heart of Ignatius Loyola; that grand Impostor. I have read, that Phidias made a buckler for Minerva, wherein his own name was so curiously ingraven, that it could not be took out, without the dissolution of the whole frame. So Christ hath divinely wrought his name in the Scriptures, and that so accurately, in so much, that you cannot take it out, but the truth will fall to the ground. Christ is the com∣plement and perfection of all science, the ground of all consolation. Hereupon the Prophet concludes triumphantly: I will rejoice in the
God of my salvation, Hab. 3. 18. . Clem. Alex. strom. 6. Our knowledge and spirituall para∣dise is our Saviour: So * Clemens Alexandrinus. O then above all thy gettings, labour to get this understanding, to know Christ and him crucisi'd. Have this, and thou needest no more: It's that unum necessarium the onely requisite. A man may read 20 Lec∣tures in Aristle, and yet be never the more moralliz'd man. All Platoes and Aristotles Precepts meddle not with heart pollutions, nor tend to the Reformation of the inward man. A man onely acted by principles of nature, cannot correct the least vice. It's be∣yond the sphaere of it's activity to discover sin in it's proper colours, I mean the siafulnesse, and pollution that is in sin. 'Tis true a tem∣perate Socrates, a just Aristides, a covenant-keeping Regulus, shame many of us Christians, and will rise up in judgment against us, and condemne us, but their morality could not advance them, to the third Heaven. The eye of naturall reason was too dimme, to di∣scerne Christ erected upon a pole. Their charity then justly deserves the check, who inlarge the way where Christ hath streightn'd it: The text is expresse, there's no other name given under Heaven, where∣by we must be saved: Till this truth be expung'd out of Canonicall Acts 4, 12. Scripture, I shall never admit any scientiam mediam, or posterne dore, to let in those, who are without the pale of the Christian world. As for those Jesuited persons, who advance nature and deprave grace, the time may come when upon conviction of conscience, they may be forc'd to conclude with Bellarmines Tutissimum est &c. It's Bellarm. 1. 5. de Iustif. the safest way to rely upon the grace of God: when as that idolized  will prove an Aegyptian reed, to give them the slip in their greatest necessity. Now it's requisite, that I should put a difference between the 3 Characters of Knowledg. precious and the vile, and distinguish that knowledg which is so in reality and truth, from that which is counterfeit, and only personates a Christian. View it in these distinguishing characters: This is a fundamentall, an excellent, and a soule-saving knowledg. 1. I say, this is a fundamentall knowledg. The knowledg of 1. Fundamen∣tall. Christ is the summe and substance of all Divinity, the scope of all the Scriptures, the very pith and quintessence of all religion, even that, which is (without controversy) the great mystery of Godlinesse. The Scripture is the field, and Christ the pearle of price; The Scripture
the Box, and Christ the pretious oyntment. Pretiosum oppbalsa∣mum in gemmeo myrhothecio. Christ is called in Scripture , The word , as though every word in Scripture didre-echo this pretious word. The Apostle sets it downe unto the life, Eph. 2. 20, 21. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himselfe being the cheife corner stone, in whom all the buil∣ding fitly framed together, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord. 2. Excellent. 2. Adde hereunto, this is an excellent knowledge. The Apo∣stle, though a man of incomparable gifts, yet accounted all things but losse, and dung, in comparison of this, Phil. 2. 8. , Be they what they will, honours, riches in their greatest estate and conflu∣ence, arts and sciences, in their resplendent lustres, let them be vir∣tues which beautify the mind, yet when they come, in competition with Christ, they passe under such a censure, , losse, and garbidge, the most vile and contemptible things in the world. This knowledge must needs be amiable, because it proceeds from Christ the fairest of ten thousands. And lastly, for the complement of all, this is a soule-saving-know∣ledge. 3. Soule saving. 1  2. 14.  When all Philosophicall speculations puzzle & non plus thy understanding, and cannot administer the least auxiliaries unto thee (For the naturall man perceiveth not the things that are of the spi∣rit of God) then when thou hast the spirit of discerning to see their emptinesse, and impotency, Christ darts a ray of supernaturall knowledge into thy soule, infuseth into thee new principles, a re∣newed nature; And now thou discernest with another manner of eye, for the spirituall man knoweth all things. Thou must then have a better master then Aristotle to teach thee. This knowledge can no where be learnt but in the schoole of Christ. A man may be admired for a great Gnostick, as accurate a Text-man (as Buxtorfe records of the Jewes) as to know every letter in the Bible, and ob∣serve every point (as the Masortes doe) yet all this while he may be a meere stranger to this soule-saving knowledge. For if the Doctrinall truth of Scripture, be not made an experimentall truth unto thy soule, and conscience, though thou mayst be reputed a great schollar, yet thou art farre from being a good Christian. When Christ comes into thy soule, by his grace, he renewes thee in the spirit of thy mind, he purifies thy nature, reformes thy life, re∣deemes thee from thy vain conversation. When his gracious face
shines upon thee, he makes his waies and saving health known unto thee, as it is Psal. 67. 2. Thus I have endeavoured to describe the object of this knowledg positively considered, lett's now view it as privatively, and by way of Antithesis set down in the text, , onely, or nothing else be∣sides Jesus Christ. Q. But doth no other knowledge passe currant? Doth my A∣postle use a kind of Ostracisme, to banish all secular learning out of the schoole of Christ? A. Doubtlesse such an interpretation stands not with the sense Calvinus in lo∣cum. Aquin: in lo∣cum. of my Apostle. Nulla mihi scientia tanti fuit; ut aliud cognoscere appeterem, quam Christum, licet crucifixum, So Calvin. He esteemed no knowledg equall to the knowledge of Christ. Per sapientiam ver∣bi vacuatur crux Christi. By eloquence of words the Crosse of Christ is made of none effect: so Aquinas upon the place. But these two agree with Estius and Paraeus, who are no enemies unto humane learning, but they much disrellished the affected eloquence of new-fangled preachers, who rent the people a sunder, from u∣nity to mutiny, from faith, to faction, and so teare the seamlesse coate of Christ. They bragd of Cardans vaine glorious humour (o∣therwise a man of wisdome) who making a catalogue of renowned worthies, inserted himselfe Hironymus Cardanus in the number. So these instead of preaching Christ in all humility, are not ashamed to vent the frothy issues of their abortive braines, rather to tickle their auditors eares, then to affect their consciences. Therefore to this poyson, my Apostle prescribes a soveraigne antidote, and that Paraeus inlo∣cum. is to preach Christ and him crucified, Sola Christi cognitio sufficit ad salutem, saith Paraeus. The knowledg of Christ, is alone sufficient unto salvation: but he addes further, sed cum aliis conjuncta, tanto erit ju∣cundir: but mixt with other sciences, will rellish some palates the better. Having a spice of humane learning, it may winne upon mens affections, and so take the learned in their own Art. Augu∣stine going to have his eares tickled, had his heart touched, and got Christ to boote, with the eloquence of Ambrose. A Minister ought to preach in the most winning way, and ought to endeavour by a pi∣ous kind of fraud (not in a Popish nor Machiavilian sense) to insi∣nuate himselfe, into the affections of his Auditors. I ground my assertion upon the Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 16. beeing crafty I caught you
with guile. The preacher studied acceptable words, Elegant com∣posures, and apposite expressions are commendable. I know not any thing to the contrary, but an Aegyptian jewel may be dedica∣ted to the service of the sanctuary. The Apostle quotes Menander, Videmus non satis esse si sidem nostrae integrita∣tis faciamus nisi ales deprehen∣dantur quorii us fucrimus opera. Quare delectus habendus est non levis, neque perfunctrtus sed exquisita di∣ligentia Calv.  Chrys. Dan. 2. 34. Aratus, Epimenides, Heathen Poets, that so he might foile the Gen∣tiles with their own weapons: Chrysostome upon my Text saith The Apostle, who knew greater things of art, could not be ignorant of these lesser things: yet, he would relinquish his learning, deny his parts, seeme to be ignorant of his gifts, that by this meanes, he might gaine the people to the knowledge of Christ. The Apostles Acts 4. 13. were accounted by the Counsell  illiterate men, even Ideots, (as the word is commonly Englished) yet these God used as instru∣ments to confound the wisdome of the wise, and to put to silence the most knowing men. We read in Daniel of a stone without hands cut out of the mountaines, which battered all the rest in pieces: so the Go∣spell of Christ in its purity and simplicity, without the help of humane policy or contrivances, throwes down all the tow∣ring thoughts of men, it levels mountaines as low as the vallies, and casts down the high and mighty from their seat. Its the arme of the Lord, Is. 53. 1. Its the power of God unto salvation, Rom. 1. 16. Yet all this while, though I admire divine learning, and preferre it to the highest place, accounting all knowledge none at all to the knowledge of Christ: Neverthelesse I discard not humane learning from its office and conveniency, and usefulnesse in a learned Republick. My hearts desire and prayer is, that the Sun may never set upon our Israel, but that the Schooles may flourish in learning and religion, and that the Sons of the Prophets may grow up as young plants, and be as the pollished corners of the temple, never wanting honourable en∣couragements. But for the prevention of abuses which are apt to creep in, I hope a caution or two will not be unseasonable. 1. Before you make use of humane learning, labour to cleanse 1. Caution. Purge and cleanse hu∣mane lear∣learning. Isay 8. 20. and purge it. There's much drosse in it and therefore it must be re∣fined. It requires an understanding head, to cull out, what is Legi∣timate and to reject what's spurious. Things must not be tooke on trust at adventure by an implicite faith relying upon the judgment of Learned Doctors. Theres a Lydius Lapis, to discerne true from counterfeit. Ad Legem & Testimonia: Examine all Doctrines by the Touchstone, which is the Word of God. Take heed that thou
bring not in those things, which contradict the principles of thy faith. Better to relinquish thy authour, & sacrifice him to the flames, then flinch one tittle from the rule, which is the word of God, and so make shipwrack of faith, and a good conscience. In the next place, be advised to make all humane learning subser∣vient, Cant. 2. Make humane learning subor∣dinate unto di∣vine. and subordinate to divine. Hagar was courteously entertai∣ned whilest she was a servant, but when once she domineer'd and despised her Mistris, she was turn'd out of doores. The comparison is obvious, betweene humanity, and divinity. If that, being but a handmaid, flaunt it and outbrave her Mistris, let her bee casheired in Deut. 21. 12. the same manner. The captive woman must have her nailes pared, and her head shaven, before she might be entertained for a wife. In like mannner, we must pare off all the superfluities, protuberan∣cies and excrescencies of humane learning, before it can be dedicated to the service of the Lord. As Moses in his glorious lustre, put a vayle before his face; so were it an act of prudence some times to con∣ceale a man's selfe. The vayle of silence is, oft times, the best at∣tire of sobriety. A foole, saith Solomon, speakes all, but a wise man Prov. 29. 11. holds it in, till afterwards. 3. Use humane learning with moderation, and modesty; The Cant. 3. Use humane learning with moderation. gold sanctifies not the altar, but the altar the gold. Humane lear∣ning improveth not divine, but is it-selfe improved by it. Arts are holy in their use only, which is, to attend upon sacred knowledge; And whil'st they doe so, the law entitles them to some kind of holy∣nesse: Nam quae sacris serviunt, profana non sunt. Surely then, that Painter discovered abundance of folly, who when he could not make the Picture handsome, then fell a daubing of it: A remedy worse than the disease. Onesilus his head (as I find it in Herodotus) Herodet. Terp∣sic. when it was empty of braines; was filled with honeycombes: such are those (and may they never come neare our Athens) whom I may terme capita sine cerebro, brainlesse, or brainsick heads, who gleane tares from a stage, and scatter them in the pulpit: Whil'st Jesuites and Postilers are muster'd up by scores, scarce one quota∣tion of Scripture. This is just as if a man should forbeare wholesome food, and gnaw hungerly upon flint stones, according to the Similiti of Robertus Guleus: The Lord complaines of this Epidemicall disease, Jer. 2. 13. My people have committed two evills, they have forsaken me the foun∣taine
of living waters, and hewed them out cisternes, even broken cistrnes. Would Jeromes dreame, might instruct our morning thoughts. e dreamed that Christ sayd unto him: Inveni te magis Ciceronianum, quam Christianum. Away with such lines of luxuriant fancies, strong you may call them, but by an Antiphrasis, they are as weake as wa∣ter, and cannot quench the drought of a thirsty soule: What's the shell to the kernell? What are all these outsides to Christ Crucified? We cannot preach Christ in any other method, but we shall bewray our own vain-glory, betray the honour of God, and the soules of his people. When poore soules lye a bleeding, and they cry out, None but Christ, what advantage will all the froth of wit afford them? When all the flourishes of witt are empty, and can doe no good, there must be a reall solid thing (as I may say) Corpus so∣lidum succi plenum, that must adde a word of comfort to a troubled spirit. Let me beseech you in the bowells of Christ, that you would preach Christ, and that in all humility. God advanceth the low in spirit: hee's the best Preacher, and he will reape the best fruit of his paines, who endeavours to condescend to the capacity of his Auditors. Perspicuity is the ornament of an Ora∣tour, and the humble preaching of Christ crucifi'd, is the grace of a Sermon. And so I am fallen upon my last particular, , and him crucifi'd. Here's a man of the right stampe indeed: What the Jewes accom∣pted a stumbling block, and the Greeks foolishnesse, he accounted his 3. Particular. The know∣ledge of Christ ctucified. only glory. God forbid saith he, that I should glory, save in the crosse of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucifi'd unto me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. Q. But why doth the Apostle so often inculcate this expression, Christ crucifi'd? why not Christ incarnate, or Christ risen, ascen∣ded, and glorified? why not Christ rather in his Robes, than now in his raggs? A. I answer, without the knowledge of the crosse, the know∣ledge of Christ will profit us nothing. Upon that he was made  a curse for us to redeeme us from the curse of the law. Christ made our atonement upon the crosse, where he felt the Phials of God's wrath powred downe upon his righteous soule, having assumed the Person of an offender. Where then is the wise, where is the scribe, where is the disputer of
this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdome of this world? 1 Cor. . 20. Are swelling words suiteable to this exinanition of the Son of God? Is a losty stile correspondent with this abasement, Is it fit to dis∣course sweetly & delightfully upon gall & vinegar, & to beset nailes and thornes with flowers of Rhetorick, and to bring our Saviour in pompe of words, and vaine-glorious pageants of Art unto his crosse? This is not to preach Christ, but to preach a man's selfe in a vaine glorious affectation of eloquence: Herein consists the duty of a Mini∣ster, for matter to preach Christ only, for manner with all humility and him crucifi'd: This is the preaching when all's done; this I may terme the very Art of preaching, which directly tendes to the Glo∣ry of God, and the salvation of soules. Admit a man be of never so meane a presence, and men come to heare him possessed with a prejudicate opinion, yet if he labour to divide the word aright, and to speake to the conscience, rather than the fancy of his Auditors, O! what wonders doth the Lord worke, by weake meanes? As by rammes hornes, the walls of Jericho, were battered in peeces: and by earthen pitchers the huge host of the Midianites was discomfited: so by that preaching which the wittes of the times, and men that applaud their own fansies accoumpt empty and foolish, the Lord workes miraculously in the conversion of soules. It's the Apostles assertion; For after that in the wisdome of God, the world through wisdome knew not God, it pleased God, by the foolishnesse of preaching to save them that believe. Thus having endeavour'd to beat the corne out of the eare, suffer me now to grinde it at the mill. Application is the life of every sermon, Let me then intreat your patience, in a few words, to presse what hath been said, unto your practise, and then I shall put a period to my discourse. Marlorate, out of Calvin, drawes two inferences of practice: Quid docendum first, and then Quid discendum afterwards: Christ crucified, is the substance of all, that we can preach or heare. It's a lesson can be never enough taught, and never enough learn'd. In the first place, seeing this is that lesson, which we all ought to teach (Fathers and Brethren) suffer I beseech you, the word of exhortation, to conferre your best endea∣vours to put in practice this excellent method, and exquisite art of preaching Wast not this pretious lamp of the sanctuary, in ma∣king
, circumstantials, the maine imployment: What's this but to tithe, mint and cummin, and to neglect the weightier matters of the law. . Ther's one most needfull Doctrine, which you ought frequently to inculcate, and make deep impressions upon the conscience, and that's the knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified. I cannot sufficiently admire how sacred is the ministeriall function What a great honour is it to be imploy'd in Embasy for the King of heaven! O! what fidelity is requisite in the discharge of so concerning a message? You are God's sword hearers, beare up that sword which he hath put into your hands: The Lord hath pro∣mised to be your portion. And if I invert the order of the words, that they which live upon the Altar ought to serve it; it's a piece of the same truth, as well as that; The Lord hath so ordain'd, that those which serve the Altar should live upon the Altar. The rea∣diest way (I conceive) to suppresse, schismes and divisions, is by preaching the power of godlinesse. This is the way to stop the mouthes of Gainsayers; when they see that selfe is not the maine Engineer, nor the promoting of a man's own particular ends, and interests, but the glory of God, and the love of Christ constraines a man, then they are put to silence, and have nothing to gainsay. We read how Moses, in his own cause, was the meekest man upon the face of the earth: yet transported with zeale in the cause of God. A spirit of discretion is required in a Christian, least he may quick∣ly pluck downe with the one hand, what he endeavours to build up with the other Moderation is much talked of; it's a goo to be desired: For oft times it serves as a golden bridle, to curbe a pas∣sion. Calvin. in Epist. ad Melanct. But Calvin's caution to Melanchthn, is worthy of your ob∣servation: Take heed (saith he) that moderation doe not quench thy zeale. Meeknesse and silence, doth good, and is commendable in a man's own cause. It's a man's glory to passe by a personall injury: but when religion suffers and the cause of God lies a bleeding then to be silent, argues a spirituall stupefaction, as if a man were posses∣sed with a dumbe Divell. When men preach their own inventions, teaching for Doctrines, the traditions of men: When men deride the way of holinesse, casting nicknames and aspersions of Puritans Precisians and I know not what upon them, that so they may render their persons, and profession odious, just as thy dealt with the Saints in the Primitive Church, who were put into beares-skins, and then
worryed: When men are not affrayd to exercise their wits, to be witty even unto blasphemy, to cast a slur or a jest upon that sacred word, by which one day they shall be judged; This is not to preach Christ crucifi'd, but it's to crucify him afresh, and to put the Lord of glory to an open shame: When men like Jehu drive furiously, mista∣king a passion for zeale, and so oft times spoile a good cause in the carriage, this is not sutable to that meeknesse, that was in Christ. Let not then any humour or opinion sway thee; ther's nothing so dangerous in religion, as this compliance with humors, and fancies, and siding for selfe-interests and advantages. The Spirit of God must be thy Pilot to seare thee, and the word of God must be thy compasse, and the glory of God ought to be in thy eye as the scope and end of all. Take nothing upon trust, but imitate those noble Act. 17. 11. Bereans, who let nothing passe, without due examination: For we read that they searched the Scriptures dayly, whether those things were so. 2. As you have heard what we must all teach, so you shall 2 Quid discen dum. heare what we must all learne, viz: Christ crucifi'd, Let me then perswade you (as Jerome doth in an Epistle to Paulinus.) Let's learne that knowledge on earth, which will carry us unto heaven. May Discamus eam teris quorum scientia perseve∣rabit in coelis. Hieronymu in Epist. ad Pau∣linum. it never be verifi'd of any of us, that, we seek our own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ, and that we resemble Mercuries sta∣tue, that poynt the way to others, but move not one step our selves. A good life is the best commentary of a good sermon, and the best contation of a slaunder. The shepherd hath discharged his du∣ty, when by his own example, he leads his flock to the waters of comfort. We should all labour to be spirituall builders: As no noise was heard in Solomons Temple; so my heart desires that there may be no differences nor jarrings, to be heard among us. Quirites, was a forcible word with Caesar, to suppresse all his souldiers muti∣nies: and shall not the word Christiani be as prevalent with us. What said Abraham to Lot, Gen. 13. 18. Let there be no strife between my herdsmen, and thy herdsmen, for we be brethren. So say I, we that are sons of the same mother the Church, servants of the same God, heires of the same hope, how should we consult the good, one of a∣nother, labouring to build up one another in the holy faith, conside∣ring to provoke one another to love and to good workes. We are , members one of another.
Is there a controversy betweene thee and thy brother? be not wanting in thy duty to pray for him: this, if any thing, will be the reconciler. Imitate thy Saviour on the crosse: who prayed for his enemies. None are so bad, but they deserve thy prayers, and com∣miseration; Is thy brother ignorant? doe not despise him: Consider who made thee to differ from thy brother, and a greater mercy, re∣quires a greater measure of thankfulnesse. Copy out that excel∣lent advice of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 8. And above all things have fr∣vent oharity among your selves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sinnes. This is to learne Christ crucifi'd, when we labour to puriy our selves even as he is pure, when we labour to be holy as he was, in 1 Jon. 3. 3. all manner of conversation, when we imitate him, in putting on bowells of mercy and tender compassion. My brethren, God hath given you greater measure of knowledge, and therefore he expects from you greater improvements. It was a greivous complaint of Austine in his time: Surguindocti & rapiunt coelum, & nos cum do∣ctrinis nostris detrudimur in gehennam. God grant that our holy life, August. may be the confutation. Let it never be told in Gath, and publisht in the streets of Askelon (I wish there were no cause) that any son of Levi should prove a son of Belial, and make the sacrifice of the Lord to be abhor'd. God forbid, that in so sacred an order, (as the Ministeriall Function is) That there should be any profane Esaus, any taunting Ishmaels, and blasphemous swearers. We cannot in any wise brooke Intruders into the Church: wee abhorre, and that deservedly, their irregular motions who runne before they are sent: wherefore wee should all unite our prayers and endeavours in our capacities, and callings to God as one man, to hinder such from ever setting footing in our Israel. If any such be, (as I feare there are) methinks the fearfull judgments of God executed upon Ʋzzah, and Ʋzziah, for their over-officious services, and intermedling without a calling, should make them feare and tremble, , so unpreparedly to ad∣venture, upon sacred mysteries. In the interim, let us walke inof∣fensively and more circumspectly in our life and conversation, and give no just offence, neither to Jew, nor Genile, nor Church of Gd. This counsell is not unseasonable; for we know not what advantage a scandalous life gives unto a common Adversary. If those that should be Seers, yet will be blind; if the Watchmen sleep, and the Shp∣heards
leave their flocks to hierlings, then will some of Jeroboams Priests, of the basest of the people, presumptuously usurpe the Mi∣nisteriall function. Take which you will, a negligent Minister who performes not his duty, or one that runs without a calling, of his own mission, and the flatteries of such like himselfe, they are both abominable, superfluous branches, which God will pluck up and sweep away, as dung out of the Church. Would we then have our callings more honoured, and our persons more reverenced, and our Doctrine with more cheerfulnesse embraced? lets all endeavour to be more consciencious in the discharge of our duties; let us not post off reformation, from one, to another, accusing, and excusing one another, but let's commune with our own hearts, make diligent enquiry into our own bosomes, every one saying with himselfe in Jer. 8. 6. particular, what have I done? The way to contract greater reve∣rence abroad is to be more circumspect at home, that as we goe be∣yond others in knowledg, so likewise, we should outstrip them in the practise of holinesse. Christ in a more speciall manner hath communicated unto us, the knowledg of his waies: how should we strive with a pious contention, which of us should bring most glory to God, and advance the cause of Christ! It shall be my close and prayer with Moses, that God would put his Ʋrim and Thummim, 1 Pet. 2. 9. upon his holy ones, even write upon all our hearts; Holynesse unto the Heb. 13. 20. 21. Lord, that so we may be a Royall Generation, a Holy Priesthood, a pe∣culiar people, to set forth the praises of him, who hath called us out of darknesse into this marvelous light. I shall conclude with the Apo∣stle, Now the God of peace, that brought againe from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepheard of the sheep, through the bloud of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good worke, to doe his will: working in you, that which is well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Baruchs Hurt and Cure: Set-forth from JEREM: Chap: 45. Vers: 5. And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? seek them not. SERM. II. IF ever a word spoken in due season might be At St Ma∣ries Oxon. Octob. 18. 1642. compared to Apples of Gold in pictures of Sil∣ver, such a one is here represented to your view, being a word of comfort opportunely administred unto a man of a sorrowfull spi∣rit. (And) in the front of my Text is a con∣nexive particle, and drawes down the Con∣text unto the Text. Take a review of the precedent History in this briefe relation. The iniquities of Israel and Judah are full ripe, and now it's high time for the destroying Angell to thrust in his sickle and cut them downe: But such are the tender bowels of our Father of mercies, and God of all conso∣lations, that he gives warning before he smites: It's his accustomed method, to leave no meanes unattempted for his peoples recovery, and for the healing of their backslidings. How often doth he draw them with the bands of a man, even with cords of love? What presuasive arguments, what alluring Rhetorick doth he use, enough to breake the Rock within thee, even an heart harder then Ada∣mant, and to melt it into the love of God, here behold bowels o∣pened,
like the sounding of an Harpe, and once more rol'd together. The Lord denounceth most heavy Judgments, and yet in the midst of Judgment entertaines some thoughts of free love and mercy. The Lord reveales his secret intentions to his servants the Pro∣phets. He makes the prophet Jeremy of his privy counsell. The Lord himselfe becomes the inditer of a dolefull writing fraught with la∣mntation, mourning, and woe: Jeremy dictates from the mouth of God unto Baruch, and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord, Jer. 36. 4. Forthwith they are communicated unto the King, and Princes of Judah. The King being no whit af∣fected Jer. 36. 4. with these dismall tidings, but rather hearing them as it were in a dreame, he cuts the role in peices, and casts it into the fire; O the Sottish Lethargy of a rebellious sinner! Hee's setled upon his lees, at ease in Zion, come what will come, he thinks himselfe se∣cure, that no evill shall happen unto him. Security is the harbinger of ruine. But wickednesse stands not still, it's a teeming mother, though of a spurious issue. To make his sinne compleatly sinfull, he sends hue and crie to apprehend the prophet, and the scribe: Heel'e be re∣veng'd on the instruments, though for the performance of their ob∣liged duty. O ungratefull patient, who when he hath trampled soveraigne physick under his feet, straightway plots the destructi∣on of his physitian! but humane power is circumscrib'd with cer∣taine limits, and compasses, and cannot goe one jot further then the supreme overruling hand permits the motion. Man purposeth, but the Lord disposeth of that purpose as it pleaseth him: God him∣selfe becomes an hiding place unto his servants: But the Lord hid them, Jer. 36. 26. the kings expresse commands must be frustrated, his messengers must returne without their errand, for God hath more worke for the prophet, and the scribe: A new role must be writ: The nationall rebellions must stand upon record, legible to posterity: This God gives in precept, and they immediatly put in execution. And over and above the text is expresse in the close of the forecited chapter, that there were added besides unto them many like words. New rebellions renew their sorrowes; and con∣tinuance in sin, abundantly aggravates the punishment. By this time Baruch is perplex'd with multitudes of sorrowes, the appre∣hension of the Kings wrath makes him feare, and tremble, he is sen∣sible of a burthen too heavy for him to beare, the weight whereof
mak's him fall groveling unto the ground. The Lord becomes the remembrancer of his passionate expressions: Thou didst say, woe is me now, for the Lord hath added greife to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and find no rect v. 3. Addidit dominus scriptionem Scripti vi, one writing after another; I hardly scap't for my former writing, and now I put my selfe into the very mouth of the lyon, adding a second danger to the former, and so expose my selfe unto a continuall succession of miseries. In the mount, in the greatest straits, and extremities the Lord will be seene. Now comes the Lord and brings out a precious cordiall, which he reserv'd for a languishing condition: Now he shewes himselfe indeed a very present helpe in this needfull condition, and time of trouble. Hee's the good Samaritan, he powrs oyle into the wounds, and binds them up▪ hee'l in no wise quench this smoking flax, nor breake this Matth. 12. 20. bruised reed: O tast, and see, O Baruch, how good, and gracious the Lord is to thee, in particular! There's an universall conflagrati∣on, and yet thou art as a brand pluck't out of the burning. There's a generall massacre, and yet thy life is given thee for a prey, whither∣soever thou goest. The Prophet brings this tidings from the mouth of God, v. 4. behold that which I have built I will breake downe. Goodly edifices must be leveld with the ground, and not one stone left upon another: It followeth and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole land. The vineyard of Gods own plan∣tation must be laid wast, and pluck't up root and branch. The Lord, when he begins, will make an end, Laesa patientia, fit furor, Pa∣tience abused breaks forth into extremity of fury: his wrath is in∣cens'd, and his jealousy burnes hot like fire. If any thing, (questi∣onlesse) a showre of teares might quench this burning, but their hearts are unbroken, their fallow-ground is not plowed up; they are past relenting, and so shut against themselves a dore of mercy. And now, O Baruch, thou sonne of Neriah, where's thy sympathy? why dost not thou call thy comforts Ichabods? Dost thou thinke to fare well at home, whilst the Church of God is under hatches abroad? wouldst thou be in the floate of prosperity, whilst the Church is in the ebbe of adversity: As the marriners in a tempest rows'd Jonah and cryed, what meanest thou, O sleeper, arise, call upon thy God, Jonah 1. 6. so say I, arise, and lay to heart the afflictions of thy brethren. When private calamities come in competition with,
publick, let the latter preponderate: Thou must not stick to fore∣goe thy own rest, ease, tranquility, nay thy life it selfe, when thou hast a lawfull calling to lay it downe in these times of horrour, and confusion. Let this advice from heaven in my text have an effec∣tuall influence upon thy spirit, & tu quaerres tibi res magnas? ne quaerito: and seekest thou great things for thy selfe seeke them not. My text may be stil'd Baruch's hurt, and cure. If he or any other Baruchs Hurt and Cure. would with the sorcerer bost himselfe to be some great one in the world, if he set upon the pursuite of great things in this world, an arrow from God will be sent, and pierce his soule through with many sorrowes: there's his hurt. But if so be he become endowed with a selfe denying spirit, so that sublunary things are below his notice, he can bid adieu unto them, as unsutable to his elevated affections, hee's a man of a singular temper, hee'l discerne a sun of righteousnesse with healing wings, there's his cure. So then in the words formally considered, there's a Question and an answere. In the Question I recommend three particulars unto 1. An Act. 2. An Object. 3. The person. your observation. 1. An act, and seekest thou. 2. The Object, great things. 3. The persons, one and the same, thou for thy selfe. The Prophet anticipates Baruchs answere, and gives it himselfe, seeke them not. This dehortation is diametrically opposite. It stands like the Cherubims with a flaming sword to keep the way of the tree of life. A sinner rides full speed in a swift career of un∣godlinesse: Here's a Remora which purposely meets him, and stops his passage. Hee's bid to stand, by the watchman of the Lord of Hosts. You see then (my Brethren) what I am to presse upon your affections, that ye would get rays'd spirits, and sue out a divorce between your selves, and the world. The Argument of my dis∣course is Heavenly mindednesse. The enlargement of this Theme is most sutable to these present distractions, where there are such sad thoughts of heart for the afflictions of Joseph, and for the divisions of Reuben. Is it now a time for purchasing of Lands, and revenues, eating the fat, and drinking the sweet, to solace our selves in all va∣riety of voluptuousnesse, and epicurisme, to stretch out our selves in beds of Ivory, to drinke wine in bowles, and yet remaine insensible of the afflictions of Joseph? If by such projects as these we seeke to get a name upon earth, we may build a Babel of our own confusion.
But let us learne to deny our lawfull pleasures, and make our teares our meate and drinke, imitating St James, whose knees (as Eusebius records) became like camels hooss by the assiduity of his devotion. Where's the man that spares the more either from his Eusebius Eccle. Hist. belly, or his back, that prostrates himselfe in the dust before the throne of Grace, whose soule is alike affected with Jremies to weep in secret for the sins of the times? I feare our times are just like those before the deluge, eating, and drinking, and making merry. God grant that wee imitate not the Swans, who (as they say) sing sweetly before their Funerall. Cast your eyes upon the bleeding condition of Ireland, and that which comes neerer home the mise∣rable distractions of the land of our Nativity: Is mirth, jollity, seasonable at a Fast, or Funerall? Is it a discourse sutable for a dying man to talke of honours, high places, and promotions? shall a man drencht in teares, pursue pastimes, and pleasures? shall hu∣mility and lowlinesse change the scene into pride, and ambition? shall poverty invest it selfe with stately robes? shalt thou O Ba∣ruch, when all the world is in combustion, be so spiritually benum∣med, as to have thy heart doting upon the momentany pleasures of this wicked world? doth thy heart hanker after thy pleasures? and with Lots wife, doest thou looke back upon the delights of So∣dom? Let her  be thy warning peice not to seeke great things for thy selfe. Thus having paraphras'd the words, I shall prosecute them ac∣cording to my proposed method, intending the question for the doctrinall part of my text: and seekest thou great things for thy selfe? And the dehortatory answere shall be my use, and application: seeke them not. In the unfolding whereof, I shall purposely indea∣vour to enlarge my selfe in a plaine and familiar discourse, making my text my Apology, not to seeke great things for my selfe, not any sublime composures to gratify any wanton eares of Athens, but to condiscend unto the capacity of the meanest Auditor that heares me this day. In the prosecution of the words I shall not separate the act from the object: they are joyn'd in the sense, and therefore Il'e not divide them in my discourse: And so Il'e resume them jointly: Et quae∣ris tibi grandia? and seekest thou great things? And now, O Baruch thou sonne of Neriah, let me once more on this wise expostulate
the matter with thee! Is there any such a miablenesse in that thing, whereon thy heart is so wholy enamoured? doth the object so necessarily conduce to the compleating of thy felicity, that with Rachel thou must have it, or else die? Is thy life bound up in it's life, as Jacobs was in Benjamins, so that for a moment thou canst not foregoe the fruition of it? what is the reason that thou art so pos∣sest with so much anxiety of spirit? when I see a man bid adieu to all other things, and wholly fix himselfe upon one thing alone, I presently conjecture that there is some rarity, and excellency in that thing which wholy takes up his affections, and terminates his acquiescencie, as lines in their proper center. Let's then, as Moses did, turne aside, and see what these great things are, whether an∣swerable to the report, and expectation. yea, or no. But alas our paines will be to small purpose, and the issue parallel to the pains, both alike unfruitfull. The text calls them great things: by which Vatablus, and some others understand the gift of prophey, but this interpretation hath no correspondence with the History, and seems Vatablus. Theodoretus C. A. Lapide Calv. in Loc. to offer violence to the words: But I rather adhere to Theodoret, a Lapide, Calv. and indeed the generall current of interpreters, who by great things understand rest and tranquility, an immunity from imminent, and apparent dangers, a confluence of outward delights and comforts, as riches, honours, and the like: Out of an apprehen∣sion of the losse of these, there arose such grievous complaints, and bitter expressions of sorrowes: a great infirmity, a practise how unsutable unto a servant of God! what was not Baruch promoted to so high an honour as to be the Scribe, and Amanuensis of the Lord of Hosts, and shall he be so nice and delicate, as to account his life more precious then many thousands, to preferre his private well-fare; before the weale-publick? O faint hearted souldier! Ʋriah was of a more Heroicall spirit, when David bad him goe home to his house, and refresh himselfe after his journey: The Arke, saith he, and Israel, and Judah abid in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord are incamped in open feild, shall I then goe into my house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as 2 Sam. 11. 11. Salu. Bell. Ju∣gurh. thy soule liveth, I will not do this thing: Marius in Salust discoverd a magnanimous resolution unto his souldiers: Doctus sum hie∣mem, & aestatem juxta pati, humi requiescere edem tempore, inopiam & laborem tolerare. A child of God must preferre the welfare of Zion
before his private respects, and interests: he must not dreame of his own personall peace in their publick calamities, in times of cap∣tivity and Iacobs troubles, we must beare a share with them in their sufferings: O brave profession of the Kingly prophet, Psal. 137. 6. If I forget thee O Jerusalm, let my right hand forget her cunning. That of Moses must be the good Christians choyce, Heb. 11. 25. Rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which last but for a season. But lets take a narrower survey of these great things, and lets consider whether they be worth the seeking after, yea, or no. One man seek's rest, and quietnesse, these are his great things. Naomi sought out a rest for Ruth: This man would Induction. One man seekes rest, and quiet∣nesse. faine sit under his own vine, and under his own figtree, hee's secure with the men of Laish, he resembles the whore, who sits as a queen, and saith no evill shall happen unto her: But ye know the wofull end of the men of Laish: Their security exposed them to their ene∣mies rage and fury: And that Babylonish strumpet shall have death, and mourning, and famine, even all these plagues come upon her in one day, Rev. 18. 8. So the foole in the Gospell, and Nebuchadnezzar amidst their vaine glorious boastings were cashier'd of all. When Amnons heart was merry with wine, then was he slaine: The hand-writing came out against Belshazzar, and numbred his dayes amid'st his ca∣rousing, and jollities. Agag came delicately, but was presently hewed in peices before the Lord in Gilgal. Sisra tooke his sleepe, but never awak't, but unto eternity. When men seeke rest, it will fly from them. When Job promis'd rest unto himselfe, he could not find it: my bones, saith he, are pirced in me in the night season, and my sinew's take no rest, Job 30. 17. Ponder seriously with thy selfe, how David was a man of warres, and the sword never departed from his house: so perhaps God hath not yet intended for thee a blessing of peace. Hee'l make a souldier of thee to fight his battles, hee'l put thee upon hard services in hard times to try what mettall thou art made of: he intends thee for a valiant champion, and combatant. Take heed then of incurring that fearfull curse of Mroz, Jud. 3. 23. who came not to the helpe of the Lord, to the helpe of the Lord against the mighty. Would'st thou faine sleep in a whole skin, when thou∣sands fall besides thee, and ten thousands at thy right hand? Thin∣kest thou to be at rest, free from all enemies within, and without? May be God sees it fit in wisdome to exercise thee with some smar∣ting
crosse, lest otherwise with Jeshurun thou should'st wax fat, and kick against the Rock of thy salvation. God know's what's better for thee, then thou dost for thy selfe. May be its a speciall providence, that thou shalt not receive good things in this life, nor take thy rest in this world. Non ad hoc noc de paradiso voluptatis Bern. ejecit (saith Bernard) God hath not cast a man out of paradise, for him to find another paradise in this world. All our rest, and qui∣etnesse is in God. It's an observation of the Rabbines, that all the letters in the name Jehovah are quiescent: And they say ther's a mystery in it, to shew that all our rest is in God alone. Domine August. fecisti nos pro te, & in quietum est cor nostrum, donec veniat ad te. Lord thou hast made us for thee, and our heart is never at rest, untill it come unto thee, so Augustine. We cannot chuse but expect crosses in this world, since we live in the valley of teares. The Ca∣naanites were thornes in the Israelites sides, which the Lord left for their triall: such a man is of a proud, and haughty spirit, God sends an affliction, and bids it take downe his pride: Another loves his ease, and lives carelesly, God sends some sharp crosse to scoure away his rust contracted by want of usage. The emulation between Rome and Carthage was a foyle to set out each others renoune and valour. The skilfullnesse of a Pilot is unknown but in a tempest: a Captains valour appeares in the day of battle, and a Christians Magnanimity in a fiery triall: so then, to summe up this particular: Let me aske thee, are peace, and quietnesse, an exemption from cares, and troubles the great things which thou seekest after? O how wilt thou be deceiv'd of thy expectation? quaeris magna, scilicet quietem, & tran∣quilitatem, thou seekest great things (i. e.) rest, ease, and tranquility & invenies misera, scilicet motus, & procllas: thou shalt find quite con∣trary, hurley-burleyes, stormes, and tempests. Another man seek's for promotion, and high places, these are A Second man seeks promotions. the grandia, his great things for the attainment whereof, he becomes as very a Parasite as were those sordid flatterers of Dionysius, who lick't up his spittle, and preferr'd it before Nctor: this is indeed  an unstable man, as St James phraseth him, who Jam. 1. 8. runs with the tide, and varies with the practise of the times: so that oft times the humour of his honourable Mecoenas becomes the compasse whereby hee'l steere the course of his life, and conversa∣tion: But pause a while thou who runst in an eager pursuit after
promotion, let me aske thee art thou fit for it? or if so, art thou sure thou shalt not misse of it? honor fugientem squitur, sequentem fugit. Honour like the shadow when a man looks towards it, it avoids him, but if a man turne his back from it, it followes him. And whence comes promotion? It comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South: But God is the Iudge, heuttth down one, and settth up another, Psal. 75. 6, 7. How many verify the proverbe of the Ambitious, who have a Pope in their belly? How many are their aspiring projects, and how unsatiable are their desires? Me thinks the practise of David, should curbe them: who went into the Sanctuary of God, and understood their end: and that's specifi∣ed, Psal. 73. 18. surely thou did'st set them in slippery places, then castest them down into destruction. Agrippina temper'd her poysons in that meat which Claudius most delighted: And so thy greatest honours may prove thy greatest torments. It's the observation Abulensis. of Abulensis, that those men of renoune who have been most glo∣rious in the worlds accompt have come to most inglorious ends, as Absaloms beauty, Sampsons strength, Achitophels policy, Asahels swiftnesse proved their overthrowes: and Alexandr notwithstan∣ding his great conquests, was at the last poisoned. Those quatuor summa imperia the Assyrian, Persian, Graecian, and Roman Empires presently came to ruine: You know the fatall end of Haman the greatest favourite in King Ahashuerosh Court, who erst while was advanc't above all the princes, and presently after was elevated higher upon a gallowes. O then take heed, lest any preferment choake the grace of God in thy soule. C. A Lapide hath a story of C. A Lapide. Pius quintus, Cùm essem religiosus bene sperabam de salute animae meae, Cardinalis factus extimui, Pontifex creatus pene desper. Every de∣gree of preferment made his condition more disconsolate. But my charity hopes better things of you my brethren, and such as ac∣company salvation: When I see the failings of my elder Brethren, as on e side, I abhorre daubing, and flattery, so on the other side I can in no wise brooke the practise of an undutifull Cham, to discover their nakednesse, where is probable hopes of amend∣ment. If it were possible we should have peace with all men, and cover one anothers errors with the mantle of love: A bad sense must not be entertain'd, when words can admit of a better construction.
May it never be verifyed of any of us, that our young yeares con∣demne our old, and that we grow worse by those dignities, which should make us more dutifull. Let not, O let not your talents be as so many prices put into the hands of fooles, for want of hearts to make the best improvement of them. What pitty 'tis to see, and I cannot see it without a bleeding heart) that excellent gifts, (and abilities are so often buried in a napkin, or else imployed the contrary way, by such who are ingeniose nequam, witty enough to their shame, and infamy: To dismisse this particular instance; thou that art so ambitious of honours; It's a great hazard, whe∣ther thou canst get honours, or if got, it's a greater hazard, whether thou canst keepe them: & miserrimum est fuisse faelicem. Quaeris magna? Honours, promotions: Invenies parva, little, small things, or else the quite contrary. Thus you see honours, and high places are not the great things worthy of our search, and labour. 3. Another man seeks after riches, and worldly wealth, they A third man seeks riches, they are his great things. are those great things, which set his endeavours a working. This man is still a compassing of corne, and oyle, he riseth early, goeth to bed late, eateth the bread of carefulnesse, and looseth his beloved sleepe. Is there a good penny-worth, a good bargaine stirring, how doth he labour to compasse it? He racks his rents, grinds the faces of the poore, he makes hast to be rich, and this he thinks is the right course, but hees not aware all this while, that he hath put his monies into a broken bag, and that the timber, and stones in the wallwill prove vocall, and cry out against him: the prophet acquaints him with his fatall doom, Jer. 17. 11. As the partridge sitteth on egs, and hatcheth them not, so he thateteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst  his daies, and at his end shall be a foole; That wedg of gold which he so idoliz'd, will in conclusion prove his greatest curse: his table will prove his snare, his meat his gravell, his cup his poyson, his bed a bed of thornes, because these creatures are not sent in mercy, and so not sanctifyed by God. And besides we my dis∣cerne by experience, how these covetous earth-wormes are crost in their intentions. They scrape up riches, and know not who shall enjoy them. Oft times God punisheth sin by it's contrary, the sin of covetousnesse in the parents, with the sin of prodigality in the children, so that they scatter as fast as the other gather'd, and wast as profusely, as the other got greedily. God crosseth men in their
darling sins, as David was crost in his beloved Absalon, Absalon in his Kingdome, Amnon in his Tamar. So the covetous are crost in their greatest confluence of riches; Those very things which they have pursued with the strongest affections, prove unto them the most bitter afflictions. Hereupon Reverend Latimer inculcates Latimer in his Sermons. this lesson againe, and againe, beware of Covetousnesse, beware of Covetousnesse. Of all other sins, Luther confest that he found his heart least inclin'd to covetousnesse: when some bad stop his mouth with preferment, another answered, hem Germana ista bestia non curat au∣rum: So Melchior Adamus in his life. Hence Seneca very divine∣ly: Melchior Ada∣mun vitâ Lu∣theri. Seneca de Bre∣vitate tae. A fourth man proposeh mirth &c. Brevissima ad divitias per contemptum divitiarum via, the con∣tempt of riches is a price paid to purchase them. 4thly and Lastly, not to multiply any more instances: Others propose unto themselves mirth, and jollity, these are their great things: Many have thoughts of Heaven, they promise to redeeme their time, as Elimelech promis'd to redeeme the inheritance, but when there came a condition, thou must take Ruth with it, then he fly'd off: I cannot redeeme it, lest I marre mine own inheritance, Ruth: 4. 6. So men are apt to say, O if I should take a precise course of life, I should marre my hopes, then farewell all pleasures, and com∣forts: whereas indeed if we had the spirit of discerning, we should see, that there's no reall pleasure but in the waies of godlinesse: The waies of wisdome are waies of pleasantnesse, and her pathes are peace, Prov. 3. 17. of all other pleasures, I may say, inter amplexus strangu∣lant. What's all the mirth, and jollity of the world but madnesse, as Slomon concluded by wofull experience: I said of laughter it is mad, and of mirth what doth it? Eccles. 2. 2. All the mirth of the wicked is like the crackling of thornes, but a blaze, and extinguished. Their hearts are full of gravell, there's a dampe upon their consci∣ences. The terrors of God afright them amidst all their mirth, an jollity. The Epicure makes his belly his God. Clemns calls his vice by two words which expresse them to the life , belly phrensy: the brutish drunkard makes his cups Clemens Alex: his Idols: Hee's mighty to powre in strong drinke, but he consi∣ders not, that cups of trembling will follow cups of healthing, and carousing, and that the time will come, when he shall be cald to a fevere accompt for those cups, which he hath powred down his own throate, and for those (which he least thinks of) that he hath forc't
upon his brother. O thinke upon this in your most sad, and com∣posed thoughts, you who ever you are, that are addicted to your pleasures, that make your recreation your profession, and imploy∣ment, who eat and drinke, and rise up to play: when cards and dice (to say no worse) shall be more exercis'd then the booke of God: when men can have time enough for vaine, and unprofitable pa∣stimes, and can have mony enough to spend upon a base lust, yet if they be requir'd to set upon a businesse of weight and conse∣quence, then they complaine of want of time, and if they be en∣treated to extend their bowels of compassion to any of Christ's afflicted members, then they plead poverty; where there are such symptomes as these, you may guesse what's the disease of the ill∣affected parts, and the issue will be lamentable. I have read of a young man, who stood by St Ambrose, and saw his excellent death, he presently said to some of his boone companions, O that I might live with you, and die with him. So many we have who with Bala∣am would faine die the death of the righteous, but take no care to live the life of the righteous. What wilt not thou foregoe a plea∣sure, a beloved sinne for Christ? Christ will one day say to thee: could I be content to part with my blood, and could'st not thou be content to part witha lust? Augustine in his confessions hath August. Con∣fession. this notable expression: Quàm suave mihi subito factum est care∣re suavitatibus nugarum? How sweet is it to mee of a sudden to want those sweet vanities! One drop of a racking conscience swallowes up an ocean of ungodly joy. Onely soule delights leave a sweet rellish in the spirit, but carnall pleasures leave a sting in the conscience. By these instances ye may guesse at the rest: suffer me to make a briefe recapitulation of the premisses. Sup∣pose rest, and quietnesse, be the great things sought after, whilst we pursue them greedily, vexations, troubles, disquietnesse of spirit come in thick, and threefold, and dash all. Promotions, and pre∣ferments if they be the great things we seeke after, they resemble Jonah's gourd, which in one night had it's originall, and it's period. Riches and wealth, if they be the great things sought after, these fly away, they prove Aegyptian reeds, wells without water, and they start aside like broken bowes. Admit pleasures, and carnall jollity be the great things sought after, however the prologue may promise a comedy; yet the Epilogue will discover a fatall tragedy;
whatever laughter was extorted, was but risus Sardonicus. All the pleasures are but  bitter-sweets; will there not in all these be bitternesse in the end? Thus drawing an induction from these and the rest, I may hence collect an universall conclusion: That nothing under the sunne is worthy of the labour, and pur∣suite of the sonnes of men. Thou then ex meliore luto sictus, who art fram'd of a better mold, who art imploy'd in a more peculiar service for the God of Heaven, O tread not Antipodes, be not un∣sutable to thy Lord and master: A shame for a child to be so unlike his Father: Tu tibi ipsi quaeris grandia? dost thou, O Baruch, Baruch the per∣son seeking. seeke great things, thou for thy selfe, which is the person seeking, and now bespeaks the continuance of your patience. This string sounds harsh; It's strange that a man so highly advanc't in the service of God should so much forget himselfe. C. A Laide checks him thus: solus vis otiari, nil vis pati pro conversione & salute C. A Lapide, in Loc. populi? would'st thou enjoy thy rest alone, and venter nothing for the conversion and safety of the people of God? There's an Emphasis in the word, wilt thou seeke for thy selfe? As suppo∣sing the Church, and State should be put into one ballance, and thy life in another, would'st thou desire to outweigh them both? Is thy life more pretious then so many millions? Would'st thou be advanc't when the Church is brought low? Would'st▪ thou warme thy selfe at home by thine own fire, when the temple of the Lord is a burning? Questionlesse (my brethren) it's the duty of a child of God to haue a fellow-feeling of his brethrens calamities, to lay to heart their miseries, as if they were his own: Private interests must give place to publick miseries. Particular relations must be swallowed up in the weale publick. Private affaires must cease and be suspended, when mighty, and urgent businesse of Church and state require our helping hand. Good old Elyes heart trembled for the Arke of God, he could heare with patience the flight of Israel, and the slaughter of his sonnes, but as soone as the messenger made mention that the Arke of God was taken, he fell from off the seat back∣ward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died, 1 Sam. 4. 18. And his daughter in law Phineas wife bowed her selfe, and travailed, and called her child Ihabod, saying the glory is departed from Israel, because the Arke of God was taken, vers. 22. You heare how deeply these two were affected with the Churches misery. It were a pru∣dent
and profitable course in such times as these wherein we live to read leasurely over the booke of Lamentations, that so our hearts might be fram'd into a broken temper. And in the fayling of this man of God, it should be our wisdome profitably to reflect upon our selves, and see where's our sympathy in these times of nationall calamities. I feare most of our Consciences, if they be not caute∣ris'd, will give in evidence to the contrary: How many are there who grow worse and worse in these perillous times, adding dun∣kennesse to thirst, living in all manner of Epicurisme, and sensuality? Now Gods judgments are abroad, how few are there that learne righteousnesse at home? Where's the man that makes such an excellent use of these distractions as to labour to walke more close∣ly with God, and to make his peace with him? Where's the man of Jermies temper, who makes his head waters, and his eyes a fountaine of teares? Jer. 9. 1. Who eats no pleasant bread with Daniel? who with Job abhorres himselfe, and repents in dust and ashes? we have many water-breaches, and we may feare an innundation. It nearly concernes us to put in practise the prophet Jols counsell: To turne unto the Lord with all our hearts, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, Joel 2. 12. would we were better acquainted that our Benonies will prove our Benjamins, our sons of sorrow, the sons of our right hand: we should mourn with those that mourn, and share with our brethren in their sufferings. There's more comfort to be extracted out of one daies communion with the Saints of God, though in a suffering condition, then in all the joviall society in the universe. It's storyed of Godfrey of Bullen, that he refus'd to be crownd at Jerusalem with a crowne of Gold, where Hist of God frey of Bullen in Fullers Holy Warr. Christ was crown'd with a crown of thorns: A modest act that would not admit such a vast disproportion between him and Christ: and shall we crown our selves with rose buds, abate nothing of our for∣mer delights amidst all these dangers, and perplexities? When one ask't Plato how he came to such a perfection of wisdome, he returnes this answer: plus olei consumpsi in lampade, quâm vini in calice, that he spent more oyle in the lampe, then wine in the cup. May the same be verified of us all: And may not the complaint of the Prophet Isaiah, Is. 22. 12. find us guilty: and in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldnesse, and to girding with sack-cloth; and behold, joy and gladnesse, slaying Oxen
and killing sheepe, eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let us eat, and drinke, Magnificè tibi prospectum vis & in omnibus procellis &c. Ju∣nius in locum. for to morrow we shall die: (Blessed be God) we have fasting daies enjoyn'd by publick authority, but have not we just cause to fast for our fasting, and mourne, and be heartily sorrowfull that we have mourn'd, and sorrow'd no more? what a fearfull woe is there pronounc'd against those that are at ease in Zion: Magnificè tibi prospectum vis, & in omnibus procellis, ac tempestatibus, tanquam è portu naufragium publicum prospectare? So Junius upon my text tells us, wilt thou sit at the haven, and see others in a ship-wrack, and not beare a share in their sufferings? My brethren, we sit here in peace: our profession is a profession of peace: We are Ministers of the Gospell, and the Gospell is a Gospell of peace: How should we with united hearts pray for the peace of Jerusalem! our weapons should be preces & lachrymae, prayers and teares are the best ar∣mour of proofe, most sutable to men of our coats. The Apostles advise must be put in practise: study to be quiet, and to doe your own businesse, 1 Thes 4. 11. Our eyes must be bedew'd with teares: Our soules must be afflicted with sorrow, and with our indefatigable supplications never give the Lord any rest, untill he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isay 62. 6, 7. O then give not liberty to thy nor satisfie thy selfe to the utmost though in a lawfull pleasure: Labour for the practise of mortification, and learne the divine les∣son taught in the schoole of Christ, to deny thy selfe. Labour to bring thy selfe over to a sweet frame of resignation, that thou canst willingly part with thy choicest pleasures, and comforts for Jesus Christ: As those in the Revelations cast down their crownes, so cast down thy chiefest comforts at the feet of Christ. It was an excellent speech of David, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. If I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back againe, and shew me both it, and its habitation, But if he say thus, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him doe to me as seemeth good to him: so if it seeme good in the eyes of God, he can wholy take thy heart off thy com∣forts, or else give thee them in greater mercy, in a more sanctified manner, and so make thy comforts exceeding comfortable. What canst not thou foregoe any outward pleasure, any worldly delight now? how wouldst thou resist unto blood, undergoe the fiery tryall, if Christ should call thee thereunto? If thou hast runne with the footmen, and they have wearied thee then how canst thou contend
with horses: And if in the land of peace, wherein thou trusted'st they wearid thee, then how wilt thou doe in the swelling of Jordan: Tertullian in his tract de cultu faeminarum hath this observation: Timeo crvicem, ne margaritarum, & smaragdorum laqueis occupata, Jer. 12. 5. Tertul. in Lib. de cultu Faemi∣narum. lorum Spathae non det. I feare (saith he) that neck, that is used to pearles, and chaines, will not give it selfe to the sword: Men of delicate appetites, who pamper their flesh, will find it a difficult taske to endure any hard-ship for Christ's name. It was an inhu∣mane practise of that Monster Nero, who rejoyc'd when Rome was on fier. None but beasts will enjoy their pleasures, when the com∣mon-wealth is in jeopardy. and religion, and liberty lies at stake. O then put on bowels of compassion, and be alike affected one to another, beare one anothers burthens: Let your resolution run pa∣ralel with St Paul's: who is aflicted and I burne not? O that in∣stead of burning in lusts, you would burne in love one to another. A blessed alteration. Tudippus, and Phocion being both condemn'd to die, one of them was afraid, the other recollected his spirits, and in this wise comforted him: Non satis est tibi, Tudippe, cum Pho∣cione Mori? Is it not sufficient for thee O Tudippus, that thou diest with Phocion. A commnion with Christ's afflicted members in a suffering condition is accounted their crowne and glory. Con∣sider God hath cald us unto vertue, and unto glory: It's the Gos∣pels glory to set out unto us high, and glorious things: these we want, and these are worthy of our search: Let's then no more seeke after lying vanities, and forsake our own mercy: The dehor∣tation reacheth us home in my text: Ne quaesuris: seeke them not, which is the Use, and Application, which I promis'd you, the close of my paines, and your patience. Application. Is. 55. 2. Use. 1. for Expostulation. Let me expostulate the case with you as the prophet Isaiah doth, wherefore do ye spend mony for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which satisfies not? There's no created power which can be commensurate to the boundlesse desires of an immortall soule: A glutton may fill his belly, but he cannot fill his lusts. A rich man may fill his barnes, but he cannot fill his heart: It's triangular, still one angle will be empty: An ambitious man may have titles of honour enough to overcharge his memory, but not to fill his pride: The voluptuous may wallow in sensuall delights, he may be a frequenter of prophane Theatricall interludes, and yet the
hell of his desires remaines unsatisfied: why then should men be such fooles to seeke after other lovers besides Jesus Christ, and to hunt after any other kingdome, besides the Kingdome of God, and his righteousnesse? how many mens hearts are in aequilibrio pendula, indifferent to which side the ballance turnes. When Mr∣decay was rays'd, many became Jewes: and it was the saying of Pa∣machius an heathen: Fac me Pontificem, & ero Christianus. Such u Platiram devi tis Portificum. follow religion, as the people did our Saviour, for the loaves, and so make it a stalking horse for the advancing of their ambitious designes: but siniter respects never prove a sure bottome for the soule to be fixt upon. If the maine question of a Minister be, what's the fleece of the sheep, I much scruple whither he hath the heart to feed them. For a man to be wedded to his revenues, and incomes, and not to the discharge of his duty, what's this but to marry the portion, and not the wife. What a great madnesse is there in men not to trust their honours, dignities, and riches with God, in whose hands they are in the safest custody? what folly is there in men to make their servants their Masters, by Idolizing an arme of flesh, and subjugating themselves unto the creatures, as if they pre∣ferred a slavery before a freedome: The Apostle tells us Col. 3. 3. that we are dead men, and is it congruous for dead men to hunt after honours, and the worlds goods? wee are crucified to the world: And we are Crucified with Christ: O labour then to answere thy Originall: As he minded not high things on earth, as he was wrap't up in heavenly meditations, so should we have rays'd spirits, and sore aloft, being carried with the wings of divine contempla∣tion. It's reported of Lysimachus, that for his staying to drinke one draught of water he lost his kingdome. So if we stay for these waters drawn out of the broken cisternes of the creatures we may hazard our pretious soules: had we eye-salve from Christ to iliu∣minate us; we should discerne such transcendent beauty in the waies of holinesse, so that we should enter an action, and zealously commence a suite against the world, and never let fall the suite, till we have obtain'd a sequestration between our soules, and these things here below. You may remember that my errand is to you, not to seeke after great things, I meane such as are reputed so by the great ones of the world. Who ever sought them and prospered? Nimrod, Haman, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod sought them out to the
utter ruine of the seekers. Let the streame be turn'd, seeke the Matth. 6. 33. Kingdome of God and his righteousnsse, and all other things shall be ad∣ded as supernumerar accruments; O that I could prevaile with you to seeke those things that are above. It's the glory of the Gospell to set out glorious things: We have a glorious God, glorious gra∣ces, glorious company, glorious priviledges, and a glorious reward: Had'st thou but a glimpse of those superlative excellencies which are treasur'd up in Christ, of those glorious things which are spoken of the City of God, which St Peter cals , 1 Pet. 5. 4. an immarcessible crowne of glory, then thou would'st be trans∣form'd into another manner of man, thy tongue will be toucht with a coale from the altar: Thy language woud bewray thee to be a denizon of Canaan, thy love, joy, and hope, would be alie∣nated from the world, and wholy center upon God, who is the love, joy, and hope of thy soule. Were there no future reward of god∣linesse, the beauty that is in it selfe is more amiable, and desiderable then all the Kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them. What Cleopatra. said Cleopatra to Marcus Antonius? It's not for you to be a fishing for small fish, but for townes, forts, and castles: And so for those who have the beames of Gods reconcil'd countenance darted into their soules, who have a spirituall acquaintance, and a sacred communion with the great  God of Heaven, and Earth, It's not for them to be tra∣ding for meane things, for the trash, and pelfe of this miserable world, but their spirits must aspire unto great things, eternall life v. Fox Martyr. de Edvardo primo. glory, and immortality, even the price of the high calling, that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. It's story'd of Edward the first, that he had a vehement desire to goe to Jerusalem, but being prevented by death, he gave in charge on his death-bed, that his sonne should convey his heart thither, and for that purpose he left a great Masse of mony: so the Saints though their bodies are not in Heaven, yet their hearts are there, and their conversation is above, though their bodies are here below: O that my words might make a firme im∣pression upon your consciences, that you would put the highest price upon godlinesse, and account it your honour and preferment, whilst others labour for corne, and oyle, and joyne house to house for the perpetuating of their memories, let me perswade you to labour for the riches of faith, and the riches of Christ, that you may be rich in holinesse, and may be truly noble by the divine image
stamp't upon your soules; you that are cald to be Gods Embassa∣dours, his mouth to his people, how dare ye chuse rather to be schollars to Pythagoras then to Christ by affecting a stupendious silence; you that have tooke upon you the charge of soules, doe not, O doe not maintaine your bravery by the price of blood. The time will come when it will be said, sheapheard give accompt of the flock committed to thy charge: When Andrew shall come in with Achaia, by him converted to the saving knowledg of the faith, John with Asia, Thomas with India, Peter with the Jewes, and Paul with the Gentiles, where then shall the idol shepheard ap∣peare, will such an Apology hold, I could not brooke the rusticity of the people, it would be a crushing of my hopes of preferment if I should spend my spirits upon such illiterate men. But how da∣rest thou deny thy breath to those poore soules, for whom Christ powred out his pretious blood out of his veines? My hearts desire is that all men in place of quality would herein anticipate authority, and feed their flocks themselves, and labour to approve them∣selves workemen, not to be ashamed, not handling the word of God deceitfully. Happy were it for us, if we could keep a Parliament within our selves, and save them a labour by setting upon the worke of reformation, every man in his own soule, and conscience. Hee's the best Critick, who makes a Critica Sacra upon his own heart, who labours to understand the Errata of his own life, and to wipe them out with the spunge of Godly sorrow. Whilst we have an heart, and a heart, a heart for God, and a heart for Mammon, whilst worldly pompe, and high place come in competition with the glo∣ry of God, so that we would gladly carry a faire correspondence on both sides: if these be our humours, we can never  walke with a right foote in the waies of godlinesse. When thou flatterest thy heart on this wise: O if I shone in an higher sphere, if I had such, and such a place of dignity, I should then labour, to bring more glory to God, thou colludest with thy conscience, and art not acquainted with thy selfe-deceiving-spirit, how higher places might cause greater precipices. If thou art not qualifi'd for the present condition, I feare thou wilt be more unfit to manage another. This is an hard lesson which I inculcate: what shall the wise man deny his wisdome, the honourable man his honours, the rich man his riches? we say tis a strong stomack that can digest
much honey, so it's a strong spirit that is not overcome with the sweetnesse of much prosperity. It's a true signe that the Eunuchs were on Jehues side, when they cast down Jezebell, who had painted her face in pompe, and glory: so when the world comes in its har∣lots dresse, and inticeth us to all manner of impurity, if we can lend a deafe eare unto its syrenicall inchantments, if we can bid defiance unto its bewitching allurements, this is an argument that we set our faces towards Heaven, that we seek a citty which is above, whose maker is the Lord of Hosts. In the second place, ile adde a few directions how we should  1. For Directi∣on. doe to slacken our pursuit after great things, and get our hearts estrang'd from them. 1. For direction, amongst many I shall on∣ly advise you to these foure things. 1. Labour for a contented mind. 2. Learne to deny your selves. 3. Study the vanitie of the creature. 4. Be acquainted with the fulnesse that is in Christ. 1. You must labour for contentation of spirit, It's a lesson worth Drect. 1. Labour for acon∣tented mind. the learning, Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in what state soever I am there∣with to be content: what's the reason that the ambitious never cea∣seth climbing, the covetous never ceaseth scraping, the Epicure never ceaseth swallowing, but because he is not contented with his present condition? No life to a contented mind, it accounts its poore cottage a kingdome, it accounts its gleanings a granary, its russet beyond all the rufflings in silk, and sattin: satis est diviti∣arum nihil amplius velle: So Quintilian: This is reckned by Seneca Quintil. Orat. 13. Seneca de vita beatâ.! Solum certe Beatum, Cor∣tina Aglium judicavit qui in angustissmo Arcadiae paupe∣ris soli Domi∣nus nunquam egessus paterni Cespitis Te∣minos invenitur, Jul Sol. Polyhist. amongst his beatitudes: beatus est, praesentibus, qualiacunque sunt, contentus, amicusque rebus suis: He indeed is a happy man who is contented with his present condition, whatsoever it be. Imagine thy present condition to be that which is allotted unto thee by God, and that best which he in wisdome sees most conve∣nient for thee: this was Agars prayer, Prov. 30. 8. Give me neither poverty, nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me. Its a great weaknesse that makes us weary of our present condition, that we make it our taske Sysyphi saxm volvere, to be in a restlesse motion, never satisfy'd: whereas a man of an excellent spirit, if the present condition be not sutable to his mind, he labours to make his minde
suteable to his condition: Godlinsse with contentment is great gaine, 1 Tim. 6. 6. No reall contentment but in godlinesse: for where its principled in a man, it casts a man into such a sweet frame, and temper of spirit, that let the condition be what it will, he apprehends it to be sent from God to him, and therefore in all humility submits unto it, making a vertue of necestity; It was an excellent vow of Jacob, Gen. 28. 26. If God will be with me and keepe me in this way that I goe, and give me bread to eat, and rayment to put on, so that I come againe to my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. Thus you see how this good man stood affected: Though the Lord had promised him a goodly inheritance, and a numerous po∣sterity, yet he seemes not to take notice of it, so he may have Gods protection, bread, and rayment be they never so course, he hath set his heart at rest in a sweet contented posture: Ofttimes theres more tranquility, and setlednesse of spirit in a condition ebbing, then flowing, in ragges rather then robes: O then labour for a contented mind, and then thou wilt be rich even in thy poverty. Secondly, Learne to deny thy selfe: Thus Abraham deny'd Direct. . Learne selfe∣deniall. himselfe, Gen. 12. 4. who left his native country, his kindred, and his fathers house: This practise proceeded from a principle of faith, as St Paul records it amongst the catalogue of the faithfull, Heb. 11. 8. It was the strength of faith indeed which made him goe he knew not whither staying himselfe upon the divine promises, which was better to him then all lands, and revenues: God was (he knew) All sufficient, and his exceeding great reward. Likewise in a per∣sonall difference between him and Lot, there he deny'd himselfe by giving precedency to him who was his inferiour: He gives him his choyse, and first refusall of his habitation, Gen. 13. 9. A man cannot be Christs crosse-bearer except he deny himselfe: A man cannot preach Christ unlesse he deny himselfe: A man cannot pray in faith unlesse he deny himselfe. A man cannot suffer for the name of Christ, nor performe any service acceptable unto him, unlesse it arise from a principle of selfe denyall: Let the actions carry never so glorious an outside, enough to dazle the very eyes of the beholders, yet if selfe be the Engineer, if selfe love, and selfe seeking be that primum mobile which sets all the other orbes in their motion, they are like those wilde gourds which spoild the whole messe of pottage, and we may cry out as they did to the prophet,
est mrs in ollâ, there's death in the pot: there's death in these gaudy services. That student then hath studied to the best purpose, who hath learn'd to deny himselfe, The wise man must deny his wisdome, the strong man his strength, the rich man his riches, the schollar his learning. The good Christian must come out of him∣selfe in all his duties, he must cast down his best performances, at the feet of Christ, beseeching the Lord Jesus Christ to beare the ini∣quity of his holiest things: here's the labour, and this is the worke: we must leave sin before it leave us. When in the greatest con∣fluence of profits, honours, and pleasures, then a man can lay aside his dignities, and deny himselfe in his pleasures: when a man is rays'd unto St. Pauls excellent temper of spirit that befits him for any condition, Phil. 4. 12. I know how to be abased, and I know how to a∣bound Hence observe a lesson very fit for us & for all Christians to learne, even to be content with our estate what soever it is. Ayr. in Phil. very where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and suffer need: When a man can use this world as if he u'd it not: When corruption hath matter to breed on then to keep it downe in the prime of a mans youth, when his bones are full of marrow, and his body is vigorous, amidst the fruition of delights he can then deny himselfe, these are the rare qualifications of a selfe denying spirit: Hence David confesseth, so foolish was I, and ignorant, even as a beast before thee. The nearer a man approacheth to a sacred communion with the invisible God, the more he is abased at the apprehension of his own vilenesse, and with Abraham, he confesseth that he is but dust and ashes. If then we have been the disciples of Jesus Christ, and have tooke out of his schoole this excellent lesson of selfe denyall, then we are better taught then to seeke after great things here below. 3. Study the vanity of the creature: It was the upshot of So∣lomons Direct. 3. Study the va∣nity of the crea∣ture. Somnus, bull, Vitrum glacies, Flot, Fabul, Foenum Umbra, cinis, Punctum vox sonus, Aura thil. verdict: vanitie of vanities, all is vanity. What are all things under the sun but bubbles, smoke, fables, wels without water, trees without fruit, broken cisternes, Aegyptian reeds, deceitfull bowes, bags full of holes. Weigh all earthly things in the ballance of the sanctuary, and they will prove too light, even lighter then vanitie it selfe. A man trusts to a friend, he deceives that trust repos'd in him. Ziba tooke an opportunity to slander his master: When we trust to our idols of gold, and silver, either by fire, or water, theeves, or robbers, perfidious servants, or sundry other waies we are brought low, and bereav'd of our confidence. Our choycest
earthly delights pretend a goodly fayre outside, like the Apples of Sodome, but being touched they fa into ashes, and cinders. The consideration of the vanity of the creature should cause us to cast off its yoke, and suffer our selves no more to be under its vassalage. Shall we be so sollicitous to seeke after our tormentor? how much vexation, and anxiety of spirit accompanies all the worlds darlings? their desires are insatiable crying with the horse-leeches daugh∣ter give, give, and the creature cannot satisfy them, the comforts of this present world urge their arguments, just as the Divel urg'd Scripture to Christ to halves, taking what serves for their turne, and leaving out what might make against them. They tell you of goodly buildings, preferments, revenues, and profits, but men∣tion not a syllable of the dayes of mourning, and of that severe account which must be rendred at the impartiall tribunall of the great Judge of Heaven and earth. Who then of any understanding will thus seeke after lying vanities, and forsake his own mercies? who would joyne himselfe associate with this perfidious world a president of all vitiousnesse? it brings us like fooles to the stocks, and then laughs at our misery: It brings us upon the rack, and then becomes our executioner. The time will come when the Lord will summon up his creatures; and they all will bring in their Bils of inditement against their dearest minions: and then thou wist find by woefull experience that those darling sins which yeelded, the sweetest rellish unto thy sinfull soule in the acting, will now present nothing unto thee but gall, and wormewood, they will make the deepest wounds, and gashes in thy conscience. If then thou art well acquainted with the vanity of the creature, thou wilt slacken thy pursuite, and forbeare such a furious prosecution of those things which are so destructive both to thy body, and soule: if thou knewest how vaine all things are in this world, how empty, how deceitfull, thou wouldst not hazard thy soule upon such an un∣profitable purchase. 4ly, And lastly, Labour to be acquainted with the fulnesse that Direct. 4. Labour to be ac∣quainted with the fulnesse that is in JesusChrist is in Jesus Christ. He hath fulnesse of wisdome to teach thee, of holinesse to sanctify, of mercy to pardon, fulnesse of riches, fulnesse of merits, and fulnesse of glory. It pleased the Father that in him should all fullnesse dwell, Col. 1. 19. Be thy wants many? from Christ thou mayest fetch a supply: be thy miseries pressing? Christ is a
father of mercies, and a God of all consolations: for we have not an high priest which cannot be tot with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. The selfe same bowels of compassion Christ hath in Heaven, which he had on earth, when he wept over Jerusalem.  2 Cor. 12. 7. v. 9. Are thy desertions impetuous, and thy spirituall conflicts violent, doth the Angell Sathan buffet thee, and sometimes leave thee as he did the possessed dead in outward appearance? O make hast to Christ, looke for him in the word, in the sacraments, in prayer; if thou find'st him not in one ordinance, never leave off seeking till thou hast found him in another: and then ee'l manifest to thy soule that his grace is sufficient for thee. Art thou poore? Christ is riches; art thou blind? he is eye-salve. Art thou weake? hee's strength. Art thou dead? hee's life. Now then remember thy selfe how all this while thou hast run on hoodwink't into errors, and precipices expecting a fulnesse in the creature wherein is nought but emptinesse. O Christians labour to make a better choyse, to get hearts emptyed of all selfe-love, and abhorre all selfe-sufficiency in, and Idolatry with the creatures: when once you are partakers of those glorious priviledges which are above, of the fulnesse of Christs excellency, beauty, wisdome, purity, these will a thousand times recompence the emptying of your selves of any fulnesse of outward contentment in the creature. How then should we powre out our petitions to have this fulnesse of Christ communicated unto us, ac∣cording Joh. 1. 16. to our measure, that of his fulnesse we may all receive grace for grace! Be thy condition never so poore in the world, yet if thou hast Christ, thou art the richest man in the world: Though all things goe against thee: friends leave thee, riches faile thee, promotion flies from thee, thy custome, and livelihood much de∣cayes, yet all this while if thou hast made Christ thy portion, none can take away thy Christ: Christ is better then thy friends, then thy riches, then thy promotion, then thy custome. Hee's above all, and better then all comforts: nay the choicest comforts are none at all in comparison of his soule-ravishing comforts: Christ hath  For Exhortati∣on. the preheminence, and is all in all. In the last place here is an use of Exhort to perswade you to get your hearts weaned from the world. And now that I might better prevaile with your spirits, that you might be took off of these things here be∣low, & no more seek great things in this world for your selves, suffer
me to presse home unto your consciences these ensueing conside∣rations. 1. Earthly things are accompanied with much vexation, and disquietnesse of spirit. 2. They cannot afford any satisfaction unto the soule of man. 3. All things on earth put together in one cannot helpe a man in the evill day. 4. They cannot lead a man beyond this present life, they cannot accompany him unto eternity. Weigh seriously these considerati∣ons, and they will be as so many plummets of lead to weigh down your affections, and keepe them from an eager pursuite after the greatest things the Universe can afford. 1. I say, the greatest things in this world are accompanied with much vexation, and disquietnesse of spirit. As it's a great ble∣ssing 1 Consider. The vexation that accompanies earthly things. to enjoy the creature with a chearfull heart: so it's a great curse to have them as so many thornes in their sides prickingm, and as so many gins, and snares in the way to intrap the followers to their ruine. Let a man have a Cornucopiam a store house of riches, yet if he cannot quietly enjoy himselfe in the use of them, he had far better be without them. Let a man be upon the rack, let the wheele passe over him, and dislocate his bones: Let him be put in Pelus Bull, or expos'd to the most exquisitely devis'd tor∣ments in the tenne persecutions in the primitive Church, yet this mans payne is easy in comparison of his who hath riches, and ho∣nours in abundance, even goods laid up for many yeares, and yet hath all this while a discontented spirit. Thou then who ever thou art, that art an Ingrosser of worldly wealth, who mak'st gold and silver thy Idols, and honour'st them mor en thy God, thou art not aware how thy earthly mindednesse will sharpen, and give teeth to an affliction to eat out thy choicest delights, and comfort. Thou art sollieitous to plow, and low thy grounds: and another may reape the fruits thereof: Likewise thou hast no power of the clouds, and canst not command the influence of heaven: for the iniquity of a people God makes the heavens iron, and the earth brasse: and now how art thou vext, and disquieted, and know'st not how to helpe thy selfe: thou hoardest up monies in abundance, the thought whereof cheares up thy heart, in the interim God de∣nies thee, thy health, sends thee the gout, chollick, stone, strangury,
and the like, so that its a burden and a torment to live. Thou hug'st thy selfe in thy ample possession, and favours of great ones: Now thou hast somewhat to loose thou art made a fairer marke of opposition: Suits in law, and vexatious controversies may wast thy estate: Thieves, shipwrack's, perfidious servants, miscarriages, and ill successe in businesse may bring thee to a morsell of bread: or otherwise God hath given riches, and not an heart to use them, and this I reckon amongst the greatest outward curses, which can befall the sons of men. Sometimes God takes away a mans tast, so that he can rellish no more sweetnesse in these things, then in the white of an egge: Otherwhile God takes away a mans rest, so that he lies all night tossing to and fro, and can take no rest, his sleep falls from him, and his eyelids can take no slumber: divitias invenisti, requim perdidisti, thou hast got riches, and lost thy rest. Stobaeus hath a story of one Anacreon who when Polycrates had gi∣ve im five talents, he could not sleep two nights together, he immediatly restor'd them, saying, Reddidit ea inquiens non tanta esse quauta ipsorum nomine curâ laboraret Stob. cap. 39. they were not so much worth as to countervaile that care which was undertooke to keepe them. But admit thou art not yet blasted in thy estate, (though usually the great ones of the world feel this by wofull experience) yet there's a fierce lyon which a long time slept at thy dore, which now be∣ing awakened flies upon thee: this is thy conscience wh presents unto thee the history of thy life in all its ugly deformities, it paints thee out in thy proper colours, and this mappe discovers a mare mortuum, a dead sea, even a sea of blood, destruction, and mi∣sery, thy fatall period. Quis tanti emet paenitentiam? So Diogenes said concerning Lais the strumpet, who then of any understanding would purchase ths worlds goods at so deare a rate, to be thus in a restlesse condition, never at quiet, distracted with thoughts; perplexed with cares, and wounded in conscience? Honour proves a torment: To be degraded is the height of infelicity: No disgrace parallel to that as to be advanc'd high, and immediatly pul'd down in the dust. It was Wolseyes complaint: Had I been as carefull to serve the God of Heaven, as I have been to serve my Lord, and master on earth, he would never have▪ left me in my gray haires. Riches prove the greatest crosse when God blowes upon them. To be as Job one while, the richest of all the sons of the East, and then ere long become a proverb of poverty, this is an exceeding misery.
Pleasures are vexations, laughter is madnesse, Eccl. 2. 2. Wouldst thou then have that which might quiet thy spirit? thou must seeke it else where: if thou seek'st it amongst the great things of this world, thou seek'st all this while for the living among the dead. No earthly thing can quiet the soule. There's much vex∣ation in the greatest things of this world here below, and there∣fore seeke them not. But admit they have wearied us in vexatious suites, tossing us from court to court, and so by many delayes, and troubles hath impoverish'd us, yet if at the last they afforded any satisfaction, this would make amends for all: but no earthly thing can satisfie the soule. This is my second consideration: They bring us into suites, 2 Consid. Earthly things cannot satisfie the Soule. weary us in them and at last cast us: The world brings us into a lotte∣ry, where we come with heads full of hopes, but at the last return away with hearts full of blankes: the Teraphim is a lye: All the creatures may be compar'd to bags full of holes, and deceitfull weights: The Lord denounceth this as a fearfull judgment: thou shalt eat, but not be satisfy'd. The world is an errand hypocrite like the pain∣ted Mich. 6. v. 11. 14. sepulchers, gaudy without, full of dead mens bones within, or like the Egyptian temples, where there were a stately Frontispice, and a magnificent structure, but naught within but an ugly Ape, the ridiculous Idol of the people: They are emptinesse it selfe, and can emptinesse fill the soule? The things of this world are wells with∣out water, and can these quench our thirst? they are broken reeds, and can they stay us from falling? when you can hoard up grace in your coffers, when you can replenish your bags with divine wis∣dome, then and not till then can an immortall soule rest satisfyed in the fruition of the transitory things of this present life. As Ho∣mer fancyed that the Gods sed upon Nectar and Ambrosia, and not Hom. Iliad. 1. upon such food as men doe: so the soule of man, being divinae par∣ticulaurae, having an heavenly borne beeing, cannot be satisfied with any terrene things: spirits and bodies, heaven and earth ad∣mit no correspondence. Had'st thou a Monopoly of the choicest delights under the sun, these could not satisfy thee, because they are but finite, and thy desires are infinite, and you know between finite, and infinite there's no proportion. Solomon tells us, Prov. 14. 14. A good man shall be satisfied from himselfe: Inward peace, and tranquility of conscience affords us true contentment, and satis∣faction
unto the soule: The light of Gods reconcil'd countenance reviv'd Davids spirit, this was his onely desiderable good: Lord list thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: Thou hast put gladnesse in my heart more then in the time, that their corne and wine encreas'd, Psal. 4. 6, 7. Moses the man of God cries for mercy to satisfy him: O satisfy us with thy mercy, that we may rejoyce, and be glad all the daies of our life, Psal. 90. 14. Only Christ, and his comforts can fill up the soule: The waters which he gives will never make us thirst againe, where∣as the well-springs of the world will the more inrage our thirst. 3. Great things here below cannot helpe thee in the evill day. 3 Consider. Earthly things cannot helpe in the evill day. An evill day will come, a day of darknesse, and gloominesse, a day of clouds, and thick darknesse, and for this day Solomon requires a memento, Ecol. 11. 8. But if a man live many yeares, and rejoyce in them all, yet let him remember the daies of darknesse, for they shall be many: When sicknesses, and diseases render thy life disconsolate, and when death the King of terrours is approaching thy house, and ready to lay his mace upon thee to arrest thee to appeare before the great Judge of Heaven, and Earth. Now can thy riches, and friends bribe this serjeant, and adde one moment unto thy life? Aske thy jo∣viall Comrades, and boone Companions, whether they can helpe thee, the very sight of them brings thy sins to remembrance, and makes thee sensible of the very flashings of hell-fier. Aske thy bags whe∣ther they can helpe thee, alas! they are full of holes▪ and let out all comfort: Aske thy dignities, and high places whether they can doe thee any good, these all come and give evidence against thee on this manner: Thou hast been a corrupt and carelesse Ma∣gistrate, feare of men hath justled out the feare of God: Thou hast bin a lazy, and debaucht Minister, thou hast sought thine ow things, and not Christ: Thus one day high places, and promotions if abus'd, will come in, and witnesse against thee. O how nearly doth this concerne all those whom God hath made Rulers i Israel to be conscientious in the discharge of their duties, that so they may hold up their heads with comfort before their judge. When a man is cast upon the bed of sicknesse, and all his sins are set in order before him, then a man would part with all his wealth for the pur∣chase of a good conscience, and he would prize one glimpse of Christs reconcil'd countenance before the Empire of the world. Now whither should a man goe for succour? The world's his e∣nemy,
and it's madnesse to goe to my enemy for comfort. Only the riche of Christ, those glorious things above must comfort thee, or else thou canst never be comforted. Those whom thou hated'st in thy health must be thy comforters in thy sicknesse. Now thou art sensible what need thou hast of their prayers whom thou accounted'st the very abjects of men, and refuse of the wotld. Surely men speake not as they think, when they revile many sin∣cere Christians under the notions of hypocrites and dissemblers, these they will be readiest to send for, and apply themselves most unto them when a fit of sicknesse seiseth upon them. You see then how great things in this world cannot helpe a man in the evill day, in a languishing condition, they fayle a man in his greatest ne∣cessity, and therefore unworthy of our search and labour. I inferre with my Prophet. Ne quaerito, seek them not. 4ly, and lastly, the greatest things on earth cannot lead 4. Consider. The greatthings of the world cannot carry a man beyond this life. a man beyond this life, they cannot carry him unto eternity: A man cannot carry his honours, and riches into another world. Can a man carry the things of this world into the place of torments to bribe the flames, or corrupt his tormentour?  in Aristotle is an Epithite attributed to something of excellency. Now the greatest things on earth are uncertaine, transitory, sading things; when death shall strip us of lands, and revenues, of all our gorgeous attires, and leave us naked, if then we are not cloathed with the robes of Christs righteousnesse, we are of all men the most miserable: This garment alone of our elder brother must cover all our nakednesse. Behold then, we all stand at the dore of eternity: severall waies God hath to call us, and then we are utterly depriv'd of all. Now a good conscience alone must stand us instead when all other comforts are defective: Hic Murus aheneus esto &c. this is the best bulwarke of defence; Let's no more trust to uncertain∣ties, to such things that will faile us. Lets lay up treasure for our selves in another world, and now make provision for eter∣nity, whence all our comfort is deriv'd. When once we are in∣volv'd in eternity, then we are in an unalterable estate, no posti∣bility of returning back to the land of the living. Me thinks that the serious and frequent meditation of aeternity should rayse up our spirits, and put us upon a dayly provision for our immortall soules.
The great things of the world are below our cognizance. We call them great but by an Antiphrasis. For they are little, and lighter then vanity: so multitudes find them by sad experience. My conclusion shall be the Apostles patheticall exhortation, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. If ye then be risen with Christ seeke those things which are a∣bove, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God.
The wisest Preacher: Set forth in a SERMON Upon Prov. 11. latter part of vers. 30. He that winneth soules is wise. THe Areopagites had a custome that such SERM. 3. at St Maries OXON. Aprill 16. 1648 as pleaded before them should pleade , without pre∣facing and without passion. For pas∣sion of my own let it be discarded alto∣gether: All my designe is this, to be in∣flamed with zeale to the glory of God, and so to be transported with a passion of love towards your soules, as to winne them to Jesus Christ. And for prefacing I looke upon all slattering Apologies as superfluous, and beneath the dignity of that worke I have in hand. The words read are a sacred Proverb, or a divine select Aphorisme deciphering forth in a Character the truely wise man. Not the  of Greece, nor the Philosophers of old, not the accurate Linguists, not the eloquent Orators, nor the learned Rabbies, nor Machiavilian Politicians, not an elixar and quintessence drawn forth out of all the elaborate vo∣lumes of Philosophers and Orators can denominate the author truely wise, in a spirituall and Theologicall acception; My ground 1 Cor. 2. 14. is from the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 14.  &c. compared with 1 Cor. 3. 19. But here the spirit of God
celebrates the praises, and stampes a character of wisdome upon him that winneth soules, He that winneth seues is wise. You know that Proverbs for the most part are entire sentences, without connexion or dependance on the precedent words: yet Context. here (And) in the front of the text denotes a relation to what went before: so that the precedent and subsequent parts of this verse referre each to other. You have a rare description of the righte∣ous man: such a one whose heart is upright with God, is resembled to a tree of life; Alluding to the tree of life in Paradise. As that was of Gods own plantation, and had the preheminence of other trees, so the graces of a godly man are of Gods own plantation: None are borne holy, but created so. Grace is no plant that naturally growes in our Gardens, but is a plant of our heavenly fathers plantation. And as the tree of life had the preheminence of John 15. 5. other trees; so the godly over all other men. And its observed by a judicious commentator on the place: That the scope of this Pro∣verbe Proverbil sum∣ma recidit ut discant homi∣nes quo pretio virum justū ae∣stimare conve∣nit, Carthw. Ehp. 5. 4. is to inhance the esteeme of the righteous man. Though Godly men be held at a cheape esteeme, and are accounted the scumme of the world; yet the Allegory in the text gives in Gods Probatum est of them, that they are as a tree of life. And further its said the fruit of the righteous (i. e.) the words and actions, the counsell, example, life and conversation of a righteous man are the pretious fruits which the tree of life doth beare: His words are savory, ministring grace to the hearer: Hee's grave and edifying in his discourse: His conversation is exemplary, such as adornes his profession: In a word, the fruite of a righteous man is pretious fruite. And if you would have a tast of it, here you may gather one of the choicest that growes on this tree, and that is to win soules, The fruite of the righteous, &c. Now the text presents you with the most choice and excellent fruite of a righteous man, the winning of soules. The text is an entire categoricall proposition consisting of a subject, praedicat, & copula. Division. 1. The Person. Or rather. 1. Here's a person set down definitely. It may be applied to the Ministers of God eminenter, for it's their peculiar office and maine designe to gaine soules to God, yet not exclusivè: It's every ones dutie to doe all the offices of love they can, and especially to consult and endeavour the mutuall good of each other soules.
2. Here's the worke set downe, to win, or take in, or gaine soules. 2. The Worke. The Metaphor may be drawn from a souldier, who hath fought va∣liantly and won the field: so must he that wins soules take up armes against the flesh, the Devill, and the world, against principa∣lities, and powers, and spirituall wickednsse in high places. And this spirituall souldier must never give over, 'till he returne away with the trophies of victory. Or else the Metaphor may be tooke from a fowler, who takes fowles in a net: So he that will winne soules must spread the net of the Gospell: And if the government of soules (as Gregory saith) Artium Ars est Regimen Ani∣marum. Greg. de Pastor curâ. 3. The Object soules. be of all other arts the excellent'st certainly the winning of soules must be a superexcellent Art, all other arts the excellent'st. 3. Here's the object, soules, immortall, heavenly-borne-being-soules, the image of God, the very breath of God inspired in our creation, of more value then all the world, the purchase and ransome of Jesus Christ: The excellency of this noble object, makes the victory more glorious, and the conquerour more renowned. To winne a strong castle, a towne, a kingdome is the glory of the conquerour: but to winne a soule to God is a farre greater glory: It's the gal∣lantest piece of service in all the world to winne soules to Jesus Christ. 4. And lastly, Here's the commendation, high Elogium, or a sa∣cred 4. The Com∣mendation. Panegyrick, which is given to him that doth this great worke: He is wise: It's a great question where wisdome is to be found, Job 28. 12, 13. the determination of all is vers. 28: The feare of the Job 28. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 1. 20. Lord is wisdome, &c. and its a great question with Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 20. where is the wise, where is the scribe? Now both these questions may be resolved from the text, its a point of wisdome to gaine soules, and hees a wise man that's a practitioner in this soule saving art: This is the wise man; a man of a pretious anointing, an interpreter one of a thousand, whose eyes are in his head, whose wisdome is taught of God. And the declaration of this wisdome is that Argument whereon I fix as a word spoknin due season, which can never be enough taught, never enough learn'd: The Lord make it as profitable as it is seasonable. The words of the text in terminis are a doctrine: But in relation to what went before, thus I shall propound it to you. That it's a choice fruit of wisdome, to win soules unto God. For my more methodicall progres in unfolding this point, I shall pro∣pose
these familiar heads of discouse. Method. 1. To assert this positive truth, and give in the proofe thereof. 2. Describe the Character of him who is likeliest to win soules: And 3ly, Draw forth some inferences of practise as may best conduce to the better ordering of your lives and conversations. Those shall constitute the doctrinall part of my text, this last, the use and application: and these shall be the bounds and limits of my ensuing meditations. I resume the enlargement of the first head propounded. And for proofe of the point, I shall consider it under a double demonstration  and : for the , that it is so: The Apostle James distin∣guisheth 1. Head. , That it is so Jam. 1. 15, 17. of a twofold wisdome, Earthly, and Heavenly, and by their fruits you may know them, James 1. 15, 17. Now humane earthly wisdome hath no part nor portion in this worke: It's above the sphere and cognizance of secular learning to reveale the know∣ledge of Jesus Christ. A man may attaine unto as great know∣ledge as ever Aristotle or Plato had, and yet be an Ignoramus in the mystery of Christs reconciliation: such a mans naturall parts are too good to goe to hell with him, he shall be degraded of them before, and so shall miscarry to all eternity. The wisdome that we speake of is divine wisdome, such alone as can make us wise unto salvation. This is not taught in Aristotles Lycaeum, nor Zenoe's Stoa, or Plato's Academy, but only in the schoole of Jesus Christ: He then must be , a man taught of God who is a good proficient in this soule winning art. To drive this spirituall trade, to negotiate for soules, to be instrumentall in the conversion of soules, It's the greatest worke in all the world. Now that this is such an excel∣lent peece of wisdome, I shall prove it by an induction of particu∣lars: such as have put it in practise themselves, are fittest to give testimony to this truth. First, and above all, I shall instance in him who is the wisdome of his Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, stiled a Counsellor for his wisdome. He was employed about his Fathers businesse, Luke 2▪ 40. And what was his businesse, but to save that which was lost? Matth. 18. 11. He professeth that he was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matth. 10. 6. He came to call sinners to repentance, Luk. 5. 32. You may read the great employment of Christ in his Ministery, Luk. 4. 18. Christ went about doing good, speaking of the things of the
Kingdome: Christ is our peace, Ephes. 2. 4. And the great my∣stery of the Gospell is declared in this work of reconciliation. Next to instance in the Apostles, however in the Judgment of the Councell, Acts 4. 13. , yet these the Lord made instrumentall to confound the wisdome of the wife. By their Mi∣nistry the Lord converted multitudes of soules, 3000 at one Ser∣mon, Act. 2. 41. Further, I'le instance in Paul whose desire was transcendent for their salvation, Rom. 10. 1. See his protestation, 1 Cor. 2. 2. See his judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21, 23. Compare this with the first of Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8. Paul that great Doctor of the Gen∣tiles, bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, a man of great learning, gives Christ the preheminence, & undervalues every thing for Jesus Christ. , Phil. 3. 8. Be they the most exquisite Arts and Sciences, riches, honours, pleasures in their greatest estate and confluences, yet in comparison of Christ he sets upon them this brand of infamy . Luther had such high esteeme of Christ and such a regard unto precious soules as he professeth—satius est conturbari Lutheri loc. com. Adveniat ver∣bum Dei, adve∣niat, et si sexcen∣tum habuissemus ora, cisummitte∣remus omnia, Baldassar Mi∣nist. Germ. Acts 17. 34. & collidi totum terrarum orbem, quam Christum non praedicari, &c. Bal∣dassar (Minister of Germany) profest, Let the Word of God come, let it come, if I had 600 necks I would submit unto it. Tis verified by experience what Luther was wont to say: Praedicare verbum Dei, nihil aliud est, quam derivare in se furorem totius inferni & satanae. Yet God in his wisdome hath ordained this for a medium to con∣vert soules. And where the word of God is preached in sincerity, the messengers meete with the same entertainment as Paul at A∣thens, though some mocked and accounted him a babler, yet others cleaved unto him. Here then my Brethren is a point of wisdome to follow the example of Christ, his Apostles and servants. It was their wisdome to beget soules unto God; It was their principall businesse, according to their commission, to open their eyes, to turne them from darknesse unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 28. 18. Goe you and doe likewise. It's a sound glosse upon the text, Ex his colligitur &c. Hence we gather wherein consists the Cartwright in locum. true praise of Ministers, not in others applauding of them, and setting forth their parts, but here's their wisdome and knowledg indeed, in con∣verting soules unto God: So judicious Carthwright. 2. I proceed to the other demonstration  Here my taske  Why it is so. Arguments. will be in laying downe some Arguments for confirmation of the
truth: The Arguments i'le cast into 4 heads. 1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of the Object. 3. In respect of the worke. And 4ly, In respect of the reward. Arg. 1. In respect of God. 1. In respect of God. God hath a tender care of his own glo∣ry: and this must be the end of the whole creation. And above all, the reasonable creature must act in every thing for the attain∣ment of the last end, the glory of God. Now wherein is God more glorified, then in the conversion of soules. Its said, John 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye beare much fruit. And amidst variety of good fruit, this is one of the most sweet and acceptable to God, to pluck a sinner out of the Devils snare, and convert him to Jesus Christ. And this should be the sole end and designe of every one that enters into the Ministeriall function to promote the glory of God in saving of their own soules, and those that heare them: when this end is first in thine eye, and accompanied with a consci∣encious sedulity in the exercise of the meanes, thou mayest expect the blessing of God crowning thy endeavours with good successe. And such a person is a man of wisdome, who is so highly honoured by God as to be an instrument to convert but one soule unto God. Arg. 2. In respect of soules. The second Argument is in respect of the object, soules, and that rationall soules endowed with noble faculties, the understanding and the will the very breath of God, Gen. 2. 7. The peculiar crea∣tion of God, not ex traduce, not by propagation, it's God that for∣meth the spirit of man within him, Zech. 12. 1. And God is termi∣nus a quo & ad quem both, Eccl. 12. 7. The spirit shall returne unto God that gave it. The soule is immateriall and spirituall, a Hea∣venly borne being, not made of the earth as the body was, but infused by creation, and created by infusion: and though the body moulder into A nima creando infunditur, & insundendo creatur. Aug. dust and see corruption, yet the soule runs parallel with the longest line of eternity. Men and Divels banding together cannot kill the soule. And hereupon against perplexing feares and cares, Christ gives a seasonable caution, Matth. 10. 28. Feare not them, which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soule, but rather feare him, which is able to destroy both body and soule in Hell. Now then in the third place in respect of the excellent work, Arg. 3. In respect of the wre. employed upon so noble an object as an immortall soule, the wis∣dome
of the worker will be more enhaunc't. We must know that God is the sole efficient cause of the salvation of a sinner, man onlyan in∣strument subservient to Gods commands. To preach, pray, conserre, & meditate is the Ministers duty, but the successe is the work of God. We are earthen vessels encompassed with infirmities, men of like passions, but in the weaknesse of the instrument, the strength of God more eminently appeares; and God works by weake meanes, men of meane presence and low esteeme amongst men, that no flesh may glory n his presence, and all the honour may redound to God. But the Lord had never any speciall service but he raised up persons of suitable spirits for the performance of it. Bezaleel and Aholiab were filled with wisdome for building of the tabernacle: God rai∣sed up the spirits of Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai, Zacharie, Zerubbabel for the reedifying of the temple. And now adaies God raiseth up men of heroicall spirits both of the Magistracy and Ministry, to carry on the worke of reformation both in Church and State, mau∣gre all the hostile oppositions, plots and projects of Sanballats and Tobiahs, even all Jesuiticall Malignantfactions, which are the Pests and Gangrenes of the kingdome, Remora's and obstructions of refor∣mation. That prophesy doth afford many hopes against in any feares, Dan. 9. 25. The street shall be built againe, and the walls in troublous times. Thus then I argue. To conquer potent enemies, to subdue places of great strength, and reduce them to outward obedience, is an argument of wisdome in the conquerours: but to subdue un∣ruly affections, to conquer mens spirits, to winne soules unto Christ, this must be a higher piece of wisdome indeed. 4. And lastly, In respect of the reward, the excellency of this wisdome shines forth more clearly. He that gaines a soule doth Arg. 4. In respect of the reward. an excellent worke so James sets it forth, James 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any one of you do erre from the truth, and one convert him: let him know that he which converteth a sinner, from the errour of his way, shall save a soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. The very worke it selfe is sometime counted a reward, the work and the re∣ward are used assynonymous termes, Isay 49 4. Yet surely my judgmnt is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And besides no man ever did, nor shall ever goe away a looser by Gods service: God keeps the wages 'till afterwards: Here we may have an earnest, part of payment, but the great summe is reserved for another world.
And they that honour God in bringing converts to the Gospell, and making Proselytes to Jesus Christ, they are highly honoured of God. Them that honour me (saith God) I will honour, 1 Sam. 2. 30. And what honour God will one day put upon them, you may read, Dan. 12. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and they that turne many to righteousnesse, is the stars for ever and ever: such honour hath all his Saints. When Andrew shall come in with Achaia, by him converted to the truth, John with Asia, Thomas with India, Peter with the Jewes, and Paul with the Gen∣tiles, and all the Ministers of the Gospell, and others whom God hath made instrumentall in this great service: when these shall be able to say, Behold Lord, here we are, and the children which thou hast given us, then will the Lord say to them, well done good and faithfull ser∣vants, enter into your masters joy. And thus I have dispatcht the first head propounded, in the second 2. Head. The Characters of him that win neth soules. Charact. 1. He must abound in love. place I am to give in the character of him who of all others is like∣liest to win soules, how such a one should be qualified, I shall repre∣sent unto you in these ensuing Characters. 1. He must abound in the grace of love, his heart must be en∣flamed with seraphicall love unto Jesus Christ. It's a passage fre∣quently used in Ignatius Epistles, , my love is cru∣cified. It's an excellent saying in Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 14. , the love of Christ constrains us. A faithfull Mini∣ster acts altogether from a principle of love to Jesus Christ. He prayeth, preacheth, giveth almes, fasteth, watcheth, and hee's inde∣fatigable in his labours, and what's the reason or ground of all, Be∣cause the love of Christ constrains him. Then onely are we upon sure grounds, when the love of Christ is that primum mobile that sets all the other orbes in their motion, and where there's a principle of love to Jesus Christ, there will be shed abroad mutuall love towards our brethren: such love was unparalleld in Moses, who wish'd him∣selfe blotted out of the boke of life, Exod. 32. 3. And in Paul, who wished himselfe an Anathema for the Jewes, Rom. 9. 3. Here's soule love indeed beyond compare. O what an ardent affection and tender compassion ought Ministers to have to the soules of their people! Love to their soules will make them runne through fire and water, grapple with beasts of Ephesus, sons of Anak, even Her∣culean labours. But where's love to the fleece onely, Mercenary
hopes of promotions, dignities, carnal interest, all such self-ends and sinister respects, will be but as so many Ignes fatui, to lead men away into dangerous and destructive ways: It's onely love to the soul that will set thee a working to good purpose. And further, he that is thus set on fire with love to Christ, and to his Brethrens souls; must be a man of such wisdom, as to temper all his counsels in love: In all his Meditations and Exhortations, Love is one main Ingredi∣ent in the composition: He abhors sin in any, and reproves it; but whilest he hates the sin, he loves the person; and whilest he endea∣vors to slay and utterly to destroy the sin, he would gladly be in∣strumental to save the soul of the sinner: This is the rule which the Apostle gives, Eph. 4. 15. , some render it speaking, some following, some, doing the truth: But if the Eng∣lish word may be admitted, it's rendred most suitable to the Ori∣ginal, truthing of it in love. 2. He must be a man of a willing minde: God expects his offer∣ing Charact. 2. A man of a wil∣ling minde. of the willing hearted, Exod. 35. 5. And the people are com∣mended for willingly offering themselves, Judg. 5. 2. The question was asked, 1 Chron. 29. 5. Who then is willing to consecrate his service to the Lord, and it's said, v. 6. Then the chief of the Fathers, and the Princes of the tribes of Israel, &c. offered willingly: And Gods people are a willing people, people of willingnsse, Psalm 110. 3. Every one set apart for the Ministry must have such a Spirit as Ama∣siah the Son of Zichri had, who willingly offered himself unto the Lord: And this was as eminent in Paul, And I will very gladly spend 2 Chro. 17. 16. 2 Chro. 12. 15. and be spent for you: Necessity and constraint may not put any up∣on a Ministerial Function, Quasi ultimum refugium, not an Advow∣son purchased by the Father, and intended for the Son; nor an Im∣propriator, who intends his Son for his Substitute at a venture. A strange Soloecism (saith Mr. Boltn, that holy man of God) a Lay-Rector and not Preach, nor a Collegiate Education, by Statute, en∣joyning at such a standing to enter into Orders, whereas, alass, many venter thus upon this calling, who have neither heart nor hand to put forth to the work, but onely that they might keep their places: I say, none of those can be a sufficient warrant in point of conscience to take upon them so high a Calling: This Calling must be took upon choice and serious deliberation: It must be wil∣lingly entred upon, and willingly performed: No thinking of put∣ting
thy hand to the Plough, and looking back, such are not fit for the service of the Lord: This must be thy resolution, come good re∣port, come evil report, honor, dis honor, prosperity or adversity, I will give my self up to God (as Hannah gave Samuel) for a loan all the days of my life. 3. He must be a man of a meek spirit, such a singular spirit was Charact. 3. A man of a meek spirit. in Moses, Numb. 12. 3. And beyond all parallel in Christ: He pro∣pounds himself the pattern of our imitation, Matth. 11. 29. How must the servant of the Lord be qualified, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. And the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all mn, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves: And how must an erring brother be dealt withal, you may observe the rule Gal. 6. 1. , &c. 4. He must be a man of zeal and courage in the cause of God: E∣very Charact. 4. He must be a man of zeal and courage. thing is beautiful in its season: There's a season for meekness, and a season for zeal. Moses, who was meek in his own cause, yet was highly transported with zeal in the cause of God: Some are Boanergesses, Sons of Thunder, and others are Barnabasses, sons of consolation: It's observed, that notwithstanding many failings, there's some good spoken of all the Churches of Asia, onely Lao∣dicea Rev. 3. 16, 19. excepted, because they wanted zeal, they were luke-warm, nei∣ther cold nor hot, and therefore God will spew them out of his mouth: Wherefore God commands the Angel or Minister of the Church, v. 19. Be zealous, and repent: He that will gain souls, must have his heart boyling in zeal to Gods glory. Paul, when he came to A∣thens, and observing their Superstition, was not afraid of the Phi∣losophers encounter; neither was he mealy-mouthed for all their reproaches, but tells them plainly to their faces, Ye men of Athens, I Acts 17. 22. perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious: Sin must not be con∣nived at, though in Athens, nay rather the more to be reproved, be∣cause in such a place, eminent for Learning, more is given, and more is to be required; and he that knoweth his masters will, and doth it not, shall be beatn with more stripes. Who can refrain speaking in the cause of God, unless he be spiritually stupified, and have a dumb Devil within him? It was Luthers brave resolution, to go to Melch. Ad. in vira Lutheri. Wormes, and preach the Gospel, though every tile was a Devil to oppose him: However zeal may be censured for phrenzy, its but the same Livery that Festus bestowed on Paul: And thou mayest urge Pauls
Apology, I am not mad, but speak forth the words of truth and so∣berness: Act. 27. 24, 25. And resolve with David, if to be zealous for God, be ac∣counted vileness, resolve to be more vile. 5. He that would win souls, must be a man of knowledge: Charact. 5. He must be a man of knw∣ledge. Where God gives a calling, he furnisheth men with a competent mea∣sure of gifts for the discharge thereof: Blinde guides, Ignoramusses, are none of Gods sending: They run before they are sent: Prophets were called Seers, and the Priestslips should preserve knowledge. As the Mal. 2. 7. Priest under the Law, so the Minister under the Gospel, must be a man of knowledge: How should the Minister be able to grapple with the Hydra of Heresies, to contend for the Faith, to convince gain-sayers, unless he be a man of knowledge? There's much use of secular Learning: Arts and Sciences are Hand-maids to Divinity: As long as they keep their distance, they contract a good esteem; but if the Hand-maid will have the preheminence of her Mistress, 'tis high time she should be casheered: And there's exceeding great use of Nurseries of Learning, and Schools of the Prophets: But here's the knowledge, which above all others you must get, even the knowledge of Jesus Christ. All the Fathers, and Schoolmen, and philosophers, though in their due place they must be reverenced, yet all their Learning put together, cannot make you gainers of Souls: Its Christ alone that can do it: He can infuse Divine know∣ledge, and give you eye-Salve, as he promiseth Rev. 3. 18. He can give you that Ʋnction whereby you shall know all things. This is a rare 1 Iohn 2. 20. knowledge, to know how to gain a soul: This onely is to be learnt in the School of Jesus Christ. 6. He must be a man Orthodox in judgement, one that hath the Charact. 6. He must be a man Orthodox in judgement. Spirit of discerning, to understand the ways of God, able to di∣stinguish truth from falshood; otherwise, being blinde and ig∣norant, the blinde leading the blinde, both must fall into the ditch. God goeth not forth with the Ministry of false Teachers: They may deceive souls, but cannot gain them, unless in that sense which is said that the Scribes and Pharisees did, which compassed sea and land to gain a Proselyte, and when he is made, he becomes seven Matth. 23. 15. times worse the childe of the devil then before. Such a gain is a dreadful loss, not a winning, but a destroying of souls: It should therefore be our principal business to study the Scriptures, and to be well grounded in the truth, to be stedfast, and setled in the faith, not be∣ing
carried about with every winde of Doctrine, by the slight, of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Eph. 4. 14. There are three emphatical words in the Text,  from  a Dye; counterfeit Teachers, imitate counterfeit Gamesters, they can cog a Dye,  every work, any trick, any shift,  a wiley art of legerdemane: To be fenced against these, what need have we to pray for a spirit of discerning to know the truth, and to have our hearts stablisht with grace, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 13. 9. 7. He must be a man of an holy life, and exemplary conversation: 7. He must be a man of a boly life. Concionatoris vita, Concionis anima: Gregory de Pastorali curâ, tells us, Necesse est ut esse munda studeat manus, quae diluere aliorum sordes curat, That hand must be clean that's imployed in wiping of others filthiness. The Exhortation is urgent, Isa. 52. 11. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. A good life is a good Commentary up∣on a good Sermon. The Apostle is earnest in his Exhortations, Rom. 2. 21. Thou that teachest others, teachest thou not thy self, &c. Mini∣sters lives should be standing Sermons, their whole conversation a pattern of Piety: They are Beacons set upon an Hill, the eye of the whole Countrey is upon them; As the godly observe: So the eye of the wicked watch▪ for their halting, ready to make them an offen∣der for a word. It's a common observation, that the contention of Abrahams and Lots Herdsmen, hath a greater aggravation because the Canaanite was then in the Land: The observation of the wicked, Gen. 13. 7. is not a small motive to engage us unto circumspect walking: The very breathings of a Minister should be spiritual, full of grace in his lips, ministring grace to the hearers; his words savory, tending to edification; his carriage serious, grave, exemplary, adorning his Profestion, as becometh the Gospel: What an efficacy hath a good Phil. 1. 27. . Sermon, when its backt with an holy life and conversation? We should therefore pray for a serious, heavenly frame of spirit. 8. He that would win souls, must be a man of industry: This is Charact. 8. He must be a man of industry. that Apostolical Character, To be a work-man that needeth not to be a∣shamed, 2 Tim. 2. 15. Christ admits no Truants in his School, no Droans in his Hive, no Loyterers in his Vineyard: It's said, The la∣brr, not the loyterer, is worthy of his hire. Ministers are in Scri∣pture called Pastors, Seers, Watch-men, Work-men: Its a palpable contradiction, for to be a Pastor and not to feed, a Seer, and to be
blinde; a Watchman, and to sleep, and a Work-man to be idle. Pharaoh bids Joseph set any of his Brethren, that were men of acti∣vity, over his cattle; and much more ought they to be men of acti∣vity who are to be set over souls: No industry, no labor like that of the brain; I should rather say, that of the heart, for the heart labor is the best labor of a Preacher of the Gospel: There's no resting from our labors, till we come to Heaven; we read of Pauls labors in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, &c. you read 2 Cor. 11. 27. often of  and  in Chrysstms Homilies: Some of Calvns excellent Commentaries were read every day: Let not such as hope to gain souls to indulge their ease: 'Tis a dangerous thing to be a lover of ease: Leave off dallying and procrastinating, and sall a working; wrap not thy Talent in a napkin, but improve it indu∣striously, to the glory of God and advantage of souls. 9. He that would win souls, must be a man of discretion, that Charact. 9. He must be a man of discreti∣on. knows how to speak a word in due season: He must have skill in this soul-trade, when to give a Corrasive, & when a Cordial, when strong∣er, when gentler Physick must be prescribed: There are Lambs as well as Sheep; Babes as well as strong men; broken hearted as well as hard hearted, and a suitable remedy must be applyed: He must speak war where God would have him, and speak peace where God would have him: O how faithful ought he to be in the discharge of his Function, he must divide to every one their portion, mercy to whom mercy, and judgement to whom judgement belongs: Thus was the Prophet Isaiah qualified, for, saith he, The Lord God hath Isa. 50. 4. given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: Gregory de pastorali cura, a Book Gre: de Pasto∣rali curâ. worthy of our reading, insists largely upon this particular; how proud and how humble persons, how merry, how sad persons, how angry, how meek persons, &c. are to be admonished, that so re∣medies may be applyed suitable to the sore: This wisdom we must pray for, and put it in practice throughout the whole course of our Ministry. 10. and lastly, He that would win souls, must be a man of an Charact. 10. He must be a man of an humble spirit. humble spirit: Love was the first I mentioned, Humility the last, but not the least: Love must lead the van, and Humility brings up the rear, and then there's great hope of a souls conquest: The A∣postle exhorts,  Be ye cloathed with 1 Pet. 5. 7.
humility: The word  (as Hensius and Pollux observes) sig∣nifies vestimentum humile, a mean Garment which servants wore, and it was a badge of humility: Let's put on Humility as a garment, this let us always wear, never put it off. Next to the Rbe of Christs righteousness, it's the best garment in all the world. When God gives thee parts, and thou art proud of them, this spiritual pride will be thy ruine: But when thou hast good parts, and an humble spirit, thou art put in a capacity of saving thine own soul, and those that hear thee: For God gives grace to the humble, and pours most pre∣cious liquor into empty vessels. I have read a Story of one that saw in a vision many snares of the Devil spread upon earth, he sat down and mourned, and said within himself, Who shall pass through these? whereupon he heard a voice answering, Humility shall pass through them. Humility will pass through Caut-ropes, Gins and Pit-solds, which the Devil lays in the way. O beware of Pride, and above all pride, of spiritual pride! It's that dead fly that mars many, a Box of precious yntment: It's like that wilde gourd that spoild the pottage, and caused them to cry out, Est mors in olla. Take notice how God blesseth the labours of many of meaner parts, who are humble and watchful, when as many of greater parts, possest with Luciferian pride of spirit, are curst in all their underta∣kings. Thus you have heard him set forth in his proper colours, and de∣cyphered in legible Characters, who of all others is likeliest to win souls. Q. But what, if notwithstanding a man in some good measure thus Q. qualified cannot reap the fruits of his pains, nor obtain the seal of his A∣postleship? I Answer, That must be our stay and supportation, Isa. 40. 4. A. Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgement is with the Lord, and my work with my God: It's said, Rev. 22. 12. And behold, I come quickly, and my re∣ward is with me, to give to every one according as his work shall be: It's not said, according to the fruit, but according to the work: It may be our sad affliction, for which our hearts must bleed, that we labor all night, and catch nothing, yet at the word of Christ we must let down our net. Though we plough amongst rocks and sow amongs thorns, yet if there be a willing minde it will be accepted: God will ac∣cept
the will for the deed: Let us then be conscientious and constant our duty, and leave the success to God. And thus far for the Doctrinal part of the Text. The third and last head propounded, is, To draw from the premi∣ses 3. Head. Application. some inferences of practice, which is the particular Application I promised you, of which in a few words, and I shall put a period to my discourse. Three Inferences I shall onely draw from this Doctrine, for Hu∣miliation, Exhortation, and Direction. 1. For Humiliation: Here's just cause of deep Humiliation, that Ʋse 1. For Humilia∣tion. we are so little acquainted with this precious fruit specified in the Text, of winning souls. It was a saying, Few Confessors of great men are saved, which a Learned Divine renders in equivalent terms, Few great Mr. Calamyes Sermon on Iosh. 24. 15. mens Chaplains come to Heaven: Few Ministers are skilled in this soul∣saving art, & they that are best skill'd, yet have cause enough of Hu∣miliation: I well know, and shall ever acknowledge, that to save a soul is the peculiar work of the great God, yet Gods Messengers are accounted his mouth unto his people: And the word of God, is the power of God unto salvation. We have a weighty duty lying upon us, Ier. 15. 19. Rom. 1. 16. and we have great cause every one to be humbled to the dust, that we come short of our duty: And if they that labor all the day in Gods vineyard, and are faithful in the work, have cause to be hum∣bled for their unprofitableness, O how should they lay it to heart, and sigh even to the breaking of their loyns, who leave the Sheep with Mercenaries in the Wilderness, whil'st themselves fare luxuri∣ously, and live with Dives deliciously every day. Peradventure they give their flock a visit at Sheep-shearing time, once a year, as the High Priest entred into the Temple, and then with blood: and indeed a Non-Resident is a soul-murderer, who maintains his bra∣very with the price of blood. Fathers and Brethren, I love not to lay out my Mothers nakedness, but my heart burns in love to your souls; and I hope and pray, that a through Reformation may go on and prosper, and that under no pretence whatsoever, Non-residency may be dispensed withal for the future, it being Materia prrsus in∣dispnsabilis. For this sin the Scarlet Gowns ought to come down in the dust, and wear Sack-cloth: Statute Tolerations, Dispensations, for such and such Dignities, local Statutes in Colledges, dispensing for such a Lecture, and for a Living under such a value, all these will
prove but sorry fig-leaves to cover thy nakedness: Will any of these leas serve thy turn at the Audit of the great Judge of Heaven and Earth? Will they stop the cry of blood? It was said in Suetonius, Quintili Vareredde lgiones, so will it be said, Steward, give an ac∣count of thy Stewardship, Sheep-herd, give an account of thy flock, Isa. 56. 10. where then will dumb dogs, (as the Holy Ghost stiles them) and Idol Shepherds appear? They will wish, that th hills might fall upon them, and the mountains cover them from the face of the Lamb. In the second place, suffer I beseech you, (my Brethren) the Ʋse 2. For Exhortation word of Exhortation: I beseech you, by the mercies of God, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, above all your gettings, get this wisdom to gain souls. In general, it concerns every one to do all the offices of Heb. 10. 24. love they can, and to consider one another, to provke to love and to good works: Let Parents do this for their Children, Tutors for the in Scholars, (they are Pro-parents for the time) Masters for their Ser∣vants, one Friend, one Neighbor for another: Let any one indiffe∣rently learn this Art, and put it into practice: These Scriptures I commend to your serious considerations, and continual practice: one is, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him: Ano∣ther is, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to a∣nother, and the Lord hearkned and heard it, and a Book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name: A third, is Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, whilest it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And in a peculiar and special manner I address my Exhortation unto my Brethren of the Ministry, in the Language of the Apostle, : I put you in remembrance 2 Tim. 1. 16. to stir up your gifts: Let not good parts be blasted, or lie rusty for want of using: If such yet remain here unpurged (would there were none) who keep their Pastoral Livings, and their Founders mainte∣nance, living here at ease, let the Flock sink or swim: I recommend those dreadful Imprecations unto their saddest thoughts, Zech. 11. 17. Woe to the Idol Shepheard that leaveth the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dryed up, and his right eye utterly darkned: And 1 Cor. 9. 16. Wo is unto me if I Preach not the Gospel. And for such as are set apart for this Calling,
and as yet have not a Pastoral cure, a particular determination, ad hic & nunc, know that you are Ministers of Christ, ordained into the universal Church, (that's my Judgement) for the benefit of the Church of God in general; be not idle, and lazy, saying, No man hath hired us: Begin betimes, and consecrate your strength and marrow to God: And if the first-fruit be holy, the whole lump will be sanctiied. Neighbor Villages stand in need of your charity: many poor souls ready to starve, cry as earnestly for spiritual bread, as poor Prison∣ers for corporal bread: And the want of a setled Ministry, in seve∣ral places, is occasioned by a scandalous maintenance. Give me leave to be importunate in my suit, and press your duty farther, from thse moving considerations. 1. Consider your high and weighty Calling, what a great honour it is to be a Minister of Jesus Christ: You are called Ambassadors, Consid. 1. The Ministers weighty calling. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Matth. 5. 13. now Ambassadors must pursue the Instructions of their Commissi∣ons, and your principal instruction is, to beseech people to be reconciled to God: You are the salt of the earth, and if the salt loose its savour, wherewith shall it be salted: You are lights, and lights must not be put under a bushel; you are Stewards, and Stewards must be faithful; you are Laborers, and Laborers may not eat the bread of idleness. 2. There's a price put into your hands, you have abilities and op∣portunities, Consid. 2. A price put into the hands of Mi∣nisters. health, and strength, and if God be pleased to give you hearts, the business would be soon done, and well done: you have helps of Learning, helps of an ingenuous Education, helps of fre∣quent Preachers, dividing the Word faithfully amongst you: these are as so many prizes put into your hands to get wisdom, the Lord give you an heart to make a spiritual improvement of them. Two places of Scripture (drawing to a close) I would gladly fa∣sten upon your thoughts: The one is, Eccl. 9. 10. What soever thy hand find th to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knwledge in the grave whither thou goest: The other is, John 9 4. I must work the works of him that sent me, whilst it is day, the night co∣meth, when no man can work. Thirdly and lastly, Consider the strictness of your account at the Consid. 3. From the day of accompt. day of Judgement: Then the Lord will say, Give account of thy Stewardship: Shepheard, give account of thy Flock: Watch-man, hast thou looked to thy Watch? Laborer, hast thou wrought in my
Vine-yard? The consideration of the day of Judgement, the day of visitation should awaken your spirits, and put you upon a care∣full provision against that day. Ʋse 3. In the last place, let me close up all with a word of dire∣ction, Ʋse 3. or direction. and I have done, according to that little experience I have (and the Lord forgive me that I have no more) I'le commend a few rules of direction to you. 1. Give your selves to Divine Meditation: This was Mose's pra∣ctice Direct. 1. To meditate. 1 Tim. 4. 13. in the Mount, Isaac's in the Field, and a duty prescribed by Paul to Timothy: Meditate upon these things: Meditation is, as it were, the wing of the soul to carry it unto Heaven, and herein a Ministers Profession hath advantage of all others: By doing, he receives good: by meditating to instruct others, he gains knowledge for himself: by holding forth light to others, he enlightens himself. This life of Me∣ditation, is an Heaven upon Earth, by it we have communion with God, and are admitted into the Prelence Chamber, so that such as are well skill'd in this Divine Art, can say experimentally, as John did, And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Je∣sus 1 John 1. 3. Christ. 2. Be mch in Prayer, Bene orasse, est bne studuisse: So Bernard, Rule 2. To be much in Prayer. He studieth best, that prayeth best. Pray for thy self, and pray for thy Brethren: pray that God would warm thy heart, that thou may∣est warm theirs. Many run from Commentator to Commentator, when as they should be upon their knees: I dis-allow no good helps, but commend the use of them, yet principally thou must study the Scri∣ptures, and so Preach a Sermon, as thou maist apprehend it to be the fruit of thy Prayers: then Minister and people are likeliest to do most good upon one another, when they mutually joyn in fervent Prayer one for another. 3. Beware of Preaching thy self, froth of Wit, fragments of Rule 3. Preach not froth of wit. Poets, affected Phrases, forc't interpretations of Scripture. I have read, that when Bernard one day Preached a learned eloquent Ser∣mon, and the next day a plain and profitable Sermon, he said, Heri Bernardum, hdie Jesum Christum: Yesterday I preacht my self, to day Jesus Christ. 4. Labor to Preach Jesus Christ: Preach that which may most Rule 4. Preach Jesus Christ. conduce to the knowledge of Christ crucified, which may most ad∣vance the Kingdom of Christ. Busie thy self in shewing the people
the way to Heaven, the necessity of the knowledge of Christ, the necessity of holyness, faith and repentance. Christ crucified, is that Ʋnum Necessarium, which above all others we must desire to know, and instruct others in the knowledge of it. 5. Let thy Preaching be from the heart, from an experimental know∣ledge Rule 5. Preach from the heart. of the love of God in thine own soul, that so thou mayest comfort others, with those comforts wherewith thy self hath been comforted in particular. A speculative Divine, that Preacheth meer∣ly from the strength of parts, from a brain knowledge, doth little good: and why? Because (as Reverend Latimer used to say) dst ignis, dest ignis, There wants fire, there wants heat. What cometh onely from the head, commonly reacheth no farther then the head, but what cometh from the heart, will go to the heart. A Minister should Preach every Sermon to himself first, before he preacheth it to his people, that so he may comfort others, with those comforts wherewith he himself hath been comforted. 6. Know thy people well, and converse with thy flock: There's Rule 6. A Pastor should know his Flock. more work to be done besides Preaching: Thou must not be a stran∣ger to any that will bid thee Ged-speed, visit them, confer with them, and see how they profit. The rule I go by, is, Prov. 23. 22. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flock, and lock well to thy hrd. Seventhly and lastly, and with this I shall conclude, Be diligent Rule 7. Be diligent and watchful. and watchful, still with Habakkuk be upon thy Watch-tower: Be not wearied in thy work: In due season thou shalt reap, if thou faint not: shake off all drousiness and spiritual slumber: Watch over thine own soul, and over those whereof thou art an over-seer. It pleased God to reveal the glad tidings of a Saviour, unto Shepheards who were watching their flocks by night: And whilest thou art watching over thy flock, Christ may call thee to eternal Glory. And blessed are they, whom when Christ comes he findes so doing.
The Pearl of price. Discovered on the Monethly Fast-day, upon Matth. 13. 45, 46. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man, seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it. THis Text is Homogenous with the last SERM. 4. at St Maries OXON. June 20. 1648. which I unfolded from this place: 'Tis a driving of a former nail to the full head: I look upon it as a link of the same golden Chain of matchless dignity, price, and va∣lue. It may be expected (and so were my first thoughts inclined) that upon such a day as this, peculiarly set apart for the af∣flicting of the soul, I should represent to you the nature and duties of a day of Humiliation; But that I am perswaded, that this Argument hath been srequently and conscientiously prosecuted in your hearing: Wherefore, upon second thoughts, waving that common place, and pursuing my intended method, I hope I shall speak a word in season, and not digress from the work of the day. I discovered then, the ex∣cellency of wisdom, and pronounced him the truly wise man, who win∣ned
souls, out of Prov. 11. 30. Go you and do likewise. My task now lies before me, to make a serious review and discovery of more of the same genuine Issue and Divine Extraction, wholly made up of the right stamp. And such a one, instar omnium, hath a sacred Panegyrick, even the singular Testimony of Christ himself in his behalf, set forth in the words now read unto you: Again the king∣dm, &c. Not to stay long in the Portall, I shall briefly draw down the Con∣text Context. unto the Text. Its worth our observation, that our Saviour Christ, in the dispen∣sation of his Ministry, propounded many choice and excellent Para∣bles, ver. 4. This was Christs familiar and accustomed method of Preaching. One reason whereof is given for fulfilling of a Prophesie took out R. 1. Ver. 35. of Psal. 78. 2. I will open my mouth in a Parable: I will utter dark sayings of old; which we have heard, and known and our fathers have told us. Every Prophesie of Christ must be fulfilled in its season; not an  of the word of God shall fail. Another Reason why Christ spake in Parables, was for the obdu∣ration R. 2. of the hearts of the wicked: God in judgement fast closeth up, and hardneth the hearts of many ungodly persons, who persist in their impenitency, ver. 13. And Isaiahs Prophesie is cited by this Evangelist for a pregnant testimony, Isa. 69. 10. which words you shall finde syllabically repeated in the substantials thereof, Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. John 12. 40. Even all the four Evangelists likewise, Acts 28. 26. Rom. 11. 8. Such a Crambe of repetitions, points out something to be specially regarded, as of more then ordinary con∣cernment. A third Reason why Christ spake by Parables, might be to gain R. 3. an attentive audience. Christ speaking Mysteries and Oracles, in∣flam'd the hearts of the Auditors, and made them inquisitive after the Interpretation. Under hidden similitudes there lay a mysterious meaning. Christ spake with authority, not as the Scribs, each word had weight: Whereupon, people hearing things which they never heard before, were eager and restless in their desires, until they un∣derstood the Parable, and the interpretation thereof. The fourth and last Reason I shall mention, why Christ preacht R. 4. in Parables was, because this was a more prevalent convincing way
of Preaching; when Reproofs or Exhortations are delivered in Pa∣rables under the name of a third person, they gain more well-come and acceptable entertainment. Thus Nathan reproved David by a Parable of the Ewe-Lamb, and set his reproof home by a Prosopopeia; David hearing of the rich mans cruelty, in taking the poor mans Lamb, passeth sentence of death upon him, and a fourfold restitu∣tion, because he had no pitty. Now David was  con∣demned 2 Sam. 12. 5. 6. out of his own mouth: Whereupon Nathan strikes whilst the Iron is hot, by making particular Application of the Para∣ble unto David, Thou art the man: This was a convincing way of Preaching. And thus ought the Ministers of Christ to put in practice the most convincing way of Preaching, whether in a way of Mercy or Judgement; whether to come with a rod, or the spirit of meekness; whether to be Boanergesses, or Barnabasses. The most taking, winning way we must use (Provided always, that we make the word of God our just Standard and rule to go by) so that we may win souls unto Jesus Christ. Now to draw nearer to the words: In this Chapter there are de∣livered sundry, choice, and excellent Parables, as of the sower, and the seed, a grain of mustard-seed, leaven hid in three measures of meal, a casting-net. I pass from these, unto that which hath immediate refe∣rence unto my Text, v. 44. The Gospel of Christ is a Treasure, and the Scripture is that pretious seed where that Treasure is to be found: Neither can every one finde it, or know the worth of it; It's a hidden Treasure: The worth of the Gospel is unknown by, and hidden from unbelievers: But the true Believer who sindes it, 2 Cor. 4. 3. Luk: 2. 19. and knoweth the worth of it, hides it, (i. e.) he keeps it safe in the secretest recesses of his heart; he hides it, as Mary did, . He that hath discovered the incomparable Treasure of the Gospel, doth not conceal or suppresse the knowledge thereof from others. But first, he'll inrich himself therewith; upon the finding of the Treasure he's so ravisht with joy, and so transported with a desire after the purchase, as without delay, de∣murs, dodgings, or abatements, he sells all he hath to purchase the field, and get possestion of it. Now my Text is a further prosecution and confirmation of this Parable: The first word,  again, specifies a dependance up∣on what went before. Expect no curiosity in dividing the words:
You have here propounded a Parable, and its Interpreta∣tion. 1. For the Parable, and therein are to be considered these six Divis. A Parable and its interpretati∣on. particulars. 1. The Subject compared, or ground-work of the comparison: The kingdom of Heaven. 2. The subject of this comparison, or Person spoken of, and he is   decyphered by his external profession and occupation, A Merchant man. 3. You have set down what he trafficks for, his particular Mer∣chandize:  He's not a petty Merchant of small wares, and mean Commodities, but a Merchant of Pearls: And because there's a dif∣ference in Pearls, Aliae nobiles, aliae minus generosae, some are of a greater, some of a cheaper estimation: he trades for the best, not ordinary, common, but goodly Pearls. 4. The success he findes: His labor is not lost, but answered with  good successe, a particular instance or specification of his suc∣cesse is, that he findes goodly Pearls. 5. What doth he finde of greatest value? He findes a Pearl of super∣lative,  invaluable price: A Pearl beyond compare, of more worth then all other Pearls whatsoever, and that is, The Pearl of price. 6. and lastly, Here's set down what the purchase cost him, and  that's all that he had. Thus far of the bare letter of the Parable, according to the dark part of it: But there's a mystical meaning to be considered; let's take off the veil, and give in the interpretation. I shall open the terms in that order they lie in the Text, . By Kingdom of Heaven, in this place, is plainly set forth, the admini∣stration of the Gospel: It's call'd the Kingdom of Heavens in the plural, alluding to the other Heaven, the habitation of glorified Scopus est commendare Evangelū piis à singulari prae∣stanuâ eâdem∣que opera di∣cere qunti E∣vangelium a piis fiat, Pisat. Saints and Angels. The Gospel of Christ is that Heaven on Earth, which will bring us to that Heaven above. Piscator observes on the place, The scope of all is this, to inhance the incomparable worth and estimation of the Gospel in the hearts of the godly: It followeth,  a Merchant man: This Merchant is every true belie∣ver, who drives a continual trade for Heaven, who is industrious and indefatigable in his labors: He seeks after faith, repentance, holyness
of life, the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, the reconciled countenance of God in the face of Jesus Christ. These are the Jewels for which he searcheth: This is his sole imployment to nego∣tiate Instar negocia∣torum debent conquirere pre∣tiosas Margari∣tas fidel & pietatis. Pareus in loc. for Heaven: He trades not for trifles, but weighty, precious Commodities: His merchandize is particularized,  goodly Pearls, the Pearls of faith and holyness, as Pareus on the place. The Gospel holds forth goodly Pearls, goodly Promises, good∣ly Ordinances, goodly Graces, a goodly recompense of reward: the beauty thereof will enamor the soul, and the Treasure therein contained will more enrich it, then all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them. And what success he had, you may see, . This Pearl of great price is Jesus Christ: The Gospel is the Cabinet. Margarites (as Pliny and other Histori∣ans observe) are produced out of the dew of Heaven, and Shell-fishes draw in that dew: They are called Ʋniones, because usually they are found two by two, unsevered, in the same shell. And that which is last to be opened, is the price paid to purchase this invaluable Pearl, Quis magno e∣mit Margari∣tam, nisi cui notum est pre∣tium. Mucul.  Chrysost. . None will buy this Pearl, who knows not the price, saith Musculus: Tis evident that this Spiritual Merchant was a man of knowledge: The knowledge of the worth of Christ made him so willing to sell all for him: He stands not dodging, and cheap∣ning, hoping to bring down the price, he knoweth Christ to be in∣finitely more worth then all, and therefore willingly foregoes all things for him. It's Chrysostom's observation, Christ is the Pearl of infinite value, if you sell not all, you cannot purchase him. But an Objection lies in the way, and must be removed, lest it Q. prove a dangerous stumbling-block: Can Christ, Heaven, Salvation, be bought and sold? Questionless, Heaven is the Saints inheritance; not their purchase, but Christs for them. For Answer hereunto, we may not too hard strain a Parable, lest A. we draw blood out of it. And it's a received rule in Divinity, The∣ologia Parabolica non est argumentativa: And Pareus observes on the place, Hoc servit Parabolae, non sensui: Non enim pretio emitur, sed gratis fide acquiritur: No merit, no purchase of Heaven; all's from Grace. But then, saith Calvin, are we said to buy Christ, Quum volentes, nos privamus carnis desideriis, i. e. When we willingly renounce carnal desires: When knowing the worth of Christ we deny our
selves, foregoe what's dearest and nearest, so far forth as it stands in competition with, or opposition unto Jesus Christ. When we for∣sake all for Christ, foregoe lusts, pleasures, profits, honors, in their greatest estate and confluence, then are we said to buy this Pearl of price. Now the Parable thus unfolded, holds forth these evident truths of Doctrine. First, That every true Believer is a Merchant of goodly pearls. Secondly, Every spiritual Merchant-venturer, must sell all for the purchase of the Pearl of price. And these shall be the ground-work of my ensuing Meditations: Both I purpose to enlarge this time () the solem∣nity of the day requiring inlargement of Duties. I resume the first  Doctrine propounded, That evry true, &c. In handling whereof, I shall observe this method. Meth. 1. To illustrate the similitude between material and immaterial Pearls: And shew how the comparison holds between them, that shall constitute the Doctrinal part. Then secondly, I'le review the comparison betwixt a Merchant, and a true Believer, and from the practice and negotiation of the one, infer the duty of the other: This shall constitute the Use and Application. 1. Then my task lies in illustration of the similitude, and making 1. A similitude between materi∣al, and immateri∣al Pearls. 1. Pearl have lustre and beau∣ty. a comparison between material and immaterial Pearls: The compa∣rison holds good in these resemblances. 1. Pearls have a resplendent lustre and beauty: Pearls and pre∣tious Stones are beautiful, even to admiration. The sparkling of a Diamond, the beauty of a Ruby, will even dazzle the eyes of the be∣holders: So the Word and Sacraments are beautiful Ordinances; there's a great deal of beauty and splendor put upon the Word of God sincerely preached, and the Sacraments purely administred. There's a vast difference betwixt Pearl and Pearl. A Bristol stone or a bastard Pearl, may cheat ignorant people: But a skilfull Jew∣eller will bring them to the touch-stone, and discover the difference. There's a great difference between Preacher and Preacher: One man bands Jesuite against Jesuite, Councl against Councel, or stuffs up his Sermon with Poetical fragments, high-flown Stage-play ex∣pressions; this man is cryed up for an excellent Preacher, even in Athens, amongst some raw, wanton Auditors: And I wonder not
that such preaching frequently of late years used in this place (thanks be to God there is better now) hath been useless, unfruitful, such as God would not honor with a blessing, because it came onely from the head, and so went no further then the head; it tickled the ear, and pleased the fancy onely, it never descended into the heart, and affected the Conscience: Whereas on the contrary, another man preacheth Christ in simplicity of heart, in the demonstration of the spirit, having experience of Gods love in his own soul, he comforts others with those comforts wherewith he himself in parti∣cular hath been comforted withall: This is the Preacher likeliest to do good: And the seet of such are beautiful. The Gospel is most Isa. 52. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 21. beautiful in its own dress: And the foolishness of Preaching is effe∣ctual to salvation. There's no necessity of guilding a Pearl; the Pearl of it self is more precious then all the guilding that's put upon it: To guild over Sermons with humane inventions, and froth of wit, is like to those, who when they could not make the Picture handsome, fell a daubing of it. I discard not humane Learning, but highly commend it, if it be used with wisdom and moderation; as a servant, keeping its due distance: But love to your souls con∣strains me to speak, and be your remembrancer; how thankful ought you to be (and O that you would improve the price put into your hands!) that instead of such, whose study was to preach af∣fected phrases, strong lines, more Philosophy then Divinity, now at last God hath sent amongst you, faithful, painful Preachers, divi∣ding the Word aright, even between the Joynts and Marrow, apply∣ing it home to your consciences, such you ought to esteem highly for their works sak, as the Apostle exhorts: It hath been an exceeding 1 Thess. 5. 13. grief of heart unto me, to hear so little use made of Scripture in this place formerly, when Postillers and Jesuites have been muster'd, as frequently as uselesly. I would therefore inhance the price of this inestmable Pearl of the word of God: There's more beauty, more strength of judgement, more conviction of the conscience in one line of Gods word, then in all the elaborate Volumes of Philoso∣phers. Compare Livy and Moses, Pindarus's Odes and Davids Psalms; compare Demosthenes and Cicero with Isaiah and Paul (as some of the Learned have done) and you'l finde how the Learned Clem. Alex. Stom. Philosophers and Orators are put down, and vanquisht in their own Art, quite foil'd with their own Weapons, so that the Quintessence, and Elixar drawn out of the exquisite Writings of Philosophers, are
but bastard Pearls, in comparison of the Holy Scriptures. Let me impart an experience (I speak it onely to the glory of God) that I have gone from Commentator to Commentator (though  approve of their help) and have been unsatisfi'd; at last I have compared Scripture with Scripture, and there have I received satisfaction upon my knees, which otherwise I could not obtain. Let's all study the Scripture more, for Gods Word is more beautiful then all the Wri∣tings of the wisest Men. 2. Pearls are very rare and scarce: A man may finde millions of 2. Pearls are very rare. Pebble-stones for one Pearl: The Margarites come out of a shel, and that very rare to be found but in the Indian Ocean: The Mer∣chant that gets them, must sound the depth of the sea: And many pre∣cious stones are found only in craggy steep rocks: A man must scram∣ble up to the top of high Rocks, and incur the hazard of a dange∣rous Precipice: And it's doubtful, whether for all his labours he shall be recompensed accordingly, there being such an exceeding rarity and scarcity of such precious Commodities. So immaterial Pearls, Gospel Ordinances, purely dispensed, are rare to be found. Pure Officers, and pure Administrators, without humane mixture or composition are very rare. Divide the World (as some have done) into thirty parts, but  are in Christendom, and even in See a Map cal∣led Chistiano∣graphia. Christendom are Papists, Socinians, Arians, Pelagians, Sons of He∣resie, who differ from the Orthodox even in Fundamentals. And now adays (though for what's already done, we have cause to bless God with meltings of heart) yet through the manifold obstructions of a formal and superstitious People, 'tis very rare to finde a faithful soul-saving Ministry: Omne tempus Clodios, non cmne Catones foret: He's but a meer stranger in Isral, who knows not that Priests of Baal and Bacchus, such as made the Sacrifice of God to be abhorr'd, have been like Sycamores in the valley for abundance. And I wish there be not a remnant left of that wicked generation, who within these Walls are enemies to Reformation, who brayd of the mur∣muring Israelites, saying, Come, let us make us a captain, and go again unto Aegypt: The Language of their heart is, Let's have our Al∣tars, our Images, Copes, Genuflexions, Cringings, the Liturgy, with all its bundle of Ceremonies: And no wonder,—Missa non morder, These never touch the quick: But all this while the faithful, sedulous I aborers in Gods Vineyard are very few: old Mnasons, the good old Puritans are very few: The harvest is great, and the laborers few:
We must therefore pray, that God would send forth faithful laborers into his harvest. Thirdly, As Pearls are rare and scarce, so they are hard to be got, 3. Pearls are hard to be got. there's much difficulty in getting of them, even in those places where they are to be found. For getting pretious Stones, I told you before, many venture far, and scramble upon Rocks to get Pearls (as some Travellers report) the Merchant must wait the eb∣bing and the flowing of the Sea, and tarry till such a certain season, waiting many days and nights till that come, then sound the depth of the Sea: Some dive and hazard their lives for them. So sor to get immaterial Pearls is a great difficulty: All the graces of the Spi∣rit are invaluable Pearls, the richest Bracelet or Neck-lace of Pearls that ever I read of, you have mentioned by the Apostle, Adde to your faith vertue, &c. To get a common, temporary faith, a verbal 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. love, a groundless hope is easie, and ordinary; but to get a justify∣ing faith, an unfained love, a stedfast faith, here lieth the difficulty, here's the labor, here's the work indeed. To get saving Graces, thou must be in labors often, in watchings often, in fastings often, and thou must pass through good report and evil report, fiery Serpents, and sons of Anak: You read of a work of faith, a labour of love, a patience of hope. Salvation is a Pearl of glory, and we are command∣ed, 1 Thss. 1. 3. Phil. 2. 12.  Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: 'Tis the difficultest task in all the World to save our souls: The way to Heaven is a straight way, a narrow Gate, there are many obsta∣cles, brakes and bryars in the way, Beasts of Ephesus to be encoun∣tred withal: This conflict cannot be managed,  without raising a dust, without shedding of Blood: Thou must set thy self in battel aray against thy self, the spirit against the flesh: Cum hac controversianati sumus (saith a Father) Thou must wrestle Matth. 11. 12. against Principalities and Powers; thou must run a race, thou must even storm Heaven, and take it by violence. Peradventure thou mayst be stript of all, and 'tis no matter, if in the interim thou beest cloath'd with the righteousness of Christ. It may be God in∣tends thee for a Martyr, to seal the Truth with thy blood: Happy wilt thou be, notwithstanding all the hardships and difficulties thou hast grapled withal, if thou comest to Heaven at the last: one moment of Heavens joys, one beam of Gods reconciled countenance, will make amends for all: The Apostle determines, That the afflictions of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall bre∣vealed Rom. 8. 18. in us. Fourthly, Pearls are of invaluable price and estimation: Clopa∣tra's 4. Pearls are of unvaluable price. Pearl was worth many thousands: One Pearl no bigger then a mans thumb, may be worth many thousands. So the Pearls of the Gospel are of invaluable price: This Cabinet contains the most pretious Gems in the whole Universe. Every Gospel-promise is a pearl: That excellent promise, which hath five Negatives (and five Negatives in Greek more vehemently deny)  Heb. 13. 5. is of it self more worth then an inheritance of ten thou∣fand pounds per annum: Those promises, John 3 36. and c. 10. 28. are the Jewels which Believers lay up as their chiefest Treasure. Fisthly, Pearls are full of vertue, and medicinable: There's much 5. Pearls are full of vertue. vertue in divers pretious Stones: Jewels commonly worn have much vertue in them; and Pearls questionless much more. That which is called the Magistery of Pearls, is of special use. It's commonly observed, that the Ruby cures the dimness of the eyes; and the To∣paz keeps a mans hand from scalding: The Carbuncle gives light in the dark, and the Saphire cures the stingings of Scorpions: So the word of God is that Ruby, that  mentioned Rev. 3. 18. that enlightneth thy eyes; that makes thy darkned▪ an enlightned minde: Christ is that Topaz, that good Physitian that heas thy distempers, both of body and soul: Look upon Christ with the eye of Faith, and thou shalt be cured of the stingings of Scorpions, of Sin and Sa∣tan, as they were who eyed the brazen Serpent, and were cured of Numb. 21. 9. the stingings of the fiery Serpents. Sixthly, Pearls are sterling Commodities in every place: In many 6. Pearls are lterling comm∣dity. Nations our Coyn is not currant with them, neither theirs with us: But Pearls are currant every where. Certainly therefore there's much worth in Pearls, for God-would not so befool the whole world, neither would the Scripture shaddow forth the glory of Heaven by Pearls, Rev. 21. 21. were there not an extraordinary worth in them. So the Gospel of Jesus Christ is a sterling Commodity, where ever it comes, It hath the stamp of the King of Heaven upon it; where the light of the Gospel breaks in, it findes, or makes a way for its entertainment: It's so lovely, that it will ravish us with its love: the Proclamation runs, Ho every one that thirsteth, come unto the waters: The Gospel is right metal, and passable wherever God will have it: It passeth currantly through all Believers for their eternal salvation;
and to unbelievers to leave them  for their conviction and condemnation. Seventhly and lastly, Pearls are lasting and durable, they are so∣lid, 7. Pearls are lasting and du∣rale. substantial, and the solidity and duration of them inhanceth their estimation: So the Gospel of Christ is a durable Pearl: It's Christs Legacy, bequeath'd from generation to generation: Gods Word shall never fail: Salvation is a Pearl that will never moulder away: The plasures of heaven are for evermore. Christ the Pearl of Psl. 16. 11. Heb. 13. 8. price is an unchangeable Saviour. Thus far of the Doctrinal part: It now remains, that I should draw down the similitude of a Merchant, and from his properties infer the particular Application unto your practice. 1. A Merchant must be a man of knowledge and good under∣standing: Prop. 1. 1 A Merchant must be a man of knowledge. He must be able to know the worth of his Commodities, how to distinguish true from counterfeit Pearls. The Merchant in the Text, knew well the incomparable worth of the Pearl of price; otherwise, he would not straightway have for gone all for the pur∣chase of it. We say commonly, and as truly, Ignoti nulla cupido: So every spiritual Merchant must know the excellent worth of the Gospel, the riches of Christ, the riches of saith: The knowledge of them will set his affections awork. Hear, O Christian! know thy main duty, that Ʋnum Necessarium, to learn the knowledge of Je∣sus Christ: This is that fundamental knowledge, without which you can never come to Heaven. Eternal life consists in this know∣ledge, John 17. 3. Above all thy gettings, get this understanding: What if thou art skill'd in all Arts and Scinces, in all the humane Learning in the World, and in the mean time art ignorant of Jesus Christ? Thou art (as the ordinary Proverb saith) penny wise; and pound foolish: For all thy secular Learning, thou mayst go to Hell. O then, let thy vote run parallel with Solomons for Wisdom: Be∣seech 1 King. 3. 9. Rev. 3. 18. Christ to anoint thee with eye-salve, and to enlighten the eyes of thy minde, that thou maist comprehend all the dimensions of the love of God. As the light of the body is the eye, so the light of the soul is the understanding. As the Pilot to the Ship, the Sun to the World, the Commander to his Soldiers, so is knowledge to the Soul, to steer, guide and direct its motions: Say not, though thou art ignorant, yet thou hast a good heart: Solomon tells us, Without knowledge the heart is not good: Say not thou art a Believer, Prov. 19. 2. though thou art ignorant, for knowledge precedes faith, Psal. 9. 10.
They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: Boast not, that thou esteemest highly of Christ, and yet canst not tell what worth is in him, what Justification means, what saving faith is: For an ig∣norant person cannot set an high price upon Christ. Hee'l ask Whats this beloved more then anther beloved? And you my Brethren, that are men of Learning, bred up in this Famous Nursry, do not glory in your skill in Tongues, nor in your skill in the Liberal Sciences; you that are the greatest Scholars, must come the same way to Hea∣ven as the meanest Christian, that cannot read one letter in the Book: What will all your knowledge avail you without the know∣ledge of Jesus Christ? There's no Postern-door for Heathens; no name but that of Christ; no way besides, v. Acts 4. 12. John 14. 6. O then set your hearts and heads on work to know Jesus Christ: If you knew the worth of this Pearl, you would prize it the fairest of Ten thousands, and you would willingly venture all for the pur∣chase of it. 2. A Merchant is a man of indefatigable labors and industry; he Prop. 2. A Merchant is a man of paint. compasseth Sea and Land, and negotiates in foreign places for his advantage: Hereupon the good Huswife, Prov. 31. 14. is compa∣red to Merchants Ships; she bringth her food from afar; she risth also whilst it is yet night, and giveth meat to her houshold, and a prtion to her maidens. A Merchant is a man of much imployment, and therefore must be very diligent and industrious: He well knoweth Prov. 10 14. that of Solomon, that the hand of the diligent maketh rich: And thus must every true Believer, every Merchant for the soul, be a man of diligence and unwearied labors: He knows it's a long and difficult journey to go to Heaven, and therefore his wisdom is to set out ear∣ly, and consecrate to God the morning of the day: The World sometimes throws Caut-ropes in the way, to gaul him; sometimes golden Apples of pleasures, profits, preferments to bewitch him; other times he meets with scoffing Ishmaels, railing Rabshakehs, Beasts of prey, which open their mouthes ready to devour him: And therefore it concerns him to fortifie himself with saith, hope, and patience, and steel himself with invincible courage. He that Trafficks for Heaven, must look for Pauls portion, To be in weari∣ness 2 Cor. 11. 27 and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness: My exhortation therefore runs parallel with the Apostles, Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Solaier of 2 Tim. 12. 3, 4 Jesus Christ: No man that warreth, &c. He that aims at proficiency,
must not shrink at difficulty: You are seeking for Pearls, for pre∣tious Stones, for pretious promises, pretious graces, even the Pearl of price, The Lord Jesus: Do not leave of seeking, till you finde, slack not your endeavors: Be not weary of well doing, but perse∣vere in the work, and you shall reap if you faint not: The preti∣ous Pearls of the Gospel are in jeopardy. A Jesuitical party would take away our Gospel, which if once gone, we may call all our com∣forts Ichabods. Adde' therefore to your pains, and as you are ex∣horted, Jude 3. Contend for the faith delivered to the Saints, stand up for Christ, and own his cause before men, otherwise he will not own you in his kingdom. Thirdly, It's the property of a Merchant to venture largely in the 3. A Merchant ventures largely in the stock. stock, in hope of a plentiful return. A Merchant-Venturer com∣mits his Merchandize to the mercies of Winds, Waves, Pyrates: It's their common Proverb, Nothing venture, nothing have: And thus must every spiritual Merchant venture liberally in the stock; he must venture his Prayers, one day they may return with good mea∣sure, full prest, and running over: He ventures his Alms, and he Eccles. 11. 1, 2. hath a ground of incouragement, to finde bread cast upon the waters after many days: He ventures his life, livelyhood, hopes, fears, all upon Jesus Christ: If Christ be in the Ship, no fear of sinking, here's safe venturing. And so let not us of the Ministry be afraid of evil en∣treaties, and unfruitfulness of our labors: Lets not bauk our duty, be∣cause we fear we shal do no good; let's put that to the venture, & fall a working: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening with-hold not Eccles. 11. 6. thy hands, for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or  King. 22. 24. whether they both be alike good. We read, That a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joynts of the harness. So though Ministers shoot at a venture, personating no man, yet it may please God so to direct the word, that it may hit the right mark. Now let's all become Merchant-Venturers: The Church is the Ship, tost up and down with Tempests and Storms: It's ex∣ceeding great folly, to trim up our Cabbin, if the Ship be a sinking. Fear not, this Ship will at last come to a safe Harbor; here then let us venture Counsels, Pains, Prayers, Estates, Liberties, Lives and all: Deliverance will come to the Church of God, we have received earnest already; let's tug harder at the Oar, and wrestle with Prayers and Supplications, as we read, Isa. 62. 1. & v. 6, 7. When delive∣rance comes as a Samuel of our Prayers, when we apprehend it the
returne of prayers, O how welcome will be that deliverance: To see the ship so well fraught in the returne, will be our rejoycing, that we have ventur'd so liberally in the stock. Fourthly, A Merchant must be a man of singular Patience, his Prop: 4. A Merchant must be a man of Patiece. stock is in a ship, whose voyage is to the Indies, he therefore must wait patiently for the returne. So must every spirituall Mer∣chant venturer wait patiently upon God. Learne hence (O Chri∣stian) to wait upon the God of thy salvation, the Charriot wheeles of deliverance are long a coming, sense failes; reason is non-plus't, but faith bids thee wait longer; It bids thee leave off disputing and reasoning and learn to believe. But when faith a little flags, then hope encourageth as it did Ezrah, amid'st multitudes of teares. But Ezrah 10. 2 hope sayeth, I have hoped long, and hope dforr'd makes the heart sicke, then comes patience, and bids thee wait and stay Gods time, his time is the best time. Do not Limit the holy one of Israell to times or meanes, this or that instrument. Eligat Opprtunitatem qui libere August. dat misericordiam. O be perswaded to possesse thy soule with pati∣ence, Ther's need of patience, Heb: 10 36. Ther's a certaine Period or Limit of time set downe by God (though unknowne to us) when Deliverance shall come. Thirty yeares was appointed to the impotent Cripple, which time expired Christ healed him; Eighteene yeares to the daughter of Abraham, and then was shee healed; 70. yeares to the Jewish captivity and then deliverance came. Wee are to observe, that ther's a great talke amongst the houshold of Christs coming, the feilds looke white to harvest, the Gods of Babylon are in disgrace, ther's great powring out of the spirit, and a gracious answer of prayers, ther's earnest thirsting and longing after delive∣rance, And these are usuall Harbingers of Deliverance: But to de∣termine the punctuall time 'tis above all our knowledge; we can say no more then with the Psalmist: We see not our signes, there is no more Ps. 4. 9. any Prophet, neither is there amongst us that knoweth hw long. Lets imi∣tate those who through faith and patience have inherited the promi∣ses. Lets resolve come what will come to wait on God, as the Church professes, Is: 8. 17: and Mich: 7. 7. God waits to do us good, let us wait for the reception of his mercy, Is: 30. 8, 5. 5 A Merchant frequents the places of Merchandize, where he may Prop. 5. A Merchant must frequents the places of merchandise. heare of his factors, and receive intelligence of his Merchandize. He's frequently at the Exchange, or such like meeting places. So doth every spirituall Merchant frequent the publike Assemblies, which
are as it were spirituall Exchanges, Places of concourse, where he may heare news from heaven, and receive Intelligence for the best Emolument of his soule. Wait then, O Christian, at these Bethes∣daes, wait at the Posts of wisedomes gate, Lie in this way where Christ frequently comes by, Omit not through Negligence any Sermon, that peradventure may be a convincing, a converting and a confirming word unto thee. It's a mercy promised to an afflicted people, Isay 30. 20. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. That you have publick Assemblies, frequent opportunities, inlarged meanes, and that your eyes behold your faithfull teachers, these are singular mercies vouch∣safed to you, your duty is to improve them to the glory of God, and the best advantage of your pretious soules. 6ly, and lastly, A Merchant must improve his estate to his best Prop: 6. A Merchant must improve his estate to his best advantage, Mat: 25. 27. advantage. He hath been at great paines, cost, and charges, there∣fore hee'l put off his commodities to his best emolument. The Lord in the Parable expects his own  with increase. An honest gaine is commendable in the trade. So a spirituall Merchant must improve all he hath, his time, Talents, Graces, Ordinances, to the advantage of his pretious soule. He must endeavour to gaine by various dispen∣sations, adversity as well as prosperity; he must endeavour to prosit by every Sermon he heareth, by every mans company, with whom he converseth. Hee's skill'd in the soule thriving trade. He stores up a stock of Divine graces, faith, love, humility, meeknesse &c. And there with he would be adorned. He stores up a stock of attributes, he knowes there's wisedom in God to counsell him, mercy in God to pardon him, power in God to defend him, and with these he supports and stayes his spirit. He stores up a stock of promises, He reads, and beleeves, that they are pretious promises, and that they are 2 Cor 11. 20. all in Christ, Yea and Amen. These he gathers up, and applyes to his particular condition. This spirituall Merchant, this true beleever is the best Husband in all the world: He not onely hath grace, but is still a growing in more▪ grace: Hee's a plant planted in Gods garden, and therefore brings forth more fruit in his elder age. Hee's not contented with what grace he hath allready, but with Paul he forgets those things which are behind, and reacheth forth unto those things which are before, pressing forward towards the marke, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. Hee's still on the getting hand, getting more Phil: 3. 13. 14. accession unto his faith, love, and humility, adding one degree of grace unto another, till at length he attaines unto the end of his faith, the salvation of his immortall soule. And thus you have heard a comparison betwixt materiall and im∣material pearles, between an earthly and a heavenly Merchant. In the close of this point, suffer, I beseech you, (Brethren) one word of exhortation; and that is to perswade you to be Merchants of pearles. Let me expostulate the case (as the Prophet did) Where∣fore Is: 55. 2. do yee spend money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which satissieth not? Be no more Merchants for Gugawes, and triffles, and the vanities of the world; which if you should get, you could find no solidity nor satisfaction in them. But let your labour be bestowed in seeking out the goodly pearls of the Gospell; Nego∣tiate for heavenly treasures, which alone are solid, which only are satisfactory, able to inrich your soules. Seeke after the Cabinet (which is the Gospell) and set an high estimate upon it; but above all seeke after Christ, who is the pearle of price in the Cabinet, and having found Christ, imitate the wife Merchant in the text, Sell all you have to purchase this pearle of price: which brings me to my second  Doctrine, That every spirituall Merchant venturer must sell all for the purchase of the pearle of price. For unfolding of this pretious point, I shall observe this Method. Method. 1. To illustrate the truth by Parallell examples. 2. To prove it by scripture Precepts. 3. To confirme it by Evidence of reason. 4. And lastly, To set it home upon the conscience, by particular Application. First, To illustrate this by Examples, time would faile me to in∣large 1 Illustration by Examples. my selfe in so great a cloud of witnesses. Review v: 44. of this chapter, set Abrahams example for your imitation; God bids Abra∣ham leave his country Gen: 12. 1. and makes him a promise to blesse him v. 3. Abraham disputes not the command, but obeyes it, v. 4. And this arose from a principle of faith, so the Apostle Heb: 11. 8. mentions. And what was the moving cause? v: 10. For he looked for a City which hath foundations, whose builder, and maker is God. God was better to Abraham, then kindred, possessions, and houses; He loved his relations well, but loved God better. That one promise Gen:
17. 7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, was of more value to him, then all the world besides. Wherefore at the command of God with all readinesse, he foregoes all. Thus Moses left a king∣dome for Christ. Josephus reports that Thermuthis Pharaohs daugh∣ter Joseph. Atiq: had no child, and therefore having found him, she set her heart upon him, and fained her selfe to be with child, and kept Moses hid, untill such time, as it might be thought to be her owne Child, to that end, that he might inherit her fathers crowne. This is doubtfull; but what the Apostle delivereth is an undoubted truth Heb: 11. 24, 25, 26.  When he became great he refu∣sed to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Moses who was skilled in all the learning of the Aegyptians, the adopted son of Pharaohs daughter, educated in a palace, a man mighty in words and deedes forsooke all for Jesus Christ, so the Apostles forsooke all for Christ, The primitive converts, sold all their possessions for the Gospels sake. Math: 19. 37. When the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified at Ephesus, those Act: 4: 3. that vsed curious arts, burnt th ir bookes, the price amounting to 50. Thousand peeces of silver. Elisha left his Oxen, and followed Eliah. Acts. 19. 19. Matthew left the receit of custome, and followed Christ. Marcus Galeacius Caracciolus (of whom Calvin makes honourable mention) left his Marquesdome, his great Relations, and all his proffers of honour, for Jesus Christ, It was a truly noble protestation which he vsed, Cursed be he that preferres all the gold and silver in the world before one dayes communin with Jesus Christ. I have read of one Hor∣misdays a noble Persian, who would rather leave his noble Robes, and weare beggars raggs then deny Jesus Christ, He was degraded of all his honours, and put to serve Camels, and was cloth'd with raggs: Once to tempt him to deny Christ, they put on him silken garments: He presently in scorne tore them in peeces, refusing silken garments upon such base termes & proposalls. The Lord Cob∣ham (as the Acts and monuments record) notwithstanding many v. Fox Acts & Monum. flattering intreaties denyed the Popes spiritualty, and sayed he was the Antichrist, he rather would dye, then acknowledg him Christs Vi∣car: He lost his life in that cause. All those are  examples to us that we should fore-go our Relations, interests, liberties, estates, even all for Jesus Christ. To purchase the pearle of price, we must foregoe all. Now in the second place for precepts commanding, read Prov: 23. 2 Proof by Precept 23. Buy the truth, and sell it not. Now if we would buy the truth, we must come up to its price.
If it be to loose our Ease, Promotions, Riches, Pleasures, Profits, we must sell them all for the purchase of truth. We are commanded by the wise man, Wisedom is the principall thing, therefore get wise∣dome, and withall thy getting get understanding: And Christs counsell Prov: 4. 7. is above all, most excellent. I counsell thee to buy of me gold, and a∣oynt thy eyes with eye salve &c. By eye salve we understand illu∣mination Rom: 3. 18 of the spirit, by gold a pure and pretious faith, by white Rayment the innocency of Christ, his immaculate robes to cloath us: These are not to be had for nothing, they must (sano sensu) be bought, after a manner, and a price pay'd to purchase them, and to the same effect tends the counsell to the rich man By our Savi∣our; Marke. 10: 21. goe thy way, and sell what soever thou hast, and give to the Poore, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, come take up the crosse and fol∣low me. I proceed to the 3. Head propounded, the confirmation of the 3 Proof by Evidence of Reason. poynt by evidence of Reason, the Pearle of Price the Lord Jesus is of that infinite price, dignity, and value, as all must be sold to purchase him: And this I'le make good by these ensuing De∣monstrations. First, The pearle of price is not to be had for nothing: we must Reason. 1. The pearle of price is not to be had sor nothing buy it, even give all that we have to purchase it. Ephron would give Abraham the cave of Machpelah. Gen: 22. 11. But Abraham would buy it, neither doth he dodge, and abate any thing, but gives the full price, which was 400. shekells of silver, currant money with the Merchant. v. 16. T'is sayed Araunah gave all the sacrifices to David as a King. 2 Sam: 24. 23. But David would not offer sacri∣fice of free-cost, but gave fifty shekells of silver, the full price. Nei∣ther is Christ the pearle of price to be had for nothing. We have sacrifices to offer, Our sins must be slaughter'd, Our corruptions crucisi'd, and we are to offer our selves as an Holocaust, a whole burnt offering unto the Lord. Q. But some will say? Is not here a gap open'd for merit? Can hea∣ven, and Christ be bought and purchas'd? Hereupon the Papists lay the rotten foundation of their owne merits. For answer, we may not lay too much weight upon a Parable, or similitude, Few similitudes runne as they say quatuor pedibus. Com∣pare this Parable with Is: 55. 1. Come buy wine, and milke, without money and without price. We must come and buy, we must be in∣dustrious in the use of the meanes which God hath appointed, and
yet without any meritorious price: In commutative justice, inter vendenda & emenda, One gives one thing and receives another worth it, so that in equity the price must be worth the commodity, and the commodity worth the price. But the greatest price we can give for Christ, comes more then ten-thousand times below his worth: Yet then in a true sense are we say'd to buy this Pearle, when we industriously pursue all good meanes to get it, when we deny our selves, pray, heare the word, entertaine Christ in our hearts, and lives. And notwithstanding the grace of Christ is free, without money or price, 'Tis our duty to come unto the waters, to frequent the meanes of grace: Though what ever we give is but as a drop to the Ocean, a sand to the Ballance, an Atome to the sun, and when we have done all we can, we must acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants. Secndly, The pearle of price is the most necessary purchase in all Reason. 2. The pearle of price is the most necessary pur∣chase in all the world. the world. 'Tis no good husbandry to lay out our moneyes upon trisles, and superfluityes; but this is Maries choyce, that one thing needfull. Thou canst not live without necessaries for thy bo∣dy, as bread to eate, drinke to drinke, and Rayment to put on: Take away these and you starve the body. Now Christ is the bread of life, a fountaine inexhausted to quench the thirst of his people, and the robes of his righteousnesle are a pretious garment to cover all our nakedness: Take away these and you starve the soule: We can∣not live one moment without Jesus Christ. Enemies may take away thy meat, drinke, rayment, and such like outward comforts; but they cannot take away Christ. In the absence of all these, if thou hast the presence of Christ, thou mayest say with Jacob, I have e∣nough. As it was say'd to the Boat-man, Be not afraid, ; Ipse unus Chri∣stus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono, bona sunt om∣nia. August. so say amidst tempestuous Euroclydons; be not affraid, if thou hast in∣terest in Jesus Christ. Christ is of absolute necessity, insomuch as thou can'st not subsist without him. For riches they are contin∣gent, to be or not to be. For honours, pleasures, and promotions, unlesse they be sanctifi'd, t'is far better to be without them, then with them. They are but the blessings of the left hand. But in the want of all these, thou art made up abundantly with Christ; and in Domine Iesu, te plus diligo, quam mea, meos meipsum. Bernard. the fruition of them all in their greatest estate and confluence, thou art utterly undone without him, The Martyr in the flames cryed out, none but Christ, and so doth every true beleever cry out, im∣portunately with Rachel, give me Christ or else I die. Christ is more to be loved then all.
Thirdly, This pearle of price is a commodity infinitely more pre∣tious Reason 3. This pearle of price is a Com∣modity infinitely more pretious then all other pearles. then all other pearles or gemmes in the universe. No man of discretion will buy refuse stuffe, and worthlesse wares: but the ex∣cellent pretious worth of a commodity allures the Merchant to bid a price for it. Now Christ is of such value and superlative excellency, as that all we can compare with him comes far short, and no waies able to reach him. v: Prov. 3. 13, 14, 15. and Job: 28. beginning at v. 15. We read, 1 Peter. 2. 7. Ʋnto you therefore which beleeve he is pretious; we render it in the concrete, but the Originall is an abstract.  an honour: Christ is honour it selfe. A plant of re∣nowne, Ezek: 34. 29. We cannot set a price high enough answera∣ble to the worth of Jesus Christ. Fourthly, The pearle of price is the most gainefull, profitable, Reason 4. The pearle os price is the most gainefull Com∣modity. 1 Tim. 6. 6 Gen. 26. 12. Mat. 19. 29. and inriching commodity. Godliness is great gaine: Christ is an inrich∣ing pearle, and his Graces, faith, hope, love, even all the graces of the spirit are inriching graces. It was great gaine for Isaak to receive in one yeare, a 100 fold increase. There is a rich and pretious Pro∣mise, Every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an 100 fold, and shall inherit eternall life. Godliness is profitable to all things: It hath the Promise of this life, and that which is to come: 1 Tim: 4. 8. so far are we from being loosers, or onely bare savers, as that we shall be exceeding great gainers by this commodity. Religion is the Rom: 6. 21. gainfullest profession. No profit comes by the service of sin. What profit had you in those things wherein yee are ashamed? Get Christ, and thou art made for ever. Hast thou this pearle? thou art richer then the greatest Emperour without it. Fifthly, There's no possibility of being cheated or any way over∣reached There's no possi∣bility os being cheated. in the purchase of this commodity: For worldly things are not Bread, and a great deale even too much of time, cost, and charge are thrown away upon them: but Christ is the best penny-worth, the best bargaine that ever thou mad'st all the daies of thy life. If thou sell'st all thy pleasures, riches, prosits, honours, for Christ, thou hast got that which is of more incomparable value, then them all. There's no feare of fraud or couzenage in traffiquing for this com∣modity. Stand not therefore dodging, and cheapning at the mar∣ket, saying, I must keepe this sin, or delight, custome, or profit, for these I hope to obtaine a dispensation; I assure thee in the next (which is the last Demonstration I shall lay downe for confirmation
of the point.) That there's no possibility of purchasing Christ for lesse than all. If thou wilt sit upon a sinne, (as Rachel upon the ima∣ges,) and interpose an exceptive with Naaman, foster a Delilah, an Herodias, entertain a Gibeonite, a pretending sinne, spare an Agag a ruling sinne thou canst not purchase the pearle: For if the commo∣dity be worth an hundred pounds, he goes without it that bids but fifty pounds, as well as hee that bids but twenty pounds. There must be no hypocriticall defaulking from the price with Ananias and Saphira, no halving of it with the strumpet, or partial almost Chri∣stianity Act. 5. 2. with Agrippa: A divided heart is afaulty heart. We must Hos. 10. 2. willingly part with all whatsoever is dearest, or nearest, though it be to the dismembring of our selves, the parting with a right hand, or a right eye, our constitution, our accustomed sins. We may not be faint chapmen, cheapning, and hoping to bring the price down: The Drunkard cannot have Christ and his cups; The swearer cannot have Christ and his oathes; The unclean person cannot have Christ, and his strumpet; The Hypocrite cannot have Christ, and his pain∣ted glosses; The cheating cradesman cannot have Christ, and his false weights, or sophisticated wares; Christ will not bee thus cou∣pled, thus unequally yoaked. Between light and darknesse, Christ, and Belial there can be no communion. And thus farre having gone by way of Explication and Confirma∣tion of the point, give me leave to presse all home unto your consci∣ences by particular Application. uses 4. 4 Uses I would make of this doctrine, for reproofe, Examination exhortation, and direction. Ʋses 4. For reproofe. For reproof, of all such who will not sell all for the purchase of the pearle of price. There are 4 sorts especially who will not goe to the price of this pearle. Ignorant persons that know not the worth of it. Covetous persons who preserre the world before it; and o∣pen profane persons, who scorne, and doe what in them lyes to tram∣ple this Pearle underfoot. These 4 come within the verge of this Re∣prehension. 1. Ignorant persons through blindnesse of mind undervalue the Ignorant per∣sons. glorious excellencies of Jesus Christ. Their grosse ignorance causeth them to undervalue Jesus Christ. So that profane Duke of Burbon prefer'd his Part in Paris before his part in Paradise: 1. Wee say, Ignorantia excusat à tanto non à non à toto; And we usually distinguish between an affected ignorance which is pravae disposit io∣nis,
from that which is crasse, invincible, purae negationis; And so their punishments may be inflicted secundum mags & minus, yet neither being excusable, These through ignorance resemble Aisop's Cock, preferring a barly corne before a gemme. And these are lyable to a dreadfull curse mentioned by the Prophet; Poure cut thy Jer. 10. 25. fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, & upon the families that call not upon thy name. 2. Idle lazy persons are to be reproved, who are so supine, and carelesse, as will not stirre a foot to purchase Christ. The wisemen came from the East to worship Christ, and the Queen of Shba from the uttermost parts of the earth to heare the wisedome of Solomon: these shall rise in judgment against this lazy generation; who will be at no paines, and at no cost for the purchase of a Saviour. Mannah falls round about your tents, You have bread in the morning, and bread in the evening, will not you take paines to gather it? You have a Mart, and a market for your soules; These places of con∣course are open (which is no small mercy) and will you not come at them? Men goe many miles for a gainful bargain, and are ye so sick of the lazies as you will not step over the threshold to hear a Ser∣mon?—Non nisi subla to reperitur gemmula saxo. This pearle is not to be had by such as fold their hands in their bosomes, nor such as lye at Tavernes, and Alehouses; nor such as in contempt of the Go∣spel willfully absent themselves from the publick ordinances, for fear lest the plain dealing of the Minister should touch them to the quick. 3. Covetous persons are to be reprooved, who will not foregoe an Ox, a farme, not a penny profit in the trade for Jesus Christ. Mammon is their god, and therefore they'le give no entertainment unto Jesus Christ. Gold and silver, corne, and wine, lands and sumptuous buildings are their God. Take away these, and they will reply with Mica, ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I more? You may read the absurd Contents of the foolish Gadarens petition, that Jesus Christ would depart out of their coasts: They prefer'd their swine before a Jesus. Judas betrayed Christ for 30 peeces of silver: And the young man in the Gospel prefer'd treasures on earth before treasures in heaven. Demas for the love of the world turn'd Apo∣state. If a man will allow himselfe in covetousnesse, hel'e be any thing as opportunity offers: Hel'e sell his conscience for Mammon: Hel'e tack about for his best advantage. A man that was never drunk with wine nor beare, yet may be drunk with the cares of the
world (as our Saviour expresseth) Luk. 21. 34. A Christian's conversation must be without covetousnesse. 4. Profane persons are to be reproved, such as are of Esau's hu∣mor, Heb. 13. 5. Heb. 12. 16. who for one morsell of meat sold his birth-right. A profane person will not foregoe a lust for Christ: The drunkard will not leave his cups: The uncleane person will not leave his strumpet nor the swearer his oaths for Christ. And why I be∣cause they are enemies to Christ: Christ and Belial, Christ and profanenesse of spirit, Christ and lusts cannot be reconciled. Use 2. For Exami∣nation. The second Use is for Examination, whether we are willing to sell all for the purchase of Jesus Christ: By way of character Il'e pro∣pound three queries. 1. Doe we exalt and preferre Christ above all besides? If so it will appeare by our judgments, affections, and conversation. 1. Doe you exalt Christ in your judgments; Have you a spirit 1 Query. Doe you Exalt Christ? 1. In your judg∣ments. 2. In your affecti∣ons. of discerning, to discerne more beauty, wisdome, riches, purity and vertue in Christ, then in all the world besides? observe what a high commendation the spouse gives of Christ upon experimentall know∣ledg Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest amongst tenne thousand: Christ was white for his innocency, and ruddy for his sufferings. 2. Doe you exalt Christ in your affections, doe you love Christ with an entire love, doth his love constraine you, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Doe you set your joy upon Christ? when Christ came in the power of his Ministery, 'tis said there was a great joy in that City, Acts 8. 9. That Christian who hath a white stone and a new name! O how is his heart ravisht with an exuberant joy? And doe you place your desire upon Christ? Psal. 73. 25. whom have I in Heaven but thee? theres none whom I desire besides thee. 3. Doe you exalt Christ in your life and conversation? Then 3 Your life and Conversation. doe we price Christ highest, when we live to him, and the life of Christ is fashioned in us, when Christs image is stamp't upon our spirits, when we square our lives according to the will of God, when we set up Christ commander in chiefe in our soules, its evident that we exalt Christ, and set the highest price of him. The second Query is, Whether we are willing to deny our selves 2 Query. Are we willing to denie our selves. for Christ? Who ever will come after Christ must deny himselfe, Matth. 16. 24. What ever is selfe must be denied for Jesus Christ. Selfe opinions, selfe applaudings, selfe reasonings, selfe righteousnesse, selfe interest, Ends, and Aymes, must all be renounced for Je∣sus
Christ. A proud man must denie his proud selfe. A passionate man must denie his passionate selfe: A schollar must deny his lear∣ning, a wise man his own wisdome, a strong man his strength; All must be denied when they stand in competition with, or oppo∣sition unto Jesus Christ. One querie more I'le propound, and it is very seasonable. Are you willing to undergoe any affliction, to suffer any hardship for Je∣sus 3 Query. Are we willing to suffer for Christ? Christ? As a man must deny himselfe, so he must take up hiscrosse. The Apostle tels the Philippians, Phil. 1 29. To you it is given in the be∣halfe of Christ not onely to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. A suffering faith is the gift of God. Are you resolved to take Christ upon his own conditions. Will you follow the lamb where ever he goeth, through thick and thin, even through a showre of blood, when you are called thereunto. Elihu makes it the marke of an Hypocrite Job. 36. 21. to choose iniquity rathr then affliction. Whereas when it comes to this Dilemma, either I must choose affliction, or sinne, then must my resolution be to choose the greatest affliction in the world, rather then to wound my conscience with the least sin. Hee's a believer of the right stamp indeed who is of Pauls resolution, Acts 21. 13. willing not onely to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. Put your selves upon triall by these three fore∣mentioned queries. The third Use is for Exhortation: I beseech you in the Bowels of Vse 3. For Exhorta∣tion. Jesus Christ (as you regard the eternall good of your pretious soules) to be Merchant Venturers for the pearle of price: Oh that I could prevaile with you to foregoe and sell all you have for the purchase of Jesus Christ. But you will demand what must we sell and foregoe? I answere 1. Thou must foregoe thy lusts, bid adieu to thy beloved sinnes, 1 Foregoe thy . put to death those brats of Babilon, slaughter thy corruptions: Thou must deale with thy sins, as Samuel dealt with Agag, hew them in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal; Make no Apologies for sinne, plead not Antiquity, pleasure, profit, custome, interest, &c. All these are but sorry fig-leaves to cover thy nakednesse. If thy nearest Re∣lations stand in opposition to Christ, thou must foregoe them too. For so Christ determines. He that loveth Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that loveth Sonne or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me, Matth. 10. 37.
2 Thou must foregoe thy pleasures for Christ, so did Moses and 2 Foregoe your pleasures. Nehemiah bid adieu to Court pleasures: Many promise to redeeme their time and take Christ: But as Elimelech would not take the condition to redeeme it at the hands of Ruth, lest he marred his own inheritance: Ruth. 4. 6. so when the condition comes thou must fore∣goe these and these pleasures and be serious, and grave in all thy carriages, then many fly off, and will not take Christ upon such termes. But without question Christ is the onely pleasure; And the waies of wisedome are the onely waies of pleasantnesse; Prov. 3. 17. no joy, no pleasure to be compared to the joy in a believers soule, arising from the beames of Gods reconciled countenance darted up∣on it. 3. Thou must foregoe thy profits for Jesus Christ. When Christ invited they all with one consent began to make excuse. But none of 3. Foregoe thy Profits. these were fit guests for Christ. Be it a great Farme, a goodly Re∣vnue, and it stand in competition with Christ, thou must let all goe. You cannot properly be said to buy Christ, (for himselfe and his graces are free rich gifts) yet much good you may doe with your monyes. You may buy Bibles, good bookes, maintaine faithfull Mi∣nisters, feed the hungry bellies, and cloath the naked backs of many poore afflicted members of Jesus Christ. 4. Foregoe thy Liberty, ease, and quietnesse for Christ. With 4. Foregoe thy Liberties. Jerome deny wife, Mother, children and all for Christ. Put it to the Question whether would you rather be with the Apostles in prison singing sweetly, and enjoying communion with God; then with Apostate Demas ranging in the wide world. Thou maist have li∣berty of body and an imprisoned spirit, and thou maist have an im∣prisoned body, and inlargement of spirit. There's a black cloud hanging over the whole kingdome, and we know not what the womb of one day may bring forth. Doe not seeke thy own ease, and quietnesse amidst publick calamities, let Baruchs fayling be thy warning peece, Jer. 45. 5. And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? seeke them not. 5. Foregoe honours and preferments for Christ. It was Ignatius 5. Foregoe thy Pleasures. his saying, Antiquitas mea, & nobilitas mea Jesus Christus; would you know, who have the best noble blood running in their veines, you may find Acts 17. 11. These were more noble then those of The salonica, in that thy received the word with all readinesse of mind, and searched
the Scripture daily, whether those things were so. No honour to holi∣nesse, no Armes so excellent, no Coat so noble as those which the Christian nobility gives; so then what ever things thou highly estee∣mest, whether preferment, friends, reputation or the like, if they stand in opposition to Christ, denie them all. 6. And lastly, thou must foregoe thy life (when thou hast a cal∣ling) for Jesus Christ. Think not thy blood too deare for him who 6. Foregoe thy life when Christ calls for it. ventur'd his blood for thee; In this cause by loosing thy life, thou shalt save it. All are gayners, none loosers that die in Christ and for Christ. But examine thy selfe, if thou canst not foregoe a lust, a pleasure, a dignity, a liberty for him; If thou canst not bear a scoffe, and a reproach for Christ, how wilt thou be able to resist unto blood, to endure the fiery tryall? I may expostulate with the Pro∣phet, Jer. 12. 5. If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? And if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst they wearied thee, then how wilt thou doe in the swelling of Jordan? If lesser afflictions cast thee down low, will not greater quite overwhelme thee? consider of those things in thy most serious composed thoughts. The 4th Use, and last is for direction. The Question will be askt Use 4. For Direction. 1. Direction. Come to the man∣kets. what meanes must bee used for the purchase of this pearle? In the winding up of all, I'le prescribe a few principall means, and forth∣with conclude. 1. You must come to the markets whilst they last, and whilst the shops are open. To day is the market, and the Ministry of the Gos∣pell shewes forth the most pretious wares. Now then come here and buy. Mary found Christ in the midst of the Doctors, and the blind man lay in the way where Christ came by. Jacobs sons must goe to Aegypt to fetch corne. The five Virgins are bid to goe to them that sell, Matth. 25. 9. The Minister tenders these commodities. Sabboths are market daies, and the publick assemblies market places: sit then at the feet of your teachers, come frequently to the meanes of grace. This coming is accepted as a kind of price (though not meritorious) paid to purchase Christ; Though grace be free, and we cannot bring mony in our hands, yet come, come, come tis thrice ingemi∣nated, Isay 55. 1. 2. When you are gone from hence give your selves to reading, 2. Direction. Give your seles to Reading and Meditation. meditation and conference. Read and search the Scripture, bring
all with the Beraeans to the touchstone of the word. John Husse was con∣verted by reading the Scripture, then there was no open vision. But the word preached is like the breast milke most nourishing. To reading adde meditation, meditate of the worth of this Pearle. What you read or heare labour to digest by meditation, and to meditation adde conference, Mal. 3. 16. so those old Disciples spake often one to anothr &c. 3ly. Seek the face of God by prayer. They that seek have a promise of finding. To aske for Christ, and his grace is a Petition suteable to the will of God. And as king according to God's will wee have a promise of being heard. Let us cry after Christ, as hid treasures; Lord give me this pearle or else I am undone. Lets resolve with Bernard. Nunquam 1 Joh. 5. 14. discedam à te, Domine sine te. Lets herein be importunate beggars, take no nay, no repulse, resolving never to be driven away from our Fathers doore. 4ly. Buy the truth, Prov: 23. 23. Bee at any cost, paines, or charges for the Purchase of truth, and whats the truth,  Joh. 14: 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Give all dili∣gence to know the truths recorded in the word of God. Bee unwil∣ling to part with the smallest truth. Take such a delight, and love to the truth, as thou wilt leave no meanes unattempted for the purchase of it. Every truth is gold, and the least shaving of gold is pretious. One truth is more worth than a world. Not an  of truth shall fall to the ground. Therefore thou must study the truth, read, pray, meditate, conferre, and hear to attain unto the knowledge of the truth. 5ly. Lastly, buy this pearle of price, in the season and opportu∣nity, when it's tendred. Take the benefit of the present time. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under hea∣ven, Eccles. 3. 1. Let that excellent covnsell make deep impression upon your spirits, Is. 55. 6. Seeke ye the Lord while he may be found, &c. And let Jerusalems misery be our warning peece, Luk. 19. 42. If thou hadst known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid frm thy eyes. Now is the market, it yet lasts (blessed be God) other the op∣portunity. Neglect not these golden seasons now tendr'd to you. It's now day, fall a working, whilst its day, the night cometh, when no
man can work, Joh. 9. 4. You have here a tender of the pearle of price this day; you know not whether you shall live to have a se∣cond tender. The Lord of heaven set home this word upon your consciences, and perswade you speedily, readily, and cheerfully to sell all you have to purchase this Pearle of price, the Lord Jesus, who is of superlative value, more worth then millions of worlds.
A Suffering Faith Discovered from Philip. 1. 29. For unto you it is given in the behalfe of Christ, not onely SERM. 5. At St. Maries Oxon. Decemb. 24. 1648. to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. THe Apostle having encouraged the Philippians to contend for the faith  vers. 27. prepares them for encounters with ad∣versaries vers. 28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition; but to you of salvation, and that of God: he tells them plainly what they must meet withall in the reason of the Text. The words containe three generalls. A Duty, An Object, An Ability to performe the same. 1. For the duty, and that is double, to believe, and to suffer, or Thetext divi∣ded. it's but one, even a suffering faith; 2. For the Object, its twice re∣peated, but one and the same, on Christ, and for Christ: Christ is the object of faith, and for his sake we must be willing to suffer. 3. Here's the abilitie to performe both duties of believing, and suffering: To you it is given: None can believe in Christ, nor suffer for Christ, except it be given from above: Before I draw forth the Doctrine, I will insist a while in the explanation of the words: It's said  its gratia gratis data, & gratia gratum facins. Faith is no hearb, that groweth in our gardens: but its a plant of our heavenly Father's plantation; Its an habit infus'd by the spirit, the supernaturall worke of God: No morall perswasion, no principle of nature, no volumes of glimmering Philosophers can make discove∣ry of this pearle; Nature is as dimme-sighted, as a mole, in divine mysteries: Its beyond the kenne of a naturall man to discerne spi∣rituall things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the naturall man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. As John gave Testimonie
of Christ, John 3. 27. That a man can receive nothing, except it be given him from above; so it may be said of Faith, except it be given thee from above; thou canst not receive it. It followes  hence its evident that every faith is not a suffering faith: when the sonne of man comes shall he find faith on the earth? A temporary, verball, dogmaticall, or historicall faith are every where to be found like the Sycamores in the valleyes for abundance: But a true, saving, justifying faith that will follow the Lamb where ever he goeth, be it to mount Calvary, as well as to mount Tabor, this is rare to be found. Here then is Shibboleth and Sibbleth, a note of distinction between a common and a speciall faith, the faith of the world, and the faith of the saints to be found in the text, not onely to believe but to suffer. Then heres the object specified  Its a true observation, but not more common then true: Nn poena sed causa facit Martyrem; there are sufferings for our faults mentioned, 1 Pet. 2. 20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye doe well, and suffer for it, and take it patiently, this is acceptable with God: If so we may thank our selves. But to die in Christ, and for Christ makes the suf∣fering glorious. Now how we may know, whether we suffer for Christ, you shall heare anon in the particular Application. From the words thus divided and expounded, I shall collect this entire point of Doctrine, which I lay for the ground worke of my ensuing meditation. That its the duty of true believers, not onely to blieve on Christ, but Dectrine. likewise chearfully and readily to suffer for him, when he calls them there∣unto. I interpose on purpose this limitation, when Christ calls; Be∣cause we may not create evill to our selves nor run without a calling; so farre as we have a lawfull calling in doing or suffering we may ex∣pect Method pro∣poundd. a blessing and no farther. Now that I may handle this Doct∣rine (as I desire) in a profitable method, I shall use all plainenesse, and perspicuity of speech. I shall onely propound three Heads of dis∣course, something by way of Illustration, something by way of Con∣firmation, and something by way of Application. 1. First for Illustration, time would faile me to inlarge my selfe 1 For Illua∣tion. in so great a cloud of witnesses. The 11 of the Hebrewes is an Epi∣tome of a larger Booke of Martyrs. Abraham did not onely believe but suffer for Christ, Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10. By Faith Abraham when he was called to goe out into a place, which he should afterwards receive for an in
heritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went: by Faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in ta∣bernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heires with him of the same promise. For he looked for a City which hath foundations, whose builder and ma∣ker is God: Moses did not onely believe but suffer, Heb. 11. 24, 25. By faith Moses, when he was come to yeares, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter, chusing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season, vers. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: Paul makes a catalogue of his sufferings; 2 Cor. 1. 23, 24. Are they the Ministers of Jesus Christ? I speake as a foole, I am in labours more abundant: in stripes above measure: in prisons more frequent: in deaths oft: Of the Jewes five times received I fourty stripes save one. Paul's sufferings were abounding sufferings, 2 Cor. 1. 5. for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboun∣deth by Christ. Review his protestations, Acts 21. 13. Then Paul answe∣red; what meane ye to weepe, and to break mine heart, for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: and see what Doctrine he teacheth, Acts 14. 22. Confirming the soules of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdome of God and see the confirmation of his doctrine, Acts 20. 22, 23. And now behold I goe bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every City, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. Through all Cen∣turies we read of the sufferings of the Saints, Abel was the Protomar∣tyr in the old Testament. Stephen in the new: Noahs arke toss'd up and down upon the surface of the waters was a Type of the militant Church; David was hunted as a Partridge in the wildernesse; see the inscription of Psal. 22. The passage of the Israelites through Acloth shahar or the hind of the morning. the red sea to Canaan was a type of the afflicted condition of the Church of God; Elias was persecuted by Jezabel. The Prophet Esaiah was sawn asunder: Jeremy was put into a dungeon, and af∣terwards ston'd to death in Egipt: Ezekiel was slaine in Babylon: Micah thrown down a steep place, and his neck broke. All the A∣postles (as Ecclesiasticall writers mention) were put to death, excep∣ting John, that was banished into the Isle of Patmos. Peter, Andrew, and Philip were Crucified: James was slaine by the sword of Herod.
Bartholomew preaching in Armenia, was beaten down with slaves, had his skin flead off, and afterwards beheaded; Thomas was slaine with a dart at Calamina in India: Matthew was run through with a speare: James (sirnamed the just) was killed with a ullers club. Lebbeus was slaine by Agbarus King of Edssa. Simon and Jude (as some say) were kill'd in a tumult; Matthias was stoned, and Paul beheaded at Rome. These primitive persecutions were so bitter, (as Jerome saith) that there was not one day in a whole yeare, unto which the number of 5000 martyrs could not be ascribed, excepting onely the first day of January. Some tooke Nero (as Austine de Ci∣vitate Di relates) to be the Antichrist—Quaesissimis suppliciis affcit Aug. de Civ. Dei Dei Tacitus. Christianos, so Tacitus writes of him. All the foure Elements were witnesses of that Monsters cruelty, some were drowned, others hanged, some were burnt to death, others were buried alive. Ignatius was torne in pieces with wild beasts, and when he felt himselfe grin∣ding in their teeth, now (saith he) I am become meale for Christs tooth: Lawrence was fryed on a Gridiron: Vin entius had his body inden∣ted with wounds, then thrown into a dungeon, where the floare was spread with sharpe shells, and his naked body was laid upon them: Romanus a Noble man, sealed the profession of the truth, with his blood, he accounted his Christian profession his chiefest nobility: Policarpus venerable for his yeares, and more venerable for his heroi∣call spirit in the cause of Christ, being prest to recant, answer'd, fourscore yeares I have served Christ, and he never did me any hurt, and shall I now turne Apostate? Eusebius, Zozomen, Socrates, Theodoritus and our Martyrologers exaggerate the sufferings of the Saints: and how∣ever Romish Rabsheka's brand our booke of Martyrs, wrote by an e∣minently Mr John Fox: learned and Godly man Mr Iohn Fox, for a Legend of lies, yet it shall be had in honour when their lying legends shall rot. Theres a famous History of the Waldenses, of the people of Merindall, and Cabryers, and of the Parisian Massacre, even this last century, when the blood of the slaine ranne warme reeking down the streets. Peruse the History of the late Marian quinquennium. Looke upon the machlesse cruelty of the blood-sucking Papists in Ireland: And all these are ensamples to us; we should not (as the Apostle saith) 1 Pet. 4. 12. Think it strange concerning the fiery tryall, which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. Thus we may argue; Did such worthies suffer? must we looke to be scot-free? are we better then they? can we plead priviledge to escape? others
have began to us in Germany and Ireland, how soone we may drink of the same Cup, who can tell? I would not be a Foecialis, yet I dare not flatter; A blackcloud hangs over our head, how soon it may break and showre down blood, and involve us in a new War we cannot tell. All that I ayme at, is to prepare you for what ever comes, for the worst of times, seeing a storme to make your garments fast about you, and retire to a shelter, to get your Arke built before the de∣luge come; Praemniti praemuniti; its the prudent mans practise to foresee evill and hide himselfe, so saith Solomon. In the second place; I shall give in the confirmation of the point: 2. The Doctrine confirmed by Reason. Amongst others these foure Reasons may confirme the truth deli∣vered. 1. Because persecution and suffering is the ordinary lot and portion of true believers: The way to Canaan is through the wildernesse, and the way to Zion through the valley of Bachah: In Reason 1. Perscution and and suffering is the Lot and Por∣tion of Believers. the world (saith Christ) you shall have tribulations, Joh. 16. 33. Many are the troubles of the Righteous, Psal. 34. 19. We must through many tribulations enter into the Kingdme of God, Act. 14. 22. Every Disci∣ple of Christ, must take up his crosse, Matth. 16. 24. Non est Chri∣stianus qui non est Crucianus (saith Luther.) The Saints are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter, Rom. 8. 36. As soone as Paul was manifested to be  a vessll of choyce, he was shewed how great things he must suffer for Christ, Acts 9. 16. and upon experimentall knowledg he layeth down this positive truth, That all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Tim. 3. 12. Now this comes to passe. 1. By the wisedome of God: The Divine hand is in it. Perse∣cutors (saith Bernard) are Gods Goldsmiths, to put the righteous into the furnace of affliction, and take away their drosse: so God permits persecutors to try the faith, love, and patience of his servants, and oft times they doe a great deale of good even against their will, Jer. 9. 7. Therefore thus saith the Lord of Hosts, behold I will melt them, and try them: for how shall I doe for the daughter of my people. The Sabae∣ans, Chald ans, and Satan were instruments of afflictions to Job, but God wrought good out of all, Jam. 5. 11. Behold, we account them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that he is very pittifull and of tender mer∣cy. Had it not been for afflictions, we had never read of the patience of Job: we should not have left us upon record that excellent booke of Job.
2ly. This comes to pass by reason of Satan's rage and malice; The great Dragon stands by ready to devoure the man-child of reforma∣tion: Hee is the envious man, the accuser of the Brethren, the adver∣sary, the roaring Lion. Pliny speakes of the scorpion, that every mo∣ment it puts forth his sting; the Devill is that Scorpion that every moment assayes to doe mischiese; hee will cast some of you into pri∣son, Rev. 2. 10. 3ly. This comes to pass by reason of the malice of wicked-men, they are the Devils agents, they have suckt the poyson of this old Serpent and swell with it, and are greatly enraged against the pow∣er of godliness. Ther's a deadly Fewd and Antipathy in wicked∣men against the powerfull workings and breathings of God's spirit in the Saints. The great ones and Potentates of the world rages a∣the godly, Psal. 2. 1. Why de the heathen rage? They hate them without cause: Tygers (as some report) rage at the sent of fra∣grant spices, so the wicked at the savour of Godliness. As long as ther's any left of the serpents brood, there will not bee wanting op∣position and persecution against the godly. This is the first head of reasons. The 2d reason is because Christ doth expect that the faith of his Reas. 2. Christ ex∣pects that the faith of his servants should act extraordina∣rily: servants should act so extraordinarily, as the faith of hypocrites and Reprobates, cannot come near it. Temporizers will profess that they have faith, but these follow Christ only for the loaves, while the Sun shines warme upon them, in Halcyn dayes of peace and tran∣quility, but when it come to fire and faggot, or degradation and suspension, , they take offence. Now he that hath not learned Christ's Cross, hath not learnt his Alphabet. The Que∣stion was in another case ask't, Matth. 5. 47: what doe you mre than others? and so in this case Christ will aske the question, are you willing to glorisy mee both by doing and suffering? are you willing not only to believe on me, but also to suffer for my sake? Such Questions as there will touch the quick: Believers must stu∣dy all advantages, and take all opportunities to promote the honour of Jesus Christ, they have a battle to fight, they are to encounter with basts of Ephesus, and sonnes of Anak, they have a race to runne and many stumbling blocks are layd in the way: They have a fie∣ry tryall to endure, a Cross to beare, they must pass through hnor and dishonor, good report and evill report: They must follow the Lambe where ever he goes, through thick and thinne, through a showre
of blood. Thy life must not be deare to thee when Christ cals for it: Bee not afraid of venturing limbes, liberty, life it selfe for him that layd down his life for thee. It was an heroicall speech of Luther, that hee would goe to Wormes and preach the Gospel there, though evry Tile was a Devill to oppose him: and it was a gallant resolution John Fox Act: Mon: : Ma∣ryes dayes: of John Adly that holy Martyr, that if hee had as many lives, as hee had haires on his head, hee would loose them all for Christ: Thus you see how the saith of Believers acts extraordinarily. A 3d Reason is drawn from the conformity of Believers unto Reas. 3. Believers in a way of suffering are made con∣formable unto Christ: Christ, for Believers are made conformable unto Christ the head and Captaine of their salvation in a way of suffering, Heb. 2. 10. And sayth the Apostle Peter: For hereunto were yee called because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that yee should follow his steps, I Pet. 2. 21: and this is that which the Apostle did so earnestly desire to know, even the sellowship of Christs sufferings, Phil 3 10. Now between the head and the members, there ought to bee a confor∣mity. Christ went into his glory by the way of sufferings. Christ suffered in his name, hee was called a Wine-Bibbr, a Deceiver, a Samaritan, an Heretick, a Devill: hee was scoft at, scorn'd, cru∣cified; And his singular patience is upon record, 1 Pet. 2. 23: who whn hee was reviled, reviled not again; when hee suffered, hee threatned not, but committed himselfe to him that judgeth righteously. Yea hee suffered in every place, hunger in the desert, resistance and reproa∣ches in the temple, an Agony in the garden, contumelies in the judg∣ment hall, crucifying without the city, likewise hee suffered in e∣very part, his eyes ran down with teares, his temples with blood, his eares tingled with buffetings, and the hearing of their blasphe∣mies, and glowed with their reproaches, they afflicted his tast with gall and vinegar, pierced his hands with nailes, his sides with a spear, his heart was full of sorrow, his soule of anguish: hee gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to those that plucked off the hair, Isai: 50. 6. Never was any sorrow like unto his sorrow, the wrath of God was powred upon him in a full bitter cup, and all was to this end, that hee might leave us an ensample to follow his steps. Heb. 12. 3. For consider him that endured such contradictions of sin∣ners against himselfe, lest yee bee wearied and faint in your minds. Now then let us expostulate the case, did our master suffer, and shall not wee his servants? did the head suffer, and shall not the members sympathise? Learne therefore to follow Christ to Golgo∣tha,
and bee conformed to Christ in the vaile of his misery, in his temptations, if ever you look to abide with him in his kingdome; Look for it, make account of it, whoever thou beest that art a Disci∣ple of Jesus Christ; Thou shalt one time or other, drink of the Fa∣thers cup of affliction in via, before thou shalt drink a cup of new wine in Patria; Doe you look for better usage and entertainment; than Christ and all his witnesses have met withall before you. Here∣in, Man hath a priviledge above Angels, hee hath a body and can suffer, and so hath not Angels. The 4th and last reason shall be drawn from those singular bene∣fits Reas: 4. Drawn from the benefit of suf∣fring for Christ: 1. that accrew unto God's people from their sufferings. 1. Their suffering places are furnaces not to consume, but to purify and re∣fine them, Dan. 11. 35. And some of understanding shall fall to try them, and purge them, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed: and likewise the same Pro∣phet tels us, Dand. 12. 10: many shall be purified and made white, and tryed: but the wicked shall doe wickedly: and none of the wicked shall un∣derstand, but the wise shall underst and. To the same effect the Prophet speaks, Zech. 13. 9: and I will bring the third part thorow the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tryed; and to purge them and to take away their dresse and Tinne, Is. 1. 25. Suffering places are Gods framing houses, wherin he fashions and casts his people into a new mold, hee makes their graces shine the  the brighter, as candles doe by snuffing. Wee had not got so great knowledge of the patience of Job, and courage of Paul, Jeremy and Daniel, were it not for their sufferings. Their suffering places are as so many consecrated Oratories, Act. 16. 25: and at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang prayses unto  God: and the prisoners heard them. In prison, Manasseh fell a pray∣ing. Hee got more good by a Prison, then by a Throne: how sweet∣ly did the Martyrs pray in prison? what ravishing letters did Brad∣ford, Philpot, Carelsse and others write out of prison? Men may imprison the body, but cannot imprison the spirit. The hearts of God's children are enlarged, though thir bodies are imprisoned. The Lord Jesus Christ is the supporter of the Saints in their suffe∣rings, and applyeth his cordial comforts to them in their languishing  condition. An Angel comforted Jacob when he was afraid of his bro∣ther Esau, and hee saw a vision at Bethell. An Angel comforted E∣lias,
when Jezabel had designed him to destruction: an Angel deli∣vered Peter out of Prison; and supporting grace strengthened Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 9: and hee said unto mee, my grace is sufficint for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness; most gladly therefore will I ra∣ther glory in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon mee. Suffering is the way to prevent sufferings: suffering loss of goods, li∣berty,  life for Christs sake, is the way to prevente eternal sufferings. For 6ly, and lastly, suffering for and with Christ hath an am∣ple  reward, Rom. 8. 17: if so bee that wee suffer with him, that wee also may bee glorified together. Compare our sufferings and glory to∣gether, vers 18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revaled in us, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17: For which cause wee faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewd day by day. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And thus much for explication and confirmation of the doctrine, Applic. I now descend to particular application. In the first place this reproves the paucity of those that will suffer  for Jesus Christ, you know how Peter boasted of his courage, and how lamentably he was foyld: Many pretend valour and resolu∣tion For reproof. for the truth, and are voces & praeterea nihil: Thers a notable story in the book of Martyrs concerning Dr. Pendlton, and M. Saundrs; Mr Saunders was timerous and affraid lest, he should de∣ny Christ; The Dr was confident and sayd (being a corpulent man) that each gobbet of fat in his body, should fry at the stake, but this Brag∣gadocian turn'd Apostate, and the other timorous Christian suffer∣ed Martyrdome. I may not shoot at Randome, but levell at some particular persons, these 'Ile single out that are of all others unlike∣ly to suffer when persecution comes. 1. They that will not endure a lesser evill for Christ, will never en∣dure 1. They that will not endure a lsser suffering are unlikely to to suffer greater. a greater; If thou hast runn; with footmen and they have wearid thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? Jer. 12. 5. If thou canst not brook a by-word, a nick-name, a scoff, or a reproach for Christ, how wilt thou resist unto blood? Art thou loath to venture thy breath to plead the cause of God, how wilt thou venture thy life? when the water is but to the ancles, and then you will not wet your feet, how will you pass over when it becomes a river? Bilney the
Martyr tryed the fire with his finger: If thou canst not endure the burning of thy finger, how wilt thou endure the burning of thy body? If a lesser cross foyl thee, how wilt thou grapple with a greater? If a reproach, a jear, the fear of displeasing a Relation, carnal interests and selfishness, make thee flie of and apostatise, surely thou wilt never kiss the stake, and welcome fire and fagot when Per∣secution comes. The glozing Hypocrite, and Machivilian Politician, will never 2. The Hypo∣crite and Poli∣titian will not suffer. suffer for Christ; his Policy is not to follow Religion too close in the heels, lest it dash out his brains; not to launch further in the deep, then he can come safe unto the Haven; his design is, not to discover his conscience farther, then he can save his skin. This is the man that chooseth sin rather then affliction, Job 36. 21. The Hypocrite hath no sure rooting, nor firm foundation, for he builds on the Sands: Superficial outsides, Popularity, Relations, Revolution of times, byass his motions, and stears all his practices, and not the glory of God, nor the love of Jesus Christ. The carnal Mamonist will not suffer for Christ. The world is his ma∣ster, & he serves it, and makes it his Idol; and no man can serve two ma∣sters: 3. The carnall Mamonist will not suffer. His Gold, Corn, Buildings, Dignities, Revenues, are his Gods; he sets up these as the Idols and stumbling blocks of his own heart. Demas loved the world, and therefore deserted the society of the Apostles; Judas loved money, and therefore betrayed Jesus Christ; The foolish Gadarenes preferred their Swine before a Jesus; The young man preferr'd Treasures on Earth, before Treasures in Hea∣ven, Mark 10. 22. And he was sad at that saying, and went away grie∣ved, for he had great possessions: The root of this lamentable choice was covetousness, , which (in the Apostles Character) is the root of all evil, 1 Tim. 6. 10. For the love of money is the root of all evil, which will become coveted after; they have errid from the faith, and pierced themselves thorow with many sorrows: The covetous man dreams of an Eternity upon Earth, he's earthed before his time; he will not forgoe his Oxen, his Farm, his Gold or Silver for Jesus Christ; he'l follow Christ no farther then he may gain by, and make a good Market of him (as the people followed Christ for the loaves:) But if it come to the parting with some of his Idols of gold & silver, he'l not let them goe, he'l sit on them, as Rachel did on the stuff. They are his Gods, and what hath he more? whoever you are, that are in love with the world, whose breath smells of earth, whose dis∣course is earthly, and whose hearts are glued fast to the Pelf of
the world, and swallowed up with worldly intanglements, of all men, you are unlikely to suffer for Jesus Christ: And as for you (the younger sort are herein most faulty) that follow the fashions of the world, the Antick, Exotick garbs, and weare ridiculous, monstrous fowl heads of Hair, borrowing other folks Hair: I may thus argue with you, if you will not part with a fashion of ill report, how will you part with your lives for Christ? Tertullian hath a saying, Ti∣meo Tertul. lib. 3. de cultu Faemi∣narum. cervicem, &c. I fear that Neck, that hath on it a Neck-lace of Pearls, that it will not lay it self down upon the block for Jesus Christ. 4. The formal Professor will not suffer for Jesus Christ; these are 4. The formal professor will not suffer for Jesus Christ. the high-way hearers, mentioned, Matth. 13. 19. When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart: this is he which received seed by the way side. A formal Gospeller, that doth all for form, will fly off and flinch when suffering comes: Many reduce Religion to a meer form, and come to the Ordinances as a fashion and a custom; and many Scholars come to Prayers and Sermons, because they are engaged to it by local Statutes: But what doe they in their Studies? Doe they pray there in secret? I beseech you chatechife every one his own heart, ask thy felf, Do I keep time and touch with God in private? Do I pray, when no eye of man seeth me? Doe I walk closely with God? how doe I carry my self in my private addresses to God? Fly from Formality, beware of resting on a formall out-side Profession. Formalists are so odious, as that we may not associate our selves with them, 2 Tim. 3. 5. Having a form of god∣liness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away. 5. Your luke-warm Ladiceans will not suffer for Christ: These 5. Lukewarm Laodiceans will not suffer for Christ. halt between two Opinions, and have two Faces; they are of the worst temper, neither hot nor cold; some calls them Ambidexters, other Neuters; some Ʋterques, some omnia: These will not suffer for Christ, these will not stand for Religion when it's under Hatches: Many that pretend to this moderation, are much of this Laodicean temper, (Erasmus like, hanging between Heaven and Hell; you can∣not tell what to make of them, like cunning Gaimsters, who will stand by a great while, and then bet on the winning side: I would (saith the Spirit) that thou wert either hot or cold, Rev. 3. 15, 16. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou wert cold or hot: So then, because thou art luke-warm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth: Those are either of Gallio's temper,
that will not take pains in the work of God; or else with Agrippa,  in some small things they will appear for Christ, so far forth, as it will not cross shins with their ovvn Politick Designs: Of all others, these are the greatest enemies to reformation, and because they would comply with both sides, God in Judgement will make them odious unto both. Lastly, Profane Libertines will not suffer for Jesus Christ, these 6. Profane Libertines wil not suffer for Christ are enemies unto the Cross of Christ, running headlong into all ex∣cess of riot; these are drunk with the Drunkards, and swear with the Swearers, how can these be put into any possibility of suffer∣ing? For first, They will not bate a Lust, forgoe a Corruption for Christ, how then can they suffer for him? Secondly, They hate Christ and his Servants, now its love to Christ that onely constrains us to suffer for him. Thirdly, They cannot sympathize with the sufferings of Gods peo∣ple; they are so far from being afflicted with them, that they rejoyce in their afflictions, and adde affliction unto affliction: They that are of this temper, will never suffer for Iesus Christ. The second use shall be for Tryal and Examination, whether you Ʋse 2. For Tryal and examination. have a suffering Faith, yea or no: Many springs move many to suffer, as a natural Conscience, and a natural Pride, and stoutness of Spirit. A man may give his Body to be burnt, and yet want love to Iesus Christ. Here's the grand Question: What's that Faith which will be a true Q. What's that faith which wil be a suffering faith? A Faith is a Christians life. effectual suffering Faith? For Answ. 1. That Faith which is thy life amidst all deaths, thy supply amidst all wants, thy supportation & consolation amidst all troubles, thy meat and drink, & houshold-stuff, thy Riches and Revenues, this will carry thee through sufferings, that Faith which makes thee live upon Christ in all straights, srovvns, crosses, losses, and hardships, this will make thee undergoe the worst of evils for him, who is the chiefest good: It's not said that a man shall live by his Wits, Lands, or Labours, but by his Faith, Hab. 2. 4. The Just shall live by Faith. 2. That Faith which is rooted and grounded upon the love of Christ, will constrain thee to suffer for him: Love made Jacob en∣dure 2. Faith is grounded upon the love of Christ. his hard service chearfully, for his beloved Rachel: Love made Moses wish himself to be blotted out of the Book of Life: And
Paul wisht himself Anathema for the Jews; none so ready to die for Christ, as the love-sick Spouse: Many waters cannot quench her love, Cant. 8. 7. Its love to Christ that will make thee willing to do and suffer any thing for him. 3. If thy Faith can carry thee well through the temptations of 3. Faith carry∣eth through temptations of Prosperity and Adversity. Foelix ille, quem nec fortuita at∣tollunt, nec ad∣versa deprimūt. Senec. 4. Faith keeps up the heart in the use of means. prosperity, it is probable that it will carry thee through the tryal of Adversity: If Faith will keep thee from swelling in prosperity, it will keep thee from breaking in adversity. 'Tis a strong Stomack that will digest much Honey: It's a strong Faith that will not be allured by the sweetness, pleasures and profits of the world: He's happy whom prosperity lifts not up, nor adversity breaks. 4. That Faith will make thee suffer, that keeps thy heart up in the use of good means, even then when all things goe against thee: David then most repairs to the Sanctuary, Psal. 73 17. Ʋntil I went into the Sanctuary of God, I knew it not, but hereby I understood their end: And see his behaviour at Ziglag, 1 Sam 30. 6. And David was greatly distressed: for the People spake of stoning of him, because the soul of all the People was grieved, every man for his sons, and for his daughters; but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God: Rabshe∣kah falls a railing, and Hezekiah falls a Praying. Observe well; if Faith keep you in love to, & frequent Exercise of holy Duties (though as yet you feel nothing coming in) yet still continue in the practice of them, and dare in no case sit loose from them, but follow Christ from Ordinance to Ordinance, and enquire every where after your Beloved, this is that Faith questionless, that will carry you through sufferings. 5. That Faith which purifies thy Conscience, reforms thy Life, 5. Faith puri∣fieth the heart. and resigns thy Will wholly to the will of God, this will make thee suffer for Christ: Onely an holy unfained Faith will make thee to suffer: Such a Faith the Apostle had, which made him not be afraid of the King of Terrors, Phil. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, to die is gain. That Faith will prove a sound suffering Faith, that will engage thee to venture soul, estate and body, upon the free grace of God in Iesus Christ: This will make thee to cast thy burthen upon the Lord, and flie to him, as a Sanctuary, as a refuge from the Storm, and as a shadow from the heat: Examine whether thou canst pro∣duce these Symptomes of thy Faith.
The third Use shall be for Exhortation: Be willing to undergoe Ʋse 3. For Exhortati∣on. any hardship, loss or cross for Jesus Christ. Consider what times you live in, what contempt is powred out upon those great Ordinances of Divine Institution, viz. Magistracy and Ministry: Perhaps God intends thee for a Martyr. A few preparations I conceive season∣able. 1. Make account of suffering: We may fear God is bringing confu∣sion Prepar. 1. Make account of sufferings. and desolation upon the Kingdom: If we consider the Ataxies and Anarchy's thereof, we may take up that complaint, Ezek. 19. 14. A fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule: this is a lamenta∣tion, and shall be for a lamentation. I neither profess my self States∣man, nor Politician; neither do I intermeddle, out of my own Sphear and Calling, onely as a Minister of God; I counsel you in the Language of the Holy Ghost, Jer. 6. 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lst my soul depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. Prepare for troubles and afflictions; for the end of one trouble may be the beginning of another, as when a man hath escaped a Beare, a Lyon meets him; and after he hath escaped the Lyon, and leans his hand upon the wall, a Serpent out of the Wall comes and bites him; know then, that you are fore-appointed unto sufferings; so saith the Apostle, 1 Thess. 3. 3. That no man may be moved by these afflictions; for your selves know that we are apointed there∣unto: Praecogitati mali, mollior ictus: Xeno suffering Ship-wrack, said, Jam didici Philosophari, By our sufferings let us learn to be better Christians. The second preparative, is to get a self-denying spirit, 'tis self Prepar. 2. Get a self-de∣nying spirit. that makes us shye of the Crosse, selfe must be first denyed; Se∣verall selfes must be denyed; selfe-opinion, selfe-counsels, selfe∣righteousness, self-excellencies, self-will, self-comforts, selfends: All these selves must be denyed for Jesus Christ; let it suffice onely to mention these at present. I proceed to another Preparative: And that, 3. Is to set upon the practice of Mortification: The Apostle pro∣testeth Prepar. 3. Set upon the practice of Mortification. that he dyeth daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31. I protest, by your rejoycing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. Strive to get thy corruptions mortified, thy ill humors purged, thy affections crucifi∣ed, thy filthy garments took away, and so thou wilt be better pre∣pared to suffer: A great power must be given thee from above, over
thy corruptions, before thou canst grapple with a suffering. Violent Storms and Thunder clear the air, so strong afflictions clear the heart by them; we are, as it were, by them powred from vessel to vessel: Read Jer. 48. 11. Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath setled on his lees, and hath been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity; therefore his taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed: Hereby the ill savour and distemper of our heart comes to be took away: Every affliction doth, as it were, preach to us a Sermon of Mortification: An unmortified man, and an unsanctified heart, will never suffer. 4. The last preparative, is still to bear in minde the sufferings of Prepar. 4. Bear in minde the suffering of the Lord Jesus. our Lord Jesus. Consider his innocency, meekness and humi∣lity, often keep in minde the dying of Christ, an exact pattern for our imitation: Let not the Disciple expect to be above the Master: The ornament of Christs Livery is persecution. But I proceed to an∣other Use, which Is for direction: I shall onely direct in two particular cases. Ʋse 4. For direction. Q. 1. When have we a call for suffering? 1. When have we call to suffer? 2. When we have a call, how must we behave our selves in suffer∣ing? For the first of these: In this case I conceive we have a clear call. 1. When we have no warrant for active obedience: So the three A. 1. When we have no warrant for our active obedi∣ence. Children made choice of a hot Furnace, rather then they would worship Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 3. 21. Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the fiery furnace. So Daniel made choice of the Lyons Den, rather then he would obey an ungodly command, Dan. 6. 16. Then the King commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of lyns: The rule is infallible, Acts 5. 29. We must obey God, rather then man. The Martyrs chose rather to embrace the flames, then to worship a breaden God of the Papists devising; we must rather suffer the greatest punishments, then wound our con∣sciences with the least sin. 2, When it comes to this Dilemma, that either thou must suffer, 2. When either we must suffer, or Gods glory must suffer. or else Gods glory must suffer, then thou must determine to suffer any thing, rather then Gods glory should suffer, rather then Religi∣on should lie at stake, or the Gospel lie a bleeding: We must have a tender care of Gods glory, we must not be afraid to be good, we
must not be ashamed of Christ; dispossess then this dumb devil, that makes thee silent, when Gods glory suffers. If God have given thee suffering graces, as faith, love, zeal, and 3. When God hath given thee suffering Gra∣ces. patience, and a brave heroical spirit, assure thy self they are not given in vain, to be buryed in a napkin, but for duty and employ∣ment. If God have given thee a Martyrs courage, thou must en∣dure a Martyrs tryal: When God calls thee, he intends thee for a Souldier, but its to fight his battles. The second Case is, how we must suffer? least we spoil a good du∣ty in the miscarriage, I will leave with you a few rules. Q. 2. How must we suffer? A. 1. We must suffer as Saints. 1. In suffering, be sure that you suffer as Saints, and not as evil doers, Matth. 5. 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly, for my names sake: Rejoyce, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you: And saith the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. 2. Suffer prudently, Matth. 10. 16. Behold, I send you forth as 2. Suffer prudently. sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harm∣less as doves: Wisdom and innocency are joyn'd together: Wisdom is a necessary ingredient in suffering: When men rashly bring evils upon themselves, they loose the glory of their sufferings: And when men suffer, and are boisterous, clamoring, and reviling, and re∣proaching such and such instruments, these do much discredit their suffering. 3. Christians must suffer believingly: Faith acts, though the vi∣sion 3. Suffer belie∣vingly. be dark, Faith approximates a promise, and amidst Euroclydons storms and tempests, can say, Nubecula est cito transitura. 4. Suffer patiently: By patience possess thy soul, Heb. 10. 36. 4. Suffer pati∣ently. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. Moral men have had great patienco: Do thou discover more patience that art a true Believer, say with good old Ely, It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good; and with Da∣vid, Psalm 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou didst it; and with Hezekiah, Isa. 39. 8. Good is the word of the Lord,
which thou hast spoken; he said moreover, for there shall be peace and truth in my days. 5. Suffer joyfully, , Rom. 5. 3. and James 1. 2. My 5. Suffer joy∣fully. Brethren, count it all joy, when you fall into divers temptations: The A∣postle mentions this to their joy, Heb. 10. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that you have in heaven a better and an enduring substance: So did the Apostles, Acts 5. 41. and they departed from the presence of the councel, rejoycing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name. 6. Suffer profitably; labor to profit by the rod, to get corrupti∣on 6. Suffer profitably. purged out, and grace wrought in: Labor to suck sweetness (as the Bee doth) out of bitter hearbs, and to eat honey out of the car∣cass af a Lyon: A wise man will gain by every dispensation of pro∣vidence. The fifth and last Use, in one word, is for Consolation: Many pro∣mises Ʋse 5. For Consolati∣on. are made to them, and they shall get the performance of them, Rom. 8. 17. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorifi∣ed together, Matth. 19. 29. And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Luke 22. 28, 29. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath ap∣pointed unto me: Let them comfort themselves with these four Consi∣derations. 1. Their sufferings are for a moment onely, but their reward is Consid. 1. Sufferings are for a moment. eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renew'd day by day: For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more ex∣ceeding. and eternal weight of glory. 2. Their sufferings are few, but there are many Mansions in Heaven. Consid. 2. Their sufferings are few. Consid. 3. Their sufferings are sanctified. 3. Their sufferings are sanctified, and sweetned by God, their Pri∣son is their Palace, their Chain their Glory, their Dungeon their Pa∣radise. 4. In Heaven there's no more suffering, all tears shall be wip'd a∣way from their eyes, and when the time of refreshing shal come from the presence of God, they shall rejoyce with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.
The dark Vision. Unfolded on the Monethly Fast-Day, upon Hab. 2. v. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time; but at the end, it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. THe Prophet Habakkuk was one of the last Prophets Sermon 6. At St. Ma∣ry's Oxon. Jan. 31. 1648 that Prophesied before the Captivity: He lived in sad troublesome times, even days of darkness and gloominess, and full of darkness: And no wonder, be∣cause they were exceeding evil, by reason of varie∣ties of sins and abominations. The Prophesie is Di∣alogue-wise, consisting of Expostulations and Answers. 1. You have an Expostulation to the Lord against the extream 1. An Expostu∣lation. wickedness of the Jews, ch. 1, 2, 3. O Lord, How long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear? even cry out unto the f violence, and thou wilt not hear? Why doest thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me, and there are that raise up strife and contention. 2ly. You have the Lords answer, threatning great calamities to 2. The Lords Answer. the Jews, by the cruel oppressive Caldeans, ver. 5, 6, to the 11th in∣clusive: Behold ye among the heathen, and regard and wonder marvel∣lously: for I will work a work in your days which ye shall not believe, though it be told you. For lo, I raise up the Caldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places that are not theirs. They are terrible and dreadful: their judgement and their dignity shall proceed of themselves. Their hor∣ses also are swifter than the Leopards, and are more fierce then the even∣ing
wolves, and their horse-men shall spread themselves, and come from far, they shall flie as the eagle that hasteth to eat: They shall come all for violence, their faces shall sup up the cast wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand, And they shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn unto them; they shall divide every strong hold: for they shall heap dust and take it. Then thirdly, you have another expostulation to the Lord against the Caldeans cruelty, ver. 12. to the close of the Chapter. O Lord! thou hast ordained them for judgement: O mighty God! thou hast esta∣blished them for correction. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, wherefore lookest thou upon thm that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongu, when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he? And makest men as the fishes of the sea. as the creeping things that have no ruler over them? They take up all of them with the angle; they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoyce and are glad. Therefore they sacrifice to their net, and burn incense unto their drag, because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous: Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the nations? Fourthly, You have Gods second Answer, which consists partly of Direction and Commination. 1. For direction, to wait and live by Faith, and patiently to ex∣pect deliverance. 2. For Commination, threatning revenge and ruine to the Chur∣ches enemies, from ver. 5. to the end of the Chapter. Lastly, You have an excellent Prayer, penned in the Prophets name, and in the name of the Church, intimating our duty in dark times, to be more frequently upon our knees, and more vehement in Prayer for the Churches deliverance. Thus in brief you have the scope of this Prophesy set forth unto you. Now to make way to my Text: From the precedent words in this Chapter, you finde the Prophet upon his warch. Notwithstand∣ing the enemies of the Church are in the float of Prosperity, and the Church in the ebbe of Adversity, yet he questions not Gods vigi∣lant eye of Providence over his People: He therefore gets out of the croud, and separates himself from the multitude, and retires him∣self from the hurry of earthly intanglements. As Watch-men get themselves into some high Turret, or fenced Castle, to espy Passen∣gers at a distance; so doth the Prophet get his thoughts highly rai∣sed,
and gets himself up into a high place, remote from all intercourse with, and interruptions from the world. If with Judicious Calvin, we weigh the reason of the Metaphor, we shall know that this Tower Speculam intel∣ligmus esse re∣cessum mntis, ubi nos subdui∣mus a mundo. Calv. in Loc. . Ver. 70. is a recess of the minde; wherein we withdraw our selves from the world: I will get me upon my rock, so the Septuagint: There's safety alone to be found in God: He's the Rock of Ages, an impregnable Tower: And whats his intention? 1. He waited to see what God would say to him: As if he should say, It's onely the word from God that can comfort me, that alone will abundantly make amends for all my watching, therefore I'le still remain Sentinel: Though I be not suddenly relieved, yet I'le not de∣sert my station: Though as yet there be no appearance of comfort, yet I know that 'tis my duty to tarry til it come: I am resolved to wait Gods leasure: I will wait for a word of comfort: It's worth wait∣ing for it: I'le wait quietly for it, and when it comes, I will yield rea∣dy obedience thereunto. 2. He waited to see what he should say unto God: What shall I answer, when I am reproved? When men and devils reprove me, and belch out calumnies against me, then I shall bear up against all: I have armor of proof to bear off all their reproofs: Though they re∣buke me never so much, and insult over me, yet now having heard what God says unto me, I am armed Cap-a-pee against them all. Hence, 1. Learn our duty, to wait upon God with a quiet spirit, whatever reproofs or oppositions we may meet withal from men or Devils. And secondly, To set an high estimate upon the word of God, and stick close to it as the rule: No matter what men say against thee, if God be for thee. And thirdly, Not to follow any devised way of man, but to make the Word of God the Umpire, guide, rule of thy life. And lastly, Though God speak not presently, we must not be ha∣sty, but wait his time: For when we wait for an answer, then are we put in a capacity to receive it. The Prophet waited for an An∣swer; and an Answer he obtains, ver. 2. And the Lord answered and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may run that readeth it. Note how opportunely God answers the Prophet up∣on his watch. An Angel revealed the welcome news of a Saviour to the Shepheards, keeping their flocks by night. And a Vision is re∣vealed to the watching Prophet: And because the Vision was princi∣pally
for publick use and edification, it was to be writ in legible Characters, even Capital Letters, that any one might read it in tran∣situ, and not stop. Q. But when shall the Vision come to pass, might some say, When will it come? Oh! it's a long time a coming, and hope deferred makes the heart sick. The Caldeans may quite ruine our nation: We may fall every one of us by the hand of the enemy, efore this Vision may be accomplished: Every minute is long, When? Oh when will the Vision be perform∣ed? A. To such impatient querulous Speeches, I oppose the reason or strong ground of incouragement from my Text, For the Vision is yet for an appointed time, &c. Which words contains a Prophetical Promise, incouraging, and a Text divided. special duty prescribed. As first, For the Prophetical Promise. 1. You have set forth the matter of it, A vision. 2. The limitation thereof, for an appointed time. 3. The truth of it, it shall not lie. 4. The ingemination for the certainty, it shall speak, it will surely come, it will not tarry. 2. For the duty: It's set in opposition to hastiness of Spirit, Wait for it. The words need a Paraphrase: Let's review them apart. Q. 1. It shall be asked, What's meant by Vision? A. You know, God spake at sundry times, and in divers manners , Heb. 1. 1. in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets: Sometimes by dreams, other times by Urim and Visions; sometimes vivâ voce, to the Fa∣thers of old; to us by his Son, voce scriptâ, in his written Word; so that Dreams, Visions, and Revelations cease, which were extraordi∣nary, and onely pro tempore: We are to keep close to the written Word, and take heed of being wise above what is written. By the Vision, some understand the Administration of the Gospel of Christ, and his glorious Appearances: But Calvin, whom I fol∣low . (as much as any Interpreter since the Apostles times) by Vision understands Admonition and Instruction to the People of God: And though this may be dark, it shall speak and not lie, not in vain, . Numb. 23. 19. so the 70. Not an  of the Word of God shall fail. God is the God of eternal Truth. Mercenary Balaam gives this true attestation: God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he
should repent: Hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spòken, and shall he not make it good? God doth not delay his people, on purpose to deceive them, and frustrate their expectations, but to ex∣ercise their faith and patience, and to prepare them for the better re∣ception and entertainment of a mercy when it comes. Q. 2. But secondly, Why is it said, it's yet for an appointed time? A. 1. To shew that it is in the power of God alone to prefix a time: He created time, and limits time and seasons according to his pleasure: He sets bounds and periods to all Kingdoms, Nations, Lan∣guages. 2. And secondly, For a Caveat to us to beware of limiting God to our times and seasons. 3. To stop our running, not to make more haste then good speed, but to wait upon God in his own way, who will accomplish his Visi∣on in his own time, for his own glory. Q. 3. What's meant by waiting here? A. Be silent, and murmur not, because the Vision seems to linger: Though sence fails, yet let not Faith fail: It's the nature of Faith to wait for the execution of a promise, though it be long a coming: Faith hath a Prophetical vertue to see a Promise a great way off, and a Magnetical vertue to draw it near to it. So that if the Question be moved to a Believer, What wilt thou do in these cloudy days? How wilt thou behave thy self amidst these dark passages of Provi∣dence? His answer is, I'le hope against hope, wait with Faith and Patience, and adhere unto the Word of God, and am resolved not to let go my confidence. However works of Providence may seem cross, yet I'le depend up∣on the truth and faithfulness of God, I will wait and believe; though sense be non-pluss'd, and I can see no reason why I should wait on the Lord any longer. And here's the acting of Faith indeed in a true Believer, who resolves, I will trust my God, depend upon his Word, stay upon his Promises, rely upon his Attributes: Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him, as Job resolved. Q. 4. Lastly, Here seems to be a contradiction, though it tarry, it Job 13. 15. Argumentum ad hominem & cre∣aturas, non ad Deum & crea∣torem. will not tarry: How can these be reconciled? A. This is an Argument to Men and Creatures, and not to God and Creator: There's no tarrying in God: Time past, present, and to come, are all one in him: A thousand years in his sight, are but
as yesterday. We are then to distinguish between the Decree and the Mora resertur ad sestinationem nostram. Caete∣rum si respicimus ad Dei cosili∣um nunquam moram facit. Calv. in Loc. Execution thereof. The Decree tarries not, nor seems to tarry: But according to the execution of the Decree, as it falls under our apprehensions and ma∣nifestations, it may seem to stay and linger: There is then no tar∣rying in God, but there is in the Creature. And though flesh and blood cannot apprehend it, yet in tarrying God makes haste. You have here represented what Faith can do: David told Achish, when he was going to Battle, Thou shalt see what thy servant can doe: Behold here what Faith through the strength of God can do. Faith meets with many Obstructions, and many Repulses, yet it will fall on again: Faith meets with many delays, yet it is not querulous, it waits, it stays at the Fathers door, it will not be driven away. A faith∣full soul believes God upon his word. God saith, The Vision shall come; the Believer saith, I have enough, I'le here cast anchor, it's good being here. The Promise is my strong hold, like Sampsons Locks, here my great strength lies, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. The Decree and Counsel of God never delays. God knows every minute of time, and gives a quick dispatch unto his work. Faith believes it, though sense cannot apprehend it, though (as I intimated before) the execution of the Decree, according to par∣ticular effects and operations, may seem to delay. Here then is the tryal of our Faith and patience, and here's a word most seasonable to Preach and practice in these days of Jacob's troubles, when the Vision or the word seems to be dark and to tarry. I shall winde up all into one bottom, and from the scope and substance of them lay this one intire Doctrine for the foundation of my Discourse. That in troublesome times, when the vision is dark, and seems to tarry,  then in a peculiar manner we should wait upon God for the accomplishment thereof. For proof hereof, we have copious testimonies of Scripture: I Isa. 8. 17. Isa. 26. 8. 18. will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and will look for him. In the way of thy Judgements, O Lord, have we wait∣ed on thee: the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. We have been with childe, we have been in pain, we have, as it were, brought forth wind▪ we have not wrought any deliverance in the Mcah. 7. 7. earth. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me.
For the Methodical inlargement of this precious truth, I shall Method pro∣pounded. propound these Heads of Discourse, which shall constitute my en∣suing Meditations. 1. To explicate the nature of waiting, what it is to wait upon God. 2. To illustrate the duty from the practices of the Saints in the like case. 3. To demonstrate the truth of the Point from convincing ratio∣nal arguments. And fourthly, To reduce all to point of practice by way of use∣ful application. I resume the first Head propounded, to open the nature of Faith, 1. What it is to wait upon God. and waiting on God. The inquiry is, What it is to wait upon God? The Answer which I shall give to this particular Inquiry, shall be comprised in this description: Waiting is a chearful submission of our wills to the will of God, whereby the soul rests in hope, exerciseth faith, ex∣pects with patience, and improves a diligent use of means for the obtaining of a good end: This description is made of these five following In∣gredients. 1. It's the Christians duty to wait chearfully: Swine roar when they 1. We must wait chearfully. have rings put into their noses; Bulls and Bears cry out and roar when they are baited; and Slaves howl when they are beaten with rods: But Christians are of another temper. Good children kiss the rod that beats them: Not onely so (saith Paul) but we glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation worketh patience: And (saith Rom. 5. 3. . James) the trying of your faith worketh patience. Likewise the Apo∣stle mentions, For ye had compassion of me in my bnds, and took joy∣fully James 1. 2. , Heb. 10. 34. the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a better and an induring substance: Murmuring, repining, and reviling Language must not be heard amongst Christians. God loves a chearful giver, and a chearful waiter too. Hannah felt some spi∣ritual illapse, something coming in as an answer to her Prayers, and her countenance was cheared up, she was no more sad: And she said, Let thine hand-maid finde grace in thy sight; soe the woman went her way, 1 Sam. 1. 18. and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. You read of the sin∣gular chearfulness of the Martyrs, how they kissed the stake, well∣com'd Fire and Faggot, embraced the Flames: What a sweet chearful frame of spirit did they discover amidst their greatest sufferings, and
were no whit daunted by the utmost cruelty of their Adversaries? It would ravish a Christians heart to peruse the Letters of Mr. Brad∣ford that holy Martyr, then whom (as I apprehend) never man wrote more sweetly, and manifested more chearfulness under the Rod. To rush upon trouble, to be forced to sufferings, and to say, I will bear it, because I cannot otherwise choose; and to murmur and rail a∣gainst such and such Instruments, this is not thank-worthy: But to make a vertue of necessity, and to bear thy Cross chearfully, to a∣bound in inward consolations amidst outward troubles; to have thine heart inlarged, though thy body be Imprisoned; to smile in af∣fliction, because God smiles upon thee, even when he beats thee, this is the glory of thy suffering: And whensoever God hides his face from us, and clouds his gracious countenance, let us with all alacrity wait upon him, and learn to bear chearfully his dealings with us. A second ingredient is, That it is the duty of Believers to wait sub∣missively 2. We must wait submissive∣ly. upon God: It's not enough to say, I must submit, I must be content; but to say, I will submit, I will be content, that argu∣eth a submissive spirit, and not the other: Shall a Zeno say, after he Jam didici philosophari. Zeno. had suffered Ship-wrack, Now I have learn'd to be a Philosopher? Shall an Anaxagoras say, after the news of the death of his Son, Now I Scio me genuisse mortalem. Anaxag. 1 Sam. 3. 18. 2 Kings 20. 19. know I begat a mortal Son? And shall Christians presume to contest with God, and grudge against their Maker? We should say with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good: with Hezekiah, Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken; and with Job, The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, Bles∣sed Job 1. 21. Levit. 10. 3. be the name of the Lord. Imitate Aaron; Moses said unto Aaron, this is it that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified; and Aaron held his peace. David profest, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because Psal. 39. 9. Amos 5. 13. thou didst it. And remember the counsel of the Prophet, Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it is an evil time: It's not meant that we should be tongue-tyed in the cause of God; for if we speak not when Gods glory suffers, it's a sign that we have a dumb Devil within us: But true Believers, which judge truly of calami∣ties, and of their causes, shall in silence, and with patience worship Gods Justice without any murmuring or scandal. David falls not a railing at Shimei, he was better instructed, then to render railing for railing, but he looks at a higher hand, and submits. So when Iliads of troubles surround thee, and one cross follows upon the neck of
another, as one Wave of the Sea upon another: Oh! do not break forth into cursing and reviling, but look at the hand of God, and say, Lord, I see thy hand, I desire to know thy meaning, to be in∣structed with Ephraim, to smite upon my thigh. and submit unto thy hand in every thing; and I beseech thee, what I understand not teach thou me, and wherein I have done amiss, I will do so no more.Job 34. 32. 3. We must wait patiently. 3. It's the nature of Faith to wait patiently. This is waiting in∣deed, when with a quiet frame of spirit I expect the fulfilling of the Vision, whether it speak good, or whether it speak evil, I am con∣tent, my heart is of Davids temper; My hart is fixed, (O God) my Psal. 57. 7. heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise: The Husband-man waits for the Harvest; so must we wait patiently for the Harvest; of delive∣rance. Delay is the sickness of the soul; Patience is the cure of it: Patience is the very soul and life of waiting: Waiting without pa∣tience, is inraged sury. We must bear Gods anger patiently, I will Micah 7. 9. bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgement for me: He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness: We must wait for that we see not. If we (saith the Apostle) hope for that we see not, then Rom. 8. 25. do we with patience wait for it: Hence are we commanded, In your pa∣tience Luke 21. 19. pssess ye your souls. There's a Philosopher that hath this ex∣pression; if the Gods would grant me my desire, and bid me ask what I would have, I would ask of them this thing, That I might have the spirit of Socrates, such a composed spirit as he had: It's ob∣served of him, and of Cato likewise, that they were in such a quiet composed sedate frame, that they never changed their countenances upon any thing that. befell them. This should stir up Christians to beg of God, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit (whereof the A∣postle 1. Pet. 3. 4. speaks) which is in the sight of God of great price: Pray hard for the excellency of a quiet composed spirit: Come what will, if thou be armed with patience, it will ward off the blow. 4 It's the duty and property of waiting Christians, to exercise Faith 4. We must exercise faith upon the Di∣vine Promises. on the Divine Promises. A Heathen, out of a Cynical stupidity, and by Moral Documents, may have patience and pass by injuries; but he knows not how to believe against sence; he's a stranger to Faith, he discerns no excellency in a Promise, he cannot live upon a word, he knows not how to relie upon a Crucified Saviour, and live by Faith on the Son of God. But a true Christian waits believingly, he lays hold upon Jesus Christ by Faith, and lives upon the Divine
Promises, and applys them by Faith unto his particular condition. Faith gives the soul a firm bottom to stand on, a strong foundation to build on, which is the Word of God: Faith (saith the Apostle) is Heb. 11. 1. Psal. 27. 13. the substance of things hoped for, and the evidnce of things not seen. There are two great words, . I had fainted (saith David) unless I had belived to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of Rom. 8. 28. the living. A Believer knows, that all things shall work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are called according to his pur∣pose: Mal. 4. 2. Such Scriptures are his strong Rock: But unto you that fear my nam, shall the Son of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall goe forth, and grow up as calves of the sall: For a small moment Isa. 54. 7. have I forsakn thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. A Be∣liever Matth. 28. 20. stays himself upon a promise, Loe, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. He fears not the opposition of men and de∣vils against the Ministry; for he knows Christ will uphold them, and vindicate their quarrel. A Believer knows, that the rod of the wic∣ked shall not rest upon the back of the righteous; therefore he waits till God take it off. He knows that deliverance shall come to the Church, that the Lord will build up Zion, and appear in his glory, that all the enemies shall come and worship before the Churches feet, and the shaking of Nations is a harbinger to deliverance: Per∣use Hag. 2. 7. that great Promise, I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill with glory this house, saith the Lord of hosts. A Believer knows that God can bring light out of darkness, order out of a Chaos, strike a straight line with a crooked stick, make the wrath of man turn to his praise, and restrain the remainder thereof. By Faith Stephen saw Christ, when the stones were about his ears: And by Faith Job saw a Redeemer upon the Dung-hill: And by Faith Moses saw him that vvas invisible, amidst Reproaches and Sufferings: Faith discerns a Sun-shine approaching, amidst cloudy∣ness and dismall darkness: Whatever makes against a Believer in a carnal apprehension, the spiritual eye of Faith seeth something to make for him: So that a Believer hath double, nay trebble even mul∣tiplyed hopes for single fears. It's the nature of waiting to have Hope for its companion: Wait∣ing . We must wait and hope. Lam. 3. 26. Heb. 6. 19. and Hope are conjoyned: It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. Hope is the Anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the vail: When thou art tossed in the troublesome waves
of the World, cast anchor, and let hope support and stay thy spirit: Were it not for hope, the heart would break, in those days of con∣fusion and misery, where there are so many sad thoughts and search∣ings of heart for the afflictions of Joseph, and divisions of Reuben; yet we are not without hope: Let's apply that of Ezrah amidst all their sorrows and perplexity, Shecaniah the son of Jhiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, Ezra 10. 2. and have taken strange wives, of the people of the Land; yet now there is hpe in Israel concerning this thing. They fall a making a Covenant, and O that we would bewail the breach of Covenant! and resolve to keep that inviolable which we made in a day of distress, and for which there will be a day of account! we are a sinking kingdom, and cry out, Lord save us, or else we perish: Hope even holds us up by the chin. We are just as the Israelites coming out of Egypt, in straights and intanglements, amidst Rocks: When they were in Egypt, O what servitude did they meet withal, and cruel bondage! Now they come out of Egypt, they meet with difficulties, the Enemy overtakes them at Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the Sea over against Baal-zephon: Pihahiroth, was a Cave hem'd in with Rocks: Migdol signifieth a Cavernac rumbus inclusae. Tower: Baal was their God; and Zephon signifies ruri specula∣tus est: And see what counsel is given, Moses said unto the people, Exod. 14. 13. fear ye not, stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day: For the Egyptians, whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. We are just as Jehoshaphat was, in great straits and know not what to do; but his practice must be ours, to fall a praying, O Lord our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us, neither 2 Chron. 20. 12. know we what to doe, but our eyes are unto thee: Hold out hope, and thus it will argue and plead, The Lord hath delivered us from our e∣nemies, we hope he will not suffer us to destroy one another; The Lord hath done us much good, and wrought miraculous salvations for us; we trust he will not now destroy us, after he hath done us so much good. Joyn Faith, Hope, and Patience, and thou wilt then wait to good purpose: Sense fails, contrivances are disappointed, Faith bids dispute not, but believe: But Faith grows weak, then Hope interposeth; its good to hope in God: Happy is that man whose hope the Lord is: Art thou a tottering, ready to fall? hope underprops thee: Art thou ready to sink? hope findes out a twig to lay hold on: but hope deferred, makes the heart sick. Then patience steps in and
argueth thus, Art thou a Believer? consider, A Believer makes not haste: Hast thou hope? thou must wait for that thou seest not, quiet thy spirit and vvait upon God, cast thy self upon his providence, stay upon his wisdom, rowl thy self upon his love, and vvait quietly for his salvation: He that vvaits chearfully, submissively, and pati∣ently with Faith and Hope, is put into a ready capacity of receiving a gracious ansvver from God. Thus did the people of God, they waited upon a word of Promise, and relyed upon God for the fulfil∣ling of the vision, and they enjoyed the accomplishment thereof, which is the second Head propounded, viz. the illustration of the Point, from the practice and example of the Saints in former times. 2. The Doctrine illustrated by examples. 2. I'le first instance in the promises made to Abraham long before they were fulfilled. There were two Promises made to Abraham. 1. That the Countrey which God vvould give him, should flovv with Milk and Honey. 2. That his Seed should be as the Stars of Heaven: Here's Gods Word; but his works seem strange, to run quite cross unto it. This vvould appear to a carnal eye to be a very dark vision: Abraham vvas commanded out of his ovvn Countrey: Now the Lord said un∣to Gen. 12. 1. Abraham, Get thee from out of thy countrey, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto a land that I will shew thee. As soon as he came into Canaan there was a Famine, he vvas ready to starve: There was a famine in the land, and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn Gen. 12. 10. there, for the famine was grievous in the land. This Promise was not made good till the Israelites vvere seated in Canaan many hundred years after: and that his Seed should be as the stars of Heaven; this vvas strangely brought about, against all humane apprehension, as by the sequel may appear: for Abraham stayed many years before he had Isaac, the childe of the promise, and Isaac stayed 20 years be∣fore he had a childe; and God bad Abraham kill Isaac. These vvorks seem directly opposite to the Word of God. But vve must not lay too much vveight upon the vvorks and thwarting passages of Gods providence, but depend wholly upon the word: What God promi∣sed unto Abraham, was fulfilled every tittle in its season. So the vi∣sion was dark to the Children of Israel. Joseph told them that God would surely visit them, and bring them out of that Land; yet they must wait the limitted time: And it came to pass, at the end of the Exod. 12. 41.
four hundred and thirty years, even the self-same day it came to pass that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt. Hannah, Ra∣chel, Rebeckah, waited Gods time; and Sarah waited for a childe, though against the ordinary course of nature: God had promised, and they must vvait upon his Word. Seventy years were appointed for the Babylnish Captivity: The Jews must vvait till the expiration, then, and not till then, came deliverance. The impotent Cripple waited 38 years, at the Pool of Bethesdah, then Christ came and put him into the water and healed him. The daughter of Abraham wait∣ed 18 years, then Christ loosned her from her infirmity. The Wo∣man waited 12 years on Physitians, who had the bloody Issue, and they left her uncured, and poverty to boot; when that time was ex∣pired, Christ came and healed her. Ten days tribulation were ap∣pointed to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Three days Plague to David. God in wisdom hath set certain periods of time, known onely to himself, all which while he will exercise the Faith and Pa∣tience of his children; at the end whereof, and not before, he will relieve and comfort them. What time God hath set for Englands deliverance, is a grand secret, locked up in his Cabinet: And whe∣ther our eyes may see a right settlement, a Peace establisht upon the basis of Truth, no man can determine: We can say no more, then Psal. 74. 9. with the Psalmist, We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, nei∣ther is there among us that knoweth how long: Yet let us fall upon our knees, and be earnest in Prayer for Zion: O that the salvation of Is∣rael were come out of Zion! When the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. Let us leave off murmuring and fall a praying, let's take off from anxious cares, and adde more fervency to our Prayers; let's not be so saucy, as to prescribe times and seasons unto God, not to limit the holy one of Israel to times or means. It's a received rule of Augustine, Let him, Eligal opportuni∣tation, qui dat miscricordiam. Aug. who shews mercy, choose his season. We have seen this duty tracked by the foot-steps of Gods people, let us goe and doe likewise. In the third place, to give in the demonstration of the Point, I shall 3. The Doctrine demonstrated. draw a threefold Argument, from the necessity, equity, and utility of the duty. 1. From the necessity of the duty: Ye have need of patience, that Arg. 1. Drawn from the necessity of this duty. after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise: And that is necessary, Necessitate praecepti & medii. For Precepts, the
Psalmist exhorts, Rst in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, fre not thy self because of him, who prospereth in his way, because of the man, who bringeth wicked dvices to pass. For evil deers shall be cut off: but thse that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. And the Prophet Zephaniah exhorts, Therefore wait ye upon me (saith the Lord) until Zeph. 3. 8. th day that I rise up unto the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to pur upon them mine in∣dignatin, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousie. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and Psal. 27. 14. he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord. Solomon coun∣sels, Say not thou, I will recompence evil, but wait on the Lord, and he Prov. 20. 22. shall save thee. David layeth a strict charge upon himself, My soul, Psal. 62. 5. wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him. David could have taken opportunity to have revenged himself on Saul, he had him (as we say) at his mercy, but he waited Gods time: The Lord 1 Sam. 24. 23. 1 Sam. 26. 23. (saith he) render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulnesse: for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day: but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the Lords anointed. David, though he had an oppor∣tunity, yet considered Saul was Gods anointed, therefore he would not embrue his hands in his blood. 2. Necessitate mdii: For waiting is an instrumental means, Gods way of obtaining a grant of the thing desired: Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel, And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, Luke 2. 25. whose name was Simeon, and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghst was upon him: The sons of God waited for their adoption: And not onely they, but our selves Rom. 8. 23. also, which have the first-fruits of the spirit: even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. And they wait for the coming of Christ, So that ye come be∣hinde I Cor. 1. 7. in no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wait∣ing prepareth us for the receiving of a mercy, whereas murmuring, querulous speeches do indispose us for a mercy. Whineing, strug∣ling, and quarrelling, provoke God to lash us more; but a quiet composed behaviour, an humble submission to the will of God, is a ready way to obtain the thing desired, even a comfortable fruition of our expectation. God is most ready to help his people, when their hearts most long after him; for so runs the Promise, I will pour Isa. 44. 3. water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine off-sppring. After
the Church was in pain and travel, and endured many throws and hard labor, in expectation of deliverance, read the gracious answer, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: a∣wake and sing, ye that awell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of hearbs, Isa. 26. 19. and the earth shall cast out the dead. So that waiting works two things. 1. It prepares us for a mercy, it seasoneth our hearts, and dispo∣seth them for the entertainment thereof, so that we are as Vessels throughly season'd. 2. It sets a higher price and estimate on the mercy when it comes: A mercy beg'd by Prayer, waited for with Patience, will, of all o∣thers, be the sweetest to us in the fruition. Hannah had more chil∣dren after Samuel, but none so valued as Samuel, the childe of her Prayers. Now if deliverance and settlement to the Kingdom come as an answer of our Prayers, O how welcome will the deliverance be! It's a comfortable experience recorded of the Church: And it shall Isa. 25. 9. be said in that day, lo, this is our God, we have waited for him and he shall save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoyce in his salvation. 2. The second Argument shall be drawn from the equity of the Argu. 2: Drawn from the equity of the duty. duty: It's all the equity and reason of the World, that we should wait upon God; we are Creatures, and is it not equal that the Crea∣ture should wait upon the Creator? we are Servants, and should not Servants wait upon their Masters? Behold, as the eyes of servants Psalm 123. 2: look unto the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us. We are children, and should not children wait upon their Father? These relations intimate the equity of the duty: we say, that Relations, though they be of least entity, yet they are of greatest efficacy. Doth not the Husband-man wait for the Har∣vest? Doth not the Mother wait for the time of her deliverance? Doth not the Patient wait upon the working of the Physick? Now God is giving the Kingdom strong Physick; a Purge to some, a Vo∣mit to others; nay, have we not just cause to fear, that by reason of our Laodicean luke-warmness, God will vomit us out of his mouth? Let's wait and see what God will do; though we know not, yet he knows the reason of his own proceedings. God made Nebuchadnez∣zar a scourage to the Jews, and God calls him his servant; but because Nebuchadnezzar acted his own malice and revenge, God will turn the
wheel upon him. Jehu was made an Instrument to root out Ahabs Family, but because his heart was naught, he aimed at the Kingdom for himself. God threatens to avenge the blood of Jezrel upon the house Hos. 1. 4. of Jehu. God may raise up one to punish another, and when they have done, God may find out a scourge to punish the punishers themselves: These are Gods Acts, his strange Acts, (for so are his judgements:) Isaiah 7. 20. God will have a razor for that purpose: In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razour that is hired, namely by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet, and it shall also con∣sume the beard: And notwithstanding greatness of strength and pow∣er in the hands of men, if they mis-imploy it, God can give strength to wounded men, to do great exploits: For though ye had smitten the Jer. 37. 10. whole army of the Caldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them; yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire: And God can cause the lame to take the prey: Thy tacklings are loosed, they could not well strengthen their Isa. 33. 23. mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil di∣vided, the lame take the prey: Let us leave off murmuring and repi∣ning, and wait to see what God will do with us, and for us: His time is next: He will bring to pass his own work, his own way, to his own glory. The third and last Argument I shall name, shall be drawn from Arg. 3. Drawn from the benefit of waiting. Isa. 40. 31. the singular benefit and utility of the duty: Art thou weak? wait, and thou shalt receive strength: They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up on wings, as eagles; they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint: Art thou afraid of shame and disgrace, lest contempt and ignominy be cast upon the Church of God? see what the Prophet Isaiah saith, It is he that sit∣teth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as gras∣hoppers; Isa. 40. 22, 23. that stretcheth out the heaven as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in, that bringeth the Princes to nothing, he maketh the Judges of the earth as vanity: Dost thou desire Gods blessing? wait and thou shalt have it: And therefore doth the Lord wait, that he Isa. 30. 18. may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: For the Lord is a God of judgement; Blessed are all they that wait for him: God knows when and how to help his Cum duplicātur lateres venit Deus. Isa. 3. 9, 10, people: In the mount God will be seen: When the Bricks were doub∣led, then came God and delivered the Israelites from their Aegypti∣an bondage: The earth mourneth & languisheth, Lebann is ashamed and
hewed down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carml shake off their fruits. Now will I rise, saith the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self. When helps from earth have been cut off, then help came from Heaven. When Abraham was stretching forth his hand to kill Isaac, then the Angel said, Stay thy hand: When David was hemm'd in on every side, then a way was made for his e∣scape by the Philistines Invasion: When Paul was a killing, and they were beating of him, to beat out his life: then came news of an Insurrection in Jerusalem, and by that diversion Paul was reprei∣ved. God hath a way of escape for his people in Fire and Water: When thou passest thorow the waters, I will be with thee, and thorow the Isa. 43. 2, 3. rivers, they shall not over-flw thee; when thou walkst thorow the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: Some∣times they have their lives for a prey, other times they are made a prey, and suffer in a common calamity: Yet though the Saints suffer, they have an hiding-place: And a man shall be as an hiding-place from Isa 32. 2. the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shaddow of a great rock in a weary land:. They have a Pella, a Zoar sometimes, where they may securely escape with their lives: yet they have always a refuge and shelter in the Divine Pro∣mises: They have a rock higher then themselves, from the end of the earth (saith the Psalmist) will I cry unto thee, when my heart is over∣whelmed: Psalm 61. 2. lead me to the rock that is higher then I. It's an obliged duty to wait upon the Counsels of God: By waiting, we may look for good successe, because we goe Gods way; by murmuring or reviling we cannot look for comfort, because we goe the way of flesh and blood: By patience, the pain and anguish of our fore is mitiga∣ted; by impatience, it corrodes and is inrag'd. Thus far of the Doctrinal part: I shall improve all unto four Use 1. For Terror. Uses, viz. For Reprehension, Exhortation, Direction, and Consola∣tion. It breathes forth terror and severe reproof unto the murmuring spirits of these present times: Never more complaining in our Streets: Oh! we would have peace upon any tearms, when will the Sword be put into the sheath? when shall the Kingdom be set∣led? That complaint is frequently taken up: Hast thou utterly reje∣cted Judah? Hath thy soul loathed Zion? Why hast thou smitten us, and Jer. 14. 1. there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and there is no good, and for the time of healing, but behold trouble.
For Answer, I expostulate with Jehu, What? Peace? What? Peace with Rome? What? Peace with Benhadad? What? Peace with falshood? Peace upon such tearms, will prove but a Body massacring a Soul-murdering Peace: What? Peace with our lusts and corruptions? Till they be slaughtered, what peace can we ex∣pect? Can we expect a cessation of punishing, before there be a ces∣sation of sinning? Can we expect peace with men, as long as we continue at War with God? For all those Monethly Fasts, and days of Humiliation, where's a serious Reformation of our hearts and lives? You know how hasty Saul was, he forced himself to sacrifice, and would not stay till Samuel came, it cost him his Kingdom. The Israelites would not wait Gods time, but were hasty for an encoun∣ter with the Amalekites, and you may see what they got by it, they fell before them, and were discomfited unto Hormah: Then the A∣malekites came down, and the Canaanites that dwelt in the hill, and smote Numb. 14. 45. them, and discomfited them even unto Hormah: And what's the ground of this hastiness of spirit? It's infidelity, because we believe not God upon his Word; we are such hot spurres, we out-run Providence, and antidate Deliverance: We go devised ways, untract pathes, according to secret impulses, quite contrary to the rode of the Word; did we believe the faithfulness of God, That he is faithful that hath promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church; we should possess our selves with patience, and wait qui∣etly for deliverance: We usually say, that hasty men never want woe. Rash, preproperous, and preposterous practices, are the ru∣ine of practitioners. An impatient man, is a gate without an hinge. Janua sine car∣dine. What shame is it, for a Christian to be like Hercules furens, or like the Demoniack (mentioned in the Gospel) rending and tearing him∣self? An impatient male-contented person, is Felo de se, his own Executioner: What a weakness was it in David, so to be over∣whelm'd in sorrovv for Absalom? and in Jonah, so to lament the loss of his Gourd? The loss of Revenues, profits in the Trade, Liberty, Oh how doth it stick near a man? But where's the acting of Faith? Now the just shall live by faith: and if any man draw back, my soul Heb. 10. 38. shall have no pleasure in him. A true Believer lives by Faith, when Trading decays, Lively-hood and Profit decays. Now let's learn to live by Faith: Though thou shouldst loose all, there is e∣nough in the Promises to make up all with Interest, if thou canst but make them thine ovvn by particular Application. Much time
is thrown away in passing our censures one upon another, reviling this or that instrument: I plead not in the least for any, but utter∣ly abhor any irregular practices or indirect ways; but I press pati∣ence and submission unto Gods will, to look thorow all instruments and secondary causes unto the first cause to hear the rod, and who hath appointed it: The Lords voice cryeth unto the city, and the man of Micah 6 . wisdom shall see thy name: heare ye the rod, and who hath appointed it. It's a doggish quality to snarle at a stone, and not look at the hand that throws it: Pray then fervently, and watch against infidelity, and an impatient and murmuring spirit: The Lord lay them not unto our charge. We might have been in Canaan long ere this, had we not been murmurers in the Wilderness. I know well that our condition is so lamentable, that we can neither bear diseases nor remedies: And complaints finde no better entertainment, then in those times where∣in the best of Historians lived, and said in his Presace, That com∣plaints Querclae ne tum quidem gratae cum sorsan ne∣cessariae. Liv. Praef. are not pleasing, no not then when they are necessary. There's much bitterness and implacableness upon mens spirits, devouring and ca∣lumniating one another: Such expostulations are rise, where is the promise of his coming? Where's the reformation so much spoken of? Where's the removing of the burthens? letting the oppressed go free? breaking the bread to the hungry? cloathing the naked? such are peculiar duties for a Fast: Is there not rather fasting for strife and debate, to smite with the first of wickedness? I aggravate these things no further, but onely let me tell you, as there were , so there are , spots in your Fasting∣days, Let's bewail them with tears of blood; let's fast for our for∣mer Fastings, and be humbled for our out-side Humiliations, and lay to heart our negligent services, and deprecate that curse that hangs over our heads for performing the work of the Lord negligently: The Lord may call us to an account as justly as he did the Jews, Zech. 7. 5. Did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? In the second place I proceed to an Use of Exhortation: Let me Use 2. For Exhortati∣on. press home the duty of the Text, to wait for the fulfilling of the Vision in these concussions and commotions, when men are at their wits end, and wonder what vvill be the issue. Oh let's take heed of impatience and murmuring, let's bevvare of tumultuous murmuring spirits, of tempestuous affections! Though there be a storm abroad, vve should endeavour after a serene quiet spirit at home. A calmness upon our spirits, vvill be of singular use for us amidst the
fluctuating condition of the Kingdom. Every one will be ready to ask, What shall we doe? How shall we demean our selves in these dark times? Such questions as these require an answer, and a word spoken in due season, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver. I will advise nothing as a States-man (that's out of my Sphere) nor as a subtle Politician (for such Policy is the bane of Religion) but from direct warrant out of the Word of God. By way of advice, I commend unto your thoughts these ensu∣ing Propositions, which I take to be Propositions of Eternall Truth. 1. It's unlawful to do any evill, that the least good may come Prop. 1. It's unlawful to do evil, that good may come thereof. Rom. 3. 8. thereof. And not rather (saith the Apostle) as we slanderously re∣ported, and as some affirm that we say, let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is just: God needs not our lies to maintain his cause. This was Rebockah's and Jacob's fault, for the compassing of a good end, to betake themselves to indirect means: This is a broken refuge, Isa. 28. 15, 17. and will fail: Because ye have said, we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement, when the over flowing scourge shall passe thorow, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falshood have hid our selves: Therefore, thus saith the Lord, Judgement will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall over∣flow the hiding place. Augustine is resolute, that if it was possible by an officious lie, to compass the Redemption of the whole World: yet so weighty and universal a good, must be rather let fall then brought about by the smallesst evil. 2. Another Proposition for confirmation, is, That no good inten∣tions Prop. 2. Good meanings cannot justifie a bad action. 1 Chron. 13. 10 and meanings can ever justifie the doing of any evill action. Ʋzzah's intention was good, but because against the rule he was pu∣nished with death: He invaded the Priests Office, and therefore the Lord smote him dead upon the place. 3. It's the duty of Christians to walk by rule, and keep close to Prop. 3. We must walk by rule. Isa. 8. 20. it, and that's the written Word of God: To the Law and to the Te∣stimony, if they speak not according to these, it is because they have no light in them. Let's not be a rule to our selves, nor follow extraor∣dinary impulses upon our spirits and revelations, but bring all to the touch-stone: Let's try all things, and hold fast that which is good; and let the Scripture be the Umpire, & let's acquiess altogether in its determinations: As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on Gal. 6. 16.
them, and mercy, and on the Israel of God: 'Tis not any rule but this rule. If an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Doctrine then what is contained in the Scriptures, let him be accursed. Whatever Seekers, Familists, Enthusiasts, &c. pretend to live above Ordinan∣ces (and so they are indeed, as much above Ordinances, as a Swine is above a Pearl, which it tramples under feet) I say, all their Lights, however new, are but Ignes fatui, false Lights, to lead us into dan∣gerous destructive ways: Let's therefore, for every action, look un∣to the rule, bring every thing to rule, and square all by the infallible rule of the word of God. 4. It's the duty of Christians to keep themselves in Gods ways, with∣in Prop. 4. Christians must keep within the compasse of their calling. Luke 4. 11. the compass of their Calling: We can expect a Blessing no further then we have a Calling for what we do: Ʋzzah and Ʋzziah paid dear for their irregular attempts: Whereupon Satan, an old cunning Sophister, when he tempted Christ, and urged Scripture: (And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot a∣gainst a stone: for he shall give his angels charge over thee to keep thee, leaves out what made against him (in all thy ways) for there was a pair of Staires to go down:) To precipitate himself down from the Pinacle had been the quickest, but it was a destructive way. 5. We must obey God rather then man: When it comes to this Dilemma, either you must displease God, and wound Conscience, or Prop. 5. We must obey God rather then man. displease a potent enemy; then thy resolution must be with the A∣postle, rather to obey God then man. When it comes to this pass, thou must either choose affliction or sin; thy resolution must be to choose the greatest affliction in the World, rather then to wound thy Con∣science with the least sin. See the practice of the three Children, they submitted themselves to the rage of the King, and the Fiery Furnace, rather then they would worship his Image. And Daniel Dan. 3. 21. Dan, 6. 16. was cast into the Lyons Den, for not obeying the Kings Decree. Some State-Polititians might have insinuated themselves into Daniell, and perswaded him to remit and abate a little of his Devotions, though for 30 days; but sinful compliance is abominable, though but for a moment. Daniel prayed three times, as he was wont, notwitstand∣ing all bloody Edicts against him. Be then well resolved: Is this thing I am commanded to do, a sin or no? Is it agreeable to the rule of the Word? Can I do it with a good conscience? Thus Cate∣chize thy self before thou venturest upon any thing: And do no∣thing
doubtfully, for what is done doubtfully is not done believing∣ly; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. 6. We may not follow a multitude to do evil: For though hand Prop. 6. We may not follow a multi∣tude to do evil. Exod. 23. 2. . Pythag. joyn in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished: Multitudes, pow∣er, fear of men, cannot be a sufficient Apology for me: Mens ex∣amples are no warrant for my imitation, for I am to walk by the rule of the Word, not by the examples of men. Pythagoras hath a say∣ing, Walk not in the rode. Beasts follow the heard, Non quà cun∣dum est: sed qua itur, (as Seneca observes) Those that are Compa∣nions of Fools, shall be destroyed. Let us not bless our selves, be∣cause we walk in beaten rodes, and follow multitudes, as if this was our commendation. Eliah was better alone, then if he had joyn∣ed with Baals Priests. Luther was better alone, then if he had joyned Unus homo solus totius orbis impe∣tum sustinuit. with the Popish party. It's said of Luther, That he was the man alone that bore the violence of the whole world. Athanasius was better alone, then if he had joyned with a multitude of blasphemous Ar∣rians. And Epaminondas was better alone, then if he had joyned Praestat solus sapere quam cum multis insanire. Epamin. Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus. with multitudes of drunken Thebans: The rule that he gives, was, It's better to be wise alone, then mad with a multitude. If thou beest sin∣gular in right ways, thou art not alone: Never less alone, then when alone; for thou hast a good God, a good Cause, and a good Con∣science, and he that hath these, hath the best Company. 7. Christians ought to believe God upon his word: All his Promises Prop. 7. We must be∣lieve God upon his Word. 2 Cor. 1. 20. in Christ are Yea, and Amen. Not the least tittle of the Word of God shall fail: The Lord would suffer none of Samuels, much lesse will he suffer any of his own words to fall to the ground: All the promises for the building of Zion shall be accomplished, and all threatning Menaces against Babylon shall be accomplished: Babylons ruine will make way for Zions raising: There shall be a joyful word among the Nations: Babylon is fallen, Amen, Allelujah: Whatever promises are made for the Church, shall come to pass in their ap∣pointed season. The Prophet Isaiah complains, There is a crying for Isa. 24. 11, 12. wine in the streets, all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone: In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction: But Dan. 9. 25. let's read the Prophecy of Daniel, Know therefore, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks; and threescore and two weeks the street shall be built again, and the wall even in troublous times: In streits of times, God hath promised to build his Church: Hath not
God said, That the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church? Hath not he said to his Ministers, that he is their portion, he will be Matth. 28. 20. with them to the end of the world? Now if God be for us, who can be against us? If God speak peace, who can speak trouble. Lets in the eighth and last place, in dark Visions and troublesome Prop. 8. We must wait pariently upon God. Times wait quietly upon God. Though passages of Providence are so intricate, like a wheel in the middle of a wheel; and our miseries are revived, and the end of our trouble we may fear is like to be the be∣ginning of another: Yet let us wait upon God, stand still & be silent: He that hurts us can heal us. And a Reverend Divine said long ago of England, That God would break us to pieces, and then set us together Mr. Davenport. again. We are all a rebellious people, and our provocations are ma∣ny in all sorts and ranks of men, even Magistracy, Ministry, People. God is doing great things, putting us into the Furnace; and if from thence we come forth as Gold, we shall be gainers by all our trou∣bles: Let us then, in a reverential way, demean our selves and wait upon God in his various dispensations. And if you demand, how must we wait? I shall shew you in the third Use, which now comes to be applyed, and that's for Di∣rection. This onely rule I shall lay down for a satisfactory Answer: That Use 3. For Direction. we ought to wait upoa God in the use of all good means. But what are those means which are joyned with waiting? They are these following. 1. We must wait and pray: Never more need of praying, of Means 1. We must wait and pray. Isa. 26. 16, 20. wrestling, of tugging hard at the Ore: This God looks for, and his people have practiced: Lord, in trouble have they visited thee: they poured out a Prayer, when thy chastning was upon them. Come my people, enter thou into thy hambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self, as it were, for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past: We are in an afflicted condition, and the counsel of the Apostle is, Is any a∣mong you afflicted, let him pray: We are sick and wounded: The same James. 5. 13. Apostle prescribes, Confess your faults one unto another, and pray one James 5. 16. for another, that ye may be healed: the effectual fervent prayer of a righ∣teous man availeth much. There's a dreadful tempest, the ship is a sinking, we had need be awakened and cry unto God; we had need pray, Lord save us, or else we perish. This God expects: Thus saith Ezek. 36. 37. the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them: I will increase them with men like a flock. This duty of
Prayer hath a commanding vertue: The expression is very high, Thus Isa. 45. 11. saith the Lord, the holy One of Israel, and his Maker, ask me of things to come concerning my sons; and concerning the works of my hands com∣mand ye me. This is Solomons Pharmachum Catholicum, even a Medi∣cine for all diseases: O pray! pray, rowl your selves in the dust; you deal for a Kingdom, you deal for the Church, the Gospel, and its Ordinances, for the lives of millions; pray then in good earnest, and joyn fasting with waiting. Antichrist is a strong Devil; this kinde goeth not out but by fasting and prayer. 2. Wait and study the Scriptures: Affliction (saith Luther) makes us Means 2. Wait, and stu∣dy the Scrip∣tures. understand Scripture, we understand now what is meant by confusion and desolation. Compare the times of Habakkuk with our times; and they come very near; they answer one another, as face answereth to face: Such a dark vision is now, as was then. Let us study and search whether the Witnesses be slain or no: If they be slain, then we may expect glorious times, if not, worse are to be looked for. As far as I can apprehend, by comparing Scripture with Scripture (though it's difficult to determine) by the Witnesses, are meant the Magistracy and Ministry. Compare Rev. 11. 4. with Zech. 4. 3. and 14. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth: So in the Revelations: And in Zechary we read, And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the o∣ther upon the left side thereof: Then said he, these are the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the whole earth: I determine nothing in this doubtful case, but the great contempt cast upon both Magistra∣cy and Ministry, (and greater yet is to be feared) even throughout all Kingdoms, makes it probable, that the time of their slaughter draweth nigh. We may not be over-curious in fixing particular times, lest we incur the same check for our curiosity as they did: It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put Acts 1. 7. in his own power. 3. Wait upon God in his Ordinances: Yet you have them, and Means 3. Wait upon God in his Ordi∣nances. Isa. 30. 20. blessed be God, vve yet have a nail left us in the publick Assembly: That Prophecy is made good, That though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction; yet shall not thy teachers be re∣moved into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers: Yet we have a publick Vision: The voice of the Turtle is yet heard in our Land: Let's wait at these Bethesdah's, at the Posts of Wisdoms Gate: we should mourn for the great contempt that is cast upon
Ordinances, and because others slight them, we our selves should learn to esteem them highly, frequent them diligently, and pray that God would teach us to profit by them. The Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Meditations, Conference, are advantagious Ordinances, even the food of our souls: Take away meat and drink, and you starve the Body: Take away Ordinances, and you slarve the Soul. Wait, and treasure up your experiences: Review and call to Means 4. Wait and trea∣sure up your experiences. minde the mercies of old, what God hath done for you in former times: Thou hast known a Famine, God hath provided for thee then: Thou hast been in great straits and dangers, and God hath delivered thee at that time: Thou hast been at the Graves mouth, and a sentence of death seemed to pass against thee, God hath re∣stored thee to tell his Praises, and to bless his Name: Thou hast known Troubles, Tumults, and Commotions in the Kingdom, and God hath quieted and composed them. Thus then argue, God is the same God, he is in Heaven still, and doth whatsoever he plea∣seth; he is as willing, as able, as merciful as ever: He sets bounds to the Seas, and stills the raging of the people: He is not changed with the change of time: Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: Though we are out of order, yet his Covenant Heb. 13. 8. 2 Sam. 2. 5. is ordered: Though we are transient, yet his Covenant is everlast∣ing. Wait in the right season: Now is the season perilous, and a time Means 5. Wait in the right season. of waiting: Times of afflictions are waiting times: When all seem against thee, and thou canst not tell how to conclude from such premises, as were unheard of before: Now wait, and be silent: Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised out of his holy Zech. 2. 13. habitation: Be far from murmurings and responsations against God. Thou must wait upon God in the way of his Judgements; yea, in Isa. 26. 8. the way of thy Judgements, O Lord, have we waited for thee: The desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. Sixthly and lastly, Joyn reformation with waiting: I press not Means 6. Joyn reformat∣on with watch∣ing. all this while a lazy, idle waiting, a folding thy hands in thy bosom, but a working waiting: Wait and purge thy conscience: Trim up thy soul for the entertainment of Jesus Christ. God will not come into a Cage of unclean Birds. The soul must be purified. Mercy follows Reformation at the heels. Deliverance followeth Reforma∣tion. Many days of Humiliation we have had, and when one is done, we had need have another to bewail the failings of the for∣mer:
So that many harvests are past, and many Summers ended, and we are not saved. But if there was one day of through Refor∣mation, the business would be done, God would be intreated for the Land: We may justly fear, that the Commission given to the Sword is not yet called back; but God will send it again to avenge the Jer. 6. 8. quarrel of a broken Covenant: My advice from God to you is, Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, lest I make the Amos 4. 12. desolate, and a land not inhabited: Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel! and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel! Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, O nation not Zeph. 2. 1, 2. 3. desired! before the Decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, be∣fore the fierce anger of the Lord come upon yoú, before the day of the Lords anger come upon you: Seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgement; seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. And for a close of all, The last Use is a Word of comfort to a wait∣ing use 4. For Consola∣tion. people: Mercy will be the portion of a waiting & believing peo∣ple: And when it comes, it will be good measure, full press'd, and running over: It will abundantly make amends for all thy waiting for it: Oh then, confirm the weak hands, and strengthen the fee∣ble knees! Learn to live by Faith in dying times: Whatever thou loosest, whether voluntarily or compulsorily, let not go thy Faith: Wait patiently and silently under dark Visions, at the end the Vision shall speak and not lie. God is a God of Infallibility and Eternall truth, and will not falsifie his promises. Though it tarry, and thou hast waited long; yet wait a little longer, it shall come and will not tarry. And it will be an exceeding comfort to the Saints, when af∣ter long waiting for a mercy, they can say by happy experience, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoyce in his sal∣vation. Isa. 25. 9.
Establishment of Justice. Vnfolded in an Assise Sermon Preacht at St. Mary's, OXON. Upon Amos 5. 15. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgement in the gate; It may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph. AS in Water face answereth face: So the Text suits Serm. 7. At St. Mary's Oxon. March 1. 1649. with the solemnity of the day. It is a word in due season, which I am resolved () without fear or flattery to apply particu∣larly to your consciences, as a word both sea∣sonably to be Preacht, and profitably to be learnt: The Lord make it as profitable to you, as it is seasonable for you. My Prophet Amos, was one of those Prophets, which we call the lesser Prophets; not of less esteem for his person, or matter which he Prophesied, then the others; but less in quantity and bulk, having reduced a great deal of choice matter into a narrower compass: He Prophesied before Israels transportation into Babyln: He was an Herdsman of Tekoah, chap. 1. ver. 1. furnished with a Prophetical Spi∣rit, and commissionated by God for so high an employment, v. 3. He Prophesied in a time of monstrous Impieties and severe Judge∣ments: He lived in the days of Ʋzziah, and you may read of his horrid attempt in invading the Priests Office, and the Judgement written in legible Characters in his Leprous orehead: And they
withstood Ʋzziah the King, and said unto him, It prtaineth not unto 2 Chro. 26. 18, 19. thee, Ʋzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord: but unto the Priests, the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: Goe our of the san∣cluary, for thou hast trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. Then Ʋzziah was wroth, and had a Conser in his hand to burn incense; and while he was wrath with the Priests, the leprosie even rose up in his forehead before the Priests, in the house of the Lord, from besides the incense altar. Some particular impieties and reigning abominacions were, 1. I∣dolatry. 1. Idolatry. Idolatry was so continually practiced, as by way of Irony, the Lord seems to invite them to heap up the full measure of their sins: Come to Bethel, and transgress at Gilgal, multiply transgressions; Amos 4. 4. Hoc est cumulare selera sceleri∣bus. Calv. in Loc 2. Vnmerci∣fulness. Amos 1. 9. and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after three years. A second sin was unmercisulness, want of bowels of compassion: Thus saith the Lord, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for fur, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembred not the brothrly Cove∣nant. A third sin was Oppression: Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that 3. Oppression. Amos. 4. 1. are in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy; which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink. And violence is another sin of the same litter: Ye that put far the Amos 6. 3. evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near. A fourth sin is Injustice and Bribery, I couple them together, like 4. Iujustice and Bribery. Amos 5. 7, 12. to like: Ye that turn Judgement to wormwood, and leave off righ∣teousness in the earth: For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: They afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their right. A fifth sin is Luxury and Jovialty: That chaunt to the sound of the Violl, and invent to themselves Instruments of Musick, like David: 5. Luxury. Amos 6. 5, 6. That drinke Wine in Bowlls, and anoint themselves with the chief Oyntments: But they are not grieved for the affliction of Jo∣seph. A sixth is Pride: Now Judgements are the unhappy issue which 6. Pride. sin brings forth. Each word is a Thunder-bolt, Amos 9. 8, 9. Be∣hold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinfull kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth, saving that I will not utterly de∣stroy
the house of Jacob, saith the Lord: For lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among the nations, like as corn is fifted in a sieve: yt shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. And particular Judgements are threatned suitable to their sinnes. As, 1. Famine: I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your 1. Amos 4. 6. cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have you not returned unto me, saith the Lord. There's the punishment of Luxury. 2. Mildew and Blasting: I have smitten you with blasting and mil∣dew, 2. Amos 4. 9. when your gardens, and your vineyards, and your fig-trees, and your olive-trees increased, the palmer-worm devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord: There's another punishment of Luxu∣ry and Intemperance. A third punishment is Pestilence: I have sent among you the Pesti∣lence, after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the 3. Amos 4. 10. sword▪ and have token away your horses, and I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nstrils: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord: So that the Pestilence and the Sword accompany each other. And wherefore are the Sword and Pestilence sent? See Levit. 26.  25. I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant: and when ye are gathered together in your cities, I will send the Pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. And the Sword is a punishment of their Pride, Amos 6, 7. Now therefore they shall go captive with the first that go captive, and the ban∣quet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed: Likewise the Sword is sent for a punishment. And for Phantastical Fashions, Isa. 3. 25. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war. A fifth Judgement is Famine, and this is for contempt of the Word: Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in 5. Amos 8. 11. the Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of the hearing the word of the Lord. A sixth Judgement is the enseebling of their strength, and weak∣ning of their forces: Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed 6. Amos 2. 13, 14. 15. that is full of sheaves: therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver himself: neither shall he stand that handleth the bw; and he that is swift
of foot shall not deliver himselfe: neither shall hee that rideth the horse deliver himself. When any abuse their strength and power, God will enfeeble it. This counsel is commended to our practice, Jer. 9. 23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdome, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches. You have by what hath been sayd a tast of bitter fruites, some sinnes and judgments set forth in their proper colours. In Israels glass England may see her face. The same evils of sinne are rise among us; and in part the same evils of punishment have already befallen us, and the rest hang over our heads and will fall heavie upon us, unless mercy speedily interpose. Now amidst varieties of wounds, and sores, and heavy judg∣ments the Prophet prescribes a soveraigne remedie: hee addresseth himselfe to divine exhortations, and counsels: One is Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus will I doe unto thee, O Israel: and because I will doe this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Another which be∣gins Si vobis animus est ad Deum re∣verti, jam abji∣cite omnes ve∣stras superstitio∣nes. Calv. in Loc. Amos. 5. 4: is continued vers. 5. 6, 14. Thus saith the Lord, seek yee mee and ye shall live. But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal and pass not to Beersheba: for Gilgal shall surely goe into captivity, and Bethel shall come to nought. Seek yee the Lord and yee shall live, &c. Now if the question be askt, wherein doth seeking of God con∣sist? A. In the former verses wee read of injustice, vers. 7. They turne judgment to wormewood, and leave off righteousness: and of bri∣bery and cruelty, v. 12. They afflict the just, they take a bribe. In∣somuch that the prudent man is amazed and stands admiring in a stupendious reverential silence. He dares not revile instruments and murmur at the Providence of God, v. 3. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time: for it is an evill time. Q. Now whats to be done? what particular remedy is to bee prescribed sutable to the disease? A. My text makes discovery hereof, and informes you what's the most effectual remedy to heale a wounded Kingdome, in the words of the Text. Hate the evil, and love the good, &c. The wordes represent unto you an excellent Medicine and the sin∣gular virtue thereof. The medicine is made up of three particular Ingredients. Text divided. 1. Hate the evill: There's the affection of hatred. 2. Love the good: There's the affection of love.
3. Establish judgment in the gate: There's the exercise of distri∣butive Justice. 2. For the virtue, it's soveraign, effectual to appease the wrath of God, to smooth his brow: So it follows: It may be the Lord God of hosts will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph. I shall briefly open the words and draw forth one doctrine, which, I shall lay down for the ground-worke of my ensuing meditations. Here by evill, wee are to understand the evill of sinne, oppression, violence, Idolatry, pride, mentioned in this prophesie, and in a large acceptation, under this word all manner of sin is forbidden. Sinne is the greatest evill; and this ought to be the object of our indignation. What God hates, wee ought to hate. Now as God hates sin; so should wee with a perfect hatred abhor & hate every evil way. By good is meant the right way, the way of holiness and virtue. Mr Calvin takes notice of the order, first to hate sinne, then to love that which is good, and he conceives the scope of the Prophet to bee this, that the Israelites should become new men: and by a Synedoch, Repentance is described in the whole worke from these two parts, in hating evill and loving that which is good. And because there was abundance of corruption and injustice in their gates, in an especiall manner hee inculcates the execution of justice, And establish judgment in the gate: you have turned judg∣ment into gall, and hemlock, and by your neglect of justice have provoked God to high displeasure against you. Now labour to pa∣cifie him by the impartiall execution of Justice. It was the custom of Judges to keep their courts of judicature near the gates of the City: so v. 10. They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly, Isai: 29. 21: that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turne aside the just for a thing of nought. Hereupon followes a strong ground of Incouragement. It may bee the Lord, &c: hee could not determine absolutely, hee knew not the decree, whether an irreversible sentence had passed against them. See a notwithstanding mentioned after a signal Reformation, 2 King. 23. 25, 26. And like unto him was no King before him that turned unto the Lord with all his heart, with all his soule and with all his might. Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, be∣cause of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withall.
But upon probable conjecturall hopes hee encourageth them; God hath been very gracious to a penitent people formerly, God was gra∣cious to Manasseh, Niniveh, Paul, Mary-magdalen, & others repenting. Upon these experiences an afflicted remnant may conclude that God will be gracious unto them. See Jol. 2. 12. 13, 14. Therefore now thus saith the Lord, turne yee even to mee with all your heart, and with fasting, weeping and mourning: And rent your heart? and not your gar∣ments, and turne unto the Lord your God: for hee is gracious and mr∣cifull, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and rpnteth him of the e∣vill. Who knoweth if hee will returne and repent and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat offering unto the Lord your God? Wee read in Scripture of the afflictions of Joseph, as a proverbial spech, alluding to Joseph the Patriarch, who met with evill intreaties from his brethren, and from Potiphars wise, hee was cast into a pit, bought and sold, slandred, cast into prison: and the house of Joseph, his posterity, and not only his proper natural posterity: but all the children of God must through many tribulations enter into the King∣dme of God, Act. 14. 22. That the whole house of Joseph, that all the generation of men is not utterly consumed is a great mercy, wee have cause to acknow∣ledge it with thankfulness that there is a remnant yet left. Now a through reformation, a turning from sinne to God, a ha∣ting that which is evill, a loving that which is good, an establish∣ment of Justice may much prevaile with God to bee gracious to an afflicted remnant. Though the number of the Church be few, though Jacob bee small, and Joseph bee but a remnant, yet many promises are made to a remnant, Isai. 10. 21. The remnant shall returne, even the remnant of Jacob unto the mighty God, Jeremiah 15. 11. The Lord said, verily it shall bee well with thy remnant, verily I will cause the enemie to intreat thee well in the time of e∣vill, and in the time of affliction, Ezek: 6. 8: Yet will I leave a remnant, that yee may have some that shall escape the sword among the Nations, when yee shall bee scattered through the countries, Eph 3. 12, 13. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poore people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. The remnant of Israel shall not doe iniquitie, nor speak lies, nither shall a deceitfull tongue bee found in thir mouth: for they shall feed and lay downe and none shall make thm afraid. Rom. 9. 27. Though the number of the children of Is∣rael bee as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved. And for the
remnant we must pray, Isay. 37. 4. It may be the Lord thy God will heare the words of Rabshakeh, whom the King of Assyriah his master hath sent to reproach the living God and will rprove the words which the Lord thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left, Jer. 31. 7. For thus saith the Lord, sing with gladnesse for Jacob, and shout among the chiefe of the Nations: publish yee, praise ye and say, O Lord, save thy people, the remnant of Israel. So then you may plainly discerne the summe and substance of these words. That which they drive at is to ingage people to a through reformation as the only means to pacifie an incensed God. Iudgments fall round about us thick, and threefold: many have been numbred out to the sword, many to famine and pestilence: Let the remnant lay these things to heart: Let them humble themselves, turne from the evill of their doings, cease to doe evill, learne to doe well, execute judgment and Justice, and it may be God may turne againe and repent, and be gra∣cious to the remnant of the house of Joseph. The words thus divided and opened, commend these principall  Doctrines to your serious Practicall Observation: That sinne alone ought to be the Object of our hatred and indignation: So saith the Psal∣mist: Ye that love the Lord hate evill: Psal. 97. 10. And the feare of God consists in hating of evill. The feare of the Lord is to hate evill: Prov. 8. 13. pride, and arrogancie, and the evill way, and the froward mouth do I hate. You have a short Catalogue of what things God hates in Prov. 6. 16. These six things doth the Lord hate: yea seven things are an abomination to him, a proud looke, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, a heart that deviseth wicked imaginations; feet that be swift in running to mischiefe: a false witnesse that speaketh lies, and him that soweth discord among brethren. Nay further whatsoever is sinfull God hates: and where God hates we should hate. 2. That which is good ought only to be the object of our love. It's a  character of the wicked, Amos 3. 2. to hate the good, and love the evill. Holinesse hath Gods Image stamped upon it, and we must love God's Image where ever we find it. God requires publick establishment of Justice in a Kingdome. It's said in the gates where people went in and out: There ministers of Iu∣stice  sate and the eyes of the whole land were upon them, and in an especiall manner the eyes of God. Iustice must not be dispensed in a scantling measure, here and there a drop: but judgmnt must run down as waters, and righteousnesse as a mighty streame, Amos 5. 24.
4. In that there is such a connexion between these words, hate  Deut. 5. 17, 18, 19. the evill and doe good and establish judgment, hence observe, In religious duties there is a sacred concatenation and harmonie, It's observed that all the commands of the Decalogue are copulative. Thou shalt not kill; neither shalt thou commit adulterie: neither shalt thou steal: neither shalt thou beare false witnesse, &c. The same God that inga∣geth us to the obedience of one Command, doth not dispense with us or give any exception for any other. 5. The people of God, his Josephs may be reduced to a very small rem∣nant. So they were in the Babilonish captivitie; but 7000 that had  not bowed their knees to Baal, and whether all these were upright hearted is doubtfull: The primitive Christians in times of persecu∣tion were but a handfull, a despised remnant in the eyes of the world. And in the Arke which was a type of Christ there were but eight per∣sons, and Cham was one of them: In Christ's own familie but twelve and one of them a Judas. 6. Observe, That the reformation of a people, in hating evill and  loving good may prevaile with God to extend mercy and compassion to∣wards them. It shall suffice only to have named these unto you. It concernes mee to fix upon the establishment of judgment, which the Text spe∣cially points at; and the aspect of, a Venerable Iudicature in pre∣sence puts me in mind of that point of Doctrine which is genuine from the text and most seasonable to the Auditorie. Thus I pro∣pound it to you. That the faithfull execution of Justice in a land is a probable meanes to move God to extend mercy, compassion and deliverance to them. Method pro∣pounded. In handling of this precious point I shall thus dispose of my Method. 1. To give in a full proofe from Scripture asserting the truth. 2. Contribute some reasons, confirming the same. 3. Represent the manner how justice must be executed. This shall be by way of Direction. 4. And fourthly conclude with a word of exhortation, and so presse closely the duty of the Text, the establishment of Iustice, and 1. The Doct∣rine proved. this shall be my particular application. I resume what I first propounded, to assert the truth of the point. See Jer. 5. 1. Run ye to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem and see now and know and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be
any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth, and I will pardon it. So Ier. 7. 5, 6, 7. for if you thorowly amend your waies and your doings, if you thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his nighbour; if ye oppresse not the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the widow. and shed not innocent blood in this place: nither walke after other Gods to your hurt, then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land which I gave unto your fathers for ever and ever. So Isaiah 1. 17, 18. Learne to doe well, seeke Juâgment, relieve the oppressed, judg the fatherlesse, plad for the widdow: come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool, Prov. 29. 4. The King by judgment stabli∣sheth the land: but he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it. In these and sundry other places God promiseth a blessing upon the executi∣on of justice. Il'e single out particular instances, that what's asserted may be cleared more evidently. When Israel committed both spirituall and corporall whoredome with the daughters of Moab (for commonly they goe both together, the greatest Idolaters, the greatest whoremongers, witnesse the Ba∣bylonish strumpet at this day) Now nothing will appease Gods in∣censed wrath besides the execution of justice upon the Idolaters. The Lord said unto Moses, take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may Num. 25. 4. 5 be turned away from Israel. And when Moses and the congregation were consulting, Phineas stands up and falls a doing Iustice: When Phineas the sonne of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest saw it, he rose up from among the congregation and tooke a javelin in his hand, and he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them thorough, the man of Israel and the woman thorough her belly. So the Plague was stayed from the Children of Israel. Here's a patterne of singular zeale, a man of heroicall courage, all steele to the back. Compare this with Psal. 106. 30. Then stood up Phineas and executed judgment and so the Plague was stayed. And you may read the ample reward, Numb. 25. 10, 11, 12. The Lord spake unto Moses saying, Phineas the sonne of Eleazar hath turned away my wrath from the Children of Israel, (while he was zealous for my sake among them) that I consumed them not in my jelousie; wherefore say, behold I give unto him my covenant of peace. Moses likewise was a man of the same stamp; Though in his own cause the meekest: yet a man of invincible courage in the cause of
God. When he was in the mount, Aaron makes them a golden calfe; the people commit Idolatrie with it: the Lord is highly in∣censed, Moses intercedes for them, Exodus 3. 11. Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hst brought forth out of the Land of Aegipt, with great pow∣er and with a mightie hand? He brake the tables vers. 19. as sone as he came nigh unto the Camp that he saw the calfe and the dancing, his anger waxed hot and he cast the Tables out of his hands and brake thm beneath the mount. He burnes the calfe to powdr, strewes it upn the water and makes the Children of Israel to drink of it, vers. 20. exe∣cutes judgment. vers. 26, 27, 28. Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me. And all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves unto him, and he said unto them, put every man his sword by his side and goe in and out from gate to gate thorowout the camp, and slay every man his bro∣ther and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour. And the Children of Levi did accordingly. Compare this with Psal. 106. 23. Therefore he said that he would destroy them had not Moses his cho∣sen stood before him in the brach, &c. Whilst the camp was pestered with an Achan, Israel could not stand before their enemies. But as soon as Achan was executed, the valley of Achor became a doore of hope, Hos. 2. 14. As long as Jonah was in the ship the storme continued: but as soone as he was cast over shipbord there was a great calme, Jonah. 1. 15. Agag was hewed in pieces by Samuel. Baals prophets were slain by Elijah. Thus David executed judgment upon the Gibo∣nites enemies retaliating their mischiefes upon their own pates, 2 Sam. 21. 1, 6, 9. There was a famine in the dayes of David for three yeares, and David enquired of the Lord. And the Lord answered, it is for Saul; and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites. vers. 6. Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us and we will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did chuse. And the King said, I will give them. vers. 9. And he delivered them into the hands of the Gi∣beonites and they hanged them in the hill before the Lord. And see the good successe vers. 14. And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his sonn buried they in the countrey of Benjamin in Zelah, in the Sepulchre of Kish his Father, and they performed all that the King commanded, and after that God was intreated for the Land. You see how just David was in executing justice upon those that slew his enemies, 2 Sam. 1. 15. David cald one of the young men and said, go neer and fall upon him. And he smote him, that he died. So 2 Sam. 4. 12. he commanded his
young men, and they slew them and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up in the poole of Hebron. Amaziah slew those that slow his Father Ioash, 2 Kings 14. 5, 6. The people of the Land slew those that conspired against Amon, 2 Kings 21. 24. I might produce for illustration many examples out of humane Authours, as that of Zeleucus to his sonne in putting out his eye for Adulterie, and such like: But I will not light a candle to the sun. I keep close to Scripture proofes, I need not range in any other felds. In the second place, Ile give in some Scripture Reasons for con∣firmation of the point. 2. Reas. 1. From the ex∣cellency of ju∣stice. The sirst reason shall be drawn from the excellencie of Iustice. And this will appeare in these particular respects. It derives its Originall from God. Iustice is a communicable At∣tribute flowing from the fountaine to the streams, and government which is that master-wheel to set the motions of Iustice in due or∣der  receives prime honour and excellencie from divine Institution. By me Kings raigne, and princes decree justice; by me Princes rule, and nobles, even all the Judges of the earth, Prov. 1. 15. 16. There's a jus divinum to warrant your honourable calling. Iustice is excellent in respect of that incomparable superexcellent  price paid to make satisfaction to it and that was the blood of Iesus Christ. It's true, that mercy is God's delight, It's above all his workes: mercy is swift pac'd; Iustice is slow pac'd, its chariot wheels drive heavilie. God was walking in the garden, when he went to passe sentence on Adam: But he ranne to meet the Prodigall: here's a walking in point of judgment: but a running in point of mercy. Yet notwithstanding Iustice will be no looser. Mercy, Iustice, power, goodnesse, obiquitie, &c. are diversly according to our capa∣cities apprehended by us: yet they are all one in God. As God is mercifull: so he is just: Iustice must be satisfied per se aut per alium. Per se no man can, it must be done per alium, by a suretie. See Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword, against my shephard, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts, smite the shephard, and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turne mine hand upon the little ones. No lesse price was paid to satisfie Divine justice then the effusion of the precious blood of the sonne of God, one drop whereof is of infinite dignitie, price and value. The excellencie of Iustice appeares in respect of its excellent effects
and operations. Iustice is the basis and supporter of the state. Le∣est corporis Politici nervus. The great body of states would be pa∣ralitick and in a paroxisme, and there would be a dissolution of the continuum, if the sinewes of Justice should faile. To justice under God we owe our lives, liberties, lively-hoods. We could not sleep quietly in our beds for feare of massacres and robberies, if lawes were not in force and the current of Iustice should be damnd up. Iustice may be compared to the stakes of a strong hedge to keepe it from falling. And a Iudg is a quick-set-hedg to keep off incur∣sions into anothers Peculiar. Iustice is the preserver of meum & tu∣um. It's the life of our societie, the bulwarke and buttresse of our safetie; the fort-royall and strength of our Garrisons. Should justice cease, and there should be no reprover in the gate, we should be resolved into an Anarchy, a Chaos, a confusion, and destruction. We should be  homo homini lupus, nay, homo homini Daemon. By the execution of Iustice, Government, Magistracie, Iudicatures, those strong walls of a Kingdome remaine impregnable. Religion, learning, trades, traffiques, lawes, arts and scienss thrive and shelter themselves under the wings of government, executing Judgment and justice. Reas. 2. From the Ne∣cessity of esta∣blishing justice The second reason shall be drawn from the apparent necessitie of establishing judgment and justice. The necessitie is indispensible, whether there be considered Necessitas Paecepti vel Medii. For the first  how frequently doth the Lord call for execution of Iustice? It's that which must be sought after, Isay 1. 17. Learne to do well: seek judgment: relieve the oppressed; judg the fatherlesse: plead for the widdow. It must be kept: Isay 56. 1. Thus saith the Lord: Keep ye judgment and dot justice: for my salvation is neere to come, and my righteousnesse to be revealed. It must not be executed as a male∣factour, thats a persecution, not execution. Iustice is executed upon delinquents, not upon it selfe, Zech. 7. 9. Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts, saying: execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compassion every man to his brother. So Zech. 8. 16. These are the things that ye shall do; speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; executo the judgment of truth and peace in your gates. Its promised as a mercy, Isay 28. 6. And for a spirit of Judgment to him that sitteth in judgment; and for strength to them that turne the battell to gte. Its an argument of Gods love to a people, I Kings 10. 9. Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighteth in thee to set thee on the Throne of Israel; because the
Lord loved Israel for ever: therefore made he thee King to doe judgment and justice. It's that which hath God's approbation, Micah. 6. 8. He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to doe justly and love mercy and to walke humbly with thy God? Its that which God loveth, Psal. 33. 5. He loveth righteous∣nesse and judgment: the earth is full of the goodnesse of the Lord. It's that which in an especiall manner God commands, Deut. 16. 18. Judges and Officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates which the Lord thy God giveth thee thorowout thy tribes; and they shall judge the people with just Judgment. There's another jus divirum for your authori∣tie. And Justice is that which God rewards, Isai. 33. 15. 16. He that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly, he that despiseth the gaine of oppressions, and shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his eares from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing of evill; he shall dwell on high; his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks; bread shall be given him; his water shall be sure. So Jer. 22. 15. shalt thou raigne because thou cloathest thy selfe in Cdar? did not thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? Justice is necessary, necessitate medii. A godly Magistrate dis∣pensing justice and judgment reconciles meum & tuum, those two wrangling pronounes, which are those Phaetons and grand incendi∣aries that set the whole world in a combustion. Terminus was so much set by among the Romans that they paid homage to it tanquam Numini tutolari: Without any tang of or compliance with their Idola∣try, we may safely say, that the law is the Boundary of a common∣wealth. Its a good sence or mound to keep off beasts of pry from making inrodes into my Severall. It's a good screne to keep off the scorchings of firy spirits, who Salamander like live in the fire of con∣tention. It's a strong bulwarke to desend a mans right from sur∣prizall by violent enemies, who lay seige and make batteries against it. The law is Terminus distingens, conservans, pacificans. The Law is Terminus distinguens. It distinguisheth one mans proprietie from anothers: all would become common (as some A∣nabaptisticall spirits would have it) and no Proprietie in goods; no man could say that any thing he possesseth were his own, were it not for the Law. Now the Law appropriates to every one his right. Its a good mark-stone, to set bounds, so far reacheth, such and such a mans right and no further. It prevents all incrochments, and
injuries; otherwise the strongest (though without right) would take all. The Law is Terminus Conservans. It preserves men in their right, that so one man may not incroach upon another. Were it not for 2. The Law is Trminus Conservans. the Law the Poore mans Acres would be soone impaled in his Lords Parke, because of it's vicinity.—Inde datae leges, ne fortior omnia posset. And hereupon a Philosopher was wont to say, Cives non minus opor∣tet pugnare pro legibus quam pro maeniis. We must fight for our Lawes rather then for our walls: for it's possible for a cittie to be safe without walls: but not without Lawes. 3. The Law is Terminus Pacificans. The Law is Terminus pacificans, that which prevents controver∣sies and preserves peace. Next to our religion we should stand for the fundamentall lawes of our Nation. Warre is occasioned for the breach of Lawes. The Parliament of England, I am perswaded, (as may appeare from their writings) had never drawn the sword at first, were it not for the defence of Religion and the Lawes of the Kingdome, (which they solemnly covenanted to maintaine) which were trampled under foot by a Malignant party. Now peace should be in the eye of them that goe to law, whom the weightinesse of the matter constraines to such a remedie; though it sadly and fre∣quently fall out, Quod primum in intentione est ultimum in executione. Reas. 3. From the Mischiefe of Injustice. The third and last reason shall be Causa à contrario, drawn from the mischiefe of injustice and the sad consequences thereof. Con∣traries (we say) illustrate one another: And of contraries there are contrary consequences. As where Government flourisheth, and good lawes are put in execution, there's Terminus distinguns, conservans, pacificans, mens proprieties are distinguished, preserved, and peaceably injoyed: So on the contrarie, where's Anarchy and licentiousnesse, every mans humour is his Law; Quod libet, licet, Theres no bound set to distinguish and segregate between mine and thine, no safetie, no peaceable injoying of any thing As soone as the Hedg of the Law is broken down and the bounds removed, the common-wealth proves like a Forrest, wherein wild beasts of prey devoure one another; the stronger the weaker, or like a great Fish pond, where the great fishes devoure the lesser. If the Law help not, might will prevaile above right: and people will be tram∣pled under feet by Tyrants who like those blustring ancient Giants made people to fall before them. For want of Magistracy you read the lamentable Catastrophe of the people of Laish, Judg. 18. 7, 27.
Then the five men departed and came to Laish, and saw the people that were therein how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet, and secure, and there was no Magistrate in the Land that might put them to shame in any thing, ver. 27. And they came unto Laish, un∣to a people that were secure, and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the City with fire. You read of the Children of Dan's robbing Micha, and he durst not speak for fear that angry fel∣lows should fall upon him. You read of the men of Gibeah's horrible abuse towards the Levites Concubine: And the Spirit of God re∣mindes us of one and the self-same reason, in Judg. 19. 1. It came to pass in those days when there was no King in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took unto him a concubine, one of Beth-lehem Judah, Judg. 21. 25. In those days there was no King in Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes: The want of Magistracy occasioned all those Outra∣ges. But I proceed to the third Head propounded; How must Justice 3 Head. How must Ju∣stice be execu∣ted. be executed? Two things I intend to open to you. 1. What manner of person he must be, & how qualified, that exe∣cuteth Judgements: 2. What manner and what rules a Judge ought to observe in exe∣cution of Justice. If you inquire, How must a Judge be qualified? The Scripture 1. How must a Judge be qua∣lified. leaves many Examples upon Record; some to avoid, others to fol∣low: Samuel's Sons took bribes, and perverted Judgement, 1 Sam. 8. 3. Corrupt Judges swim through Pactolus, and land at the back stairs, as if they had the yellow Jaundice in their eyes, Gold being so much in their sight: Justice may neither be bought nor sold. Gallio was a careless Judge, let all sink or swim he's indifferent. The unjust Judge would do nothing without importunity, something at last he did through multitudes of importunate sollicitations, not out of re∣spect to Justice, but his own ease: He would not be wearied with too many supplications for Justice. Pilate condemned Christ against his conscience, to please the People, and to be accounted Cae∣sars friend: Such a Judge you ought not to be. But what a one a good Iudge should be, let him have an eye unto Davids practice, Psal. 101. 8: I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord: A Iudge should have
respect unto Samuels appeal to the people, 1 Sam. 12. 3. Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord, & bfore his anointed: whose Ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blinde mine eyes therewith and I will restore it you? It was Jobs Character, Iob 29. 14, 15, 16, 17. I put on righteousness, and it cloathed me: my Iudgement was as a Robe and a Diadem. I was eyes to the blinde, and feet was I to the lame: I was a father to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I searched out. And I brake the jaws of the wickd, and pluckt the spoil out of his teeth. Such you must be as Jethro chargeth you: And be∣cause his counsel was the Archetypum or first draught of Magistracy, for a well ordered Body Politick; this instar omnium I shall propose for an exact pattern for your imitation, Exod. 18. 21, 22. Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens: and let them judge the people at all seasons, and it shall be that every great matter they shall bring unto thee: but every small matter they shall judge; so shall it be easier for thy self, and they shall bear the burthen with thee. He must be an able man: 1. He must first be a man of judgement Qualif. I. A Judge must be an able Man. and understanding, well skilled in the Laws: He must have a spirit of discerning, to discern between right and wrong. Judges pass many years study at Inns of Court before they come to this promo∣tion: They must be men of mature age and solid parts, Learned, Grave, and Judicious 2. He must be able in respect of moderation and equanimity; able to subdue and get the mastery of his own passions, not suffer∣ing his affections to pervert judgement. Hercules Club, they say, was made of Olive Wood: There must be  and  in a Judge, he must be willing to bear and forbear the rusticity and homely delivery of Evidences from illiterate people, and stoop to the capacity of the meanest Countrey-man who comes for Iu∣stice. 3. A Iudge must be able in respect of courage: Iudges are to turn the Wheel over the Wicked, they are to encounter with Beasts of Ephesus; they must be of such a Lion-like spirit, as to pluck the prey out of the Lions mouth: Hereupon it's conceived that Judah, the Law-giving Tribe, had the Lion couchant sitting by the prey for
its Scutcheon: The Lion couchant is not afraid of any Resuer. This likewise was symboliz'd in the steps of Solomons Throne adorned with Lions. A Judge must grapple with the Hydra of sin, and op∣pose the Current of Times and Torrent of Vice; he must be of a resolved courage with Esther, If I perish I perish; and with Luther when he went to Wormes, If every tile was a Devil, yet he would goe to Wormes and preach Christ. Come what will come, a good Judge ac∣counts this Maxime like the Law of the Medes and Persians, Fiat ju∣stitia, ruat coelum. The second Qualification of a Iudge is, He must be a man fearing Qualif. 2. A Judge must be a man ea∣ing God. God, 2 Sam. 23. 3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake unto me; he that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Only a godly man is fit to be a Iudge, though I abhor that Anabaptistical Opinion Dominium temporale fundatur in gratiâ: yet I am assured that the fear of God planted in the heart of a Iudge, moves him to judge righteous judgement: This serves him as a compass to steer his acti∣ons by: And when he is tempted to pervert Iustice by great mens Letters, he sets Josephs resolution before him as a continual Monitor, How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? He will nei∣ther be threatned nor intreated, nor Courted, nor Complemented, nor Flattered, nor Over-awed to wound his Conscience by pervert∣ing Iustice: This, this it is, even the fear of God that will beautisi the soul of a Iudge. The Iudges Scarlet Robes puts a glory and lu∣stre upon the Beholders eyes; but Divine Graces make him more glo∣rious within. Such a Cloathing is of wrought Gold: If the fear of God be wanting, in a very short time judgement will be turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock: Wisdom will dege∣nerate into craft and subtilty; Power into private revenge; Valour and Courage into violence and peremptory obstinacy. Now the fear of God will set all right; if this be in the heart, it will set all right in the practice of the life. 3. A Iudge must be a man of truth: A true-hearted Nathaniel; Qualif. . A Judge must be a man of tru, no Machivilian, nor Iesuitical Politician: He must be a plain-hearted man: His heart must dictate to his tongue, and the Spirit of God dictate to his heart: He is such a Prudent Man, that his Heart ad∣deth Learning to his Lips, Prov. 16. 23. The heart of the wise teach∣eth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips: He's a Man of Integri∣ty; he speaks truth, loves truth, and searcheth every Thicket, and sifteth the matter to the bottom to finde out the truth: and it's his
care to keep men of truth about him, even such servants as are per∣sons of integrity, Psalm. 101. 7. He that worketh deceit shall not dwell in my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight. 4. A Iudge must be a man hating covetousness. Covetousness is Qualif. 4. the mother of Oppression: Bribes blinde his eyes, he dares not meddle with them: Bribes are pitch, he dares not touch them, lest he be defiled: He's afraid that his hands will wither, therefore he shakes his hands of them: He's afraid that they will prove like E∣quus Sejanus, or aurum Tholossanum, a Moth, a Canker to consume the rest of his substance, Job 15. 34. The cngregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the Tabernacles of Bribery. Cor∣rupt Iudges are Icterici, they (as was before hinted) cannot see a∣right: But an upright Iudge seeth clearly, he washeth his heart and his hands both: He dares not take a Bribe in a private Chamber, he fears lest the Timber and Stones may cry out against him: When he comethon the Bench he fixeth his eye, neither before him on the per∣son, nor about him on the Beholders, nor behind him for Bribes; but he looks upward towards God, remembring that he who sits now to judge others, shall himself be judged at a higher Tribunal by the impartial Iudge of Heaven and Earth, and there give an exact ac∣count of all his proceedings. Thus (Right Honorable) you have the Glass of Jthro set before you, wherein you may behold your own face: You have heard what manner of Persons you ought to be, who undertake this weighty Calling. 2. In the next place give me leave to set down the Rules which 2. you ought to observe in execution of Iustice. You must execute judgement speedily, yet deliberately, impartially, according to truth, regularly and compassionately. Iustice must be executed speedily: Such a charge we read, Ezra Rule. 1. Justice must be executed spee∣dily. 7. 26. Who will not do the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgement be executed speedily upon him, whether it be to Death, to Ba∣nishment, or to Consiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. English de∣lays (as some have observed) are worse then Spanish Strappado's: Let not the poor Client be tired out by tedious attendances, tossed up and down (and never a whit the nearer) from Court to Court, but let his business be dispatch'd with all convenient expedition. Un∣conscionable Lawyers deal like unconscionable Chyrurgions, who keep the Wound long in Cure for their own advantage. Non missura
cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. You that are Lawyers, doe not snarle and intangle a cause and so bring it into Mazes and Labyrinthes, but with what facility and expedition may bee, let the controversie bee decided. Bernards counsell to Eugenius may bee a good motto for the Councellour at Law: Frustratorias & vexatorias praecide dilatio∣nes. By unnecessarie delayes and tedious suites many are served by Lawyers, as the poore woman, mentioned in the Gospel was ser∣ved by Physitians. They left her uncured of her disease and po∣verty Mark. 5. 26. to boote. I have read of a Chancellour of England who in a fore-noone dispatch't all the causes brought before him, and hee askt whether there were any other causes, and they answered, no. I wish Law suits (especially Chancery suits) were ended with more expedition, lest by reason of tedious waiting, the remedy oft∣times proves worse than the disease. But secondly, Justice must notwithstanding be executed delibe∣rately. Rule. 2. Justice must be executed de∣liberately. It must not be delayed on the one side, nor rashly determi∣ned on the other side. It must be performed with mature advice and deliberation. There's Pondus Causae & Pondus Legis to be taken in to ferious consideration. Justitia licet sit coeca exequendo, tamen culata dijudicando. A Judge must not be Vir Tendius (as Lycophron men∣tions) nor must his instrument of Justice be Tenedia bipennis: making (as our Proverbe is) more haste then good speed.—Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa. If there be an Acre of ground, an Oxe or an Horse in question, Oh! what adoe is there to get an ablesuffici∣ent Jury? And surely the life of a man is more precious. Can Ignora∣musses serve for life and death? You that are concerned herein seek for sufficient men, men of conscience and understanding, take not up men that can neither write nor read, who must take all upon trust. Judgement on life and death is a serious worke, and requires prudence and deliberation. Joh. 7. 51. Doth our Law judge any man before it heare him and know what he doth?  goes before  and  before : your Commission is of Oyr and Ter∣miner: First you are to heare before you determine. Job searched out the cause which he knew not. Job. 26. 19. There must be a serious in∣quisition after the truth. The greatest paines is little enough for the investigation of the truth, and the right administration of Justice. Justice must be executed impartially. Levi must know neither Rule. 3. Justice must be executed im∣partially. father nor mother. Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica Veritas. A Judge he mustnot pervert Justice to pleasure my Lord or
my Lady, mine antient friend and acquaintance. Threats, flatteries, gold or silver may not turne him one jot out of the Bias of Justice. It's said of Fabricius, That the Sun might sooner be turned out of it's course, then he out of the course of Justice. Neither doth a just Judge favour a poore man in an unrighteous cause. Exod. 23. 3. Neither shalt thou countenance a poore man in his cause. He dares not judge for popular applause, to get himselfe a name, to be the poore mans Advocate, and so swerve from the rules of Justice. A just Judge will frequently and seriously catechise his owne conscience, and aske this question; how shall I answer this great Iudgement before the great Judge of heaven and earth? How shall I answer that charge, Levit. 19. 15. Yee shall do no unrighteousnesse in judgement: thou shalt not re∣spect the person of the poore, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousnesse shalt thou judge thy neighbour. It was a gallant speech of Worthy Mr Pym, a renowned and true hearted Patriot of his Coun∣trey. See Mr Mar∣shals Sermon at his sunerall. Such a one indeed is my good Friend, but I will never pay my pri∣vate dbts out of the publicke stocke. Iustice must be executed according to truth. Truth is of such an Rule 4. Justice must be executed ac∣cording to truth. invaluable price, as we must buy it at any rate, Prov. 22. 23. There's an heavy charge, Is. 59. 4. None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth, they trust in vanity and speake lies, they conceive mischiefe, and bring forth Iniquity, v. 14. And judgement is turned away back∣ward, and justice standeth a farre off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. You call your Iury good men and true, (I hear∣tily wish they were all so) and the witnesses must be men of truth. The ninth Commandement forbids false-witnesse-bearing. False witnesse was so abominable among the purblind Heathen that the Law of the 12. Tables ordered, That if any bore false witnesse, he should See Beards Theater of God's Judg∣ments. be tumbled downe the Tarpeian rocke. Many fearsull judgements have overtaken perjured persons. They are upon record in diverse wri∣ters, and others are sufficiently knowne by experimentall Know∣ledge, even in our dayes. Be sure, you that give evidence, that you keepe your oath to sweare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. Iustice must be executed regularly. Neither passion, nor preju∣dice, Rule 5. Justice must be executed re∣gularly. nor friendship, nor gifts, may rule, nor any unknowne arbi∣trary Law. There's a Buoy in maritime Lawes to give warning of an Anchour. There's a Pole-starre to direct the Pilot. And the Law of God and of the Land, in subordination thereunto, must rule. The
Law of God is the Archetypum. All other Lawes are but Tran∣scripts, An able Iudge is well-skill'd in the Law of God, he hath a copy of it before him. So he is charged, Josh. 1. 7. Onely be thou strong and very couragious, that thou mayest observe to doe according to all the Law which Moses my servant commanded thee: turne not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper wheresoever thou gost. And he's well skill'd in the Lawes of the Land; he needs not the Tutoring of a Clerke; he feares no contradiction of By-standers, to say, This is against Law. We read, Esth. 1. 15. What shall we doe unto the Queene Vasti according to Law, because she hath not performed the commandement of the King Ahasuerus by the Chamberlaines. So that hence it is evident, that the Law is the rule of Iudicature. Both sides are allowed a faire hearing. None may be praejudged and condemned without hearing. Thus many laid the charge as a terrible Tyranny on Richard the 2d, who first hang'd men and afterwards proceeded in a tryall against them. Qui statuit aliquid parte inaudita altera aequum licet statuerit haud aequus fierit. Iudgment is to bee given, secundum allegata & probata. And this is a regular administration of justice. 6ly, and lastly, Iustice must be executed compassionately. Rule 6. Justice must be executed compassionate∣ly. Iudges were usually Fathers and so more likely to shew compassion. A Iudges Motto is, Peccata interficio, hominem amplector King Edward the sixth wept when hee gave his consent to put Joane Butcher to death, though shee highly deserved it, as being one ofthe worst of Haereticks. An ingenuous spirit relents with teares, Ille dolet quties cogitur esse ferox. Iudgment must bee given with abundance of humanitie and commiseration. And now (Right Honorable, and the rest beloved in the Lord Iesus) give me leave for a close of the whole to apply all in a word of exhortation. Let mee divide to every one his portion. You that sit in Iudgment remember the text. Establish judgment, Ʋse for ex∣hortation. &c. Consider your Authority, in what an eminent place you are set, lay out your dignity to doe God and your Countrey good service. You are a Beacon set upon a Hill, the whole country ga∣zeth upon you. There are many eyes upon you, and if you swerve from the rule of Iustice; the people will serve you as the Levite served his Concubine; they will quarter your faults and send them up and down the Kingdome, with a was it ever thus? I commend Jehoshaphats counsell to your serious consideration, 2 Chron: 19. 6. 7. Hee said to the Judges, Take heed what you doe: for yee judge not
for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment; wherefore let the feare of the Lord bee upon you, take heed and doe it: for there is no Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. You are summoned and have a charge given you by the spi∣rit of God, Psal. 2: 10. Bee wise now therefore yee Kinges: and bee instructed yee Judges of the earth. You have the name Elohim, Psal. 82. 6. I have said yee are Gods, and all of you are children of the most high. Doe you as God would doe. Hee would relieve the oppres∣sed, acquit the innocent, condemne the nocent, stand for the poore man in a righteous cause. Hee would have Achans, Zimris, Co∣sbies, Blasphemers, Murderers, Idolaters, Adulterers punished. Remember (I humbly entreat you) that Iustice is God's Legacy and you are Executours and Administratours thereof; be carefull to have the will of God performed. I beseech your patience in a few humble requests which I shall make unto you before I conclude. I intreat you for poore Prisoners, for their soules and bodies. For To the Judges. their soules that they may have some to teach them the Knowledge of God. And for their bodies that they may not bee starved in pri∣son, & lye in a pit, wherein is no water. Prisons are oft times Nur∣series of all wickedness: and that which is a place of restraint is im∣ployed in all manner of licentious outrage: so that none are more vile, and wicked than Iaylours and their Prisoners. 2. I intreat you to incourage the faithfull ministry of the King∣dome. As for Baals or Bacchus Priests that make God's sacrifice to be abhorred, I wish an Ostracisme to them, a tumbling out of their places, (if they evidence not signall Repentance) I plead only for men pious, orthodox, learned, help them to bread, help them to bookes. If the nurse bee starved, the child will bee starved. Help them to encounter with the mighty, who refuse to pay them their dues, because they dare not give the Sacrament to them that are Scandalous, when as many times such as they refuse are fitter to go a grazing with Nebucadnezzar amongst the beasts of the field. Because some Conscientious ministers have refused to give the Sacra∣ment to drunkards, swearers and adulterers, some have detained their maintenance from them. 3. I have a word to speake in behalfe of this University. I speak to a Person of learning, my argument is, maintaine that (my Lord) which maintaines you. Wee desire no Prelaticall Pompe or domi∣nation, but only our just rights and priviledges, that Religion and learning may be countenanced by your Authority.
4. I have a word to speak for the Town. I beseech you subdue the Ale-houses, the Nurseries of the Divell. Ther's a good expe∣dient and a pious worke begun very lately, a work-house and some poore are set to worke in it. I humbly crave your incourage∣ment, and counsell that it may not be crusht in the Bud, nor sinke for want of your assistance. And you the honourable Bench, the Iustices of the County. I beseech To the ono∣ble bench. you to lay forth all your Interests to promote the Kingdome of Ie∣sus Christ. Labour to bee as so many instrumentall Saviours for your Countrey: punish swearing and blasphemies. There is an Act in the beginning of Q. Eliz: that such as maintained Heresies con∣demned by the foure Generall Counsels should be burnt to ashes You have a late Ordinance of Parliament for your warrant, nay ra∣ther the Ordinance of God, Levit. 24. 16. Hee that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely bee put to death, and all the congrega∣tion shall certainly stone him; as well the stranger, as hee that is borne in the land, when hee blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall bee put to death. Try your skill, and put forth your skill to subdue the lewd Ale∣houses. Mr Bolton said in an Assise sermon, that it was easier to take Dunkirke than put down an Ale-house. Dunkirke was not long since taken; would the Ale-houses were put downe. You must seare these Hydras, else new heads will spring up. Give not any just cause to any to complaine that the Justice sweares himselfe, and will not punish swearing; that the Justice is a good fellow himselfe and will not punish drunkenness. I hope better things of you. Purge your families; keep no swearers, drunkards, adulterers, sa∣bath-breakers within your roofe. Give them not harbour for se∣cular Interest, but resolve that if they will not serve God, let them not serve you, according to Joshuas practice, chap. 24. 15. If it seeme evill unto you to serve the Lord, chuse you this day whom you will serve, whether the God's which your fathers served, that were on the o∣ther side of the flood, or the Gods of the Amorites, in whose land yee dwell: but as for mee and my house wee will serve the Lord. Set the 101 Ps. as a just standard & rule to go by. TheMaxime of Constantius was, He cannot be faithfull unto mee, that is unfaithfull unto God. Remem∣ber the National Covenant taken in a day of distress, for which there will bee a day of account; to goe before each other in a reall ex∣ample of reformation. That Covenant is not an Almanack out of date, but obligeth us (as the Tenour runs) all the dayes of our life.
You the learned, Lawyers I have a word to say to you. To the Law∣yers. Doe not patronize unrighteous causes. Set not your tongues to sale, to bolster a bad cause. See Isai. 5. 20. Woe unto them that call evill good, and good evill, and put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Doe not wire∣draw Clients suites. Doe not snarle and intangle a cause with needless perplexities to tire out the poore Client with tedious at∣tendances. Take heed likewise of base mercenarie silence, when the right of the cause and just ingagements require you to speak. Tamper not about secular business on the Lord's day: Verbum sa∣pientibus: abundans cautela non nocet. You the grand Inquest, let mee bee a remembrancer of your To the Grand-Inquest. duty. Inquire into the sinnes of your County. Are there not Blasphemers, Sabbath-breakers, Prodigious swearers, Opressers, Adulterers? Make of them faithfull Presentments. Doe not you see what abundance of mischiefes Ale-houses produce? what a great deale of service they doe the Devill? Labour I beseech you to disposess the Divell of his strong holds. Purge your Townes and Families. Who knowes but that yee are called to such a time as this? You have a price put into your hands, Oh! let it not bee a price put into the hands of fooles, who want hearts to make the best improvement of it. As you love the Gospell, your lives, livelyhoods; as you consult the good of your Countrey, and tender the safety of the land of our Nativity, strive to beat down sinne, to reforme your lives, that so God may turne away from his fierce anger. And to you all high and low; of what ranke or condition soever I addresse my exhortation, as Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus will I doe unto thee, O Israel, and because I will doe thus, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Zeph. 2. 1. Gather your selves together, yea gather to∣gether O Nation not desired: &c: so Joel 2. 12. Therefore also now, thus saith the Lord; Turne yee unto mee with all your hearts, with weeping, fa∣sting & mourning. And you that remember least, bee sure to remember my text. Carry it home with you and put it in practice, Hate the evill, and love the Good, and establish judgment in the gate: It may bee that the Lord God of hosts will bee gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
The Fountain opened: Or Free Grace discovered, From Zech. 13. 1. In that day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. A Word spoken in due season, is like Apples of Sermon. 8. At St. Ma∣ry's Oxon. May. 17. 1649. Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prov. 15. v. 11. My Text is such a precious, seasonable Word, even a Word of Comfort opportunely administred to the Mourners in Zion: For you may cast your eyes on chap. 12. v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and there you may read how deeply the Children of God drank of the Cup of Mourning; they had tears plentifully given them to drink, and their sorrow is not an ordinary, but a soaking, bitter sorrow, ver. 10. And I will pour up∣on the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mournth for his onely sonne, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first∣born.
A midst these sorrows, this Evangelical Prophet holds forth the Mssias Iesus Christ, the chiefest joy, to swallow up an Ocean of sorrows. So that the words read are a Prophesie of Jesus Christ, tendring his free grace and mercy to a people broken with godly sorrow for sin: Whilst tears are in their eyes, and sorrows in their hearts, soul∣ravishing joys and consolations are promised from the presence of God: In that day there shall be a fountain opened. Wherein observe, First a Mercy promised; not a stream, but a The Text divided. fountain. 2. The extent and greatness of the Mercy in hand; not a foun∣tain sealed, lockt up, but opened. 3. The opportunity, In that day. 4. The persons to whom this great rich Mercy is promised, to the house of David, &c. 5. The end and benefit accruing, for sin and for uncleanness. To give a brief Paraphrase on the Words: They are a Prophesie of the wonderful Redemption and Sanctification of sinners by the Blood of Christ; It's said; In that day, (i. e) a day of sorrow and mourning for sin, after they had been sensible of sin, throughly humbled, felt the Gall and Wormwood, bewailed the bitterness of sin, then joy comes after sorrow: After the people had mourned for their sins against Christ, then Christ washeth them and cleanseth them; when sin hath been their greatest sorrow, then comes Christ, and is their greatest joy. It is sayd, A fountaine, O rich mercy! A foun∣taine opened, O height of mercy! Free grace is offered, justifi∣cation, and sanctification by the blood of Jesus Christ: He is the inexhausted fountaine; his blood is never drawn dry; neither is the Exchequer of his grace lockt up, so that none can come at it: but it's opened, and freely tendred for the house of David, & the inha∣bitants of Jerusalem. This fountaine is opened for them, they are washt and cleansed in the meritorious laver of Christ's blood. But why to them? v. 10. to them is promised the pouring of the spirit, and to them is Christ promised, they are sensible of the bitterness of sin, they know how to relish the sweetnesse of a Messias. The fountaine is opened to them exclusive, and to them only; To others it's a Fountaine sealed. Christ came to save his people. There are a peculiar people, whom Christ loveth, washeth, saveth; and these are the house of David and Ierusalem, (i e) the Children of God
in Covenant. It's said for sin & for uncleannesse: whatever pollutions & impurities are in the Saints, here they are invited to come & wash & Rev: 1. 5. be cleane. This fountaine of the blood of Christ washeth & cleanseth the house of David and Jerusalem from all sinne and impurity. This scripture requires a fuller Exposition: but it's my purpose to draw forth the Doctrines, and in the explication of the doctrines to insist on a larger exposition of the words. Two doctrines which are principally held forth are these. 1. When the children of God are soakt in their teares of godly sorrow for  sin, then in that season divine refreshing consolations come from the pre∣sence of God. 2. There's a fountaine of free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ opened  to purge and cleanse his people, from all their sins and impurities. I resume the first doctrine, andfor the enlargment of it I propound Method of handling the first Doctrine. this following Method. 1. To select scripture examples for illustration and Incou∣ragement. 2. To confirme it by scripture reasons for conviction and plenary probation. 3. To draw downe some scripture counsels and exhortations for the better ordering of our lives and conversations. The former shall constitute the doctrinall part of the text: This last the use and application. For the first, for scripture examples, time would faile mee, if 1 Scripture Examples. I should enlarg my selfe in so great a Cloud of witnesses. There's a plentifull heape, I shall gather sparingly, and select only some choice remarble examples. God comforts prophane people and exiles from the Covenant, in the day of their distresses, much more will he comfort his own peo∣ple. A father will not take care of a Kite and neglect his child. Ha∣gar was comforted and Ishmael in a necessary instant, when the bot∣tle was spent, and they knew not what to doe. Further, in temporall mercies God answereth his people seasona∣bly: When Aegypt's flower was spent, then it rained Mannah. I may instance in Sampsons thirst, Elijahs fasting, &c. An Angel, a Raven, a Brook, a Widow-woman, were his Purveyers. But I'le enlarge the proofe in spirituall things and persons. Daniel found di∣vine assistance in the Lions den. Dan. chap. 6. 22. chap. 9. 21, 22. My God hath sent his Angel, and hath shut the Lions mouthes, that they have
not hurt mee: Forasmuch as before him innocency was found in mee: and also before thee, O King, have I done noe hurt. chap. 9. Yea whiles I was speaking in praier, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seene in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly touched me about the time of evening oblation. David amidst multitudes of distracting thoughts found God his comfort. Ps. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within mee, thy comforts delight my soule. Paul in a ore con∣flict met with seasonable refreshing comforts. 2 Cor. 12. 9. And he said unto mee, my grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakenesse: most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my in∣firmities that the power of Christ may rest upon mee, so true is that Ps. 126. 1. When the Lord turned againe the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dreame; then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: Then said they among the Heathen; the Lord hath done great thinges for them. Isai. 16. 1, 2, 3. The spirit of the Lord God is upon mee; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meeke; he hath sent me to binde up the broken hearted, to proclaime liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaime the acceptable yeare of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourne; to appoint unto them that mourne in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oyl of joy for mourning, the garment of praise, for the spirit of heavinesse, that they might be called trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. When there's a double tale of bricks required, Cum duplican∣tur lateres veni deus. then comes God, and brings deliverance: when 430 yeares for Israels comming out of Aegypt, 70 for comming out of Babylon, 13 for the daughter of Abraham, 36 for the impotent cripple were expi∣red, then came seasonable deliverance. So for morning for sin, In that day, and whilst Mary was weeping, Christ came. When the Disciples were going to Emmaus and discoursing of Christ, then comes Christ and cleares up their judgments. 2 Scripture Reasons. Reason. 1. The scripture reasons are, 1. Because God hath prefixed and limited a peculiar time for deliverance. When the fit season is come, the appointed time of God, then deliverance will come and will not tarry. Heb. 10. 36, 37. For yee have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise, for yet a little while and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry. 2. God would have a people prepared for him. Mat. 3. 3. This  is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one
crying in the wildernesse, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 3. The price of the mercy will be the more esteemed. O how  welcome was a deliverance to Israel in the brick-Kilne? misery will make us priz mercy at the highest rate. 4. The greater glory will redound to God, when he helpes at a  time of need. Ps. 46. 1. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. 5. It's usuall with God to looke upon a people in a low estate that  it may appeare that none but a God can bring deliverance. Isai. 33. 9. 10. The earth mourneth and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and hw∣en downe; Sharon is like a wildernesse; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits, Now will I rise, saith the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my selfe. Deut. 32. 36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himselfe for his servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left. 2 Kings. 14. 26. For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter, for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel. Thus was the poore woman healed by Iesus Christ, when she lost all upon Phy∣sitians. And joy came after a great mourning in my text. 6. All the gifts and graces of the spirit will be set a working; viz.  of prayer, faith, love, hope, patience, and when joy comes as the birth and issue of all these, O how welcome will deliver∣ance be! Now Ile cast the scripture counsells into an use of exhortation. 1. Be exhorted to possesse your soules with patience. Luke. 21. 9. In your patience possesse ye your soules. Heb. 10. 36. For yee have need of patience, that after yee have done the will of God, yee might receive the promise. Be patient, waite quietly upon God. 2. Encourage your selves in God. so did David. 1 Sam: 30. 6. 3. Learn to live by faith. Heb. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith. 4. Be much in prayer. Aske, and ye shall receive. 5. Limit not the holy one of Israel to times or meanes. It was the Israelites great fault, in Limiting the holy one of Israel. 6. Take heed of omitting duties, or of abating of love, zeale, me∣ditation, &c. Adde to thy duties. If God send not comfort at one time, it may come at another, and that may be a more convenient time. Knock harder, cry lowder, wrestle, tug harder at the oare.
But the other doctrine is the Principall (which I intend) and I  shall handle it more largly: That there's a fountaine &c. The invitations are many Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come yee to the waters, and he that hath no mony: come ye, bye and eat, yea come, buy wine and milke without money and without price. Iohn. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drinke. Rev. 22. 17. And the spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him that heareth say, come, And let him that is athirst come, And whosoever will, let him come and take of the waters of life freely. Rev. 21. 6. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountaine of the water of life freely. And the vertues of this fountaine are set forth, John. 4. 14. Whosoever drink∣eth of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into e∣verlasting life. This fountaine was opened for Manasseh, a bloody sinner. 2 Chron. 33. 12, 13. And when he was in affliction he be∣fought the Lord his God, and humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his fathers. And prayed unto him, and he was intreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him againe unto Jerusalem into his King∣dome. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God. This foun∣tain was opened for Saul, a cruel persecutor. Act. 9. 3, 4. And as he journyed he came neere Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from Heaven. And he fell to the earth and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? This foun∣taine was opened for the poore woman, a grievous sinner. Luk. 7. 47. Wherefore I say un to thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for shee loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. The woman with the bloody issue believed it, and shee will make triall. Mat. 9. 20, 21. And behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood 12 yeares came behinde him, and touched the hem of his garment. For she said within her selfe, if I may touch his garment, I shall be whole. The woman when she had spent all upon Physitians, which were of no value, was cured by Christ both in body and soul. Luke. 8. 48. And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace. And what's the reason? why is there such a fountaine opened? No other but free love and bowels opened. Sinne endeavours to lock up this fountaine: free grace, love, & mercy opens this fountaine. But how comes such vertue in this fountaine? A. This is the fountaine and originall of all vertue.
Q. But who are to wash in this fountaine? A. All are invited, none excluded, but such as exclude themselves, such as are not sensible of their sins, who apprehend not their pollu∣tions, will never take the paines to come hither and wash. My text is free grace exalted, bowels opened, mercy heightned, gospell enlarged. Here's the Gospel Exchequer full of riches and pretious thinges. Here's the brazen serpent erected, the golden scepter held forth; If we come not to this exchequer, look not up to this serpent, take not hold of this scepter, the fault is our own. O Israel thou hast destroyed thy selfe, but in mee is thine help. Hos. 13. 9. Q. But who are washt and cleansed? A. The house of David and Ierusalem, the children of God, that are sensible of their misery, mourners for sin: such as apprehend themselves stunge looke to the brazen serpent. Such as are humbled for sin are in a capacity of receiving Christ: such as are mourners in Zion shall have beauty for ashes, the oyle of joy for mourning. And those that have thus mourned as for an only son shall have the be∣nefit of this fountaine. The invitation is large, Luke 14. 17. And he sent his servant at sup∣per time to say unto them that were bidden, Come: for now all things are ready. But read their shifting excuse in the verse following. They all with one consent began to make excuse, The first said, I have bought a peice of ground and I must go and see it, have me excused. Jesus Christ is freely tendred and offered sermon after sermon, and frequently in these gospell dispensations; but how few embrace him. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first be∣gan to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? The fountaine is full enough, large enough, O come hither, wash and be cleane. But you cannot come, unlesse you be drawne by the father; neither will you come unless you be sensible of your owne vilenesse, pollutions, impurities, and of the wondersull ver∣tue Ca. 1. 4. John. 6. 44. that is in this fountaine to wash and cleanse you. Of this more anon. You heare my text is pure gospell: It holds forth the pearle of the Gospell Jesus Christ. My message from God to you is to per∣swade you to imitate the wise Merchant, To fell all for the purchase of the Pearle of great price, Its a fountaine, and theres no fcarcity at Math. 13. 46. the fountaine. Its a fountaine opened, and there's riches of mercy. My invitation from God this day is to humble sinners such as are
sensible of their lost condition, to come and wash in this fountaine. Be thou never so much polluted: yet this fountaine can cleanse thee. Let not thy sins hinder and discourage thy comming; but come quicklier, and hasten thy pace. This Exchequer will pay all thy debts; This Fountaine will make thee cleane: I doe not, I dare not open a gap to Licentiousnesse: But I enlarge the riches of free grace and mercy. Dost thou thirst? Here's an invitation. Art thou a godly mourner this day? Here's a fountaine opened. Be thy sinnes crimson sinnes, double dyed? O now come in to Jesus Christ. Here's a plaister every way as broad as the sore. Be they as scarlet? Christ's blood will make them as white as wooll. This fountaine doth mira∣cles, which none other can doe. For it washeth the Aethiopian, & cleanseth the Leopard. Will you then perish for want of water, and there's a fountaine? Will you lie and die in your sinnes, notwithstand∣ing salvation is tendred, and thewater of life offered freely? O! des∣perate, sottish sinners, though God would heale them; yet they wil not be healed: though God would enrich them; yet they looke not after his riches, nor value them at all: Though he would cleanse them, yet they will not come to the fountaine. It's said Gen. 21. 19. God opened Hagars eyes to see a well: It is God alone that can o∣pen thine eyes to see this fountaine. The fountaine may be hard by us, Christ may be tendered, and yet we may not see nor heare him. Let God be true and every man a Liar. More I shall speak in this Kind, when I come to the Application. Methd pro∣pounded. For a more full and profitable handling of this precious Doctrine, I shall propound this Method. 1. I shall discover the Analogie and Resemblance between Christ and a Fountaine. 2. How Christ may be said to be a Fountaine opened. 3. For whom this fountaine is opened. 4. The wonderfull benefits that flow from this fountaine to the Children of God. Fiftly, and Lastly, I shall set all home unto your Consciences by particular application. 1. What Analo∣gy there is be∣tweene Christ and a foun∣tain. First, What Analogie and resemblance there is between Christ and a fountaine. The Analogie holds good in these ensuing particular respects. 1. There's fullnesse of water in a fountaine; No want at the well spring, the well head: There's the confluence of waters, there's
water in abundance; bring never so many vessells, yet there's wa∣ter enough to fill them. So there's fulnesse in Jesus Christ, of mer∣cy to pardon, wisedome to counsell, righteousnesse to justifie, ho∣liness to sanctifie; fulnesse of grace and fulnesse of glory. Col. 1. 19. For it pleased the father that in him should all fulnsse dwell. 2. There's a communication of the water of a fountaine to the streams: So there's a communication of grace from Christ to his mem∣bers, John. 1. 16. Of his fulnesse we receive, and grace for grace. The Head hath influence upon the members: From Christ we receive Union. John. 17. 21. So runs Christ's prayer, That they all may be one as thou fathr art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And from Christ we re∣ceive Communion. 1 John. 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard that declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the father and his son Jesus Christ. Now Christ derives vertue upon his members. Vertue flowes from him to cure his peoples maladies. Christ is the tree Rev. 22. 2. In the mid'st of the street of it, and on either side of the river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yeelded her fruit every moneth, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. Christ's blood is diffusive, and takes in all his people, not one member can be wanting. Look upon the fountaine and acknowledg Christ: whatever grace thou receivest is derivative from Jesus Christ. 3. A fountaine is said to have liveing waters. Waters in a Pond are dead in a metaphoricall sense: they stir not, they run not, they purge not: But waters in a fountaine are called liveing waters; they convey waters to the streames, they are continually running from it: So in a peculiar manner Jesus Christ is a fountaine of liveing wa∣ters. The Lord complaines, Jer. 2. 13. My people have committed two evills; thy have forsaken me the fountaine of liveing waters, and hewed to themselves cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water. God is cald the fountaine of life. Ps. 36. 9. For with thee is the fountaine of life, in thy light shall we see light. The Lord Christ alone can give life unto his people. His blood is not dried up, it stands not still, but is continually running and flowing to his members. 4. A fountaine sendeth forth pure waters. James 3. 11, 12. Doth a fountaine send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Can the fig-tree (my Brethren) beare olive berries? either a vine, figs: so
can no fountaine both yeeld salt water and fresh. A fountaine enter∣taines no Garbidge nor Carrion. And most properly is Christ com∣pared to a fountaine in regard of purity. Hee is purity it selfe, and purifieth his people: Ther's no Impurity in him: yet some impurity cleaves to his people as long as they are in this world. Theres ful∣nesse of purity in him, in us only a measure; in him absolute perse∣ction, in us a mixture of sinne, Rev. 22. 1. And hee shewed mee a pure river of water of life, cleare as Christall, proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb. Such shall bee the Saints condition in Heaven. 5ly and lastly. Christ is compared to a fountaine for perpetuity. A sountaine continually supplieth the streames, and is never drawn dry. Now Christ is a fountaine inexhausted. Many goe with Pitch∣ers and returne, and wee meet with many men in the way going to fill their Pitchers: yet ther's enough for thee too. Bee sensible of thy want of Christ, entertaine a spiritual thirst of him; and ther's an invitation for thee too. Though a thousand come unto him with Pitchers, and goe away replenished: yet ther's enough in the fountaine for millions more: Therefore goe not to creatures, bro∣ken empty cisternes, streames quite dried up, or running very low. But to Jesus Christ the inexhausted fountaine; Millions of Pitchers fild cannot draw him dry: by communicating to them the fountaine looseth not one drop of water. 2. But in the next place it comes to bee enquired; How 2. How may Christ be said to be a foun∣taine opened? may Christ bee said to bee a Fountaine opened? wee read the con∣trary, Cant. 4. 12. A garden enclos'd is my Sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a fountaine sealed. By a fountaine opened Diodate. un∣derstands the grace of God in remission of sinnes and sanctification of spi∣rit shall be proferred to all believers in Christ. The fountaine is sealed to Unbelievers and Reprobates: Yet because wee know not the se∣cret decrees of God concerning election and Reprobation, wee are to make an Invitation to all to come in, and to make a Proclamation to all thirsty soules, Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come to the waters, and hee that hath no money come buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milke without money and without price. Our duty is to in∣vite all sinners to repentance, And wee have a warrant to tell all true penitent sinners, that mourne for sinne, that the fountaine is open for them. In this sense Christ is said to open the kingdome of Heaven to all Believers. Opening doth imply a shutting. Sinne shuts us out of Heaven, and bolts the doore against us. Every sinne
thou committest ponit obicem, hinders thy access unto Christ. But Je∣sus Christ opens the doore and takes away the bolt. Jesus Christ is said to bee a fountaine opened in these particular Respects. 1. When hee opens his bowels of Love and compassion, and 1. God opens his bowels of com∣passion. tenders himselfe, his virtue, his holinesse to sanctifie, and his righ∣teousness to justifie. The free offer of himselfe in his Gospel di∣spensations is a cleare manifestation of a Fountaine opened. 2. When hee takes off the barres and bolts from the doore, re∣mooves obstacles and Impediments that lye in the passage. Wee can∣not 2. God takes off barres and bolts from the dore. find the dore; the Lord opens our eyes and directs us to it. When wee have found it, sinne puts barres and bolts and locks on it; Christ removes them. Sinne lyes in the way as so many stumbling blockes: But Christ removes these stumbling blockes, and admits us into the presence chamber. By him wee have access unto the Throne of grace, Rom. 5. 2. The partition wall is taken away and distances are removed. 3. It appeares the fountaine is opened, because so many come 3. Many come with Pitchers to the Foun∣taine. with Pitchers to bee filled at the Fountaine. Ther's such a great concourse of thirsty persons to the waters. When the Fountaine is lockt, you shall see none, but when it is opened, many are there ready to fill their empty Tankards. Isai. 55. 1. Whosoever is thirsty is invited there to come and draw water. When the Foun∣taine is opened and men apprehend their thirst they will hasten to the waters. 4. The fountaine is opened, because God sends messengers to 4. God sends Mes∣sengers to in∣vite. invite, and guides to direct to it. The ministers Embasse is to in∣vite men and women to come unto this Fountaine, to perswade them to reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then wee are Embassadours for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, wee pray you in Christs stead to bee reconciled unto God. It's our maine business to beseech and in∣treat men to take Christ, and to come unto this fountaine. 5. Now is the day of grace, the opportunity & season offered from 5. Now is the day of grace. God, a price put into our hands. Now Christ tenders himselfe and his benefits; Now the counsel is a word in due season, Isai: 55. 6, 7. Seek yee the Lord while hee may bee found, and call upon him while hee is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him returne unto the Lord, and hee will have mercy 6. The Lord opens to us. upon him, and to our God, for hee will abundantly pardon. 6. The Lord himselfe now opens to us; and this is evident, be∣cause
hee knocks for us to open to him, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand 6. The Lord opens to us. at the dore and knock, if any man heare my voice and open the dore, I will come in unto him, and I will sup with him and he with mee. And the Lord affords us severall Hammers to knock at his dore withall, viz. especially, 4. Hammers God useth to knock withall. 1. The Hammer of his word. Every sermon you heare is a 1. Hammer of the word. knocking at the dores of your hearts. God makes use of his Mes∣sengers as his mouth, Jer. 15. 19. Thou shalt stand before mee, and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt bee as my mouth. However the Ministers of God be despised and evill intreated, Christ accounts the affronts offered to them, equall to those hee met withall immediately offered unto himselfe, Luk 10. 10. But into whatsoever City you enter and they receive you not, goe out into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of your City that cleaveth on us, wee shak off against you. By the sermons you heare God knocks at your hearts, Ezek. 25. and Ezek. 33. 30, 31, 32, 33. They speak each one to another, saying, Come and heare what is the word that com∣meth forth from the Lord, they sit before thee as my people and heare thy wordes, but will not doe them. 2. The hammer of his spirit. The spirit breatheth upon the wa∣ters. 2. Hammer of the spirit. How many strivinges, waitings, whispers of the spirit are there to draw us unto God. Wee are exhorted not to quench the spirit, nor grieve the spirit. The Lord will once say as Gen. 6. 3. My spirit shall not alwayes strive with man. 3. The Hammer of mercies. God knocks at our hearts by mer∣cies, peace, prosperity. Ther's a prevalent exhortation, Rom. 12. 1. 3. Hammer of mercies. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that yee present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable ser∣vice. To us he speakes by mercies. Wee are brands pluckt out of the burning, and have our lives for a prey. 'Tis mercy wee enjoy peace in our Borders, wee are free as yet from the Plague, Famine, and the sword; wee enjoy the peace of the Gospell, and the Gospel of peace. 4. God knockes sometimes by the Hammers of judgment, some∣times 4. The Hammer of Judgments. by the Sword, Plague, and other Calamities (though at present we are free) our duty is, Jer. 6. 8. Bee thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soule depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate and a land not in∣habited. Wee should learne righteousness at all times, especial∣ly
when judgments are amongst us, Isai. 26. 9. With my soule have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within mee will I sek thee eare∣ly: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learne righteousness, Micah. 6. 9. Heare yee th rod, who hath appointed it. It appeares, farther that the fountaine is opened, because God God affords the right key. One false key is Free-will. hath afforded us the right keys to open it. There are three false keyes, and foure true keyes. The first false Key is free-will. O saith the sinner, Ile repent here∣after: I shall have time enough. But is repentance in thy power? Velle naturae, malè velle corruptae naturae, bne velle gratiae, Phil. 2. 13. For it is God who worketh in you both to will and to doe of his own good pleasure, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that wee should bee a kind of first fruites of his Creatures. Free-will is an Aegyptian reed, it will deceive us. Jer. 10. 23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himselfe; it is not in man that walkth to direct his steps. Samsns case is very observable, Judg. 16. 20. And shee said, the Philistines be upon thee Samson, and hee awoke out of sleep, and said, I will goe out as at other times before and shake my selfe, and he wist not that the Lord was depar∣ted from him. Man can undoe himselfe, and marre himselfe, but cannot save himselfe, Hos. 13. 9. O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy selfe, but in me is thy help. 2. A second false key is universal grace and redemption. Christ died A 2d false key is universal Re∣demption. for all, (say some) tasted death for every man, for Cain and Judas, as well as David and Paul, many plead and think by this key to open the Fountaine: but it's a false key and will not unlock the fountain Dore. The latter part of the Text which they urge expounds the former: they urge, Joh. 316. God so loved the world that hee gave his only begotten-Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have life ever∣lasting. And that in 2 Cor. 5. 15. And that hee died for all: But what fol∣loweth? that they which live should not hnceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them and rose againe. They urge likewise, Heb. 2. 9. But wee see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour, that hee by the grace of God should tast death for every man. The grace and free love of God moved him to bestow this transcendent benefit on his people, only, not for the whole world. Rom. 5. 18. Therefore as by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the righte∣ousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to justification of life. Here is
hended the universality of Christ's body. Adam was a common Root, and brought death unto all his Posterity. And Christ was a common Root and brought life unto all his Posterity. They urge likewise Joh. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world. A. Those in the world whom he loveth, washeth and justifieth, it's not universall, not singula genrum, but genera singu∣lorum. Compare this with Mat. 1. 21. And shee shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for hee shall save his people from their sinnes. The third false key is presumption of long life and mercy. Nei∣ther A third false key, Presum∣ption of long life. space nor grace are in thine own power. God gave Jezabel space, but denyed her grace, Rev. 2. 21. And I gave her space to re∣pent of her fornication, and shee repented not. This presumption hath ruined many a soule. Many neglect their opportunities, run their swinge and career in sinne and presume of mercy; but the dore of mercy is shut against them, and this key cannot unlock it. Now God affords foure true keyes. 1. Knowledge. The eyes are opened to see the fountaine, to 1. True key, knowledge. look up to the brasen serpent. The knowledge of the worth of Christ provokes us to come to him. God's people have inlightned judge∣ments, they are renewed in the spirit of their minds, Eph. 4. 23. 2. Faith to believe that ther's virtue enough in Christ to cure all 2. True key, Faith. our diseases, both of body and soule, Matth 9. 21. For shee said within her selfe, if I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. 3. Love. And this will make us take many journies, long and dangerous, through fowle weather, and it will sweeten all. The 3. True key Love. beloved object when enjoyed will make amends for all the waiting for it. 4. Repentance, mourning for sinne. Repentance in us causeth 4. True key, Repentance. God to repent and make his bowels like the sounding of an Harp, Jer. 31. 18 19, 20. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himselfe thus; Thou hast chastised mee, and I was chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoake; turne thou mee and I shall be turned: for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned I repented; and after that I was in∣structed I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, even confounded, I did bare the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my deare son? Is he a plea∣sant child? for since I spake against him, I doe earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord. You must understand these clave non er∣rante,
not as if the fountaine was merited for any of these duties: for when wee have done all wee can, we must acknowledge that wee are unprofitable servants. But God hath afforded these meanes, keyes, and helpes, we must make use of them, but may not make them our Christs, and our Saviours. 5. I will adde a 5th, Praier. This is a key to open and shut 5th True key prayer. Heaven, James 5. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and hee prayed earnestly that it might not raine, and it rained not upon the earth by the space of three yeares and six months. And he prayed againe, and the haven gave raine and the earth brought forth her fruit. Pray that God would wash thee and cleanse thee, Psal. 51. 10. Create in mee, O Lord, a cleane heart, and renw a right spirit within mee. 3. I proceed to the third head propounded. For whom is this 3. For whom is this Fountaine opened. fountaine opened? To give in my answer, 'Ile lay down this truth by way of corollary inferred from the premises. That the fountaine of free grace is only opened to the adopted children of God. This I shall open and apply briefly, for opening whereof I shall propound these ensuing considerations. 1. God from all eternity hath elected a peculiar people unto him∣selfe Consid. 1. God from all eternity hath elected a pecu∣liar people un∣to himselfe. according to his owngood pleasure and purpose of his will. Now election is of here and there one. It's an act of choice, ta∣king some, and passing by others, Jer. 3. 14. Turne, O backsliding chil∣dren saith the Lord: for I am married unto you, and I will take you, one of a City and two of a familie and I will bring you unto Zion. Like glea∣ning grapes. Isai. 17. 6. Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the upper∣most bough: foure or five in the utmost fruitfull branches thereof, saith the Lord God of Israel. This election hath no other motive but free love and grace. Wee were in our blood, Ezek. 16. 5: When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own blood; I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live; yea I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. No provision of faith, or Repentance mooved God to set his heart upon us, as appeares, Rom. 9. 11. For the children being not yet borne, neither haveing done any good or evill, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works: but of him that calleth, &c. This Postulatum being laid down for unde∣niable, God from all eternity hath elected a peculiar people; Hence I frame this syllogisme; only the elect have interest in the fountaine
of free grace and mercy. But only God's adopted children are e∣lect, ergo, they only have interest in it. 2. There are a peculiar people who alone are justified by the free grace of God in Christ, Rom. 5. 1. Being justified by faith wee have Consid. 2. There are a pe∣culiar poople justified by free grace. pace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. 3. 24. Being ju∣stified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Now thus I argue. Only justified persons have interest in the foun∣taine of Christ's blood: But the sons of God by grace and ado∣ption are only justified persons, Ergo, they alone have interest in the fountaine of Christ's blood, Psal. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is hee whose tran∣gression is forgiven, whose sinne is covered: Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guil. Iustification is a forensicall terme took from an earthly Tribunal, where a person arraign'd and condemned, is afterward by virtue of a pardon acquitted. 3ly. Consider there are a peculiar people effectually called. Ma∣ny Consid. 3. There are a pe∣culiar people effectually cal∣led. have an outward calling, and take upon them an outward pro∣fession few are inwardly and effectually called. This the Apostle presseth, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if you doe these things you shall never fall. There are a few, and but a very few, called out of the world, partakers of a holy calling, called to bee Saints. These alone have interest in this fountaine. 4. Consider there are a peculiar people for whome alone Christ Consid. 4. There are a pe∣culiar people for whom Christ prayeth prayeth, Joh. 17. 9. I Pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given mee, for they are thine. Those for whom Christ prayeth have alone interest in this fountaine. But the adopted chil∣dren of God are those for whomalone Christ prayeth, ergo, &c. 5. There are a peculiar people whom Christ washeth and san∣ctifieth, Consid. 5. There are a pe∣culiar people whom Christ washeth. Revel. 1. 5. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithfull wit∣ness and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kinges of the earth, unto him that loved us and washed us from our sinnes in his own blood, Joh. 13. 8. Peter saith unto him, thou shalt never wash my feet, Jesus said unto him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with mee, Eph. 5. 26. That hee might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, 6ly, and lastly; There are a peculiar people whom Christ will Consid. 6. There are ape∣culiar people whom Christ ju∣stifieth. glorifie and save. Hee came to save his people. The Climax is on this wise, whom hee elects, those hee cals, and whom he cals, those hee justifieth, and whom hee justifieth, those hee sanctifieth, for
them hee prayeth, and them hee glorifieth: and these are his ado∣pted children. They that are outcasts from the covenant of grace: even all Unbelievers & Reprobates have no interest in this fountaine, They have the false Key and cannot open it. 1. Now to apply this briefly (before I come to the larger Applica∣tion,) Inf. 1. The first inference will bee to justifie the wayes and procee∣dings of God. On whom hee will, hee hath mercy, and the Pot∣ter hath power over the clay; and who dare make responsations a∣gainst his maker? God chooseth poore, meane, contemptible; passeth by great, wise, rich men. All comes from his , his decrees of election and reprobation are just and righteous altoge∣ther; they stand not, nor fall to our Consciences and determina∣tions. God chuseth a David, passeth by an Eliab; chuseth a Jacb, passeth by an Esau: chuseth an Isack, and passeth by an Ishmael; and all according to the counsell of his will, without prevision of workes in the creature. 2. Bee informed how few come to Heaven; few have interest in Christ, few shall bee saved, , the house of David and Inf. 2. inhabitants of Jerusalem. 3. Make hast to this fountaine: Labour to bee of this number: Cleare up your evidences for Christ: But this shall further bee ap∣plied in it's peculiar place. I come to the 4th Head propounded, what are the virtues of this Inf. 3. fountaine? 4. What are the virtues of this fountaine. 1. Amongst many I shall instance in five. 1. Her's a cleansing virtue in this fountaine to wash the Aethio∣pian, to make crimson sinnes as white as wooll, to purifie thy nature, to wash filth and guilt from off thy soule. 2. Ther's an healing virtue. Many wells among us cure disea∣ses: But this well of salvation cures both kinds of diseases, Psal. 103.  3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases. 3. Ther's a cooling virtue. Water cooles thy body: This cooles thy spirit, allayes thy passions, takes away thy heat. God's chil∣dren  in their sufferings are oft like to breake forth into passions; but if they seriously consider the meekness of Christ, it will much coole and allay their spirits. A fountaine abates heat: wash in this foun∣taine and it will allay thy heat of passion. 4. A fountaine hath a filling, sufficing virtue; it quencheth the thirst, Joh. 4. 14. Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give
him, shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall bee in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life, When wee thirst after Creatures, our thirst is the more enraged: wee are never satisfied with broken Cisternes, empty pleasures, pro∣fits of the world. But ther's a fulness in Christ to satisfie our de∣sires. Doe wee desire wisdome? In him are treasures of wisdome and knowledge. Doe wee desire riches? his riches are unsearchea∣ble. All our fresh springes are in him. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. Hee hath fulness of righteousness, holyness, mercy, salvation; Thou shalt have as much as thy vessell can hold. Accor∣ding to a measure hee will derive of his fulness to thee. 5ly, and lastly. This fountaine is perpetually running. The virtue of many medicines last but for a moneth, a yeare, &c: but the virtue of Christ's blood lasts to all eternity. This fountaine can never bee drawn dry: you can never empty this fountaine. Now then to draw all home unto particular Application, (the larger part I promised) I shall make 4. uses. viz. For consola∣tion, examination, exhortation, direction. 1. For a bundance of consolation unto the children of God; Ʋse 1. For Consola∣tion. the house of David and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, who have interest in this fountaine. To them it is wide open to cleanse them from all sortes of sinnes and impurities. Bee they scarlet sinnes? yet by the blood of Christ they are made as white as wooll. Bee they double dyed? yet Christ's blood wash∣eth them away. Manasseh, David, Paul, Peter, Mary Magdalen found benefit by this fountaine to wash and cleanse them from all their sinnes and impurities. This I speak, not for wicked men to snatch at, to encourage them in their presumption: but to encou∣rage the children of God to come and wash in this fountain, which is full enough, broad enough, never drawn dry. Come then, make speed, wash and bee cleane. The bloud of Jesus Christ washeth us from all sins, of all sorts and sizes, 1 Joh. 1. 7. But if wee walke in the light, as hee is in the light, wee have fellowship one with an other, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin. It's usuall with the wicked of the world to reproach and cast into the teeth of the godly their former faylings. I remember (saith one) whatever hee pro∣fesseth now, this man was a swearer, a drunkard, &c. Let this rule bee our monitour where God forgiveth and forgetteth, wee must forgive and forget. 'Tis true peradventure a Saint now, was
before his conversion scandalous in his life: Blessed bee God that hath now opened his eyes that hee seeth, that hee's pul'd out of Sa∣tan's snare from darkness, &c. And if thy eyes were open too, thou durst not cast into his teeth his former failings. The child of God saith, Ego non sum Ego—Quantum mutatus ab illo! Ther's a reall change for the better, a worke of grace wrought on the soule. Take heed of scandalizing and scorning the generation of the righteous, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but yee are washed, but yee are sanctified; but yee are justifyd in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. You then that are washt in this fountaine, rejoyce and bee glad that your names are written in the book of life, that you have received a white stone, a new name, the hidden Mannah. Stand then admi∣ring and praising God that hath done so graciously for you, that when many even the greatest part of the world, are shut out, cannot find the Dore, are denyed the right key, and the fountaine is lockt and barr'd against them: yet it's opened wide to thee, thou art washt and cleansed in this fountaine: Not any goodness in thee; but free grace and mercy makes the difference. Whatever asper∣sions, calumnies, reproaches thou meetest withall in the world from ungodly men, bee of good comfort, all is washt away by the bloud of Jesus Christ. The world casts dirt on thee: Christ washeth thee cleane. O then doe not desponde, doe not droop as without hope by reason of hard∣ships, sufferings, evill entreaties in and from the world. Drinke of the waters of this fountaine, They are the Restorative to revive and refresh thy spirit. Thou meetest with diseases, corporall, spirituall, oh come to this fountaine. Its a medicine made up of the blood of Jesus Christ: It will cure both diseases, of soule and body. Thou seest by experience, that the Cisternes of the creatures are dried up. Honours, Pleasures, Profits decay and faile: tarry not at these cisternes, goe to the fountaine, it's inexhausted. Thy manifold sinnes trouble and torment thee; sinne is a havy burden upon the conscience; thou art afraid to come. O! bee not afraid to do good unto thy own soule. This fountaine workes miracles, cleanseth the Aethiopian and the Leopards spots, even a persecuting Paul, a perjur'd Peter, an adulterous David, and it is not shut a∣gainst thee, unless thou shut out thy selse. Bee then of good com∣sort you that are God's children; amidst your fainting fits you have
this Aqua vitae. In your diseases and sores, you have this soveraigne plaister. Amidst your pollutions and defilements, you have a foun∣taine opened wide to wash and cleanse you in. In diseases, afflictions, pollutions and all conditions whatsoever repaire to this fountaine: the streames are healing, reviving, refreshing streames; O but my sins are a barre against mee! Ans: Art thou sensible of sinnes? thou art the fitter to goe: bewaile thy sinnes, allow not thy selfe in them. Though sinne lockes the Fountaine dore yet, free grace will open it wide againe. O! But I have been there and have not found any virtue! Ans: Goe againe. The virtues of medicines are not presently discerned. Medicines may worke when thou least thinkest of them. A sermon preacht now, if the Lord work by it, may doe good many a yeare after. Imitate Eliah's servant, who went over and over againe; at last a cloud was seen which maskt the whole Hea∣ven. O but I question whether I have any right to come, it's o∣pened only to the house of David. Ans: Doe not shut out thy selfe, doe not destroy thy selfe; the Invitation is very large, Isai 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsteth let let him come, &c. If thou dost but thirst thou hast an invitation. To this purpose I proceed to a second use which is for Vse 2. for Examination. Examination Let's search andtry whether wee have right to come, whether wee are so qualified as to receive benefit and virtue by this fountaine. I shall therefore propound 7 Qualifications. 1. Wee must see fully and discerne the emptiness of all creature Qualif. 1. Wee may see the emptiness of creature Ci∣sternes. cisterns. Jer. 2. 13. My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken mee the fountaine of living waters, and hewed them out cisternes, broken cisternes that can hold no water. Creature cisternes are bro∣ken, they run through (as a sive lets water fall to the ground) or are quite drawne dry. Honour could not satisfie Haman. Riches could not satisfie Solomon. Luther would not so bee satisfied valdè protestatus sum me nlle satiari ab co. 2. Discerne their vanitie and emptiness, wee must forsake them, Qualif. 2. We emust for∣sake Cisterne Comforts. Isai. 55. 2. Wherefore doe doe you spend mony for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not, hearken diligently unto mee and eat yee that which is good and let your soule delight it selfe in fatness. Wee must forsake these lying vanities, wee must not stay by them, wee must relinquish them, and leane no more to broken staves:
but value the world at it's own rate, and breake off all carnall con∣fidences; wee must bid honours, riches, profits, pleasures adieu, so farre forth as they stand in competition with or opposition unto Christ. 3. Wee must bee sensible of the want and necessitie wee have of Qualif. 3. Wee must bee sensible of the necessity of Christ. Christ, that wee are poore, blind, miserable and naked. Wee must apprehend our selves stung with the fierie Serpent. 4. Wee must discerne fulness and Excellency in Jesus Christ, Qualif. 4. Wee must dis∣cerne fulnesse in Christ. beauty, wisdome, holiness, abundance of virtue flowing from him. There are cleansing and healing streames in this fountaine. Empti∣ness discerned in our selves will enhance Christ's wroth. Scarcity raiseth the market. 5. Wee must come with faith to bee healed. In the whole dis∣pensation Qualif. 5. Wee must come with faith to be healed. of Christ's miracles, ther's a question premised, believest thou? or a condition interposed, be it unto thee as thou believest. 6. Mourne for sinne, like the mourning of Hadadrimmn, in the valley of Megiddo. They who mourne for sin are prepared to wash Qualif 6. Wee must mourne for sin. in this fountaine. Their eyes are blubbered for sinne, and they come and wash themselves in this fountaine. 7ly, and lastly. Wee must come in the strength of Christ. Wee Qualif. 7. Wee must come in the strength of Christ. can doe nothing without him, Cant. 1. 4. Draw mee, wee will run after thee. Noe man commeth unto mee, except the father draw him. Wee must performe our duties in the strength of God, , through Christ that strengthneth us. The third use shall bee for exhortation. This hath two parts. Ʋse 3. For Exhorta∣tion. Generall and speciall. 1. In generall. My invitation from God is for all to come in and wash in this fountaine. Christ is here offered and tendered to all. The Brasen Serpent is erected upon a pole. The free grace of the Gospel is enlarged; mercy is exalted O come come in quickly and accept of Christ. O! that God would worke upon your hearts this day to imbrace the free tenders of the Gospel of Iesus Christ. Now the fountaine is open, come unto it: but you must bee thir∣sty, have a spiritual appetite; else you will never come. It is not a bare comming. Take heed least you come without a wedding garment. You must bee qualified as I mentioned before. I call upon the young ones this day; O bewaile your mispent time, your trading in the vanitie of the world. Tis too too much, that you have given so much of your fresh green yeares unto Satan: Now come; and O that
God would draw you, else you can never come: Give up your strength and marrow to God. You have tried the flesh, the Divell the world, they cannot help nor comfort you. You have gone to King Jareb, Hos. 5. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound: then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jarb yet could hee not heale you, nor cure you of your wound. Youthfull pleasures and vanities cannot afford any reall satisfaction. O! that God would perswade you to make a better choice, to goe to Christ for Physick, to make him your Physitian. You have spent all upon Physitians of no value, imitate the poore woman and come unto Jesus Christ, let not the Devil steale this precious truth out of your hearts, that the present time is the time of repentance, and tempt you to put off Repentance 'till your spectacle dayes, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creatour in the dayes of thy youth, while the evill dayes come not, nor the yeeres draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them. I call also upon old ones, you that have lived so many yeeres, spent so much time as is not worthy of reckoning in the sacred Chro∣nologies. Though I dare not flatter, or give the least advantage to any to put off repentance 'till old age: yet I dare not set a barre against you. If now God open your eyes, and give you a hun∣gring and thirsting after Christ, and discover to you more of Christ in your old age, than in your young, happy is it for you. Some God cals at the eleventh houre and they receive their peny; Now then though you begin late: yet set upon the worke seriously. Commend God in your old age, that now hee hath opened your eyes to see this fountaine, and because you have set out late, there∣fore you must worke the harder. To every one young and old, to all sorts of sinners, single, dou∣ble died, I address my invitation, come, come unto this fountaine, Isai. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsteth, come to the water, and hee that hath noe money: come yee, buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milke without money and without price, Joh. 7. 37. In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cryed, saying if any man thirst, let him come unto mee and drinke, Rev. 22. 17. And the spirit and the bride say, come; And let him that heareth say, Come; and let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will let hiw take of the water of life freely. Neither doe I proclaime universall grace: but free grace. Come and take Christ upon the Gospel termes and conditions. Cast
downe your rebellious weapons, try conclusions noe longer with God. Isai. 55. 6, 7. Seek yee the Lord, while hee may bee found, call yee upon him while hee is neare: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him returne unto the Lord, and hee will have mercy upon him, and unto our God for he will a∣bundantly pardon, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then wee are Embassadours for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, wee pray you in Christ's stead, bee yee reconciled unto God, Rom. 12. 1. I beseech you there∣fore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that yee present your bodies a li∣ving sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable ser∣vice. O! that God would move some soule this day, open some heart this day. O! that God would plucke some soule out of the Devil's snare, wash some Aethiopian, some polluted sinner in this fountaine. My Errand and Embassie this day is to proclaime free grace, to offer Jesus Christ; what message shall I returne to him that sent mee? I have the office of a Barnabas to bee a son of Consolation, to tender the riches of Christ; What will you not accept of Christ? Will you undervalue the glo∣rious excellencies of the Gospel? Will you not have this man to raigne over you? Your blood bee upon your own heads, you are left without all excuse. 2. My exhortation is speciall, to the house of David and inha∣bitants of Ierusalem, to those that have received virtue from this fountaine. Goe, goe often to this fountaine, wash and wash a∣gaine, take heed of thinking you have enough of grace, enough of Christ already. The oftner you have been at the fountaine; the more your desires will bee enlarged—Quo plus sunt potae, plus siti∣untur aquae. This is a holy warrantable covetousness, to covet grace, never to think you have enough of Christ: still labour for more of him. Cry with the Horse-leech's daughter, give, give, Lord give mee more of Christ. I want grace, more grace, more grace. Thou that hast tasted of Christ, wilt desire to drink a full draught. Thou that hast a sparkle of true grace, wilt desire it may increase into a flame, Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. Brethren, I count not my selfe to have apprehended: but this one thing I doe, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before. I press toward the marke for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let therefore as many as bee perfect, bee thus minded, and if in any thing yee bee otherwise minded, God shall reveale even this unto you. Then goe
againe and againe to the fountaine, never leave going. Whilest thou hast pollutions, thou canst never get rid of the body of sin in the Church militant, thou hast need of dayiy washing and cleansing in the fountaine. None other can cure thee; none can cleanse thee but this fountaine, but this laver of Christ's blood. The 4th and last use shall bee for direction. Ʋse. 4. For Direction. 1. Bee broken of all those cisternes that are broken and can hold no water. Say not with Naaman, are not Abana and Pharphar, &c. No other streames are healing: but those that are from this fountaine. 2. Neglect not the due season of comming to the fountaine. The five foolish Virgins mist their opportunities: and so did E∣sau, Heb. 12. 17. For yee know how that afterward, when hee would have inherited the blessing hee was rejected; for hee found no place of repentance, though hee sought it carefully with teares. 3. Make use of all the right keyes, knowledge, faith, love, repentance, prayer. 4. Waite patiently upon God, who will open the fountaine. Tarry at the poole of Bethesda, wait at the posts of wisdome's gates. Continue knocking, never give over, 'till God open the fountaine. Bee not impatient of delayes, but still tarry at thy Father's dore; resolve to take no repulse, no put off, with Esther resolve, If I perish, I perish. 5. VVash in this fountaine continually. The streames are clen∣sing. Beseech God to wash and make thee cleane. The streames are healing; Here's a medicine made up of Christ's blood. Ap∣ply this to thy sores: It cures all diseases of body and soul. Ne∣ver leave this fountaine. Take heed of going to Abana and Pharphar: Preferre not them before the waters of this Foun∣taine. If thou wilt bee a tasting of all waters, thou must never look to bee cured. If thou wilt goe from creature to crea∣ture, and hew out their broken cisternes, and depart from the fountaine, to thy perill bee it. If thou desirest to bee made whole, sinne no more in trusting to Creature Cisternes, lest a worse thing come upon thee. Goe to Christ, wash in the fountaine of his blood keep close to him, never goe from him, nor let him goe, and thou shalt bee healed. 6ly and lastly. When thou art healed, returne thankes for thy healing (as the Samaritan did) Bless God that hee hath lo∣ved
thee, given his Sonne for thee, and washt thee. And doe not speake only, but act thankfullness by thy Obedience to God all thy dayes: Then is thankfulness best performed, when we praise God with an holy life. 'Ile conclude all with Psal. 50. 23. Who so offereth praise glorifieth mee, and to him that ordereth his Conversation aright, will I shew the salvation of God.
The Pleasant and Peaceable ways of Wisdom. Prov. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness; all her pathes are peace. THe Proverbs of Solomon are Divine Aphorismes, Serm. 9. At St. Mary's Oxon, July 5. 1649. select, pithy Sentences, penn'd by Solomon; but Indited by the Spirit of God. 'Tis rare to find any coherence or dependance on the precedent words, they are so entire of themselves, & om∣nibus numeris absoluta: Yet the Words read have some dependance upon the precedent Verses. They are a Link of a goodly Chain of Pearls: For if you review v. 13. that Man's happiness is admi∣red who hath got this Jewel: Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding. And to invite others, and draw them on to this rich purchase, the wise Man dedicates an ample Panegyrick to Wisdom. Tully commends Pompey; Pliny, Trajan; but they both come short of this Encomium. Many Arguments are set down from the 14. to the 20. ver. inclusivè, to inhance the match∣less, unvaluable worth and dignity of Divine Wisdom. My Text is placed in the middle, and is a special encouragement to quicken our Spirits, to wing our affections, and make them soar Heaven-ward: Her ways, &c.
And here a tacit Objection is removed: O say some, if we take upon us the profession of Godliness, then we must bid adieu to all pleasures. Farewell all mirth and delight: nothing now but mourn∣ing and lamentation, breaking the heart, pensiveness of spirit, and going mourning all the day long. 'Tis no such matter; you are mi∣staken, when once you make choice of the ways of Godliness, and have got a spiritual acquaintance and communion with God, you shall not loose pleasures, but change them: you shall loose carnal, and get spiritual pleasures: you shall loose empty and unsatisfying, and get full satisfying pleasures: you shall loose transient, and get permanent pleasures. O but say some, we meet with many troubles, many oppositions in our way to Heaven? We are to encounter with the grand Enemies of our salvation, the Flesh, the Devil, and the World; and much molestation we find from them: But however thou maist want peace with men, thou hast peace with God, and Conscience: Though thou wantest peace on Earth, yet thou art no looser, if thy peace be made in Hea∣ven. Her pathes, &c. The Argument of my Meditations is the singular commendation Text divided. of the ways of Wisdom: Wherein observe a Subject and a Predi∣cate. The Subject term'd ways and pathes of wisdom: The Predi∣cate, ways of pleasantness and peace. I'le not injure them by any sub-division, lest I divide the sense: They contain in them two pre∣cious Points of Doctrine. 1. All the ways of godliness are ways of pleasantness, and full of de∣light  unto the children of God. 2. The pathes of godlinsse are peaceable pathes, and full of  peace. I resume the first Doctrine, and shall inlarge it in this easie Me∣thod. Method pro∣pounded. 1. Clear the truth from some Doubts and Objections made a∣gainst it. 2. Prove it by particular instances. 3. Confirm it by some evident Demonstrations. Fourthly and lastly, I shall set it home upon your affections by particular Application, and hope so to conclude, through the Grace of God, as to make you in love with the ways of godliness.
1. Then let's remove the Objections as so many stumbling blocks 1. Head. Objections re∣moved. Object. 1. out of the way. It's Objected, That Godlyness abridgeth men of pleasure; it bindes them to their good behaviours: They must sanctifie the Sab∣bath; they must set up God in their Families; they may not swill, swagger, carrouse and game away their time. Now what is so great an enemy unto the pleasures of Men and Women, as Religi∣on? It cuts them short of those Delights and Pleasures which others enjoy. For Answer hereunto, 1. I say, Godlyness cuts us off unlawful,  but not lawful pleasures: Whatever pleasures it forbids thee, the reason is, because there's sinfulness in them. And 'tis a great mer∣cy, even the godly mans delight, to want such pleasures. Godly∣ness hinders thee of those delights which dishonor God: And upon serious thoughts thou wilt profess with Austin, Quam suave mihi subitò factom est carere suavitatibus istarum nugarum. 2. Whatever pleasure Godlyness denys you, it makes it up a∣bundantly with the pleasures and ravishing consolations of Jesus Christ, Psal. 16. 11. Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy pre∣sence is fulness of joy: and at thy right hand there are pleasures for ever∣more. It takes away dross and gives thee Gold: it takes away world∣ly, and gives thee heavenly pleasures; when thou hast less of the Creature, and more of the Creator, thou hast cause to be glad of the exchange. Abraham left his Countrey at Gods command, but the Promise made all up with interest, Gen. 12. 2. The Lord said un∣to Abraham, Get thee out of thy countrey, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a land that I will shew thee: So did Mo∣ses, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suf∣fer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the trea∣sures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward: As it was said to Amaziah, The Lord is able to give thee much more then 2 Chron. 25. 9. this: So it may be said of thy pleasures, either they are lawful or un∣lawful; if lawful, God will make them up; if unlawful, happy art thou that God deprives thee of them: 'Tis a sign that the Parents have a tender love to their children, when they take away a Knife from them, for fear lest they should hurt themselves with it: So 'tis mercy when God cuts thee off, and deprives thee of such Delights
and Pleasures, which if thou hadst liberty to enjoy, therewith thou wouldst dishonor Almighty God. Object. 2. A second Objection is, How are the ways of God ways of pleasantness, when they require abundance of Humiliation, brinish Tears, sorrow for sin, and is not this irksome and unplea∣sant? A. There's more sweetness in this which thou callest bitternesse, (I mean godly sorrow for sin) then in all the pleasures of the world; for as in the laughter of the wicked, the heart is sorrowful; so in the sorrow of the godly, the heart laughs and rejoyceth. Christ turns these Waters into Wine: Call not the tears of repentance Marah, but Naomi: In the winding up we shall finde that the tears of repentance are not bitter waters, but sweet refreshing wa∣ters: Every tear in thy eye, is a Pearl in Gods eye: Every tear is exhal'd into Gods bottle: All the laughter of the wicked is Risus Sardonicus: Their greatest merriments are . Luther hath an excellent saying, Ʋna guttula malae conscientiae totum mare mun∣dani gaudii absorbet: But the godly rejoyce in their sufferings, Rom. 5. 3. And not onely so, but we glory in tribulations. They have in∣ward joy amidst outward sorrows: VVhen their cheeks run down with tears, they have a chearful spirit; something they feel of comfort coming in: They have a principle of Joy within them, from the ap∣prehension of Gods love in Christ, and this swallows up all sorrows: One glimpse of Christs countenance will swallow up an Ocean of sorrows: And this will appear in two or three Particulars. 1. The work of Humiliation hath the melting work of the Go∣spel: The Law breaks, but the Gospel melts the heart: No such kindly working upon the heart as mercy, bowels opened, and the goodness of God: To sin against these will deepliest affect the heart. When a soul is humbled for sinning against mercy and goodness, and the heart is melted and dissolved into tears, there must be pleasant∣ness and sweetness in these, because they proceed from such a Prin∣ciple, even the Principle of the melting work of the Gospel, and this cannot have much bitterness in it. 2. The Soul in the work of Humiliation melting before the Lord easeth it self of abundance of sin: We say, Leves curae loquuntur, Sen. Trag. ingentes stupent: When people can shed tears, thereby they ease their heart; but when the heart is so opprest, as the eyes cannot shed tears, the sorrow or passion of the heart is greater and more dange∣rous:
By weeping for sin, thou dost ease and rid thy self of abun∣dance of sin; thy heart feels some joy, and draws, and sucks some sweetness out of these bitter herbs. 3. In the work of Humiliation there's much delight, because the soul hath much delight in looking back to that sorrow it hath had: The wicked rejoyce in their pleasures; the godly rejoyce in their tears. Epaminondas went sad about the City, when the Thebanes were a revelling; when others have been in May-games and Merri∣ments, and lascivious Enterludes, it will cheer up thy spirit that thou hast been sorrowing for thy sin. Object. 3. But thirdly it's Objected, That godliness puts us upon hard services, we shall meet with many scandals, great sufferings and persecutions for the name of Christ: we shall meet with sore tem∣ptations and tryals; Peradventure we may be brought to fry at a Stake for Christ: How then can the ways of godliness be ways of pleasantness? A. Notwithstanding the hardest sufferings that the heart of a godly man shall meet withal: yet there's that delight in the ways of godliness, as to uphold the heart under all sufferings, and carry it on sweetly: How much did the Martyrs rejoyce? They kist the Stake, welcomm'd Fire and Fagot; some of them leapt for joy, wrote sin∣gular Letters for the confirmation of their Brethren. Godlyness will carry thee chearfully through sufferings: It will make thee ac∣count thy Chains as Ornaments, thy Prison thy Palace; thy Dun∣geon thy Paradise. Gods people suck sweetness out of the bitter∣est hearbs: They finde an Honey-comb in the carcass of Lyons: They never see so much of God in prosperity as adversity: Never do they feel more inward comforts, then amidst outward sorrows; for then God settles the tranquility of their spirits, and the sere∣nity of their consciences. Christ appeared to Mary weeping; to Jacob at Bethel; to Elias after forty days fasting. God brings forth his Cordials to his people in their forest tryals; so that whatever sorrows, hardships and troubles they meet withal abroad, yet they have joy at home; and though they may make many a hard meal: yet a good conscience is to them a continual feast. There's one Objection more which I shall answer, and then pro∣ceed. Object. 4. Some object from common experience: When people come into the ways of godliness, they do not finde that delight
and joy as they had before: The world observes them to be more melancholy, and of a heavy dumpish spirit. This is a meer calumny of the Devils raising to keep men off from the ways of God: This is a great pull-back and Remora to the con∣version of many souls. I shall give a more full, and, I hope, satis∣factory Answer to the Objection, in these following Considera∣tions. 1. Religion denys not civil, courteous, and affable behaviour: Consid. 1. Religion denys not civil beha∣viour. Religion forbids not a chearful disposition: Nay, there's a Judge∣ment threatned to the contrary, Deut. 28. 47. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness and with gladness of heart, there∣fore shalt thou serve thine enemies, saith the Lord. A churlish Nabal is a dishonor to Religion: Take heed therefore of discrediting the Gospel by your sad melancholy spirits, lest the world bring an evil report upon the ways of godliness. None have such chearful spi∣rits as true Believers: Their heart is full and must have a vent; their tongues, countenances, carriages, will shew that they have comfort in God. But secondly consider, thou maist mistake Gods children: Thou Consid. 2. Gods children are serious. accountest that sadness and sorrow, which is seriousness, gravity, and a stay'd compos'd carriage. The carriage of Gods children must be sober and grave, their words serious, season'd with salt, and their whole conversation must be such as may adorn their profession, Phil. 1. 27. Onely let your conversation be as becometh the Gospell of Christ. 3. Consider Gods people may appear sad, because they are out Consid. 3. Gods children are sad when out of their element. of their element. When the Fish is out of its element of Water, it cannot enjoy it self. Birds do not ordinarily sing upon the ground, but when they are got up into the Air. When Gods children are out of their course of duties, when they are in Meseck, and have their habitation in the Tents of Kedar, their spirits are dumpish: But when their hearts are set in a right frame; when they are exercising holy Duties amongst the society of Saints, then are their hearts chearful, then are their spirits revived, then are they merry indeed. 4. Thou complainest of Gods peoples sadness, maybe it's thy com∣pany that makes them so. They hear thee Swear, see thee Drunk: O Consid. 4. Bad company cause Gods peo∣ples sadness. how this troubles them! It so troubles the children of God to see any dishonor offered to God, as they cannot be merry, Psal. 119. 136.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law: But let them come amongst Believers, and joyn with them in reli∣gious Exercises, their wonted joy comes to them again: Then their joy is above the joy of Harvest, and the dividing of the spoil with the mighty. 5. It is not Religion that makes Gods children sad; but because Consid. 5. Gods people are sad because they are no better. they are no more religious: They grieve that they can grieve no more: They are sorry that, they are no more sorry for their sinns: They finde many failings; they want former Love-tokens and feel∣ings, then they mourn and cry out, Restore to me the joy of thy sal∣vation: They want Gods gracious countenance, wherefore they cry out, Psal. 4. 6. There be many that say, Who will shew us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. 6. This Joy is secret, an inward thing, which strangers shall not Consid. 6. Joy is a secret inward thing. intermeddle withal: A worldly man cannot judge of this Joy, Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it. The joy of the godly is not in outward flashes, nor is it to be measur'd by outward aspect. This is a hidden thing, which so ravisheth their hearts as they cannot utter it. Saul could not be merry without a Musitian; nor Ahab without Naboth's Vineyard; nor Gardiner that bloody Persecutor, till he had receiv'd the news of the Martyrs death. A godly Mans v Fox Acts and Monum. in Q. Mary's Raign. joy proceeds from no outward principle: A covetous man joys and takes pleasure in his Barns heap'd with Corn, and Coffers cramm'd with Gold. A voluptuous man joys in Cards, Dice, Hauks, Hounds: A Drunkard in his Cups: An ambitious man in his Titles, Pedegree, Preferments: But a godly man can rejoyce and be merry without all these: His joy ariseth from another principle, even the recon∣ciled countenance of God in Jesus Christ. Now these Objections being remov'd, and my passage thus clear∣ed, I come in the second place to prove the truth of the Doctrine 2. The Doctrine proved by par∣ticular instan∣ces. by particular instances: And I shall instance in particular Scriptures which give testimony to this truth; then in particular persons, who by their own experience subscribe to the truth of it. And lastly, I shall survey the particular ways of godliness, and discover the pleasantness of them all, and so from an Induction of Particulars sufficiently numbred, I shall collect this universal Con∣clusion, That all the ways of godliness are ways of pleasantness.
1. For Scripture Testimony, meer Quotations would fill a Ser∣mon: 1. By Scripture Testimony. But I shall gather sparingly from the heap, Prov. 22. 17. Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge: for it is a pleasant thing, if thou keep them within thee. If Pleasure consists in Honors, then Wisdom affords it abundantly, Prov. 4. 7, 8, 9. Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting get understanding: She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee. Exalt her and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor when thou dost embrace her. Prov. 8. 15, 16, 17, 18, and 31. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. I love them that love me: and they that seek me early shall finde me: riches and honor are with me, yea durable riches and righteousness. If Life be a pleasure, it's to be found in Wisdom, verse 35. For whoso findeth me, findeth life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. If there be pleasure in Singing and Rejoycing, it's promised to the people of God, Isa. 51. 11, 12. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain gladnss and joy, and sorrow and mourn∣ing shall flee away. I, even I am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man, which shall be made as grass? I'le instance in particular Persons, who by experience confesse the ways of godliness ways of pleasantness: They call the Sabbath a delight, Isa. 58. 13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words, then shalt thou delight thy self in the Lord. Nehemiah accounts the joy of the Lord their strength, Neh. 8. 10. Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and sena portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy un∣to our Lord: neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your strength. So Habakkuk, cap. 3. 17, 18. Although the fig-tree shall not blssom, neither shall fruit be in the vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat: the Flock shall be cut off from the fld, and there shall be no Herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, and will joy in the God of my salvation. So David danced before the Ark with all his might: He makes it the Character of a blessed Man,
Psal. 1. 2. But his delight is in the law of the Lord: and in his law doth he meditate day and night. And his counsel is, Psal. 37. 4. De∣light thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give the the desires of thine heart. And his own practice is, Psal. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will, O God, yea thy law is within my heart. Psal. 94. 19. In the multi∣tude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Psal. 119. 16. I will delight my self in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word. ver. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I delight. ver. 47. And I will delight my self in thy command∣ments, which I have loved. ver. 70. Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law: So Paul, Rom. 7. 22. I delight in the law of God in the inward man. There was joy in the whole City when Christ was Preached, Acts 8. 8. Joy in the Eunuch converted: Joy in the Jaylor, Acts 16. 34. And when he had brought them into his huse, he set meat before them and rejoyced, believing in God with all his house. Great joy in rearing the material Temple, great joy at the bring∣ing of the Ark and celebration of the Passover: And such joy and delight is in the hearts of all Gods people. They do not onely per∣form duties, but delight in them: As a man drinks when he's dry, eats when he's hungry, and delights in meat and drink; so it's the meat and drink of the Saints to do the will of God. 3. Wee'l survey the particular ways of godliness, and see what cause of delight there's in them. The ways of Wisdom are either the ways of Gods Ordinances, or ways of exercise of the Graces of the Spirit, or ways of obedi∣ence to the Commandments. These are all ways of Divine Wis∣dom and Godlinesse, and all these ways are top full of delight and pleasure. 1. The ways of Gods Ordinances are ways of pleasure: Every Ordinance is a pleasant, sweet and delightful Ordinance. 1. The Word is a sweet Ordinance, Psal. 119. 103. How sweet 1. The word is a sweet Ordi∣nance. are thy words unto my taste? yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. It was his comfort in all afflictions, Psal. 119. 50. This is my com∣fort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickned me. Psal. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the te∣stimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoycing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightning the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for
ever: the judgements of the Lord are true and righteous altogether; more to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold; sweeter al∣so then the hney or the honey comb. Moreover, by them is thy servant warned, and in keping of thm there is great reward. God speaks to us in his Word by the mouth of his Messengers: O what sweetness doth God communicate to the soul out of this Ordinance! There∣fore Mary chose the better part, Luke 10. 42. You may read her practice, ver. 39. She sat at Jesus feet, and heard his Word: Prov. 8. 34. Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my dores. 2. Prayer is a sweet Ordinance: The Saints have conference with 2. Prayer is a sweet Ordi∣nance. God, and feel much sweetness and delight coming in: Therefore Prayer is called incense, Lev. 16. 12. And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail. Numb. 16. 46. And Moses said to Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly and make an atonement. Psal. 141. 2. Let my prayer be set before thee as incense, and the lifting up of mine hands an evening sacrifice. Rev. 8. 3, 4. And another an∣gel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it, with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. And the smoak of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended Solatium st ha∣bere cui pectus aperias. Ambr. up before God, out of the angels hand. Hannah, after all her tears, felt joy coming in, and she was no more sad, 1 Sam. 1. 18. When we are in great afflictions, we account it matter of comfort to have a friend to whom we may ease our selves, by way of communicating our condition, and unbosoming our selves to him: These are such times when we can trust no person, never so near nor dear, Micah 7. 6, 7. For the son dishonoreth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother; the daughter in law against her mother in law: a mans ene∣mies are the men of his own house: Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. Yet at all times we may goe to God, unbosom our selves to him, make our requests known unto him in the name of Christ: And though riches forsake thee, and friends forsake thee; yet all's abundantly recom∣pensed in this sweet promise, Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as you have: For he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. VVhatever thou
wantest, yet if thou wantest not a heart to pray, thou wilt finde comfort. The children of God would not loose the benefit of their Prayers, nor a good look from Christ, smiling upon them in an∣swer to their Prayers, for all the Joys and Delights in the Universe. 3. The Sacraments are sweet, delightful Ordinances: For the Sa∣crament 3. The Sacra∣ments are sweet Ordinances. of initiation, Baptism, it's a comfort to be admitted one of Christs Family: 'Tis that which Theodosius preferred before his Em∣pire. But the fruit of this joy and comfort will appear, when God hath regenerated thee, and made thee a new Creature, Titus 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghst. Now compare this Sacrament of Baptism with Circumcision, and we may see how much God indulgeth us under the Gospel: That was a hard and irksome service in cutting away the fore-skin from the flesh. Simeon and Levi overcame the Sichemites when they were sore. Now Baptism is far easier, the dipping or sprinkling in Wa∣ter. More delight and pleasantness was in this Ordinance then that. Then for the Lords Supper, This is a spiritual Banquet, a Feast of fat things, such as is promised, Isa. 25. 6. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well re∣fined: 'Tis a sealing Ordinance: The word writes the evidence fair; Prayer prevails with God for a sight of it. The Sacrament comes and sets a seal to it; and when there's such a sealing day, then salvation is come unto thy soul. And these Ordinances must needs be full of delight and consolation, which are the means of our eter∣nal salvation. 3. As the Ordinances are full of delight, so are all the Graces of 3. All the Graces of the Spirit are sweet Ordinances. Gods spirit, Cant. 1. 3. Because of the savour of thy good oyntments, thy name is as oyntment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. Cant. 4. 13, 14. Thy plants are an orchard of pomgranates with pleasant fruits, camphire with spikenard. Spiknard and saffron, calamus and cyna∣mon, with all trees of frankincense, myrrhe & aloes, with all the chief spi∣ces. As for instance, Faith is a sweet, pleasant Grace; its our life, & no∣thing sweeter then life, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith: So Hope is sweet & pleasant, Pro. 10. 28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness; but the expectation of the wicked shall perish. Then patience is sweet;
for it sweetens all hardships, and bears, all crosses: It makes a ver∣tue of necessity, Heb. 10. 36. For ye have need of patience, that af∣ter ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. Likewise Love is pleasant, for it, by a Divine Alchimy, turns the basest Me∣tals into gold, Cant. 8. 6, 7. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, and as a seal upon thine arm, for love is strong as death: Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. Another delightful Grace is Meekness: A meek spirit is chearful, and reviv'd amidst storms of persecution: And so is Humility. Passionate and Proud men take no joy in any thing, they are of Haman's humor: But meek, humble, self-denying spirits, are full of joy and tranquility: when the minde is quieted and setled, whatever makes against it, there's something to make for it, something coming in to support the soul, and carry it on chearfully: There's the exercise of no Grace, but it's joyous and delightsom to Gods children. Faith, Hope, Patience, Love, Meek∣ness, Humility, are the delight of Gods children. 4. Lastly, There's much delight and joy in obedience to Gods 4. There's much delight and joy in obedience to Gods com∣mandments. commandments. O how love I thy law! Thy law is my delight, said David: All the Duties of obedience are pleasant to Gods chil∣dren: When the Spouse is once drawn, she will be a running, Cant. 1. 4. Draw me and I will run after thee. So David, Psal. 119. 32, 77. I will run the ways of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart. It was Pauls delight, in the place above mention'd; and it was Davids rejoycing, Psal. 119. 14, 15, 16. I have rejoyced in the ways of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. I will delight my self in thy statutes, and not forget thy word. Obedience to the command∣ments is easie to Gods children: They do it with as much delight, as David danced before the Ark. But profane persons do duties as Phaltiel followed Micl. 'Tis said, 1 John 5. 3. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous. 'Tis easie with Gods children to forbear Swearing, they covenant with their tongues: It's easie to forbear Whoredom; they covenant with their eyes: It's easie to keep the Sabbath; for they call it a delight: It's easie to hear the word, and tarry it out patiently, for it is a joy unto them, Matth. 11. 28, 29, 30. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am lowly and meek: For my yoke is easie and my burthen is light. Do not therefore discourage any from the ways of Religion, as the Spies did from entring into
Canaan. You can subscribe to this by experience; you can do much more work, when your spirits are chearful, when you do your business willingly: A chearful minde will facilitate the weigh∣tiest enterprize. Many use Recreations to refresh their spirits: And Recreation may not be us'd otherwise then as a File to Devotion. Now the practice of holy Duties is the godly mans recreation: It was Christs meat and drink to do his Fathers work; and so it is of the godly: Therefore they Pray, Read, Hear, Meditate, and live chearfully: Their souls are delighted and quieted in the perform∣ance of duty. Carry home this truth with you, that there's more real, sollid joy in the ways of Religion, then all the delightful ways in the Uni∣verse: And Oh! that this might stir your affections to be in love with the ways of godliness. I now come to the confirmation of the Point by some evident Demonstrations. 1. Whatever pleasure men finde in the world, is much more to Demonst. 1. No pleasure in the world like to the pleasure of godliness. be found in the ways of godliness, Prov. 3. 14, 15. For the mer∣chandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain there∣of then fine gold: She is more precious then rubies, and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. Prov. 8. 14, 15. Coun∣sel is mine, and sound wisdom; I am understanding, I have strength. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. I shall instance in all the senses: The eye takes delight in beauti∣full Objects. It's a pleasant thing to behold the Sun: the Light is pleasant, but no such beauty as in the ways of God. Solomon speaks much of the Ruby, and compares Wisdom to it for its resplendent Lustre. Could the beauty of godliness be seen with these eyes, they would be dazled. Excellens sensibile corrumpit si sensū. The eye of man hath seen stately Buildings, rich Treasures, precious Commo∣dities; but the eye of Faith in a Believer seeth the holy Trinity, the Throne of God: In comparison whereof, the bravest sights in the World are nothing, even less then nothing. 2. The eare is delighted with melodious musicke. Men love to heare a skillfull Musitian. But in a transcendent manner the eares of the godly are delighted with hearing the word, the strong cryes and prayers of God's people, the singing of Psalmes, Psal. 89. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyfull sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. Some antient Philosophers phansied
musick in the Orbes and Intelligences to wheel them about. That opinion is much controverted amongst themselves: But this is an undoubted truth that there's no musick so delightfull to the eare as duties of religion. They are pleasant to God's eare. For hee loves to heare his people praying, and should not they bee pleasant to ours? And besides, what wee heare of God now is but for a moment: what wee shall heare heareafter shall bee to eternity. When the damned are a roaring, skriking, howling, blaspheming, cursing, weeping, and heare nothing else: Then the Saints shall heare Hallelujah's, prai∣sing, singing, and joyne themselves in a Celestiall Consort. 3. The tast shall bee delighted in the ways of godlinesse. Glut∣tons and drunkards delight much in their tast. Curious tasts will not bee pleased but with sweet and delightfull things. Now O Chri∣stian get another tast, a spirituall relish of heavenly thinges, Psal. 34. 4. O tast and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that put∣teth his trust in him. 4. The smell is delighted in the ways of godliness. Hence it's called the savour of ointment. And graces are resembled to spices for their fragrancy. When the Alabaster box of ointment was opened, it per∣fumed all the roome. The godly have a good savour, they leave a sweet sent behind them, Prov. 10. 7. The memory of the just is bles∣sed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. The righteous have a good name, and they live, when they are dead. The wicked goe out like the snuffe of a candle. Then 5thly for touching, ther's delight in that likewise. The Demonstrat. 2. All the wayes of godliness are rational wayes poore woman had the sweetest touch that ever shee met with, Mat. 9. 21. Let mee but touch the hm of his garment, and I shall be whole. And thus in every sense ther's delight. A second Demonstration is: All the wayes of godliness are ra∣tionall wayes: There are observed (according to Philosophers di∣rections) , rationall and irrationall desires. As wee are to pray to bee delivered from unreasonable men: so from unreasonable desires. The very heathens scorn'd sensual brutish delights. Clemens Alexandrinus brands gluttony by two significant words, viz: . And Tully tels us; Nemo dignus nomine hominis, qui unum diem velit ess in vo∣luptate. So that drunkenness, gluttony, &c: are irrationall, bru∣tish, sensuall pleasures. Godliness only hath rationall pleasures, so that the pleasures of Godliness are sutable to the principles of
right regulated reason. They indeed elevate and are above it: yet Rom. 12. 1. , Quod nostrum sacrificium sit ejusmodi ut de eo possimus a∣tionem poscen∣tibus reddere. Origen. De∣monstrat. 3. All the ways of godliness are made up of love. not contrary to it. Ther's reason in every holy duty, ther's ra∣tionality in the pathes of wisdome. Carnall reason doth not ap∣prehend it: but spirituall and illuminated reason apprehends the wayes of holiness to bee most rationall, and the godly man to bee the man of understanding. Hence a wise man and a godly man, a fool and a sinner are synonymous termes in the proverbes of Solomon. The third Demonstration is, the wayes of godlinesse must needs bee wayes of pleasantness, because they are all made up of Love. What comes from a principle of love hath much delight and pleasure in it. Now every principle of the way of God is love. God sets his heart upon us, and that love to us makes our love reciprocall to him. Love I may terme, Vehiculum animae, the chariot of the soule. It carries on the soule swiftly unto God, Bee the way smooth or ruggid, faire or fowle, love will carry the soule on with expedi∣tion. A love to godliness will make thy soule delight in it abun∣dantly, Cant. 3. 9, 10. King Solomon made himselfe a Chariot of the wood of Lebann, hee made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottome thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being pav'd with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem. A strange expression that the midst of the chariot should bee pav'd with love. The chariot whereby Christ doth carry his people up and downe in this world, and bringes them to himselfe, is such a chariot, as the midst there∣of is pav'd with love, Peruse vers. 7, 9, 10: compared together. Behold this bed which is Solomon's, threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. King Solomon made him a chariot of the wood of Lebanon, &c. The bed of Solomon, is to be understood of the rest and glory which the Saints shall have with Christ eternally. And by the Chariot of Solomon, the wayes wherein Christ carries his people up and down in the world to himselfe and in the midst thereof is love. Such wayes then must needs bee pleasant. What wee love wee delight in. Ps. 84. 1. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hostes: my soule longeth, yea even fainteth for the courts of the Lord. The 4th demonstration is; The wayes of godliness must needs bee wayes of pleasantness, because they have the presence of God; and Demonstrat. 4. Wayes of god∣liness have God's presence. in these wayes God communicates himselfe unto the soules of his people. Holiness is God's Image▪ and God delights himselfe in his own Image; and therefore hee lets out the influence of his love, and manifests his peculiar presence to those that walke in these
wayes. Thus Enoch walked with God, and God translated him. Thus the Apostles sang in prison. They had merry hearts, because God was with them. Thus David at Ziglag encouraged himselfe in the Lord his God, 1 Sam. 30. 6. God is in them, and lets out him∣selfe unto them: Now the quintessence of all good put together is in every beame of God's reconciled countenance, and therefore when God thus manifests himselfe to a soul, there mustneeds be de∣light. This made the Apostles rejoyce, when they had been beaten: This made the martyrs kiss the stake; For they apprehended a glymps of God's loving countenance, and this reviv'd their spirits: some of them said, Bee of good cheere, wee have a sad break-fast, but wee shall have a merry supper with the Lambe. 5. The wayes of godliness have all the properties of such a good as is Demonstrat. 5. The wayes of godliness have all the proper∣ties of a desira∣ble good. most desirable and delightful to the soul. Philosophers distribute them in honestum, juundum & utile. All these are appropriated to godliness. 1. It's honestum, of good report, Phil. 4. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honst, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are love∣ly, whatsoever thinges are of good report; if there bee any virtue, and if there bee any praise, thinke on these things. 2. Jucundum. No delight like the wayes of Religion. Then thers delight in the soule, when its in a right frame and temper. Now the soule is in no such temper; but in the wayes of Religion. A good conscience, or as it is rendred, a good or merry heart is a con∣tinual feast. And James 5. 13. Is any amonge you afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry, let him sing psalmes, , if ones mind be right. Thus the Law was David's and Paul's delight. 3. Ʋtile, much emolument accrues to a godly man. In the left hand of wisdome are riches and honour. And wee read. 1 Tim. 6. 6. Godliness with contentment is great gaine. God is a liberall pay-master to his servants, and none ever went away loosers by the service of God. Heathens faired the better for their compas∣sion to the Israelites, Exod. 1. 21. And it came to pass, because the Midwives feared God, that hee made them houses. Obed Edom fai∣red the better for entertaining the Arke. The Sareptan widdow for entertaining the Prophet: Potiser for Joseph. God's people receive benefits by others, and are beneficiall to others. 4. To these I adde a fourth, Bonum Honorabile. Riches and honour are with wisdome. None so honorable as God's servants. Noe such honourable wayes as the wayes of Religion. The pathes
of wickedness are base and ignoble. Antiochus is cal'd a vile per∣son, Dan. 11. 21. And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honour of the Kingdome, but hee shall come in peaceably, and obtaine the Kingdome by slatteries. But godliness is ho∣nourable. Honor est in honorante. What shall be done to the man, whom the King of Heaven delights to honour. And wee read, Act. 17. 11. These were more noble than those in Thssalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures dayly whether those things were so: . Hence Ignatius sayd, Nobi∣litas & antiquitas mea Jesus Christus. Godlinesse is an honourable service. The wayes of Wickednesse most ignoble and dishonou∣rable. 5. It's bonum conveniens, a good suteable and commensurate to the desires of the soule. The soule is a heavenly borne being, spi∣rituall, immateriall, and nothing can bee suteable, but that which beares a like proportion. The soule is not nourished with huskes, pleasures, profits, delights of the world. No earthly thing can sa∣tisfie the vast and boundless desires of an immortall soule when the Depth says, It's not in mee: the sea it's not in mee: the easterne and westerne treasures of gold & spices say, It's not in us: from God alone commeth satisfaction. Hee alone can fill up the Angles of our heart, Psal. 90. 4. O satisfie us early with thy mercy, that wee may rejoice, and bee glad all our dayes. Wee may eat and not bee satisfied, that's a curse threatned, Micah. 6. 14. Thou shalt eat: but not bee satis∣fied, and thy casting downe shall bee in the mid'st of thee, &c. Wee may see varieties of delightfull objects: and yet not bee satisfied, Eccles. 1. 8. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the eare fild with hearing. Wee may love silver and yet not bee satisfied, Eccles. 5. 10. Hee that loveth silver shall not bee satisfied with silver; nor hee that loveth abundance with increase: But Jer. 31. 14. And I will satiate the soules of the Priests with fatness; and my soule shall be satisfied with goodness saith the Lord. Pleasures, riches, honours, profits, are not suteable goods. But holyness is suteable and satisfactory to the soule. 6. Bonum permanns. Riches make themselves winges and fly away. Friends are perfidious. Creature comforts are like Job's deceitfull brook. But godliness is durable. Prov. 8. 18. Riches and honour are with thee, yea durable riches and righteousness. Holy∣nesse lasts to eternity. When all leaves thee, a good Conscience
keeps thee company in Heaven. Doe you then desire an eternall permanent good! get the feare of God principled in your hearts. Demonstrat. 6. Drawne from incouraging delight which God hath pro∣mised. The 6th and last demonstration shall be drawne from the many incourageing delights that God hath provided for them. They en∣joy the garden of Eden, a paradise of delights here upon earth, their lives are sweet and delightfull: for they have a God to goe to, to call him Abba, father: They have Christ their Mediatour: the spi∣rit of truth, their comforter. They have thee the sweet springes and Rivers of Ordinances to refresh them, and rich and precious promises. They have in them a grand Charter, full of immunities and glorious priviledges. And they have a Christ, the tree of life, and what hee hath is put forth for their good. Hee's a counsellour to instruct them, a fountaine to cleanse them, a mighty God to de∣fend them: so that having all these helpes and Incouragements from the holy Trinity, from the promises, from the ordinances, they must needs suck sweetness out of these breasts of consolation. Review all these demonstrations, and from them learne to set a high price of, and delight your selves in the wayes of Godlynesse. Therefore this doctrine serves, 1. For an Use of conviction, to con∣vince Use. 1. For conviction. the world of their exceeding great folly in their prejudicate opinions against the wayes of godlyness. They are unacquainted with the amiable beauty & sweet refreshings of divine wisdom, and therefore they speak evill of that which they know not, prejudging and rashly censuring God's people for melancholy, dumpish spiri∣ted persons. These deale with the wayes of God as the Pagan Per∣secutors with the primitive Christians: They put them in Beares and dogges skinnes, so to render them odious to the multitude, then they baited and worried them. Just so prophane men now adayes put religion into ugly conceits: they censure Professours of religion for dissemblers, and hypocrites, and the profession it selfe sowre, un∣pleasant and burdensome, and thus they revile the wayes of God. But these peoples tongues are no slanders. They even fight against their own shaddowes, or else make a man of clouts and then fight against him. This is their fancy, their conceit, and their ground∣lesse misprission: Not that ther's any such thing as they fancy in the wayes of godliness: For all the wayes of Godliness are lovely and excellent, sweet and delightfull unto the Saints of God; only thou judgest ignorantly and rashly. Thy eye is like one that hath the yellow Jaundice, which seest all things yellow. Thou hast a na∣turall
eye and therefore canst not discerne aright of the wayes of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. But the naturall man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishnesse unto him: neither can he know them: for thy are spiritually discerned. But hee that is spiri∣tuall judgeth all things: yet hee himselfe is judged of no man. Thou hast a dull eare & therefore wilt not hear the voice of a spi∣ritual charmer, charme hee never so wisely. Thou hast a carnal tast, and therefore canst not relish and tast sweetness in God's wayes: Thou hast all thy affections disordered and out of frame, thy love, joy, desire are upon the world. Thou followest other lovers, plea∣sures, lusts, profits. These have bewitched thy heart and took up thy delight: and therefore thou art a mere stranger unto the wayes of godliness. I would gladly convince carnall men, that ther's no delight in carnall, sinfull pleasures. I have proved largely that the wayes of godliness are the only wayes of pleasantness. Ile propound some convictions that the wayes of sinne and wickednesse have no reall solid pleasure, no true delight and contentment in them. 1. The wayes of wickedness afford only sensuall, fleshly plea∣sures. Convict. 1. The wayes of wickedness af∣ford sensuall pleasures. The drinking gameing, epicurizing of ungodly men only reacheth to the sensuall part. And what shall I pamper a carcass, that which must bee wormes meat, and shall I neglect my precious soule? what shall Christ, heaven, eternity bee neglected for satis∣faction of a base lust, a few paltry pleasures, which last but for a season? If carnall wisdome bee sensuall, much more carnall lusts, Jam. 3. 15. This wisdome descendeth not from above: but is earth∣ly, sensuall devilish. Will the glutton please his brutish appetite; will the drunkard dare to make his throat his tunnell, his belly his barrell for a little sensuall pleasure, and hazard his immortall soule to all eternity? 2. Ther's much mixture of inward sadness, many damps of spirit amidst all the carnall pleasures of wicked men, Prov. 20. 17. Convict. 2. Theres inward sadness amidst outward sinfull pleasures. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but afterwards his mouth shall bee filled with gravell. And in the midst of laughter the heart is sorrowfull. Ambrose hath a notable expression to this purpose. Vi∣des convivium peccatoris, interroga ejus conscientiam, &c. Thou seest the wicked man's feasting▪ but question with his Conscience; doth not that stink more filthily than any sepulchre. Thou seest his joy, his lustinesse, thou wonderest at the abundance of his riches,
children: but couldst thou look within, thou wouldst see wounds of Conscience, sadnesse and heaviness of spirit. A wicked man may put on a merry countenance, though his heart may bee sad. When Belshazar was a carrowsing, a damp of heart seazed upon him presently as soon as hee saw the hand writing. Damocles at a great feast had a sword hanging over his head with a twined thread. All these pleasures are , mixt with sorrow and vexation of spirit. 3. Carnall pleasures produce the curse of God. What delight Convict. 3 Carnal plea∣sures bring a curse. couldst thou take in a time of infection to have a brave suit of ap∣parrell with the plague in it? what delight in drinking poyson in a guilded cup. Aggrippina tempered poyson for Claudius in that meat wherein hee most delighted. Thou followest the careere and swinge of thy affections. God makes thy strongest affections thy thy strongest afflictions. David was most crost in Absolom, and Adonijab, Amnon in Tamar, Jonah in his Gourd. A volupuous man delights in gameing, by gameing God bringes him to poverty. A glutton makes his belly his God, God makes his table his snare. The drunkards cup is become his poyson. What seavers, dropsies and diseases accompany him? The slothfull man, who sleeps out his time, is cloath'd with ragges. Give mee, saith Chrysostome, one voluptuous man, that is idle and hath his health. Idleness is the chamber of all diseases. Drunkards pull the houses of their bodies about their eares. 4. Carnall pleasures are vanishing and momentary. All the Convict. 4. Carnal plea∣sures are va∣nishing mo∣mentary. merry meetings, sports, pastimes are but flashes, a blaze and soon gone, like crackling of thornes, Eccles. 7. 6. For as the crack∣ling of thornes under a pot: so is the laughter of the foole. Either they leave us or wee them. Haman was banqueting and in great request with the King, upon a sudden out of favour and hang'd uppon a gallowes. Can any man of wisdome delight in fickle, flashie, vaine things? Isai. 55. 2. Wherefore doe yee spend money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligent∣ly unto mee, and eat yee that which is good, and let your soule delight it selfe in fatness. If the pleasures of the wicked would hold for e∣ver, then they would have somewhat to say for themselves: But they are gone upon a suddaine. 1. They are gone from thee. They are like a snow-ball, presently they melt away. Riches make themselves winges. They are gone from thee in thy youth. The
candle of the wicked is soone put out. Or else when thou comest to bee old, thou wilt say as Barzilla did, 2 Sam. 19. 34. How long have I to live, that I should goe up with the King unto Jerusalem? Or else 2. Thou art gone from them. When death arrests thee to appeare before the Judge of Heaven and earth, then farewell all pleasures, merry meetings, boon companions: All sports will leave thee, then thou must bee in eternity; And O how dolefull will that sound bee to thee; The season is past now, the Judge hath vaild his face: thy cursed delights in burning lusts will end in eternall burnings. 5. All the carnall pleasures in the world are not able to satisfie Convict. 5. the soule. Haman was discontent amidst all his glory for want of Mordecaies bended knee. Witty jests, melodious musick, stately buil∣dings, delicate cheare; how can these satisfie the soule? Doe they leave any sweet contentment behind them? No, ther's a sting in the Conscience. What man of wisdome can comfort himselfe when hee goes to bed, when hee hath spent the day past in carnall lusts, sinful pleasures? Let mee aske thee, and O▪ that thou wouldst aske thy soule the question, what benefit have I got by the societie of de∣baucht Ruffians? what comfort can I take from my chambring and wantonness? what delight in my drinking, carrowzing & healthing? O aske thy Conscience, and if it bee not feared, it will tell thee, all these are miserable comforters. Believe it Christians, soule delights on∣ly leave a sweet relish in our soules after their acts are past. When wee are reading, hearing, praying, meditating, Oh! what joy doth there remaine upon our spirits. One dram of such spirituall joy will more chear up our spirits, then all the joy in harvest and the dividing the spoile with the mighty. But on the contrary, sensuall, carnal pleasures, when theire acts are over, then is the beginning of our torment. 6ly, and lastly. The finall period and end of all finfull pleasures is eternall destruction. Job. 20. 12. Though wickednesse be sweet in Convict. 6 The end of sin∣full pleasures is eternall de∣struction. the mouth, though he hide it under his tongue: yet his meate in his bow∣ells is turned; it is the gall of asps within him. Prov. 23. 31, 32. Looke not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it mooveth it selfe aright. At the last it biteth like a ser∣pent, and stingeth like an adder. Prov. 7. 22. 23. He goeth after her straightway as an Ox goeth to the slaughter or as a foole to the correction of the stockes, till a dart strike thorow his liver, as a bird hasteth to the snare and knoweth not that it is for his life. Prov. 5. 11 And thu mourne at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed. Sensuall
pleasures lead to and fit us for destruction. Isai. 5. 14. Therefore hell hath enlarged herselfe, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pompe, and he that rejoyceth shall descend into it. Job. 21, 12, 13. They take the timbrel and harpe, and rejoyce at the sound of the organ: they spend their dayes in wealth, and in a moment goe downe unto the grave. These are they that come to a fearefull end. Your sorrow shall be proportionable to your joy. Rev. 18. 7. How much shee hath glorified her selfe, and lived delicious∣ly, so much torment and sorrow give her: For shee saith in her heart, I set a queene, and am no widdw, and shall see no sorrow. O that these premises might deeply affect all voluptuous livers. Consider amid'st all thy delights, what will there not be bitternesse in the end? will not dayes of mourning come? cups of trembling for cups of healthing and carrowsing? Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoyc, O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheare thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. If after every intemperate draught a cup of scalding lead were poured downe thy throat, how grievous would that be! The end of all thy intemperate pleasures will be worse. Job. 2. 20. His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drinke of the wrath of the almighty. Now thou delights in long sitting amongst drunkards (though thou canst not patiently stay out a sermon) but thou shalt drinke of the cup of Gods wrath eternally. O that what hath been said might terrify all prophane persons, voluptuous livers, that seeing the sad, dismall condition of carnall pleasures, they would make a better choice. To which purpose I presse a second use, for exhortation. Let me beseech you as you consult the eternall good of your im∣mortall Ʋse. 2. For Exortation. soules to delight your soules in the waies of godlinesse. No true pleasure to be found else where. O make God your delight, your joy, let your spirits be solaced in the waies of God. David would rather be a dore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of wickednesse. Be your condition never so mean, your sorrowes in the world multiply'd: yet all's abundantly made up in the joy of Gods loveing and reconciled countenance Account then the sabbath a delight: Heare with delight, pray, read and me∣ditate with delight. If you take a delight in the waies of God, assure your selves, God will come in and you shall see and tast more sweet∣nesse
in God, then ever you did all the daies of your life. I formerly∣surveyed all the waies of God, and concluded they were the only pleasant, delightful waies in all the world, And the more I meditate on them the more delight I find in them. The young Levit's heart was merry when preferment was offered to him; much more joy is in that soule which is prefer'd to a sweet communion with Jesus Christ. The soule is ravished with the love of Jesus Christ, The joy is unuttera∣ble. A stranger cannot intermeddle with it. It's a saying of Bernard. Vis nunquam esse tristis, bene vive. I perswade you to make a blessed change ofearthly to get heavenly, of carnal to get spiritual, of momen∣tany and transient to get permanent pleasures. A rich man delights in his riches, a voluptuous man in his pleasures, an ambitious man in his titles of honour. And what reall contentment can be found in all these? but a godly man delights in Christ. Christ is his joy, his hope, his love, his desire, his honour. 1 Pet. 2. 7. Ʋnto you which be∣lieve he is precious: But unto them which be dissobedient, the stone which the builders dissallowed is made the head of the corner. Will beauty delight you? Christ is the fairest of ten thousand. Will riches and honour take you? In the left hand of wisdome are riches and hon∣nours. What are your desires? Be they what they will (and the desires are boundlesse) yet read, Ps. 37. 4. Delight thy selfe in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. O! then be no longer a stranger to the wayes of wisdome. O delight in the promi∣ses, and you shall suck sweetnesse out of these breasts of consolation. Delight your selves in the divine ordinances, and with joy you shall draw water out of these wells of salvation. O delight in Jesus Christ, Isaih: 12. 3. let your whole desires beset upon him. And hee's faire and plea∣sant for delight, Cant. 7. 6. How faire and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights! Get your hearts in Love with Christ and his ways; And one sparke of love will beget a flame of seraphicall affections. What you love, you will most delight in. I proceed to a third Use for tryal and examination: Every one Use 1. for exa∣mination. lays claim to the duty: They profess delight in Christ and in his ways: As it was said, When the Son of man comes, shall he finde Faith on the earth? so when Christ calls us to account, shall he finde this true delight in his ways? This pleasantness may be much mista∣ken, and many pretend to it, who have no right nor portion in it. Many mistake natural pleasantness for spiritual pleasantness: There∣fore it nearly concerns us to examine our selves whether this plea∣santness
be natural or spiritual. I'le lay down some Qualifications of spiritual joy and pleasantness. 1. Spiritual joy and pleasantness is serious, grave, composed. Gods  children rejoyce with prudence: Whereas in a natural pleasantness there's much lightness in carriage, much vanity and indiscretion. Gods children are careful to let no misplac'd word, , come from them: Natural joy wants this circumspect, considerate be∣haviour. 2. Spiritual Joy is such as can stand with fear, and the work of  Repentance and Humiliation, Psal. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trembling. Psal. 112. 1. Praise ye the Lord: blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his command∣ments. This transcends the sphear of the activity of natural joy: It never looks at Humiliation and godly sorrow for sinne. These dash its mirth presently, and spoils all the sport of a naturall man. 3. Spiritual Joy hath God for its object: The joy of the Lord  (saith Nehmiah) is your strength. So David encouraged himself in God. Now natural joy looks no higher then Farms, Pleasures, Friends, Profits in the World; If riches encrease, then are their hearts set on them. 4. Spiritual Joy delights in all ways of Wisdom: It's said of He∣rod  that he heard John , sweetly; but he could not brook the seventh Commandment. Many natural men can delight in some way of wisdom, so far forth as they please their fancies. The stony ground received some truths with joy; but could not close with o∣ther truths: That joy which is spiritual, delights in all the Com∣mandments of God respectively: There's an equal and indifferent respect unto all Gods Commandments. 5. Spiritual Joy is the strength of the soul, and carrys it on in the  ways of God more fully: Its as Oyl to the Wheels to facilitate its motion. Are your spirits reviv'd in the ways of God? Are you carryed on with vigor and delight in the ways of Godlyness? Are your motions more quick and nimble? VVhat life have you felt in Prayer? What sweetness in Hearing? What activity in Medita∣tion? Are your affections on the wing, soaring aloft to Heaven? Doth this joy quicken your spirits to a chearful performance of du∣ty, and make the Chariot Wheels of your souls move swiftly? Then this is a spiritual joy: Whereas natural joy makes a mans heart
dead in spiritual things. When men are full of worldly joy, if you interpose some savory discourse of God, and his ways; those men who had fluent tongues before, can say nothing, they are as it were dead men, their hearts are as Nabals, as a stone within them. Sixthly and lastly, Spiritual joy will support the spirit and bear up  the heart in the want of all outward joy and pleasantness, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, and joy in the God of my sal∣vation. A soul that hath onely natural pleasantness is all amort, and quite cast down, when any affliction befalls it: But a soul that hath spiritual pleasantness amidst all sorrows, findes comfort in God to swallow them all up. When crosses and afflictions befall a childe of God, then is the time for tryal of his joy, Rom 5. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we stand and rejoye in hope of the glory of God. He kisseth the rod: Amidst outward sorrows he feels inward consolations; an exchange of worldly for spiritual joys. The fourth Use shall be for Direction: you will ask, How shall we Ʋse 4. For Direction. carry on the work of God chearfully? A. 1. Take heed of allowing thy self in any secret sin: A secret sin allowed of will dash all thy mirth. I told you before a saying of Luther: for its excellency I reminde you of it again. Ʋnagu∣tula malae conscientiae totum mare mundani gaudii absorbet. No way in the world so conducible hereunto, as the purging out thy corru∣ptions, the exterminating of sin out of thy soul. The fewer sins, the more will be thy joy, as I may instance in David, who com∣plain'd of broken bones, and Prayes, Restore unto me the joys of thy salvation, that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce. 2. Study seriously and frequently all the ways of godliness: The more knowledge thou hast of the ways of God, the more de∣light wilt thou take in them. The saying is, Ignoti nulla cupido: Princi∣ple thy heart therefore aright in the ways of godliness, and labor for more knowledge of them: Labor to know the beauty, and excel∣lency, and incomparable riches of Christ. The ignorant people ask, What is thy beloved more then another beloved? Labor to comprehend with all Saints the heighth, depth, length and breadth of the love of God: Be not content with that measure of knowledge which thou
hast already attained, but get accessions and additions to it, Psal. 9. 10. And thy that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou, O Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee. 3. Put in practice the Divine Art of Meditation: This is the spi∣ritual digesting of the Food of Heaven: O what abundance of comfort do Christians feel by Meditation! Meditation is Animae ve∣hiculum, it carrys up thy Devotions to Heaven. To go to duties with a barren, dull spirit, there's no delight; but to go to them af∣ter spiritual Meditation, this is sweet and pleasant indeed. Thus Isaac meditated in the fields. Mary pondred Christs words in her heart: Sequester therefore your souls apart from all worldly intan∣glements, and meditate of the riches of Christ, of the excellency of his ways, and by this means your spirits will be elevated, and you'l perform duties with more vigour and alacrity of spirit. Fourthly and lastly. Be sure to walk uprightly: Get an upright heart, and thou mayest take comfort in whatsoever thou doest, Pro. 10. 9. He that walketh uprightly, walketh surely: but he that pervert∣eth his way shall be known. Many complain, I cannot do as others do, I want those joys they have: I cannot perform duties as well as they. I direct thee to be sure that thy heart be upright, that what thou doest is in sincerity, and God will accept sincerity in lieu of perfection. Is then thy heart upright? Is it the desire and en∣deavour of thy soul to close with God? Dost thou not willingly al∣low thy self in any sin, be of good comfort: It becometh the up∣right to be joyful. I have one Use more for consolation to the people of God, who Ʋse 5. For Consola∣tion. by experience subscribe to the truth of the Doctrine, That all the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness. To these comfort apper∣tains as their peculiar right and interest: They find comfort com∣ing in amidst all their religious services, amidst their tears and sor∣row for sin, they feel joy coming in, they have tasted and felt how sweet the Lord is. And if there be now such comfort in via, what will there be in patria? Si adeo dulcis quaerenti (saith a Father) quid invenienti? You therefore that are acquainted experimentally with these truths, That the ways of godliness are ways of pleasantness, I be∣seech you manifest the truth of these things. Tell and discourse to one another, speak what good God hath done for your souls. Ma∣ny are kept back from God hy reason of scandals and calumnies, that Religion makes men of melancholy and dumpish spirits: Confute
therefore these mistakes both by your words and actions: Tell o∣thers, and strive to win them to God, and allure them with the narration of the delights and soul-ravishing comforts that you have found in these ways: O abor to comfort others, with those com∣forts wherewith you your selves have been comforted in particular. And so walk in the ways of God: Let your actions be so carryed, and the whole frame of your soul so ordered, that it may appear to the whole world, That all the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness. Rejoyce therefore in the Lord. Delightfulness in the ways of god∣liness, put a beauty upon them: We have a sweet promise, Isa. 65. 18. But be ye glad and rejoyce for ever in that which I create: for bhold, I create Jerusalem a rejoycing, and her people a joy. A joy in the ab∣stract, and it's Gods work of creation: You therefore to whom God hath darted the beams of his reconciled countenance, I coun∣sel in the language of our Saviour, Sons and Daughters, be of good comfort, and go on chearfully: Let your hearts, as Jehoshaphats was, be lifted up in the ways of God: When the Spirit of God witnes∣seth to your spirits, that ye are the children of God, there must needs be abundance of joy in your souls: And here's your ground of rejoycing, that your names are written in the Book of Life: The Lord set home these truths unto your consciences, and move your hearts to embrace the ways of godliness. I proceed to the second Doctrine, That all the pathes of Divine Wisdom or Godliness, are full of peace to the sons and daughters of  peace. This truth I shall prove by Scripture, confirm by Reason, and press it home unto your Consciences by way of Use and Appli∣cation. For proof of Scripture, Psal. 37. 11. But the meek shall inherit 1. The Doctrine proved by Scri∣pture. the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace, and v. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. Isa. 26. 3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose minde is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Isa. 48. 18. O that thou hadst hearkned to my commandments, then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea. Isa. 54. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children. So Isa. 59. 8. The way of peace they know not, and there is no judge∣ment in their goings; they have made them crooked pathes, whosoever go∣eth therein shall not know peace. Jer. 33. 6. Behold, I will cure them,
and reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth. Ezek. 34. 25. And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of their land, and they shall dwell safely in the wilder∣ness and sleep in the woods. Even mountains bring peace, Psal. 72. 3. The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righ∣teousness. So are the beasts of the field at peace, Job 5. 23. For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Officers are made peace, Isa. 60. 17. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron, silver: I will also make thine officers peace, and thy exactors righteousness. Their habitation is peaceable, Isa. 32. 18. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. Their life peaceable, 1 Tim. 2. 2. We are commanded to pray for kings, and for all that are in autho∣rity, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and ho∣nesty. Their wisdom is peaceable, James 3. 17. But the wisdom that is from above, is first ure, then peaceable, gentle, and easie to be intreated; full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypo∣crisie. Let's inquire into the reasons of the Point. Consider, 1. God∣ly  persons are sons of peace, Luke 10. 6. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall turn to you again. And if sons, heirs, peace is their inheritance and legacy. John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. John 16. 33. These things I have spoken unto you, that you might have peace; in the world you shall have tribulation: But be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. Consider their several pathes and ways, either in this life and pil∣grimage,  in their deaths and after death. 1. For their life: Notwithstanding afflictions and persecutions, troubles from the world; yet their whole life is peaceable. A God reconciled, a Conscience pacified, makes them full of peace amidst varieties of troubles. 2. In their deaths: The remembrance of their uprightness of heart, and their utmost endeavor to serve God in sincerity, brings abundance of peace, inward peace, a tranquility in their spirits, 2 Kings 20. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walk∣ed before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Whatever storms may be from the Flesh, Divel and World; yet a serene, pacified conscience, makes a great and quiet calm in the soul.
3. After death, in Eternity they feel the fruits of peace, the complement of blessedness. A third Ground shall be taken from the nature of Divine Wis∣dom  and Godliness. For first, Wisdom onely can direct to peaceable pathes: Ways of wickedness lead us into Precipices and Dangers: Wisdom shews the good and right way: This Samuel shewed the people, 1 Sam. 12. 23, 24. Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right way. Onely fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you. 2. Wisdom protects its followers in the ways of peace: It shews them the good way, and protects and defends them in it, Prov. 4. 6, 7. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee. 3. Wisdom and Godliness remove all stumbling Blocks, Envy, Malice, Pride, &c. Enemies to peace, Prov. 4. 12. Whn thou go∣est, thy steps shall not be streightned; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble. 4. Wisdom satisfies the hearts of those who are its followers: The spirits of the godly are quieted, and established in those ways; whereas still there are troubles, and vexations, and disquietness in ways of wickedness: But godliness pacifieth the conscience, and quiets the spirits of Gods children. The fourth and last ground shall be drawn from the causes of true  peace. Now the wayes of the godly must needs be peaceable pathes. 1. Because they have a God reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 19. to wit, That God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and hath committed unto us the word of recon∣ciliation. 2. They have a Mediator and Prince of peace, Eph. 2. 14, 15. For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition betwixt us. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace. Isa. 53. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our ini∣quities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Isa. 5. 6. For unto us a Childe is born, a Son is given,
and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his Name shall be cal∣led Wonderful, Councellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace. 3. They have the Gospel of peace, Rom. 10. 15. How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? 4. They have a conscience at peace: The answer of a good con∣science quiets their spirits. Hic murus aheneus esto, &c. And now let's apply this by way of Information, Instruction, and Consolation. 1. For Information, That the ways of godliness are the onely peaceable ways: Not onely eminenter, but exclusive: What pace, said Jehu, &c. No peace with lusts, no peace in the ways of wicked∣ness, Isa. 57. 20, 21. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Thre is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked. Whatever jollity and quietness wicked per∣sons enjoy from without; yet there's war at home: A tortur'd conscience will dash all thy sports: But a childe of God, though wars may be without, yet he injoys peace at home with God and a good conscience. I shewed formerly the causes of peace, wicked men want all these. God is their enemy, Christ their enemy: The Gospel thunders out Anathema's against them: As for those mine enemies that would not have me to reign over them, bring them out, and slay them before me. For Instruction▪ 1. Be instructed in these particular Duties. 1. Select the ways of godliness, and walk close in them: Turn neither to the right hand nor to the left: Walk straight forward, and square all your actions by the rule, which is the Word of God. When men relinquish their callings, and walk out of Gods ways, then troubles and calamities befall them, and they can take no com∣fort in them. But when thou walkest exactly, and keepest close to God, whatever crosses befall thee, thou maist take comfort: in∣ward peace thou maist injoy in the midst of outward troubles. 2. Get a spiritual acquaintance with God, Job 22. 21. Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee, Job 34. 29. When he giveth quietness, who can make trouble? and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him? Get thy peace made in heaven. 3. Prize at an invaluable rate the pearl of a good conscience, and
take heed of sinning against thy conscience: Wouldst thou walk without trouble? walk uprightly (as was before mention'd) for it's undoubtedly true, That he that walketh uprightly, walketh truly: but he that perverteth his ways, shall be known. 'Tis true, offences will come, and many scandals and hardships we shall meet withal in our way to Heaven: But if we can , we shall be as bold as Lyons: Uprightness onely hath boldness: The upright is as bold as a Lyon. 4. Choose any affliction, rather then wound thy conscience by the least sin, Job 36. 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather then affliction. To procure peace with men, O do not hazzard thy peace with God, and the serenity of a good con∣science: No peace like to the peace of a good conscience. Here's comfort to Gods people: Amidst all their troubles they in∣joy abundance of peace: The serenity of a good conscience quiets their spirits, so that the fiercest turbulent Euroclydons cannot shake them. Object. O but I have many perplexities of conscience: I go mourn∣ing all the day long: God shooteth his keen Shafts at me, and vex∣eth me in his sore displeasure. 1. For answer I demand: Art thou weary of the burthen of thy sins, and art thou sensible of thy insupportable burthen? Art thou acquainted with thy miserable condition, and apprehensive of thy wretchedness? 2. Dost thou willingly allow thy self in no sin, though never so secret, though sin of delight or constitution? 3. Dost thou desire grace for to sanctifie thee, as well as mercy to pardon thee? Wouldst thou rather be rid of thy sins, then the punishments due to them? Then thy condition is full of hope: And I shall propose these counsels to thee. 1. To lie in the way where Christ comes by, at the Pool of Be∣thesda. 2. Unbare thy Wounds unto him: Look unto the Brazen Ser∣pent. 3. Stand not in thine own light, but hearken to Gods voice in his Messengers, Psal. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will say: for he will speak peace unto his people and to his saints: but let not them turn again unto folly.
4. Continue thy duties: Adde more Oyl to the flame: Be more swift to hear, more fervent in the spirit: When God holds up thy spirit to continue chearfully in the performance of thy duty, there's mercy in store for thee. 5. Remove all hinderances of thy peace, all murmuring discon∣tented expressions: If peace comes not as soon as thou wouldst have it; take heed of Rachels passionate language, Give me children, or else I die. 6. Cherish those motions of the spirit and feelings that Christ puts into thy heart: When Christ gives thee one good look, O make much of it! 'Tis mercy thou hast one good look: O set a high prize of it! Christ sometimes comes and dines, and sups with his Spouse, and then she is overjoyed: other while he absents himself from her, then she's sick for him. Now whenever Christ inspires a good mo∣tion into thy heart, be sure thou cherish it: When ever he smiles upon thee: O! observe it and make much of it. And seventhly and lastly, VVait, and resolve not to be driven from thy Fathers dore: Though he slay thee, yet put thy trust in him: Though he be angry with thee, yet still praise him: Wrestle with him, as Jacob did, and at last thy desires will be granted, and thy joy shall be full.
The dignity of the Soul. Mark 8. 36. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gaine the Serm. 10. St Maries Oxon. March 10. 1650. whole world, and lose his own soule? OUr Saviour Christ in the verses immediately forego∣ing, exhorteth his disciples, to deny themselves, v. 34. Hee lays down a Reason verse the 35th, where∣in he prevents a tacit objection, Is it not good (me∣thinks) to look to our selves, and to sleep in a whole skin? No, thou mistakest thy selfe, whilest thou thin∣kest to save thy life, thou will lose it; For whosoever, &c. But further, they might say, wee must bid adieu to the world, our losse will be wonderfull great: But compare thy losse and gain to∣gether; If thou gainest the world, O miserable gaine! oh dread∣full losse! if in the interim thou hazardest thy pretious soule; For what shall it profit us, &c. The words are a weighty reason evidently convincing us of this truth; That the gaine of the world is a miserable, unprofitable gaine, purchased with the losse of the soule. The words are propounded by way of question, and containe virtually a vehement negation. As if he should say; The gaine of the world will not profit; there's no comparison, the world is base, and contemptible, the soule excel∣lent, and invaluable; Is there any compare between gold and drosse, excellency and baseness, the soule and the world? Wherein observe, Division. 1. The things compared, the soule, and the world. 2ly. The pur∣chaser.
A man. 3ly. The price pay'd, and shall lose, &c. 4ly. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. The purchase. The whole world. 5ly. The miserable bad bargaine. What shall it profit, &c. I'le a little insist in the explication of the words, and then draw forth the Doctrines contain'd in them. Here's a question propounded of, ; This affirma∣tive question hath the force of a strong negation, . It will not profit, not the least advantage will ensue; Hee'le reape no gaine, no profit at all. , indefinitely, Indefinita in materiâ necessariâ aequivalent universali; Any man, all men, every one shall be thus served. Let the man take what paines he will; make the most of what he hath got, yet unprofitableness will be the Catastro∣phe; No man shall fare better, all the Merchants of the world shall speed alike; all that negotiate for the world, and make merchandise of the soul shall be bankrupt, and broken. . It's spoken ex hypothesi, supposing a man might gaine the world so Alexander having conquered the world, whined, that there was not another world to conquer.—Paeleo juveni non unus sufficit orbis. The Scripture speakes of severall worlds. As, 1: The elementary world, Heb. 11. 3. 2ly. The reasonable world, all mankind in 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. earth, Rom. 5. 12. 3ly. For Reprobates; Joh. 17. 9. 4ly. For the elect, Joh. 3. 16. 5ly. For the present life here, 1 Cor. 7. 34. 6ly. For the pomp and glory, the good things of this life, as Gal. 6. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 31. And thus I take it; by world, I understand all earthly excellencies, and accommodations: honours, pleasures, pro∣fits, riches, in their greatest estate and confluence, whatever is pleasant, delightfull, and esteemed of in the world. The treasures of the East, and West Indies, were all the honours, glory, dignity, pomp, riches met in one, and wert thou the purchaser of them all? wert thou as great as Nimrod, Alexander, &c: what are all these in comparison of thy soule? , mulctabitur animâ. O dreadful losse! oh lamentable hazard! the worst bargain that ever was made, the most mad purchase that ever was got; To lose thy pretious soul for base dirt, trash, pelfe, vanity, to lose one soule for a whole world, is a lamentable bargain purchased at too deare a rate. By soule is here meant the rationall soul; which is defined, , some render, actus primus, perfecte habea, . Anima est tota in toto, & tota in qualibet parte corporis, the most noble part, for wa informans. The soule of beasts, their sensitive soule is annihilated:
the soule of a bruit-beast might admit a faire dispute. That which hath life is more noble than lands, buildings, &c: which are inani∣mate. But there's no compare, between the soule and the world, an immortall soule, a materiall earthly world, and immateriall, and spirituall soule, of all created things the soule is a none-such, be∣yond compare, invaluable, and hath the preheminence. It's farre from my intententions to read a naturall Philosophy lecture upon the essence and operations of the soule; I may not mistake the Pulpit for the Schools, & stuffe up a Sermon with Philosophicall notions: though I discard not Philosophy as a hand-maid to Divinity, yet I had ra∣ther have one proofe from the scriptures than from them all, I pre∣ferre this one verse before all their elaborate volumes: my proofes therefore shall bee altogether scripture proofe. That which from these words I lay down for a foundation of my discourse, is this entire doctrinall conclusion. That the gaine of the world can in no wise countervaile the losse of o Doct. pro∣pounded. soule. For the unfolding whereof, I purpose () to make a comparison between the soule and the world, the excellency of the one, and the baseness of the other; that shall constitute the doctri∣nall part: Which done I shall improve all to point of practice, for the better ordering of your lives and conversations. This shall con∣stitute 1. Unfolded by a Comparison. 1. the Use and Application. 1. Then, wherein consists the excellency of the soule? For re∣presentation of the soules exellency; 'Ile inhance the dignity, price and value thereof in these 7 ensuing singularities. 1. The excellency of the soule consists in it's excellent and high o∣riginall. Singul. 1: The soule is the breath of God. The soule is the very breath of God, Gen. 2. 7. Job. 33. 4. The soule is not ex traduce, by carnall generation, nor by derivation or propagation from the Parents, but it's immediately inspired by God Zech. 12. 1. Crando infunditur, & infundendo creatur; so St. Au∣gustine. 2ly. Consider the paterne after which the soule was created, and Sing. 2. The soule was crea∣ted after God's image. Corruptus cor∣ruptum, lepro∣sus leprosum. that was the exactest paterne, the perfect Archetypum and exemplar, the image of God, see Gen. 1. 27. Eph. 4. 23, 24. It's said Adam be got a son in his own likeness, (i. e.) a sinner like himselfe, Gen. 3. 5. But that was statu corrupto. The Apostle argueth the case concer∣ning the decent carriages of man and woman in external circumstan∣ces,
1 Cor. 11. 7. It's the commendation of a child to resemble it's father: this inhanceth the soule, that it resembles it's Creatour. 3. Consider the soules spirituality, and immateriality. The soule Singul: 3. The soule is spiritu∣all. was not made of dust, nor shall ever be resolved unto dust. It was not made of the grosse substance of the earth, but immediately for∣med by God. The soule and spirit are coupled together, 1 Thes 5. 23. Heb. 4. 11. Luk. 23. 46. The soule is a spirituall, immateriall, incorporeall substance. 4. Consider the soules immortality, and eternall duration, Eccles. Singul. 4. The soule is immor∣tall. 12. 7. Matth: 10. 28. Both body and soule shall be immortall at the resurrection and reunion. The soule is capable of no corruption nor mortality at all. As soone as the body moulders away, the soule leaves the body; But not only the soule, but the body at the resur∣rection shall be immortall and incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15. 34. Phil. 3. 21. The soule runs parallel with the longest line of eternity. The soule hath no contrary corrupting qualities; It depends not on the matter, not on the body; for when the body is corrupted, and putrified, made meate for wormes, the soule is incorruptible, and immortall. 5. Consider the noble faculties of the soule. 2. Noble faculties appertaine to the reasonable soule, the Understanding and the Will. Singul. 5. The The soule hath noble faculties. 1 The under∣standing. 1. For the understanding, it's the bright luminary of the soule,  and , are used promiscuously in scripture. It's the Pilot to steere the ship; it sits at sterne and guides the affections, and ru∣leth over all the members. The understanding was created marve∣lous quick, knowing the Creator's mind, discerning the natures of things, Adam gave all the creatures names, suitable to their na∣ture. 2. The Will, and this was created pliable and obedient unto the 2. The will. will of God, to yeeld ready obedience to it's Creatours commands. And though the understanding be blinded, and the will depraved, the affections disordered by reason of Adam's, fall: yet Christ giveth his eye-salve to his people to cleare up their understanding, and sub∣dueth their wills unto his will. These are noble faculties: The me∣mory, conscience, affections are reduced unto these two: These faculties difference men from bruit beasts. 6. Consider the invaluable price pay'd to purchase the soule. E∣ven Singul. 6. The price paid for the soule. no less than the effusion of the bloud of Christ. He pay'd his life for the redemption of his people, the soule must needs be of in∣valuable
worth, that was bought, purchased, and pay'd for with the bloud of the Son of God: O! invaluable price more worth than millions of worlds, more then all Angels in heaven could doe, more than if Adam and all his posterity had suffered unto eternity; That the Son of God, , the eternal, God should become a child, the Antient of days should become the Infant of days, the Divine person should assume an humane nature by an hypostaticall union, that he should disrobe himselfe, and weare the ragges of mor∣tality, come into the world, not to reigne as a King, but as a ser∣vant, to dye a painefull, shamefull, and cursed death, this was an incomparable price, never to be parallel'd: And what was the end of all, but to save the soules of his people to pacifie God's wrath, reconcile man to God by the death on his crosse? 7. Consider the difficulty to save our soules; Wee have a bat∣tle to fight, a race to run, we must be wrestlers, warriours, ra∣cers, Singular. 7. It's a difficult matter to save the soule. we are to enter in at a strait gate. Few are saved, . It's no easy taske (as the ignorant world dreames of) to make our peace with God; when the Son of man commeth shall he find faith on the earth? so, shall he find Repentance, and Love? A common temporary faith, a formall Repentance, a pretended love, are every where to be found, as the sicamores in the valley for abundance: but a justifying purifying faith, a repentance not to be repented of, a love without dissimulation are hard to be found, rare hearbes, which grow in few gardens. The world cheates their soules with a shell, a picture, a fancy of faith, they believe as their parents did before them; and so they cheat their soules with a picture and fancy of repentance, they think repentance enough, if they can but mumble over that neck-verse, Lord have mercy upon me; but such lasy, easy, formall devotions, will not serve the turne, see 1 Thes: 1. 3. There is a worke of faith, a labour of love, and a patience of hope. Cheap, easy, lasy ways, are suspicious ways: Its the grea∣test work in all the world, to work out our salvation: some indeed have a sharper, some an easier birth: None are without pangs and throws one time or other. Heart wounding goeth before heart hea∣ling, Act. 2. 37. But whoever belongeth to God, shall feele the gall and wormewood, the bitterness of sinne. Sinne cost David, Peter, Mary-Magdalen, Paul, deare. Now then, that it is such a weighty difficult worke to save thy soule, hence the excellency of the soule is the more inhanced and raised.
On the contrary, as I have inhanced the soules excellency in 7 singularities, so I will debase, and vilifie the world in as many ag∣gravations. 1. The world is a stye and sinke of impurity, 1 Joh. 5. 19. Agrav. 1. The world is a sink of impurtly. What's pure religion, see, Jam. 1. 27. To kep ones selfe unspotted from the world. The world is the mother pollution: the daugh∣ter , Pet. 2. 20. The world may not be loved, 1 Joh. 2. 15. You may soone know that all the world hath, 1 Joh. 2. 16. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. 2ly. The world is a grand impostor, an arrant jugler. There Agrav. 2, The world is a grd Imposter. are three words, Eph. 4. 14: which describe the world to the life, , it courts and complements as Joab did Abner, and Amasa, as Jal served Sisera, as the Panther leaves a sweet sent, and allures the passenger to come to her, and presently hee's devoured (as they say) the Syrens songes first lull men asleep, then devoures them. The world puts a gaudy faire vizzard on the soulest actions: it calleth drunkenness, covetousness, whordome, by mincing, plausible appellations. The lewd strumpet tels of her bed of ornaments, and braveries, Prov. 7. 16, 17, But mentions not a syllable of the dart striking through the liver, vers. 23. So the wine wherewith the drunkard is intoxicated, allures him with it's colour, Prov. 23. 31; but forewarnes not of it's biting, vers. 32. The world never represents sinne in it's proper colours, but sub spe∣cie boni. Take heed of the world, it will serve thee as Jacob served Laban, change thy wages 7 times: It will serve thee as the High-Priests served Judas, Matth. 27. 4. When an anguish came upon his spi∣rit, and hee restored the thirty peeces of silver, saying I have sinned, in that I have btrayed the innocent bloud, and they said what is that to us? see thou to that. Then thirdly, the world is a merciless cruel tormentour; Solmon found it to be so by lamentable experience, Eccls. 1. 14 The cove∣tous man is upon a Rack, his bed is a bed of thornes, his bread, gra∣vell, for the losse of his God Mammon. The ambitious man, lose∣ing honour and preferment, is disquieted, that he cannot enjoy him∣selfe, so was Haman, nothing could satisfie him, so long as he wanted Mordcaie's bended knee. The want of a complement more vexed him, than all his honours contented him. At what a great losse was the young man, when he must foregoe all his possessions? At what a losse were the foolish Gadarens, when their swine were
drowned, they even preferred their swine before a Jesus. 4. The world in it's best estate, is vanity, Eccles. 1. 2. The ri∣ches, Aggrav. 4. The world is vani∣ty. honours, and pleasures, in this world, are empty broken cisternes, trees without fruit, bare leaves or apples of Sodome, which (as Hi∣storians relate) are goodly to the eye, but being touched, dissolve into cinders, and ashes, Isai. 55. 2. Not bread. The worlds goods are things which are but shadows, pictures, shels, emptiness, va∣nity, nothing, in reality and truth, Chimera's, entia rationis, brain fancies; Great expectations we have, Parturiunt montes, &c. The world is a meere lottery, we come to it with heads full of hopes, but returne back with hearts full of blankes. 5. The world is unsatisfying and unsuitable to the soule. The Aggrav. 5. The world is unsa∣tisfying. world is materiall, corruptible, earthly; the soule immateriall, in∣corruptible, heavenly. How can these be reconciled? What agreement can there be between them? Ther's no proporti∣on, nor reconciliation. The soule cannot feed on gold, you may as easily fill a bagge full of spirituall graces, as satisfie an immor∣tall soul with the world. The riches, pleasures, &c: of the world, are no way suitable, noe way satisfying, not in the least measure com∣mensurate to the vast and boundless desires of an immortall heaven∣ly-borne being soul. The high-Priests money could not satisfie Judas; as soone as conscience pricked him, he could keep the money no lon∣ger. Honours could not satisfie Haman; What doth all this availe me, &c? The foole in the Gospel could not be satisfied with the barns he already had, he must have bigger? It is not within the sphere of the activity of any sublunary thing, to satisfie an immortal soule. 6. The world is unhelpful and unprofitable in the evil day. There Aggrav. 6. The World is un∣helpful in the e∣vil day. are 4 evil dayes wherein the world cannot help. 1. In the day of affliction, losse of husband, wife, children, what can the world doe thee good? In the day of a tormented conscience; all the worlds goods cannot pacify a tormented conscience. 2ly. In the day of death. The world cannot bribe death. 4ly. In the day of judgment, no help no comfort from the world. A friend we say is known in adversity; it plainly appeares that the world is a very false perfidious enemy; be∣cause it serves thee as Absolom's Mule served him, left him helpless in a time of misery hanging between heaven and earth. 7 And lastly; The world in all it's bravery, in it's greatest estate and Aggrav. 7. The World is mo∣mentany. confluence is but momentary, transient, it cannot help beyond this life it canot carry us to eternity; It passeth away, 1 Joh. 2. 17. The ambiti∣ous
mans, honours, promotions, high places, cannot follow him to ano∣ther world. An ungodly great man, noble and honourable in the world, when he dieth he shall be degraded of all. His honours will not follow him to hell, he shall be there, base, ignoble, inglorious. The riches of the covetous Mammonist shall not goe to bell with him, they cannot corrupt the flames, nor bribe the tormentours. The voluptuous man's haukes, and hounds, cards, dice, cups, shall not goe to hell with him: as soone as death surprizeth him, all these leave him. What distinction can be given between the rich man's skull and the poor man's? What difference doth death make, between the noble, and ignoble, rich and poore? Death cuts down all with it's sithe. It's mercy, and free grace that makes all the difference. Those 4 Summa Imperia were dissolved,—Sic transit gloria mundi. The world is a Jonah's gourd, like a vapor, a bubble, transient, mo∣mentany, uncertaine, of short continuance; Now weigh these to∣gether, the excellency of the soule, and vileness of the world, as I have represented them in severall particulars. Wee know Contraria juxtase posita magis eluccscunt; And upon serious premeditation give in your verdict, which would your rather have? Oh! that God would move, and perswade your hearts to make the better, choice to prefer your pretious soules before all the kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them. Thus much for the doctrinallpart of the Text. The doctrine being thus proved and cleared by the forementioned comparison, it now remaines that I should make the best improve∣ment of it, and set it home upon your consciences by particular Ap∣plication. I shall hold forth a sixfold use of this Doctrine, which I shall endeavour to set home upon your consciences, for Terrour, Expostu∣lation, Exhortation, Examination, Direction, and Consolation. The first Use is a word of terrour and commination; it speakes hea∣vy tidings to all those who preferre the pomp and glory of the world 1 Ʋse for Ter∣rour. before their pretious soules? how many preferre a base lust before their soules? a penny profit before an immortal soul? This is the condition of thousands, the farre greater part, even of the Chri∣stian world. Now because every one will plead not guilty, Il'e single out particular persons notoriously guilty. 1. Ignorant persons, who know not the excellency of a reaso∣nable soule, and Ignoti nulla cupido. Discourse of the dignity of their soules; and tell them of the infinite price pay'd to redeeme the soules of the elect, they plead ignorance, they are not book-learned.
But will this plea lick thee whole? If thou art not book-learned, yet thou must be heart-learned. No kind of ignorance can acquit thee â toto, though it may à tanto. A sinne of ignorance in the Leviticall law had a trespasse offering. An invincible gross ignorance, amongst blind guides, and blind corners, where there hath been wanting a teaching ministry, is lamentable, but not excusable. They shall be punisht with fewer stripes: Hell shall not be heat so hot for them as for presumptuous sinners, who sin against illumination of judgment, and the bright shining light of the Gospel. But they that suffer the least paines in hell, shall suffer enough: Doe not then plead thy ig∣norance, that's to purge one fault with another. Now if a bare ig∣norance, Ignorantia purae negationis; an invincible crasse ignorance, where meanes are wanting, (which wee have, and enjoy) if this be damnable, and no excuse for a sinner, for Rom. 1, , there's enough to leave any without excuse, what shall we say of an affected ignorance? which is Ignorantia pravae dispositionis, a shutting of the eyes against the light, to be ignorant of the worth of Christ, and the soule in these days, when knowlege aboundes as the waters cover the seas, when as for the time and meanes they might have been teachers: when notwithstanding such a marvelous light shining brightly, yet they are in darkness, notwithstanding sermon upon sermon, &c: a constant powerfull ministry, shining lampes, yet still people are ignorant, they know not God, what shall I say of them? Let me tell them that they are under a dreadfull curse, as Jer. 10. 25. 2 Thes. 1. 8. Thou hast a pretious soule, and knowest not of it, notwithstanding so many warnings, and admonitions by the messengers of God, whose fault is that? thy own, question∣less thou maiest know, O! desperate, damnable ignorance! 2. Negligent persons are to be reproved, these are heedlesse and 2. Neggent persos. carelesse what become of their soules; For their bodies and estates, they turmoyle and vexe themselves, rising early, &c. For a gainfull bargaine, for increasing their estates, for boone, joviall company, they can find time enough; but presse them to the practise of religi∣ous duties, they plead want of time. They want not time, but good hearts. Manna is even ready to drop into many mens mouthes, and yet they will not take paines to gather it. Many are so supine and lazy, that they will not step over the threshold to heare a Sermon. Many have gifts, and good abilities, but let them lye rustie for want of using: slothfull persons shall be cloathed with ragges. The foun∣taine
is opened, people are not sensible of their thirst, and therefore they will not come; God affords food for our body, and food for our soule in abundance: now an hungry man will goe apace for corpo∣rall food, and had we a spirituall appetite, a soule hunger, we should quicken our pace, and run as fast for the sood of our soules, see Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? God puts a prize into our hands, if we neglect to use it, our condemnation will be the greater. A sluggard will tell of this Lyon, that mountaine, and that shrubbe in the way: so your lazy negligent people will tell and reckon up all the difficulties they can, to flatter themselves in their idlenesse, whereas indeed when we consider the battell we are to fight, the race to runne, the strait gate to passe through, and the great difficulty to attaine salvation, this should excite and provoke us to beg strength from God, and act in his strength, tugge hard at the Oare, wrestle harder, mend our pace, that we may enter in at the strait gate, fight the good fight of faith, and so runne that we may obtaine. A third sort of persons to be reproved are unbelievers. They be∣lieve 3. Ʋnbelievers. not such worth, and excellency in the soule as we speak of. This is the grand, capitall, damning sin of the Gospel; Unbeliefe is a com∣plication of many sins, made up of a fraternity of iniquity. See John 8 24. Unbeliefe as well as covetousnesse, caused the yong man to pre∣ferre treasures on earth, before treasures in heaven. Unbeliefe as well as covetousnesse made the foolish Gadarens to preferre their swine before a Saviour. Did people in good earnest believe that the soule is more worth then a world, that the soule is of a heavenly-borne beeing, and runnes parralell with eternity, they durst not graspe the world, make an Idol of Mammon, Volupia, &c. and put their pretious soules in jeopardy. What hindred Christ's miracles? see Matth. 13. 28. What's the portion of unbeleevers? see Luk 12. 46. Rev. 21. 8. The Jewes had a saying, that, every sinne that they commit∣ted had a spice of the golden calfe. Every sinne without question hath a spice of infidelity: Unbeliefe, and misbeliefe are destructive to the soule. 4ly. Impatient sinners are to be reproved; these are worst of all, 4. Impenitent sinners. they throw away the remedy, spurne away the plaister that God or∣daineth for their cure. Wee say, falling into the water drownes not, but lying there, for a man may fall into a water, and may be plucked out alive: so falling into sinne damnes not, but lying in it without re∣pentance.
'Tis true that every sinne deserves damnation, but all sinnes doe not actually damne, otherwise who could be saved? There are two sorts of sinners, penitent, and impenitent sinners. Penitent, broken hearted sinners are received into mercy, through Christ: their sinnes are wash't away in his bloud, their sinnes are imputed to his score, and his righteousness imputed to them for justification. But impenitent sinners, such as sweare, and will sweare, are drunke and will be so, breake sabbaths, and will doe so, without remorse or re∣gret of conscience, these shut the dore of mercy against themselves; An impenitent person is Felo de se, his own executioner, see Rev. 16. 11. Rom. 2. 5. Impenitent persons take not the dignity of their soules into consideration, little doe they think what will become of their soules unto all eternity. The law requires exact obedience, will not abate a tittle, not the least transgression; God hath given us a Court of mercy, the Gospel, and in it a surety, Christ, and the instrumentall meanes, faith, and repentance. Now, impenitent Persons, despise the Gospel, the suerty, the remedy, they reject the great salvation tendred in the Gospel, and so they are left unexcusable. Their bloud be upon their own heads. God would heale them, they will not be healed; they are filthy and impure, the Lord proclaimes a fountaine to wash in it, but they will not come unto it, and so their damnation is just, and they are, , selfe condemned, and their destru∣ction is from themselves. Of all judgments, deprecate this of impe∣nitency. The Lord never give you over to impenitency. 2. The next Use shall be for expostulation; and here I would expo∣stulate Ʋse 2. For ex∣postulation. the case, as Isai. 55. 2. Rom. 6. 21. Who of any understanding would serve so unprofitable a master as sinne is? who would bee so mad as to be penny wise and pound foolish? as to get riches, lands, revenues by cozenage, fraud, oppression, and hazzard their pretious soules? What if you could get never so much gold, purchase never so much land honestly, and justly, and yet with the care, and tur∣moyle of getting and keeping all, you neglect your soule? what ad∣vantage would all this be unto you? Call your selves to an account, and reckon what you get by purchaseing the world, and loseing your soules, cast up your accounts, and you will find, you have made a miserable bad bargain; 'Ile draw this Use unto particular instances. 1. Let me expostulate the case with the voluptuous persons, who eate, and drinke, and rise up to play; Hawkes, hounds, cardes, dice,
whores, cups are the voluptuous man's: companions. Hee's lul'd a sleep on the lap of pleasures, and followes his own swinge, and careere against the counter-blasts of a reclaiming conscience. Let me aske the voluptuous liver, what doe all his pleasures conduce to the advan∣tage of his soul? what comfort can a man take at night when he goeth to bed, when all the day he hath past away in gameing, drinking, and carrowsing? How many spend more upon their houndes, then they doe towards the maintainance of a faithful Ministry? How many pre∣ferre a pack of cards, a pack of houndes, a cast of hawkes, before the word of God? How many preferre a drunken merry meeting be∣fore a Sermon? They can sit whole days and nights at cards and dice, and at their cups upon ale-benches, and yet how weary at a Sermon? Double duties are tedious to them, sabbaths, fasts, are heavy bur∣dens unto them. This sin of voluptuousness, is the crying sin of the nation, for which God lets us bloud by his heavy judgments at this very time; O that all voluptuous Epicures would seriously lay to heart the sacred Irony of the wise man! Eccles. 11 9. O! that God would perswade you to have special regard of your pretious soules! O that God would open your eyes to see your vanities and wicked pleasures, and turne the streame into the right channel, as Prov. 3. 17. To account the wayes of wisdome the only wayes of pleasant∣ness. 2. Let me expostulate the case with the covetous Mammonist; He riseth early, &c: hee's a scrapeing, and carking for the world, the trash and pelfe here below, filling his barnes with corne, his cof∣fers with gold, still labouring for corne and oyle, never satisfied, never thinking he hath enough. But what's all this to the soule? His Mammon is his God, the wedge of gold is his confidence. Hee's earth'd before his time, his heart is rivetted upon the world. Surely he dreames of an eternity upon earth, and of heaven upon earth: Hee heeds not, nor regards any hereafter. His breath smels of earth, his discourse is earthly, his whole life and conversation is an earthly worldly conversation. But what will all his riches availe him when death arrests him? See, Zeph. 1. 18. Luk. 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, and the 21. v, makes the Ap∣plication. Thou canst not carry thy riches to another world, they cannot bribe the flames of hell, nor corrupt the Tormentor; where∣fore then shouldst thou labour thus greedily for that wich is not bread, for those things which are not? wherefore shouldst thou
take such care for trash and pelfe, the base, transitory trash of the of the world, which lasts but for a short season, and in the interim neglect thy pretious soule, which abides unto all eternity? O! that God would alter thine affections, as Col. 3. 2. O! that God would work in thee a serious beliefe of this truth, that thy soul is more worth than all the world! 3ly. Let me expostulate the case with the ambitious man, who aspires unto great places, dignities, honours, and promotions in the world? What are all these in comparison of his soule? Many have great Titles, honourable names in this world, who shall be degraded of all in the world to come. What's honour? It's but momentany. Honor est in honorante; it's that which a wicked man may have, Haman, Nimrod, Hred, had it. What would rich Coates of armes, great dignitis, popular observance, advantage thy pretious soule? The Apostle tels us, not many, 1 Cor. 1. 26. &c. Hee doth not say not any, some are ennobled by a spiritual, as well as by a natural birth. But oft times great dignities, preferments, honours, promotions, are clogges, and hinderances to the soule. Marcus Galacius Caraccio∣lus knew it well, and renounced all for Christ; so did Moses, ; Heb. 11. 24. So must thou. What high places, preferments, dignities, thou fearest will insnare thy soule, and withdraw thee from Christ, thou must foregoe them all, so farre forth as they stand in competition with, or opposition unto Christ. What will it profit thee to have a great name written on earth, but no name at all writ∣ten in the book of life? Wherfore then doest thou pursue high pre∣ferments, see Jer. 45. 5. Art thou fit and preferred for those great high places thou lookest after? Hast thou taken an Antidote before hand to prevent the poysonous inflations of pride? Or art thou sure thou shalt speed, and obtaine thy desire. Honor fugientem sequitur, squentem fugit, see Psal. 75. 6. Prov. 3. 35. Remember Haman's period; Wolseyes fall, &c. Thou that art higher by the head than thy brethren, as Saul was elevated to great dignities, must come the same way to heaven as the poorest Christian. Wherefore then, should any man labour more for greatness than goodness, prefer∣ring favour of men before the favour of God, high places on earth, before the high places in heaven? The reason is, because they prefer the world before their soules; Consider seriously of all these. The voluptuous Epicure never ceaseth swallowing, the covetous Mam∣monist, never ceaseth scraping, the ambitious Parasite, never ceas∣eth
climbing. But what will it profit the voluptuous man to have his fill of pleasures, the covetous man to have his coffer crammed with gold, the Ambitious man to have honours, promotions, and great titles, enough to clogge his memory, and yet in the interim to lose their pretious soules? Let your serious thoughts be exercised herein, and then return an answer, whether your soules be not of more va∣lue than the whole world? I proceed to a third Use for exhortation: Suffer I beseech you the Use 3. For Exhor∣tation. word of exhortation, above all other things to take speciall regard, and care what will become of your soules to all eternity, above all your gettings get this understanding, to know the incomparable worth of your immortall soules. Above all trades which you drive for the world, learne this soule trade, this soule thrist. I perswade you to take the most thriving, most gainfull way in the world: where∣as others labour for corne and oyle, wealth, dignities, which are failing perishing things, which are not bread, and cannot satisfie, let me perswade you to labour for that which endureth to eternity. Be therefore good husbands for your soules, learne this spirituall hus∣bandry to improve your time, talents, and opportunities for the ever∣lasting benefit of your pretious soules. Tell men of a wise, rich, honou∣rable, thriving way for the world, they will readily embrace it; I re∣present before you this day, the most wise, rich, honourable, thriving way for your pretious soules. This course is wise, Deut. 32. 29. It's rich and honourable, Prov. 3. 16. The godly are most honourable. It's thriving and gainfull, 1 Tim. 6. 6. Up and set about the worke. A∣bove all workes work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Me∣thinks I might spare Motives; what? will ye not doe good to your own soules? Will you neglect your choicest Jewell? will you leave your soule at randome, neglected, unregarded? Do ye not know the singular worth of your soule? To quicken your affecti∣ons, I shall recommend to your serious thoughts these 9 moving considerations. 1. One soule is more pretious then all the kingdomes of the Consid. 1. One soule is more worth than the world. world, and the glory of them; Seest thou a poor man picking off a dunghill old cast rags, another picking sticks or coles out of the ken∣nel, almost ready to famish by reason of hunger, or to starve for want of fire: seest thou others working for a penny a day, going many a mile to earn a penny, and scarce able to go through weak∣nesse; however these poore people may seem vile and contemptible
in the eyes of the world, yet their soules are more worth, and high∣lier to be valued, then all the pomp and bravery of the world: My Reasons are, 1 Because the world is transitory, fading, perishing; the soule permanent, abiding to eternity. The forme of the world passeth a∣way; this goodly structure of this visible globe, shall be dissolved and burnt up with fire, but the soule is incorruptible, capable of no consumption; now that which is permanent is of more worth then that which is transient, therefore the soule is more worth then the world. Secondly, all the riches, honours, bravery, &c. in the world cannot redeem one soule; If a man would give all his lands, gold and silver, &c. to save his soule, it could not be obtained: the Mannors, Lands, and richest treasures of the whole world put altogether, cannot pur∣chase one soule: the soule cannot be bought nor purchased by such a price, when death arrests a sinner to appeare before the judgement seat, the sinner would give ten thousand pounds for a good consci∣ence, nay all his estate, riches, &c. but all these cannot bribe death to stay one minute longer, nor can they all make any atonement for the soule. Riches, honours, &c. are not a suitable proportionable price, sor these are materiall and corruptible, the soule immateriall and incorruptible, and between these there's no proportion. Thirdly, The price paid to redeem our soules is infinitely, super∣latively more worth then millions of worlds, what's that, see 1 Pet. 1. 18. The soul was redeemed with the price of bloud, even of him who was : not one soule saved any other way; not the richest in the world, nor the poorest can come any other way to heaven, but by Jesus Christ. The soule of the poorest saint (though his person be trampled on by the world) is bought by so great a price, as the effusion of the bloud of Jesus Christ. Hence it evidently appeares, that the soul is more worth then the world, Christ died not for the world, he prayed not for them, John 17. 9. but he died for his own, whom his father had given him out of the world. O Consid. 2. Jesus Christ alone, and the graces of his spirit can a∣dorne the soule. pretious, heavenly-born-being soule! 2ly. It's Jesus Christ alone, & the graces of his spirit that can beau∣tifie, enrich, and adorne the soule. Aske a covetous Mammonist where lies his riches? he'll tell you in such a stock of cattell, such lands & re∣vennues, gold & silver, &c. Aske a child of God where are his riches? he'll tell you his riches are in Christ, his treasures are in heaven, his
high place and preferment is in his fathers house. Aske your stately Gallants whre their ornaments are? They will shew you their neck∣laces; and bracelets of pearles, their Diamond-Rings, Gorgeous ap∣parrell. But what's all these to the soule? The soule is not beautified with golden chains, costly raiment, pretious jewels. Ile tell you of a chaine of pearls, which will adorne your soules, and enrich you more then all the pretious gemmes the Universe can afford, read 2 Pet. 1. 5. Ps 45. 13, 14. Ezek. 16. 9, 10, 11, &c. Thou mayest be rich in the world, yet poor in grace, thou mayest have a beautifull face and a polluted soule; goodly, brave, stately apparrell, and a foule rotten conscience; outward beauty, inward deformity; fair without, foule within. Now Christ his graces can alone make thy soule beau∣tifull; His graces are the best ornament, and therefore beseech him to beautifie thy soule, and to adorne thee with faith, love, and the rest of the Graces of his spirit. Thirdly Consider, God out of the riches of his free grace and mer∣cy Consid. 3 God puts a price into our hands to im∣prove for our souls. puts a price into your hands by the Gospell dispensations, which he expects you should improve for the best advantage of your soules. Force not the Lord to complaine, as Prov. 17. 6. you have sermon upon sermon, Manna falls frequently round about your tents, will you not stir out of your doores to gather it? you have the ordinan∣ces frequently dispensed amongst you, you have bread in the mor∣ning, and bread in the evening, many occasionall sermons. All these helpes and meanes are afforded by God for the good of your soules: you have publick assemblies continued, your eyes behold your tea∣chers, you enjoy Sabbaths, dayes of humiliation, dayes of thankes∣giving, wherein Gods keeps open market for the good of your soules, and its your duty to husband them all for the eternall wel∣fare of your soules? The Spirit knocks at your hearts, by the sermons you hear, by all the mercies you enjoy, to take care of your pretious soules. The salvation of your soules is the intention and end of all our preaching. It's the only designe we have upon you, to win you to Jesus Christ: all the Ordinances are the food of your soules, to keep your soules in heart, the sabbaths are the market of your souls, you have soule-fatting Ordinances. Oh take heed, lest a leanenesse enter into your soules. The markets will not alwaies last, the shops will not alwayes be open, now come and buy wine, &c. Improve the Sabbaths, Sermons, all your Gospel-opportunities for the eter∣nal benefit of your soules.
Fourthly, Consider, This present time of life whilst you are in this Consid. 4. This is the present time to regard our soules. world, is the only season and opportunity offered to make provision for your pretious soules, see John 9. 4. This is the time to worke out your salvation in, as Phil. 2. 12. The time of seeking God, Isa. 55. 6. This is the time of working the worke of faith, the labour of love, and patience of hope, 2 Thes. 1. 3. This is the time of making our peace and reconciliation with God. Now we presse upon you the Doctrine of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 20. If thou livest and diest in an unregenerate and unreconciled estate to God, thou wilt remaine so even to all eternity. Now thou must run, otherwise thou shalt never obtaine; now thou must fight the good fight of faith, otherwise thou shalt never obtain the end of thy faith, the salvation of thy soule. Now thou must wrestle, otherwise thou wilt never obtein the blessing. Now thy peace must be made, whilst thou art on this side hell, other∣wise it will never be made hereafter. There's no time for purgation in another world, for perfecting thy faith and hope; this time of life is the seed time, and according as a man soweth, so shal he reape. This time of life is a time of working, in heaven there will be a re∣sting from our labours. As therefore thou tendrest the eternall welfare of thy soule, whilst thou hast life, breath, space, opportuni∣ty, whilst thou art on this side the grave, on this side of eternity, set seriously upon the businesse of greatest weight and consequence, to make thy peace with God, to make thy calling and election sure, that so when death separates thy soule from thy body, nothing may be able to separate it from the love of Jesus Christ. Consid. 5. This present life is but for a moment. Fifthly, Consider, This present life is but for a moment, and upon this moment depends eternity. The longest life is but a moent, if compared with eternity; and this moment is a short moment, com∣pared in Scripture to bubbles, vapours, spans, weavers shuttles, flowers, things of shortest continuance. And this moment is a shortning mo∣ment, each day, each hour, each minute shortneth thy life, and makes thee nearer eternity; each step thou treadest is a step nearer thy Grave; each moment thou breathest, is a drawing on to thy home. And further, this moment, when once past, is irrecoverable; all the world cannot call back one minute of time; and when this lit∣tle inch and moment of time is past, thou shalt be in eternity, in that condition which is unalterable, as long as God and Christ are, world without end. Oh that God would work this consideration, and set it home upon your serious thoughts! that considering your life daily
hastens to an end, you might timely and seriously prepare for that life, which shall never end. The Lord give you grace to make the best use of this moment, to beautify your soules, to trim up your lampes, to walke every day as if it were your last day, that so when the Lord summons you by death, you may have nothing to do but to die, and with comfort and confidence, you may breath out your soules into the armes of Jesus Christ. Cons. 6. There will e a day of Judgment. 6. Consider, there will be a day of judgment for soule and body. There's a day of visitation, a day of accompt, a generall Assize held for all the world, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And Christ's coming is like a theefe in the night. There's a different sentence, Matth. 25. viz. Come ye Blessed, Go ye cursed. A different place, heaven, and hell; no medium no tertium; Purgatory is a Popish dream: If thou beest not purged here, thou shalt never be purged hereafter: Body and soule shall be reunited, and either be companions in woe, or blisse, unto all eternity. 7. Consider, as death leaves thee, so judgment will find thee. As Cons. 7. As Death leaves us, so Judgment will find us. the tree falls, so it lies; If thy soule be filthy and guilty, and un∣washt by the blood of Christ, when separated from thy body, it will ever so remain in that condition. If thou diest unreconciled to Iesus Christ, judgment will find thee so, and so thou shalt remain even unto all eternity. If sanctification be not begun, yea and in some measure wrought in this world, it will not be wrought in ano∣ther. If here thou hast not the first fruits of the spirit, the hansell, part of payment, thou wilt never reape the whole harvest in another world. If thou art not justifi'd by grace, nor sanctified by the spi∣rit, nor acquitted by the bloud of Christ, before thou departest this world, death will give a returne, unjustif'd, unsanctify'd, unacquit∣ted, and judgment will so find the returne, and passe upon thee an irrevocable sentence: O then be perswaded so to live as ye may have hope in your deaths; and so to die, as you would have judg∣ment to find you: judgment will neither find you better nor worse then death hath left you. 8. Consider, the riches of Gods mercy, free love and grace a∣bounds exceedingly, That thou art yet alive, on this side the grave, Cons. 8. The riches of free grace and mercy. hell, and judgment, and God gives thee this gracious warning. God might justly cut thee off in thy wickednesse, and send thee to hell speedily. But Oh! infinite patience, and long suffering. Now God expostulates, why will ye die, oh house of Israel! God delights not in your blood, see Acts 17. 30. Isai. 55. 7. Isai. 55. 1. God gives
you warning, sends his messengers to premonish you, to bid you look to your soues. It's the whole drift, and scope of Gods messen∣gers, to perswade you to have a speciall care of your soules; Now you have food for your soules; now you have sabbaths, the desire of daies, and many pretious Gospel opportunities. It's free grace you enjoy them. For you have forfeited them all, Oh! wonderfull mercy, that God doth not take the forfeiture. Consid. 9. This may be the last war∣ning. 9. And lastly, Consider this for ought any of us know, may be the last warning that God will give any of us. You may not live to hear another Sermon, you may not live to enjoy another sabbath. God may say to you, because you loath this spirituall Mannah, I'le take it from you, Because you misuse my messengers, I'le take them away from you: Because you seight all the admonitins and counsels for the good of your soule, I'le not have these pearles cast any more before you. I will suffer my messengers no more to be abused, my pearles no more to be trampled uner foot; this is the last warning I will give yu, my spirit shall no longer strive with you, I'le no longer stand and wait knocking at your dores. Brethren, we cannot promise to our selves a moment of time; we have none of us a lease of our lives. VVe are Tenants at will, whether many or any shall live to heare any further war∣nings, none of us can determine. Let's therefore be perswaded to look upon these counsels I have given you, as for ought you know may be the last warning we may have. And Oh! that God would give us grace to take warning; VVeigh seriously in your most re∣tired, sad thoughts, those 9 forementioned considerations, and the Lord go along with them. The 4th Use shall be for a strict triall, and examination, whether Use 4. For Exami∣nation. we take care for our souls yea or no? Ask the vilest of people, what! do ye not take care for your soules? They will tell you t'were pitty else they should live: But to undeceive the world, Ile propound some searching queries. 1. Dost thou set a higher price of thy soule then all things under Qu. 1. the sun? Dost thou foregoe pleasures, profits, father, mother, wife, children, the dearest and nearest relations, when they come in com∣petition with or opposition to thy soule? Dost thou foregoe thy beloved sins, thy constitution sins, sins of profit, antiquity, delight? Dost thou take up weapons against thy soules enemies, and resol∣vest never to give over till thou returnest with the trophies of victo∣rie? If so, it's apparent that thou lovest thy soule.
2ly, Dost thou survey the windings, diverticles, and turnings Qu. 2. of thy soule? Dost thou study to know thy soule, it's angles, and lurking places? Dost thou reveiw the breaches in thy soule; and endeavourest the reparation of them? Dost thou take a twofold Candle, the Candle of the word, and the Candle of thy conscience, and searchest into the meanders, recesses, and most inward corners of thy soule? This is a signe that thou hast a care of thy soule. 3ly, Dost thou keep strict watch and sentinell over thy soule? Qu. 3. Dost thou watch over thy thoughts, words, and actions? As watch∣men examine passengers, so dost thou examine thy heart, call thy selfe to account for vain thoughts, misplaced words, evill actions? and when thou findest them, dost thou labour to exterminate them, and to execute justice on them? Dost thou watch against vagrant lusts, not willing to give entertainment to straglers, but as thou findest them thou casheerest them? if so this is a signe that thou takest care of thy soule. 4. Dost thou endeavour to wash and cleanse thy soule? A pure Qu. 4. fountain is stil a purging. Dost thou purge out thy corruptions? Dost thou lament over thy soule for sin, water thy couch with thy teares? and as sin comes and corruption surprizeth thee, art thou a purging rinsing and cleansing thy soule? Art thou unwilling to allow thy selfe in any sin unconfest, unrepented of? If so, it's evi∣dent that thou takest care for thy soule. 5. Dost thou make use of those meanes which God hath appoin∣ted for the good of thy soule? God gives thee ordinances, dost Qu. 5. thou feed on them? he scatters many pretious promises, dost thou gather them up, and apply them for thy comfort? God reveales many pretious graces, as faith, love &c. dost thou attire, and beau∣tify thy soule with them? God affordes meanes publikely, private∣ly, hearing, reading, praying, meditation, conference, dost thou make use of these meanes? dost thou improve this prize put into thy hand, for the good of thy soule? if so, thou takest care for thy soule. 6ly And lastly, Dost thou goe to the fountain of the bloud of Qu. 6. Christ? Dost thou look to the brazen serpent to cure thy soule? Dost thou see Christ with the eye of faith, and lay hold on him with the hand of faith, believe on him, with the heart of faith? If when thou hast done all thou canst, thou lookest through all unto Christ, and actest all thy duties, not in thy own strength, but in the strength of Christ, questionlesse thou hast a speciall regard of thy soule. Exa∣mine
your selves by these 6 Queries; and if in truth and sincerity you can give affirmative answers to them, I may safely pronounce you such, as regard the eternall advantage of your immortall soules. The Fifth Use shall be for Direction. To handle this Use for your Use 5. For Directi∣on. greater advantage, I shall acquaint you with some Impediments, which must be removed, and then I shall prescribe some Duties that must be performed. These Impediments must be removed. 1. Love of the world. This is the soules clog and hinderance, Imped. 1. Love of the world. which keeps it from soaring aloft. The earth wormes of the world love their Mammon; their Gold is their confidence, Luk. 16. 14. The young man in the Gospel, Judas, the Gadarens, preferred the world before Christ. If you would regard your soules, you must sit loose off the world, your hearts must be alienated from the love of it. 2. Too much love of the body, such pampering a carcase with Imped. 2. Too much love of the bo∣dy. variety of delicate meates, so much time spent inter pectinem & spe∣culum, in trimming up the body, these hinder the care of the soule. The body must be loved in a subordinate way; shall we take more care of the carcase which must be wormes meat, and neglect the soule which runs parallel with eternity? The soule is animae manci∣pium, will you preferre the servant, and the drudge before the Master? 3. Remissenesse in spirituall duties. These are the spiritual viands, Imped. 3. Remissenesse in spirituall duties. which keep the soule in heart. Take away these you starve the soul: they are as necessary as meat and drink for the body. If you keep not time and touch with God in a constant, conscientious perfor∣mance of duties, it's evident you have no care of your soules. The soule hath need of all duties, prayer, reading, hearing, meditation, conference, these are Pabula animae, & animae vehicula: they wing the soule, and make it soar aloft. As you love your soules neglect not spiritual duties. 4. Presumption of long life. Its a dangerous thing to presume of Imped. 4. Presumption of long life. long life, when as neither space nor grace is in our power. This is that soule-murtherer, that hath slaine many thousands. Many pre∣sume of time, God cuts them off in the midst of their sins. Many have time, and presume of grace; though God gives them space, he denies them Grace, as he did to Jezabell, Rev. 2. 21. Its an exceeding great folly to presume of that which is out of our power, its an high contempt and affront offered to God, to offer him the lame and the blind, to offer him (that I may speak it with reverence) the Devils
leavings; when the Devill hath sucked out the marrow, to leave unto the Great God the empty dry bones. 5ly. Carnall security. See dreadfull judgments of carnally secure Imped. 5. Carnall secu∣rity. persons, Deut. 29. 19, 20. Having removed these Impediments, and dangerous stumbling blocks out of the way, I shall prescribe some Duties which you must put in practise. 1. Labour as much as in thee lieth to keep thy soule unpolluted Duty 1. Keep thy soul pure. with sin. Every sin pollutes thy soule; watch therefore against sin, fight against it, account sin thy soul's enemy. Harbour not, hugge not in thy bosome thy desperate enemy, but stir especially against that encompassing sin, mentioned Heb. 12. 1. . Consi∣der that the Lord seeth all thy sins, he loatheth and abhorreth them. Do thou hate that which God hates; make no peace with Gods ene∣mies, give not quarter to Benhadad, make no league with any Gibeo∣nites, spare no Agag, foster no Delilah, no Herodias, &c. 2. Covenant in the strength of God against thy corruptions. Duty 2. Covenant a∣gainst corru∣ptions. Resolve I will swear no more, be drunken no more, &c. All sin de∣files my soule: Lord, give me grace to crucifie my corruptions, and to get victory over my sins. Lord I cannot of my selfe get victory o∣ver any one sin: I have covenanted against my pride, and I am proud still; against my passions, and I am froward still; against my earthly-mindednesse, and yet am earthly-minded still; I desire now to get out of my own strength, and to act in thy strength; Lord, give me thy strength, then I shall do thy work. I can do nothing without thee, but I can do all things through Christ that strengthneth me. 3. Set time apart every day for a serious search and examination Duty 3. Set times a∣part for selfe searching. of thy soule; Examine how it fares with thy soule. Doth it grow lea∣ner or fatter? doth it thrive or decay? How doth the Pulse of thy Devotion beat? are there not many intermissions? Fourthly, Frequently and seriously consider of the inestimable price paid to redeem a soule. No lesse price than the bloud of Christ; Duty 4. Consider the price of the soule. shall I neglect that which cost Christ so dear? shall I disregard that which extracted the pretious bloud of Christ out of his veines? Didst thou frequently consider the worth of thy soule, the inestimable price paid to purchase it, it would make thee look to thy soule. 5. Labour to get all thy soule-pollutions washt away in the Duty 5. Goe to the foun∣taine. Duty 6. bloud of the covenant: go to the fountaine and wash there. Sixthly and lastly, Make use of all meanes God hath ordained for
the good of thy soule. Apply the Promises, feed on the Ordinances, Make use of all meanes ap∣pointed. Vse 6. For Comfort. support thy selfe on the Attributes. The last Use shall be for comfort unto those, whose care above all other things is imployed for their soules; whose businesse and labour it is, to worke out their salvation with fear and trembling: Oh happy people, whose hearts are lifted up in the waies of God, whose maine design is to storme heaven, and take it by violence; who whilst o∣thers labour for pelfe and muck of the world, they labour for the salvation of their soules. Whilst others adorne and beautifie their bodies, i. e. the outward man, these labour to adorne the inner man, i. e. their immortall soules. Others labour to be rich and great in the world, these labour to be rich in grace, and great in the Favour of God. Others not knowing, nor understanding the worth of their soules, preferre earthly treasures before them: but true Believers set a higher rate upon their soules, than all the Treasures under the Sun. Oh happy people, that make it their businesse to beautifie their souls with all the saving graces of the spirit! As they have sown, so they shall reap. In this world they shall reap the first fruits, but in heaven the full harvest. There they shall attaine unto the end of their faith and hope, even the salvation of their soules unto all eternity. THE END OF THE FIRST DECAD.
A SECOND DECAD OF SERMONS Preach'd to the UNIVERSITY AT St. MARIE'S, OXON. BY HENRY VVILKINSON, D. D. Principall of Magdalen-Hall, Oxon. 2 Tim. 4. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering, and Doctrine. OXFORD, Printed by A. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, for THO: ROBINSON: M.DC.LX.
To the Christian Reader. I Conceive it altogether impertinent and for∣reign from my Work in hand, either to prefix an Epistle by way of Apology, or de∣tain thee any longer with a praeliminary discourse. Onely be entreated (Courteous Reader) to take notice that this Second Decad of Ser∣mons agrees in the same stile with the other two. I know not wherein I vary from my self, but pursue one and the same Method, both for Matter and Form, en∣deavouring (to my best apprehension) to declare all the Act. 20. 27. counsell of God. Insomuch as comparing Sermon with Sermon (notwithstanding the revolutions of times, and various dispensations) one and the self same Author may be easily discerned— Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. I purposely wave all along, and abhorre all uncouth, 2 Cor. 3. 12. . 2 Tim. 1. 13.  unscripturall Phrases, and affectation of words coyn'd at the Mint of counterfeit Teachers. My endeavour is to use plainesse of speech, and (as the Apostle exhorts) to hold fast the form of sound words. What censures I may incurre from such as have (as was said of Bolsecus)
Religionem Ephemeram, I value not; nor of others, who kick and winch because they are rub'd on the gall'd sore: I heartily wish their amendment, and then they will be of another mind, and like that afterwards which they mislikt formerly. Although I Preach'd these Sermons to a Learned Ʋni∣versity, yet what at first I had in design (through Christ that strengtheneth me) I endeavour to carry on to this day (and so hope to doe alwaies) (i. e.) to make it my business to affect the hearts, and speak home to the con∣sciences of my Auditors, by reproving and exhorting, without partiality, & not in the least to gratifie, & tickle the phansie of any wanton wit of Athens, or any itching Auditor, whose phansie outruns his judgement. How plain soever these Sermons may seem, I am no whit discouraged, hoping the plainer they are, the bet∣ter may be the successe; because where least appears of Man, God usually doth great things, That no flesh may 1 Cor. 1. 29. glory in his presence; but that the praise and glory of all may redound unto God alone. Neither may I conceal such a mercy (for which I can never be enough thank∣full) that I have been informed by severall persons, who profest to me, that they had received much good by severall of these Sermons. Wherefore (though when I have done the best I am but an unprofitable servant) I am the rather encouraged to make these Sermons of Publick Use, hoping that (through the blessing of God) they may doe much more good for the future, and help people forward in the narrow way to life, and give them a lift to Heaven. As for my own failings (for which I desire more and more to bee humbled) I shall thanke him heartily, who shall in a brotherly way discover them unto me. It was Davids desire (and may mine ever run
parallel with his) Let the righteous smite me, it shall be Psa. 141. 5. a kindnesse, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excel∣lent oyle, which shall not break my head. If these labours (such as they are) be any way instrumental for the ad∣vancing of the Kingdome of Jesus Christ; or if but one poor soul be by them (as instrumental means) begot∣ten unto Jesus Christ, I shall conceive that Eternity it self will he little enough to praise God for so great a mercy. I often consider, how God brings great things to passe by weak means, as by empty Pitchers the Mi∣dianites were discomfited, and at the sounding of Rams Judg. 7. 20. Josh. 6. 20. 1 Cor. 1. 21. 2 Cor. 8. 12. horns the walls of Jericho fell down; And by the fool∣ishnesse of Preaching to save them that beleeve. And I likewise consider, that a willing mind is accepted; Bad∣gers skins, Goats hair were accepted, when with a willing mind dedicated to the Tabernacle; the Widdows two Mites were accepted, and Abrahams reall intention of Heb. 11. 17. offering Isaack, was accepted for the deed. What I shall adde further is this, that I have offered these La∣bours according to my ability (and should rejoyce if I could bring better;) and shall entreate thee (Reader) to help me with thy prayers and counsel, that these may not lose their desired successe, nor (if God give life) what I intend hereafter for publick view in a Decad of Practicall ireatises. In a word, be perswaded (whilst 'its day) to set a high estimate upon all the means Joh. 9. 12. of Grace put into thy hand, as so many prices to get Wisdome withall. Neglect not the great salvation ten∣dred in the Gospel: Lye at the Posts of Wisdoms gate, and labour to digest what thou hearest, and make thy own by Prayer, Meditation, and particular Applicati∣on. Dr. John Reynolds Presdent of C. C. C. By every Sermon thou mayst reap some good, if thou beest not wanting unto thy self. * One of the most eminently Godly, and Learned Divines that ever I read
of (since this was an University) often profest, that hee could get good by every Sermon he heard. As he was a constant hearer of Sermons, so he made charitable con∣structions of what he heard, and was a ready counsellor and encourager unto Preachers. I shall adde no more, but entreat thee (Reader) to lay aside all prejudices and expectation of Novel Opinions and Phrases; and as for the failings either of Author or Printer, be pleased to cover them with the Mantle of a charitable Interpreta∣tion. I beg thy Prayers, and commend these Labours to thy acceptance, and commit thee unto Gods graci∣ous providence: I remain, Thy Servant for Christs sake, Henry Wilkinson.
The Contents of this Second Decad. SERM. I. JOb 13. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and makest to possesse the inquities of my youth. The Text divided, p. 2. and explained by answering 5. Queries, 1. What's meant by bitter things, p. 3. 2. What's meant by writing of them, p. 3. 3. What's meant by the sins of youth, p. 4. 4. What's meant by possessing the sins of youth; p. 5. 5. Why doth Job a holy man (whose sins were pardoned) complain of himself, p. 6. Doct. That sins committed in our youth will cause much smart and bitternesse in our elder years. Method of handling the Doctrine. 1. By Scripture proof, p. 7. 2. By three Reasons. 1. Dawn from the rule of Justice: p. 8. Reas. 2. Drawn from the nature and quality of sin, p. 9. Reas. 3. Drawn from four Aggravations of youthfull sins, viz. 1. They are committed with a great deal of violence, p. 9. 2. They are committed with abundance of delight. p. 10. 3. Young men make many vain pretences, ibid. 4. Youth∣full sinnes are committed after many Invitations, Calls, and Warn∣ings, p. 11. 3. By improving all in four Uses, 1. For Humiliation, p. 12, 13, 14. Here are four sins especially reproved; 1. Voluptuousness, p. 15. 2. Contempt of Superiours, p. 16. 3. Affectation of Novelty, p. 17. 4. Pride, p. 18. Use 2. For Exhortation, p. 19. Four Considera∣tions are prest. 1. From Gods Omniscience, p. 20. 2. God keeps Record, ibid. 3. Consider what sinne will cost thee, ibid. 4. Consider the four last things, p. 21, 22. Use 3. For Direction. 1. Be hum∣bled for all sins, p. 22. 2. Look through thy Humiliation to Christ, p. 23. 3. Walk circumspectly, ibid. Use 4. For Consolation, ibid.
SERM. II. Gen. 6. 3. And the Lord said, my Spirit shall not alwaies strive with man, for that he also is flesh, yet his dayes shall be an hundred and twenty years. The Text Divided and Explained, p. 28, 29. Doct. 1. That it is a most dreadfull judgement upon a people when the Spirit of God refuseth to strive any longer with them, p. 30. Doct. 2. That it's an exceeding great mercy to a people, when the Lord vouchsafeth them time and space of Repentance, ibid. Method of handling the first Doctrine. 1. From Scripture Testimony, p. 30, 31, 32. Three signes of Night, 1 When shadows grow long, p. 32. 2. When wild beasts goe a∣broad, and 3ly. when Labourers go to their rest, p. 33. 2. Seven wayes the Spirit strives: 1. By its Motions, p. 35. 36. 2. By the Ministery of the Word, p. 37, 38. 3. By the checks and convictions of conscience, p. 39, 40. A fourfold Rule for examining of conscience, p. 40. 4. By the tenders of mercies, p. 41. 5. By the exercise of patience, p. 42. 6. By National Judgements, p. 43. 7. By Personal Judgements, p. 44. SERM. III. upon the same Text, viz. Gen. 6. 3. 3. Reas. 1. Because man is flesh, p. 45, 46. Reas. 2. Because the Spirit is a free Agent. p. 47. Reas. 3. Drawn from the rule of Divine Justice, p. 48, 49. 4. For Application. Use 1. For Information, of the greatnesse of the Judgement when the Spirit ceaseth striving; in 4. Aggravations: 1. God takes away his Ordinances, p. 50. 2. God suffers not the Spirit to work by the Ordinances. 3. God gives them over to a Spirit of de∣lusion, ibid. 4. God gives them over to a hard heart: p. 53. se 2. For Exhortation. Three Morives: 1. From the brevity of our lives, p. 55. 2. From the Ʋncertainty of the Spirits striving, ibid. 3. From the certainty of the Day of Judgement, p. 56. Use 3. For Reproof of 4. sorts of persons especially. 1. Such as contemne the Spirit, p. 56. 2. Such as are barren and unfruitfull, p. 57. 3. Such
as are secure, p. 57. 4. Impenitent persons, p. 57. Use 4. for Exa∣mination in three Queries. 1. How we may distinguish the strivings of Gods Spirit from a spirit of error and delusion, p. 58, 59. 2. How we may distinguish the strivings of Gods Spirit from our own spirit, p. 59. 3. How we may know whether Gods Spirit hath effectually stroven with us, p. 59, 60. Use 5. for Direction, in four particulars, p. 60. Use 6. for Consolation. Doct. 2. That it is an exceeding great mercy, when the Lord vouch∣safes unto any person time and space for Repentance, p. 60. Reas. 1. To glorifie the Riches of Gods Mercy, p. 61. Reas. 2. To glorifie his Ju∣stice, ibid. Reas. 3. At the request of Gods servants many are spared, ibid. Vse 1. For admiration of Gods infinite mercy. Vse 2. For terrour unto presumptuous sinners Convictions. 1. It's great folly to put off Repentance, 2. It argues great contempt, 3. It argues high pre∣sumption. Use 3. for Exhortation, in four Considerations. 1. Now the Spirit strives, 2. Now is the limited time, 3. Now is the accepted time, 4. Now once past cannot be recalled. Use 4. for Caution, in five particulars, 63, 64. The 5. se for Admonition, in five par∣ticulars, p. 64, 65. The 6. Vse is for Comfort, ibid. SERM. IV. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dis∣solved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godlynesse? The Coherence and Text explained and divided, p. 65, 66, 67, 68. Doct. That the serious consideration of the day of Judgement should in an especial manner engage us unto an holy life and conversation, p. 69. Method of handling the Doctrine. 1. By Scripture Testimony, p. 69, 70. 2. By evidence of three Reasons. 1. Because onely holy persons shall be able to stand in judge∣ment, p. 71. Q. Whether the Saints shall have their sins mentioned at the day of Judgement? p. 71. Reas. 2. This is the present time, ibid. Reas. 3. Judgement returns all as death leaves them, p. 72. 3. By particular Application in five Vses. 1. For terrour unto three sorts: 1. Scoffers at holynesse, p. 73. 2. Hypocrites, p. 74. 3. Secret sinners, p. 75. Vse 2.
for Exhortation, p. 76, 77. 9. Motives 1. We are elected unto Holy∣nesse, p. 78. 2. We are created unto Holynesse, ibid. 3. We are redeemed to be holy, ibid. 4. Its Gods will that we should be holy, ibid. 5. Holy∣nesse is our calling, p. 79. 6. Heaven is a place for holy persons, ibid. 7. There shall be holy employment, ibid. 8. There shall be holy company, ibid. 9. This is the time of labouring after holynesse, ibid. Use 3. for Ex∣amination. in 12. Characters: 1. Spiritual poverty, p. 80. 2. High e∣stimation of Jesus Christ, ibid. 3. The heart is in love with holynesse, p. 81. 4. Irgenuous sorrow for sinne, ibid. 5. Mourning for others sins, p. 82. 6. The heart approves it self to God, ibid. 7. There will be a pressing forward towards perfection, p. 83. 8. A strict watch over the heart, ibid. 9. The desire and endeavour must be universally extensive, ibid. 10. The Spirit is without guile, p. 84. 11. There will be the practise of Mortisication and Vivification, p. 85. 12. A burning in love to Jesus Christ, ibid. Use 4. for Direction, in 6. Particulars: 1. Pray for the spirit of sanctisication, p. 85. 2. Wash and cleanse thy heart, ibid. 3. Be exercised in Meditation, p. 86. 4. Consider the Omnipresence and Omniscience of God, ibid. 5. Set an high estimate on Gods Ordinan∣ces, ibid. 6. Associate your selves with holy company, p. 87. Use 5. for Consolation. SERM. V. Joh. 3. 10. Jesus answered and said unto him, art thou a Master of Israel, and knowest not these things? The Text divided and expounded, p. 91. Doct. There may be, and are many men, otherwise of great Learn∣ing, yet grosly ignorant in the maine Fundamental Doctrine of Regene∣ration, p. 92. This is proved by Scripture Instances, p. 92. and by 3. Reasons. 1. From the nature of Regeneration, p. 93. Reas. 2. Drawn from the Nature of Unregeneracy in a foursold estate. 1. Of Impurity, p. 94. 2. Of Enmity, ibid. 3. Of Blindnesse, ibid. 4. Of Death, p. 95. Reas. 3. From the Free workings of Gods Spirit. Application in 5. Uses. 1. For Exhortation, and that to Teachers, p. 96, 97. and to Disci∣ples, p. 98, 99.
Use 2. For Information. 1. What Regeneration is not. 1. Not in Nicodemus his sense, p. 100. 2. Not in a new Physical Beeing, ibid. 3. Not in Civility and Morali∣ty, ibid. 4. Not in great parts and abilities, p. 101. 5. Not in common graces, ibid. 6. Not in a bare Profession of Christ, ibid. 2. What Regeneration is: 1. The new Nature, p. 102. 2. A new Vnderstan∣ding, ibid. 3. A new Will, ibid. 4. New Affections, ibid. 5. A new Heart, ibid. 6. A new life, ibid. Use 3. for Excitation. Mot. 1. From the Necessity, p. 102. 2. Unregenerate persons can ob∣taine no acceptance, p. 103. 3. Nothing defiled shall ever come into heaven, ibid. Use 4. for Direction. 1. Pray hard for Divine Wisdom. 2. Wait upon God in his Word. 3. Pray for the Spirit. Use 5. for Consolation. And their duty is: 1. To prase God. 2. To walk as becommeth Converts. 3. To set an high price on Gods love. SERM. VI. Esth, 9. 27, 28. The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joyned them∣selves unto them, so as it should not faile, that they might keep these two daies, according to their writing, and according to their appointed time every year, &c. The Text divided and expounded. Doct. That it's the duty of a delivered people to keep mercies upon Record, and make a thankfull remembrance of signal deliverances, and perpetuate the Memorial thereof from Generation to Generation, p. 108. Reas. 1. Because Gods name and honour is from Eternity to Eternity, p. 109. Reas. 2. Because Thankfulness is Gods Tribute, ib. Reas. 3. Drawn from the excellency of the Duty. Reas. 4. Drawn from many obligations,
viz. 4. Vinculo Creationis, Redemptionis, Gratitudinis, Gloriae divinae promovendae, p. 110, 111. Vse 1. For Information. In the Popish Treason eight particulars are considered. 1. Length of time in pro∣jecting, p. 112. 2. Ʋnwearied pains, p. 113. 3. Cunning conveyance, ibid. 4. Inveterate malice, ibid. 5. The persons acting, p. 114. 6. The persons against whom, p. 115. 7. The place, ibid. and 8. their cruelty, ibid. Observe, 1. The Means of discovery by Auricular Confession, p. 116. 2. The seasonablenesse, p. 117. 3. The just Retribution, ibid. Vse 2. for Caution. 7. Popish opinions. 1. That the Pope is Christs Vicar, p. 119. 2. That he hath power of bnding and loosing. 3. That he may depose Princes, ibid. 4. That Protestant Princes may be Ex∣communicated, ibid. 5. That they may be murthered, ibid. 6. That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks, ibid. 7. That Equivocation is lawfull. Protestants Principles: 1. That the Pope is , p. 120. 2. That a Papist cannot goe beyond a Reprobate, ibid. 3. That the eought to be no peace with Rome, ibid. 4. That a Papist living and dying in the opinion of his own merits cannot be saved, p. 121. 5. That Babylon is Rome, ibid. Vse 3. for Exhortation. 1. Remember, and transmit the memory of this day to Posterity, p. 121. 2. Praise God for the Deliverance, p. 122. 3. Remember and be vigilant, ibid. SERM. VII. Rom. 2. 16. In the day that God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. The Text divided and expounded, p. 124, 125, 126. Doct. 1. There shall be a day of Judgement, p. 126. Doct. 2. At that day the secrets of all mens hearts shall bee judged. Doct. 3. Christ shall be Judge at that day. Method of handling. The first Doctrine proved by Scripture out of the Old and New Testament, p. 126. and confirmed by six Arguments: 1. From Gods Decree, p. 127. 2. From Gods Iustice, ibid. 3. From conviction of conscience, p. 128. 4. From the dependance and connexion between the Resurrection and day of Iudgement, ibid. 5. From the generall expecta∣tion of the Saints, p. 129. 6. From Gods glory, ibid. Vse 1. For Reproof to ungodly persons, p. 131, 132. Vse 2. for Instruction,
to Magistrates and Ministers. 6. Lessons commended. 1. Enter∣tain serious thoughts concerning the day of Iudgement, p. 134. 2. Let this consideration engage us to holynesse of life and conversation, ibid. 3. Let this read us a Lecture of Patience, p. 135. 4. Lets be engaged to watchfulnesse. 5. Lets learn to fear God, ibid. 6. Lets learn compassi∣on and charity, ibid. Vse 3. for Consolation. 1. From the nature of the day, p. 136. 2. From the Iudge, Christ, ibid. 3. From the sentence, ibid. 4. From the eternal happinesse, ibid. Doct. 2. That at the day of Iudgement the secrets of all mens hearts shall be judged, p. 136. Reas. 1. Drawn from Gods Omniscience, p. 136. Reas. 2. From Gods justice, p. 137. Reas. 3. For the acquitting of the godly, ibid. Reas. 4. For the further condemnation of the wicked, p. 138. Vse 1. for terror unto the wicked, ibid. Vse 2. for comfort to the godly, p. 139. 3. For counsel to both, p. 140. Doct. 3. At the day of Judgement Jesus Christ shall be Judge, p. 140. 1. Proved by Scripture, p. 140. 2. By 3. Reasons. 1. From E∣quity and Retaliation, ibid. Reas. 2. For the comfort of the godly, ibid. Reas. 3. For the terrour of the wicked, ibid. Q. 1. Is the Father excluded? A. p. 141. Q. 2. How shall Christ appear? A. p. 141. Q. 3. Whom shall Christ judge? A. ibid. Q. 4. What will be the manner of Christs judging? A. ibid. Q. 5. What signs are there of this day? A. p. 143. Q. 6. Why God defers the day of Iudgement? A. ibid. Q. 7. Whether man can determine when the day of Iudgement shall be? A. p. 143. Q. 8. Whether we must desire this day? A. p. 144. 4. Obections answered, p. 144, 145. Vse 1. for comfort unto the godly, ibid. Vse 2. for terrour unto the wicked, ibid. Vse 3. for Exhortation to prepare for the coming of Christ, p. 148. SERM. VIII. Mat. 10. 17. Good Master! what shall I do that I may inhe∣herit eternall life? pag. 148. The Text divided and expounded, p. 148, 149. Doct. The main inquirie and businesse of Christians ought to be em∣ployed concerning their eternal condition, p. 150.
Method propounded. 1. What Eternity is? It is answered negatively by four Proposi∣tions: 1. Eternity admits no succession of time, p. 150. 2. Eternity admits no alterations, ibid. 3. Eternity admits no augmentation nor di∣minution, p. 151. 4. Eternity admits no revocation, ibid. Eternity is defined and explained particularly, p. 152, 153. 2. The Doctrine is illustrated by Scripture examples, p. 153. 3. By Scripture Precepts, p. 153, 154. 4. By Scripture Reasons. 1. Privatively: Because 1. We are freed from sin. 2. From Tentations of Flesh, Devil, and World, p. 154, 155. 3. We are freed from Punishments, p. 155. 2. Positively. 1. The Saints shall enjoy the blessed vision, p. 155, 156. 2. They shall enjoy the Society of Saints and Angels, ibid. 3. They shall be busied in rare em∣ployments, p. 156. 4. This employment shall be in our Fathers house, p. 157. 5. Glorifyed Saints shall keep an Eternal Sabbath in heaven, ib. Vse of Exhortation, p. 157. 4. Motives pressed. 1. The study of E∣ternity is an honourable study, p. 159. 2. This is a sweet study, p. 160. 3. This is a profitable study, ibid. 4. This is a seasonable study, p. 161. SERM. IX. Mal. 1. 14. But cursed be the Deceiver, which hath in his flock a Male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: For I am a great King, saith the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadfull among the Heathen. The Coherence and Text expounded, p. 162, 163, 164, 165. Doctrine handled. In all our services, its Gods expectation, and our obliged duty, is offer the best we can possible unto the Lord, p. 166. Method propounded. 1. How must our services be performed in the best way? A. In six distinguishing Characters. 1. All must be performed with a pure heart, p. 167. 2. The beauty of the season must be regarded, ibid. 3. We must make Religion our businesse, p. 168. 4. We must do all in Faith, p. 169. 5. We must do all in the Name of Christ, ibid. 6. We must doe all with reverence and godly fear, p. 170.
2. The Doctrine is asserted and proved by Scripture, p. 171, 172. 3. By Application: 5. Vses are made. Vse 1. For Exhortation: 1. To all in generall, p. 173. 2. To Magistrates and Ministers in particular, ibid. SERM. X. upon the same Text. 7. Considerations: 1. From the Majesty of God, p. 176. 2. From the Holynesse of God, ibid. 3. From the Equity of the Duty, p. 177. 4. From the credit of the Gospel, p. 178. 5. From the greatnesse of the sin, made up of 4. Ingredients, viz. Folly, Contempt, Presumption, Sacriledge, p. 179, 180, 181. Notwithstanding failings all will be ac∣cepted through Christ, p. 181, 182. 7. Consider the dreadfull curse a∣gainst Hypocrites, p. 182. Vse 2. for Reproof. 1. Of the Hypocrite, p. 183. 2. Of negligent, lazy persons, p. 184. 3. Of such who put off Repentance to old age, p. 185. Vse 3. for Examination. 1. Whether we give God the best in Duties, p. 186, 187, 188, 189, 190. 2. Whether we give God the best in our Graces, p. 191. 3. Whether we give God the best in our lives and conversations, ibid. & p. 192. Vse 4. for Direction. 1. What impediments are to be removed? A. 1. An igno∣rant mind, p. 192. 2. A frothy vain spirit, p. 192, & 193. 3. A world∣ly spirit, ibid. 4. An unbeleeving heart, ibid. 2. What duties are to be practised? A. 1. Set God before thine eyes, p. 193. 2. Labour for sincerity of heart, ibid. 3. Embrace the present season, p. 194. 4. Be much in prayer, ibid. 5. Make Religion thy businesse, ibid. Vse 5. for Consolation. Consid. 1. Infirmities befall the best, p. 194. 2. Gods Children allow not themselves in sinne, p. 195. 3. A sincere heart is accepted, ibid. 4. A sincere heart labours for more Grace, ibid. 5. We must not goe by others examples, ibid. 6. Perseverance obtaines the Crown, ibid.
ERRATA. PAge 96. lin. 5. r. 6. Ʋses. p. 110. l. 21. r. upon us. p. 113 l. 23. r. implacable. p. 115. l. 33. r. King. p. 116. l. 1. r. on one stone. p. 119. l. 29. r. . p. 120. l. 12. r. of our own. p. 121 l. 17. r. Revelations. p. 125. l. 4. r. In the which. p. 129. l. 15. r. 2 Cor. 5. 1. p. 131. l. 4. r. and such like. p. 137. l. 13 r. 2 Cor. 5. p. 140. l. 5. r. peace. p. 158. l. 20. r. of our. p. 180. l. 20. r. Isa. 43. p. 189. l. 28. r. accepted. For litteral faults, and want of points, the Reader is desired to amend them.
DECAD II. OF SERMONS Preach'd at St. Mary's, Oxon. JOB 13. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me to possess the Iniquities of my youth. YOU are all well acquainted with the History of Serm. 1. at St. Maries Oxon. Iune. 25. 1650. Job, this eminent pattern of Integritie, as to his sufferings and patience, which are upon Di∣vine Record, both for our instruction and imita∣tion, Jam. 5. 10, 11. I shall wave the Narrative, being so abundantly known, even to a Proverbial Speech: Onely thus much I shall premise to make my passage clear unto my Text: Job being on the Dung-hill sorely afflicted with va∣riety of sufferings, his Friends came with an intention to com∣fort him, but, through mistakes, they proved miserable Comfort∣ers, even Physicians of no value; and added affliction to affli∣ction, passing uncharitable Censures upon him, and looking upon
all his Sufferings as just Punishments of his Hypocrisie: Many Dia∣logues there passed between Job and his Friends, with several An∣swers and Replyes. At this time he hath to deal with Zophar the Naamathite; Zophar gives him good counsel indeed, To put ini∣quity far away, Job 11. 13, 14. It's true in Thesi, but not in Hy∣pothesi: The Doctrine is good, the Application, as to this upright man Job, altogether impertinent; thereby he insinuates, as if some Bribery was in the hands of Job, being an innocent Person, as to Men; and indeed chastened thus by God, not because he was a greater Sinner then others, but for his tryal, the demonstration of his Faith and Patience, and to make it appear to all the World, that the Devil was a Lyar; Job, I say, vindicates himself from his Friends aspersions, and betakes himself, in the 12, 13, and 14 Chapters, to a plenary answer; his affliction makes him to speak, Job 12. 3, 4. he's sensible how cheap an esteem they had of him, Job 12. 3, 4. He was as one mocked of his neighbour: The remedies they apply to Job 13, 4. him, are worse then his disease; he speaks plainly to them, Job 13. 4. But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all Physitians of no value: He's surrounded with miseries, he's like a very Skeleton, all his Bones may be told; he lives a dying life. Mark his Question, Job 13. 14. he gives in an excellent Answer and Resolution, Job 13. 15. But that which renews his grief, is Gods hiding his face from him; if men fail him and despise him, he can easilier brook that; he stands upon his vindication, quoad hominem; but if God be angry, and account him an enemy, there's his grief, that's the wound indeed, v. 24. He further expostulates the matter, v. 25. (i. e.) Wilt thou break that which hath no power? A leaf is a weak thing, its dri∣ven too and fro; Wilt thou set thy power against weakness? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble, that will be soon on a flame, and consu∣med? Now Job is inquisitive after the cause; God is angry, but there's good cause for it; God writes bitter things against him, but youthful sins are call'd to remembrance, and now reckoned for in old Age. The words read are a heavy Charge, or a Bill of Indictment a∣gainst Divis. 1. 2. 1. 2. 3. a Delinquent; wherein you have two generals. 1. The Charge it self. 2. The Sentence given upon it. In the Charge, you are to consider of the matter or thing charged, 1. Iniquities. 2. The aggravation of them, drawn from the Age that commits them; they are sins of youth. 3. The person against whom this Charge was drawn, viz. against Job. In the Sentence given, you
have here set down sore afflictions, which Job reckons as exceeding heavy upon him, which may be represented by these aggravations. 1. These are not ordinary afflictions, but bitter things. 2. They 1. 2. 1. 2. are assured, and made firm to him two ways. 1. By writing, there is as it were, a writing drawn firm and sure. 2. By possession: And makest me to possess, as if he had authentick Scribis tan∣dm sententia∣que tuâ, manu & sigillo mu∣nis, ut acerbis∣sunâ morte ple∣ctar, Pineda in Loc. Ascribis sive imputas mihi quae admisi in juventute, quo∣rum non recor∣dor amplius. Vatabl. Rev. 10. 10. Writings, and Li∣very, and Seisin, given for these bitter things. Now in handling this Scripture, I shall first premise an Explication of the words, then draw forth a point of Doctrine, and prove it, and so conclude with particular Application. For Explication of the words, these Queries are to be resolved. 1. What is meant by bitter things in the Text? some understand by bitter things, the evil of sin, and indeed, sin is a very bitter thing, Deut. 29. 18. It is called a root that beareth gall and worm∣wood: There's an Exposition of this place, Heb. 12. 15. where it is called a root of bitterness. Though sin be sweet in the acting, yet there will be bitterness in the end; like the Roll, which was sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly. This is a plain truth, that sin will bring all bitterness to the soul: yet I shall rather incline to Malim acer∣ba intelligi sup∣plicia, dolores gravissimos qui bus discrucia∣tur. Merc. Mercers Exposition, By bitter things he understands bitter pu∣nishments, and grievous sorrows, wherewith Job was afflicted: And this I take to be the proper meaning, you shall hear Job complain∣ing of terrors, pouring out his soul, &c. Job 30. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Now amongst several kindes of savours, bitterness is most offensive to the Pallate: Bitterness is spoken of, and applyed to sad afflicted conditions, Ruth 1. v. 20. Call me not Naomi, (i. e.) pleasant and delectable, but call me Marah, (i. e.) Bitter, for the Ruth 1. 20. Lord hath dealt very bitterly with me. Afflictions in themselves are very grievous and bitter, most distasteful to the Pallate; No cha∣stening for the present, seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: So then Heb. 12. 11. by bitter things we are to understand those sad crosses, and bitter af∣flictions which were incumbent upon Job, those Arrows of the Almighty which stuck fast in his sides, all evils of punishment or chastisement. 2. What's meant by writing of bitter things: This, saith Learn∣ed Q. 2. Scribendi ver∣bum judiciale uto ut Graei dicunt. Merc. in Loc. Mercer, is a judicial phrase, the Graecians were wont to write these Sentences in their judicial proceedings: Writing alludes to that which in Civil Law is an acusation called Libelling. Its the usual course of Law, to bring in Charges or Bills of Indictment in writing a∣gainst
the Offender Caryl In locum. A Reverend Divine observes on the place, That God hath a double Book, and both in a Figure; he hath a Book of resolved Decrees, and a Book of his acted Providences: This Book of his acted Providences, is but a Transcript of the former; Job is to be understood of this latter Book of Providen∣ces, in which God writ bitter things against him. By Writing, Chrysost. Chrysostome understands, The firm and irrevocable Decree of the Judge: This writing is firm and stedfast, , saith John 19. 22. Dan. 6. 8. Job 31. 35. Pilate, which is as if he should say, It is written under my hand, it shall stand; like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not: Jobs wish gives a good gloss to our assertion, Job 31. 35. where he marketh, that that his Adversary had written a Book against him. The Laws of Draco were written in Blood, and the De∣crees of God against Job (as he conceived) were written with gall and wormwood. 3. Why doth Job make such peculiar mention of the sins of his Q. 3. youth? Quidam in locū existimāt suae Adoles∣centiae peccata vocare quae à filiis suis Ado∣lescentulis perpetrata fu∣issent. Pineda in Loc. Job 1. 5. Why is such a brand of Infamy put upon young men? For Answer, Pineda mentions, That some think that God imputes his childrens sins unto him, as if he were remiss in his duty towards them: And the version of the 70. seems to favor this sense, , (i. e.) Thou hast imposed or laid upon me: But this sense is foreign, though God doth punish Children for their Parents, and Parents for their Childrens sins; yet I conceive it not so to be understood here; and we have a good warrant for a more charitable opinion of Job, c 1. v. 5. because we read he sanctified his sons. Job here is to be understood, speaking of his own personal sins: Sins of Infancy and Childhood could not so well be remembred, but youthful sins may more easily be called to remembrance: Ita Jobus ipse medita∣tur, Sanctius in Loc. quia eum recentium peccatorum non morderet cruciaretque consci∣entia, &c. As if Job had not been conscious to himself of late sins, therefore he conceives that he now suffers for former sins; thus some conecture, as Sanctius observes on the place: But this savors not of Jobs spirit, though he was exemplary for holiness, yet he was sensible of daily sins, he knew himself to be a daily sinner, he knew what a sinful nature he had, full of pollution, yet his youth∣ful sins carryed the greatest filth and guilt in them, which, in his apprehension, made the greatest gashes and wounds upon his con∣science; he knew that his youthful sins had most aggravating cir∣cumstances
in them, that a Bill of Indictment drawn up against them would be blackest, and charge him homest: Where upon Ju∣dicious Mr. Calvin gives two reasons why he speaks of the sins of his youth; one is, Because in that age lusts are most predominant, the Calvin. in l∣cum. nature of a man, which is sinful, doth then cast up his greatest froth; the passions are most violent, and therefore that age hath need of the strongest Bridle. Another reason is, Because Job meant to declare, that God brought all his sins to remembrance, as if he should frame an Indictment against him of all that he had done ever since he was a childe. And herein he seems to complain of rigor, seeing thou hast pardoned them, wherefore dost thou lay them before me? But we may not finde fault with God, he punisheth less then we deserve: The Lord is righteous, we have sinned against him. A fourth Query is, what is meant by possessing the sins of Q. 4. Hieronymi translatio. Chald. Parap. Jun. in Loc. youth: Jerome reads it, consumere vis, youthful sins may bring Consumptions upon old Age. The Chalde Paraphrase reads it, Me haereditare facis: Thus Junius interprets, Efficis ut possideam haereditario jure. As if elder years did inherit youthful sins: Gray Hairs, even old persons gray headed in sins, receive the punish∣ment of their youthful green headed sins for their inheritance: It's an observable note of Pineda on the place, * Punishment is the Poena est quasi culpe prognata & filia, atque adeo ipse homo grandevus & senex, succedit sibi ipsi puero & Adolsn∣ti. Pineda in Loc. Daughter of sin: An old man is successor to himself a young man. There is, as it were, a natural succession and derivation of sins committed in youth, to become the inheritance of old age: So that a sinner becomes his own Heir, the old sinner the young mans Heir. The meaning is, A man that runs on in a riotous ungodly course, following his swinge and full career in wickedness in the days of his youth, shall feel the smart and bitterness of his sins in his old crasie bones: We render the word in the Text ordina∣rily to possess, and that is Emphatical: A man that hath present possession of his Inheritance, hath most points in the Law; The right next Heir hath a legal Title. Now when the Heir hath pos∣session of his Inheritance, this adds to the strengthning of his right. Now an old sinner doth inherit and take possession of his youthful sins; and this is a sad possession, to possess the inheritance of sin. It was charged upon Ahab, for killing and taking possessi∣on; there is the killing of the soul, when there is possession took of sin. He then may be said to possess the sins of his youth, who feels the smart and pain of them, who suffers bitter sorrows
for them, when the sins committed in his youth, even breaks his bones when he comes to be old. I have one Query more to propound: How is it, since Job an ho∣ly   man, whose sins were pardoned, yet complains of such an hand-writing against him, charging upon himself youthful sins? For answer, you must know, 1. That sins repented of and par∣doned,   may yet prove gall and wormwood to the soul: They that have repented, must renew their repentance. The remembrance of the wormwood and the gall, the bitterness of sin will cost Gods people many a salt tear. 2. Though sins may be pardoned, yet the soul may not be able  to read that pardon, it may want the manifestation of the pardon; though there may be a pardon sealed, an acquittance, a white stone in the Court of the Judge, yet it may not appear so in the Court of a mans own Conscience. 3. We are to know, that Fatherly chastisements are the lot and  Heb. 12. 5, 6. Rev. 3. 19. portion of Gods dearest Children, as the Scripture plainly sheweth There is a Judgement of Revenge, and a Judgement of Chastisement; Judgements of Revenge are the portion of the wicked; Judge∣ments of Chastisement are incident to the generation of the righ∣teous: As a Judge, God will not pass an eternal Judgement a∣gainst his people; They are the beloved of his Soul, and he loves them to the end; but as a Father he may, and doth pronounce ma∣ny temporal Judgements as Chastisements against them: The fruit whereof is, to take away their Dross and Tin, and to make them partakers of his holyness. 4. It is wisdom in a godly man, when present sufferings are up∣on  him, to call former sins to remembrance: Afflictions brings sins to remembrance. Job lookt back upon his former failings, he was not unmindeful of his present failings, but his former, in an espe∣cial manner, might call for a rod of correction to whip out his fol∣ly. When afflictions befall us, we should inquire into the cause, and search out our sins, and be humbled for them: So Josephs Bre∣thren, when distress befell them in Aegypt, called to minde their Gen. 42. 21. cruelty against Joseph, many years before committed. Thus you have heard the Explication of the words, from which I'le draw one Point of Doctrine, which I take to be the fundamen∣tal Doctrine of the Text: That sins committed in our youth, will cause much smart and bit∣terness  in our elder years.
This Point lies plainly in the Text, & I shall make it the ground∣work of my ensuing Meditations: In the prosecution whereof, I shall pursue my plain and accustomed method, by proving the Point from Method. of handling the Doctrine. Scripture, confirming it by evidenc of Reason, and reducing all to point of practice, by way of Use and particular Application. For Scripture proof, Job speaking of the momentary joy of wicked men, cap. 20. v. 5. sets forth his judgement, v. 11. His bones are full of the sins of his youth, Hos. 12. 14. He shall leave his blood upon him, (as Diodate and others observe) God will not pardon him his sin, nor cleanse him from it, but will keep it still in remembrance, to punish him for it at his appointed time. God makes a grievous complaint against Samaria and Jerusalem, under the names of Aholah and Aholibah; Aholahs youthful Whoredoms are charged upon her, Ezek. 23. v. 8. And likewise the same charge is given in against her Sister Aholibah, v. 19. See their doom, v. 33, 34. The cup of astonishment and desolation should be their por∣tion. David being sensible both of the sins of his youth, and ri∣per age, how heavy they would be upon him if God call'd them to remembrance, prays earnestly, That God would not remember them a∣gainst him, Psal. 25. v. 7. Though he was a potent King, and an excellent Musitian, a Man of a sanguine complexion, (and such naturally are most chearful) yet after he had committed those two scandalous sins, Murther and Adultery, he lost his former chear∣fulness, he complains of broken bones, Psal. 51. 8. of restless bone, Psal. 37. 3. of diseased bones, Psal. 6. 3. His sad condition is fu∣ther aggravated, Psal. 6. 6, 7. & 38. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. You know by experience, that some sprains and bruises that you have got in the heat of your youth, afflict you sore in your old age; old men feel some blows, some aches and pains which they have got many years before; some over-strain themselves by running, wrestling, or such like violent Exercises, and they feel the smart thereof in their old bones: So likewise the sins which young me venture on, their Whoredoms, Voluptuousness, Carousing and Gaming, which they make light of now, may lie heavy upon their spirits in old age; so that when green sins and gray hairs, young sins and old bones meet together, there will be more bitterness in the remembrance of them, then ever there was pleasure in the commission of them. The Devil will let a man alone a great while, whil'st he is young and follows his Voluptuousness: The
Devil thinks he is sure enough of him; But when old age comes, and a sinner then is awakened from his security, then the Devil bestirs himself all that he can; bringing all his sins to remembrance, and tempting him to dsperation. It's a good note of Estius, Estius. Insidebit calcaneo: The Serpent will be most busie to do us mis∣chief in the end of our life; So then, take it which way you will, when God comes to reckon with sinners, there will be bitterness: Sin it self is a bitter thing; Affliction is the punishment of sin, and that is a bitter thing; and Repentance, which is the instrumental means prescribed, is no pleasant potion. The issue is indeed sweet, because they that sow in tears shall reap in joy: Yet the Scripture sets forth Repentance by breaking the heart, afflicting the soul, going mourning all the day long, like the mourning for an onely Son, Zech. 12. 10. Sin will cause bitterness in the end. That this may appear more evidently, I will give in the demon∣stration of the Point, by evidence of Reason. The first shall be drawn from the rule of Equity and Justice: There is a Commutative and a Distributive Justice; in the Commutative R. 1. Drawn from the rule of Equity & Justice. Justice, Inter vendenda & emenda, equity and good conscience must take place; the Commodity sold must be worth the money given, and the money given must be worth the Commodity, this is most true, yet not in that sence which I drive at this present: But there is a distributive Justice, and the rule thereof is, suum cui{que} Tribuere, this serves for my purpose: It's just with God to give a sinner his own, to pay him in his own coyn, to let him reap what he hath sowed; That as in his youth he hath sown the seeds of wickedness, so in his old age he should reap the fruits of sorrow and bitterness: It's Eliphaz experience, Job 4. 8. They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same; youth will have its swinge: No bands will hold them, no bounds will keep them in, they will have their own ways, and its just with God to let them be filled with their own ways, Prov. 5. 22, 23. His own iniquity shall take the wicked Prov. 5. 22, 23. himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin: he shall die without instruction, and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray: Isa. 3. 10, 11. Rom. 6. 23. , Pro stipendio & quovis sala∣rio accipitur, Piscut. Compare those two different Sentences together, Isa. 3. 10, 11. Sin hath a voice, it cries aloud for it's wages, and that is a dead pay, Rom. 6. 23. , Young men rush into sin with greediness, but they take not into their thoughts the consi∣deration of a day of an account: There will come a day of visita∣tion
a day of recompense, when God will reckon with thee for thy most delightfull sinnes. In thy elder age thou must feel the smart of them and possess a bitter inheritance: Read that sa∣cred Irony of the wise man, Rejoyce O young man &c. Eccles. 11. 9. Reas. Second, drawn from the nature and quality of Sinne. A Second Reason shall be drawn from the nature and quality of sinne, every sinne is a pollution, a defileing of the conscience, there is an abundance of filthiness in every sinne, this the Psal∣mists question implyes wherewithall shall a young man cleanse his ways? Psal. 119. 9. Sinne in Sctipture is called lewdness, folly, perversness, uncleanness, compared to a menstruous cloath, to dung, vomit, mire, poyson &c. There is nothing so loathsome in our eyes, as sinne is in the pure eyes of God, sinne is the poy∣son of the soul, sinne is worse then hell, then the Devil, more black, more ugly then either of them, Quod efficit tale est magis tale. There would be neither hell, nor devil were it not for sinne. Now then if every sin be thus filthy, what shall we say of youthfull sinnes, which are committed with vigour, greediness, alacrity. when men sell themselves to work wickedness, and spend their marrow and strength in the devills service, these (though they li∣tle think of it) will one day feel the smart of their youthfull vani∣tyes if God open their eyes to see the filthiness of their wayes and to loath themselves, their sinnes will cost them many a salt tear: Hence will follow an holy self-confusion self-displacency, and ab∣horrence, Jer. 13. 19. Job. 42. 6. as was i Ephraim, and Job. Though they wanted  fore witt, Its a great mercy if they have  after wit. A Third and last Reason shall be drawn from the severall ag∣gravations of those sinnes which are committed in the dayes of our youth. Reas. Third. from the ag∣gravations of youthfull sins 1 Aggravat. because youthfull sins are commit∣ted with greater vio∣lence. Job. 11. 12.  &c. Arist. Eth. l. 1.  1. 1. They are commited with a great deal of impetuousness and violence: Though the story of Phaeton be fabulous (and I pur∣posely wave Poeticall Fictions) yet the morall is sound, that rash young men may set all in a combustion: Job hath a full comparison: A young man is like a wild Asses Colt. Aristotle accounts him an unfit hearer of morall Philosophy. Neither Aristotle his Ethicks, nor Tullyes offices, can break a young colt. This one word Volo is the bane of many young men. They are refractory, and will have their own will, and a self-willed-man is felo de se, his own executi∣tioner:
with what violence doe young men pursue their lusts? They leaue no stone unmoved for the satisfaction of their hu∣mours: They measure not things by the light of judgment, much lesse by the rule of the word, but they act according to fancy and passion. And there is an Anarchy in their passions, or such a tu∣mult or Ataxy in them, as that they love what they should loath, desire what they should abhorre, rejoyce when they should mourn: Nitimur in vetitum, is the main trade they drive. And thus un∣bridled youth, without all government, is like a City without gates and walls Satan and all his instruments will enter in speedily and surprize them. A Second aggravation is because snnes commited in dayes of 2. Aggrav. Because youthful sins are commit∣ted with greater de∣light. youth are with abundance of delight and complacency acted by sinners. Old men cannot act some innes (though their hearts are as naught as ever) by reason of naturall Impedements, and indis∣position of their present constitution: But yong-men whose bones are full of marrow, they delight in joviall company, drinking, gameing, seeing Theatricall Enterludes, They are young, and therefore they put far from them the evil day, Let them read that dreadfull woe Amos 6. 3. 4. 5. 6. Its the young man voyd of under∣standing that was enticed by the Whore, Prov. 7. 22. Absolon was a young man that rebelled against hi Father, O what eager pur∣suits was there, what delight what desire and endeavour to accom∣plish his designes? He falls a fawning and flattring and so steales away the hearts of the people, and then he will not tarry till his fathers death, but on hee goeth with his designe, A vow to God he pretends in his mouth, but he meditates Treason and ebellion in his heart, And you know what became of him. David seemes to ex∣tenuatet he matter, when he bids deal gently with the young man Absolom. However the Rebell is no whit lesse in excuseble. A Third aggravation is drawn from the many Pleas, and vain 3 Aggravat. is drawn from the waine preten∣ces which young men make. pretences that young men make, they will tell you that youth must have a grain allowed, what's a Gentleman but his pleasure, Now they are young hereafter they will think upon their soules, They must haue a time to sow their wild Oates, They can quote the Laetitia juve∣nem Frons e∣cet, tristis senem. Sen. Trag. Tragedian; Mirth becomes a young man, gravity an old man. Would they were as well verst in the book of God, there they may read 2 Tim. 2. 22. Flee youthfull Lusts: I have often seriously thought that Its no wonder to see so many wanton youths, when as
there remaine so many wanton Authours (Poets I mean especially) such as Horace, Martiall, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius &c. ho cor∣rupt many young men, Its high time that all such bookes were ei∣ther throughly purged or els condemned to the fire as theirs were Act. 19. 19. You youngmen doe not plead for your pleasures, Solomon tells you that Childhood and youth are vanities. I remem∣ber Tertullian hath a saying Vides convivium peccatoris interroga e∣jus conscientiam &c. There is death in the Pot; In the middest of Tertul. laughter the heart is sorrowfull. There is death in the Adulterers bed, death in the Drunkards cup, death in the deceivers false weights, never plead pleasure in sinfull wayes. But youth will plead, will you allow no Recreation? Eph. 5. 16. . Emercantes, hoc est, dato pretio sserrere in libertatem. Erasm. Est curiose merces considerare, u emas meliores. C. a Lap: I Answer that no recreation that is sinfull may at any time be al∣lowed, no recreation of ill report and scandalous, no recreation as a vocation, no mispending of time, for we are commanded to redeeme time or making a good Market of time. Only such recreations may be used as are of Good report, which may serve as files and whetstones to devotion, to draw thee neerer to God, and not to keep thee farther off. I may say of recreations as a Reverend Di∣vine said of Ceremonyes some are tollerable, none necessary, but most be abominable, Would you know the right pleasure? It's in the ways of wisdome Prov. 3, 17. would you know the right object of re∣joycing? Vis nunquam esse tristis be∣ne vive. Bern. de modo be∣ne vivendi It's in God Phil. 4. 4. Bernard hath an excellent say∣ing Wouldest thou never be sad, live well. Lay aside all your vaine pleadings, study the scripture, be much in prayer, much in medi∣tation, and searching your own hearts, and then you will find by experience that there is more true pleasure in one moments communion with God, then in all the delights and vanityes of the whole world were they all put together. The fourth and last Aggravation that I shall name, is this, Sins 4 Aggravat. Sins of youth are greater because com∣mitted against warning and invitations of youth are greater sins, and will cause the greatest bitterness, because yong men sin after so many invitations, calls and warnings from God. The soul of God loves the first ripe fruits; The Holy Ghost calls to day, not to morrow, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth: Thou must consecrate thy fresh green years to God; Thou must dedicate the first fruits, the first born, the Mich. 7. 1. Eccles. 12. 1. dren of Israel were to give their first fruits, their first born, the best of their flock, a Lamb withot blemish God calls for thy youth, Wilt thou put him off with the refuse, thy old crazy
bones, (that I may speak it with reverence) when the Devil hath suckt out the Marrow? Wilt thou offer God empty bones? Mal. 1. 8. Thy Governor will not accept of it: Now thy sin is aggravated, Hin colligit se affici nimis gravi Injuriâ, quod Judaei audeant offer∣re, quod mor∣talis homo res∣pueret. Calv. because thou dost refuse Gods call at present, upon presumption of space, and grace for the future, neither of which are in thy power; He may give thee neither, whilest thou art a refusing at the call of God, to give him thy youth. and thy fresh green years, he may be a sweating that there shall be no more time, and cut thee asun∣der in the midst of thy sins, and cast thee into eternal torments; or if God give theespace, it's doubtful whether he will give thee grace, It's said of Jezabell, Rev. 2. 21 I gave her space to repent but she repented not: There is a Peradventure, 2 Tim. 2. 25. They en∣couraged the blinde man, saying, Behold he calleth thee: Christ Loquitur non de fidelibus tā∣tum sed de om∣nibus homini∣bus in genere, praesertim non∣dum credenti∣bus in Chri∣stum. Muscul. knocks at the doors of your hearts, he offers to be your guest, Will not you now open to entertain Jesus Christ: Now we are sent on Embassy, 2 Cor. 5. 20. To pray you to be reconciled unto God: If you hearken not to day, our commission may be out of date to¦morrow; I know Christ calls at several hours, I dare not set a bar against ancient people, I invite them to come unto Christ, and Ministerially perswade them: For, saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We perswade men: Now let them begin and bewail their mis-spent time, and though they have begun later, let them work the har∣der that work of faith, that labor of love, that patience of hope: 1 Thess. 1. 3. Yet I dare not encourage any, for all the world, to put off their repentance to their old age; They that begin soonest, will finde the most comfort, the most experience, and the lesse work to doe when they come to die: Yet let not elder persons say 'tis too late, let them not shut the door of mercy against themselves, and so judge themselves unworthy of eternal life: But let them lay aside all excuses, and now come and work in Christs Vineyard, and be faithful, and they shall receive their penny. Thus I have given you the Doctrinal part of the Text, I shall improve it in four Uses for Humiliation, Exhortation, Direction, and Consolation: This shall be my particular Application of all unto our selves. The first Use shall be for deep Humiliation: Let us all be hum∣bled Use 1. For Humilia∣ion. for the sins of our youth▪ Let us smite upon our Thighs, sigh to the breaking of our loyns: Let us abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes. Youth is easily over-taken with sin: Plato tells us, Fu∣riosus
est Juvenibus animi habitus: Aristotle saith, He is head∣strong, given to his passions: . Aristot. Eth. l. 1. But Solomon gives his experimental verdict, instar omnium, Eccles. 11. 10. Youth is vanity: Let us reflet upon our youthful sins, and aggravate them with all their sinful cir∣cumstances, and be confounded and abased even to the dust, at the remembrance of them. Mr. Bolton in that excellent Tract, En∣tituled, Helps to Humiliation, takes it for granted, that Christians Mr. Boltons Helps to Hu∣miliation. keep two Catalogues of their sins; one before, another after their conversion: Did we indeed keep a Diary of our lives, we should finde abundant cause of a heart-melting Humiliation; as for all, so especially for those notorious Pollutions that cleave to our youthful days. Austin made Confessions and Retractations, which Books, amongst his Works, can never be enough admired, but are accounted the very Marrow and Quintessence of all his Works: In his Confessions, amongst other sins, he sets out a sin which ma∣ny idle Truantly Boys now adays would laugh it out, and would make nothing of, accounting it onely as a trick of youth: It was Aug. Conf. l. 2.  the robbing of an Orchard, which he confesseth with a bleeding heart in several aggravations. 1. Saith he, This sin which I com∣mitted, was not onely forbidden in the book of God, but I had it daily in my heart. 2. I did it with a previous resolution, with full pur∣pose of heart. 3. I did it not for want, but in disdain of goodness,  and out of an eager desire to do wrong. 4. I had abundance of the same kinde at home, and better. 5. I did steal them not so much to enjoy the thing, as my own lust, That it might be said to my old companions, that I robbed an Orchard. 6. He aggravates his sin  from the bad company, there were a great many swaggerers, and in∣carnate Devils with me. 7. From the unseasonableness of the time,  It was at mid-night. 8. From the base imployment they had been at, before they came there; we did it when we had been Sporting, Dancing, and Drinking. 9. We carryed all away, so that they were a burthen  to us. 10. When we came home, we gave them to the Swine. I have enlarged this Confession of Austin, hoping, through the Grace of God, that it may do a great deal of good. My Brethren, I be∣seech you look back on former sins, call to remembrance your ma∣ny mad pranks committed in your youth: Some now adays glory in their youthful sins, and will make a Jest of them: But you know Solomons censure of such, Prov. 14. 9. That fools make a
mock of sin: Some will boast even of those sins that they never Prov. 14. 9. mmitted, thereby to ingratiate themselves with their boon Companions. Many there are, who will finde matter for discourse, by talking of their old sins, with what delight and merriment can they talk of youthful vanities, such slippery tricks and wanton car∣riages? and by the delighting in the narration and repetition of them, they possess their youthful sins, and they act them over again. I am fully of that Reverend Divines opinion, who hath took ex∣cellent pains in his Exposition upon the place, That so often as a Caryl on the Text. man remembers a sin which he hath committed, with consent, he com∣mits it again: Take heed then of boasting and telling pleasant sto∣ries of your youthful sins; Be humbled, be humbled for every sin, especially for youthful sins: Call to minde your prophanati∣ons of Sabbaths, Sabbath sins will sit close upon the conscience: Call to minde your barrenness under the means of Grace, your rashness, precipitancy, frothyness of wit, wantonness, self-wil∣ledness, all your youthful vanities; spread the letter before the Lord (as Hezekiah did in the case of Rabshekah) spread the black Bill of Indictment against your selves, take shame to your selves, glorifie God, by making confession to him; if there may be any possibility of hope, any healing of your errors; you are yet alive on this side Hell, on this side the Grave and Eternity, you cannot promise unto your selves the least moment of time. Now there is hope, there is a door of mercy opened, the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land, you live under the sound of the Gospel: Now I am sent in mbassy, the substance whereof, is to perswade you to make sin your greatest sorrow, and Jesus Christ your greatest joy, to be sensible of the stingings of the Fiery Serpents, to be affected with the wounds of sin, & then to look up to the brazen Serpent Je∣sus Christ for a perfect cure. Had not you better mourn for sin now, whilest you have breath, space, hope, then weep and wail, and gnash your teeth in Hell fire, in that hopeless condition whence there is no redemption, where the Judge hath veil'd his face, and past a Sentence irreversible: And because many Scholars bewail in an e∣special manner their University sins, considering, that here they have committed those sins with delight, which in their elder age, will prove Gall and Wormwood, even Gravel, as Solomon speaks: Prov. 20. 17. Give me leave, out of love to your souls, to deal plainly with you, and to be your Remembrancer of some peculiar reigning sins,
which upon observation, I finde more ripe amongst young men; I exclude not, nor excuse them from other sins, for who can say his heart is clean? whose heart is not a Womb, to bring forth the most hideous Monsters? whose heart is not a Garden to bring forth the most rank poisonous weeds? whose heart is not a sink, to entertain the most noisom carrion? but that Grace preventing, renewing and sanctifying Grace steps in, and keeps a soul from such foul acts: ut I say, upon grounded experience, these sins amongst young men are most notorious, for which there is exceeding great cause of humiliation. The first sin I shall mention, is Voluptuousness: Young men 1. The sin of Voluptu∣ousness. are all for their pleasures, addicted to their sports and vanities: It's lamentable to consider what a great deal of precious time is thrown away in vain pleasures by some young men (I wish there were none such within our Walls) What abundance of time is spent, I say, mis-spent by many young men, in Ball-courts, Cards, Dice, Tables, with Hawks, Hounds, one of which hours cannot be recalled. I have read the Story of John Husse, whom Luther calls Sanctissimum Martyrem, when the Bishops put a ridiculous Crown upon his head, to make him their Ludibrium; he made this Answer, My Lord Iesus for my sake did wear a crown of Thorns, why should not I then for his sake wear this lght crown, be it never so ignominious? Truly I will do it, and that willingly: You know (saith he) In my younger years (which grieveth me now) I have d∣lighted oftentimes to play at Chesse, have neglected my time, and have unhappily provoked both my self and others to anger many times by that play: You may make good use of the words of this Holy Martyr, which were the words of a dying Man; and an emi∣nent Martyr for Christ: I shall not dispute at present the lawful∣ness or unlawfulness of that Play: Be it never so innocent, never so indifferent, where those ill consequences are produced, viz. Loss of much time, and provocation to much anger; its the safest way to lay it aside: and the like may be said for other Games, which Cicero. are doubtful & disputable, Abundans cautela non nocet: Aristotle by no means will have happiness to consist in pleasure: He calls voluptuous persons Slaves, , that lead a life more beseeming a Beast then a Man. The best of Orators gives this character of Pleasure, That it is esca omnium malorum, and looks upon a volu∣ptuous person, as one that hath un-manned himself, and not wor∣thy
the name of a man. It was a famous Speech of Titus Caesar, That he had lost that day wherein he had done no good: Consider of O amici perdi∣dimus dim. Tit. Caes. this, that day is lost wherein you have done God no service; when you have wasted your time in idle Company, Drinking, Gaming, Carowsing, What comfort can you take when you come to die? What good will your boon Companions do you? They will prove as miserable Comforters, (as the High Priests to Judas) Matth. 27. 3. They said, What's that to us, see thou to that: O this sin of Voluptuousness reigns thorowout the Land; How many make their Recreation their business, their imployment, eating and drinking, and rising up to play, with the Idolatrous Israelites: Believe it (my Brethren) mis-spent time will lie heavy upon your consciences when you come to die: Then thou wilt cry, Call time again, call time again, as some have done on their Death-beds: Then what promises would'st thou make if thou might'st live a little longer? Thou would'st redeem every vanity with an age of preciseness. O how thou wilt curse those prophane Companions that called thee from thy Study to the Tavern; that inticed thee from a Sermon to a Whore-house! Then thou wilt finde by experience that thou hast been mistaken all the while, and that there is no solid real pleasure in the ways of sin: May these considerations disengage and wean your hearts from sensual Pleasures: Neither do I cry down all Pleasures this day, onely I perswade you to make the best choice, to turn the stream of Carnal and Sensual, into Spiritual and Heavenly Pleasures: Would you have Pleasures follow Wis∣doms Tracts? Prov. 3. 17. Are you all for Delights? Delight your selves in God, Psal. 37. 4. Are you for Joy? rejoyce in God, The joy of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8. 10. A Second sin I shall name is contempt of superiours, Young 2. Contempt of Superiors. men would gladly have the reynes of government let loose, they will fain be lawlesse, left to their own liberty, every one to doe that which is good in his own eyes, no Bonds will hold head strong refractory spirits, they joyne with those in their resolution to breake of all bands. Psal. 2. 3. I could wish heartily those com∣plaints were not verified of our times Isa: 3. 5. Lam. 5. 12. Lam. 4. 16. I am sure the 5th commandement is obligatory, so is the pre∣cept. Heb. 13. 17. God is the God of order, and not of confusion: if the order primi & secundi be not observed, If there be not go∣verning and obeying: But if Levelling designes of a rude multitude
that bellua multorum capitum, take place, there will be a dissoluti∣on of the continuum, and we shall be reduced into the first Chaos. Therefore to you (my Elder Brethren) I addresse my exhortation, to keep up that authority that God hath put into your hands; Let no man despise you: Keep up good discipline: Set up Catechising in all your houses: Teach those under your charge their particu∣lar dutyes, season them with the knowledge of God in their youth and train them up in their duty, and when they are old, they will This I heard Mr. Herbert Palmer preach at Al∣dermanbury never forget it. I have heard that in the beginning of that horrid Irish rebellion, some Servants cut their masters throats, and told them they should have taught them better. Were there better Ma∣sters, there would be better servants. You that are Tutors and have the inspection of others, look upon your selves as Pro-parents, and be faithfull in your trust. Doe you read diligently to them? I wish you all did else. Take heed of sloathfulness, of hiding your Talents in a Napkin. But let me ask you plainly, you that find young men licentious, head-strong and refractory, doe you pray frequently with them, and for them? Doe you Catechise them? Doe you teach them knowledge in Aristotle, and doe you not much more teach them knowledge in Jesus Christ? Let us then all in our places and capacityes look to our charge, and doe our du∣ties with diligence and fidelity, and leave the success to God. A Third sinne is an affectation of Novelty, or devising wayes 2. Sinne, affectation of Novelty. besides, or quite contrary to the knowledge of the word of God; We brayd of the humour of old Athens: we have Itching eares af∣ter novelty. It is sad to consider how many young mens heads af∣fect froth of wit, and spend much time in reading stage playes, Poets, Pasquills, Romances, high-flown non-sense of late Scrib∣lers: Others out of curiosity are not afraid to meddle with Ju∣dicial Astrology, which was Mr. Perkins his sinne in his younger years, and his sorrow in his elder years. Another sort there are, who are much affected with New-Lights, (i. e.) Antinomian and Familisticall writers, who with a swelling Title in the frontispice, allure men, as the Syrens doe with their Musick, and then devour them; Some of their bookes are no better then guilded Pills, or guilded Rats-bane, which whilest they pretend the exaltation of Christ and bright morning beames (as some of their Titles pretend) they deceive young heads, and whilest they pretend new lights, they revive old Antiquated Her esies, and like an ignis fatuus mis∣lead
multitudes, ho follow after to their own destruction. There∣fore lets all as one man be exhorted not to be wise above what is writ∣ten, not to follow any further then they follow Jesus Christ. Keep close to the good old rule, unto the law and the testimonyes, study the Scriptures and converse with those Mnasons, those old disciples, study their works such as were Greenham, Perkns, Regers, Hil∣dersham, Dod, Dyke, &c. Their memory is blessed, their works prayse them in the gate. And let me communicate an experience unto you: I have observed of some, that at first out, of pregnancy of parts, and singularity, they would be scepticall and hold Para∣doxes in Philosophy: In tract of time they stayd not there, but they would set their wits a working and afterwards they became scepticall and Heterodoxe in Divinity. And therefore take heed of Sceptisme: There is Mr. John Bidle a notorious Heretique. One whom I knew very well, a man of a proud spirit, that used in the schooles to be septicall and main∣taine Paradoxes, and to goe against the principles of Philosophy: He is gone further now, and hath wrote a blasphemous book against the Divinity of the holy Ghost. Whither will not pride and vaine glory carry any man? And what becomes of the best wit, the best parts, when God leaves any man unto himself? The Fourth and last sinne I shall now name is pride, and of all 4. Sin, Pride. pride, spirituall pride is most dangerous, when a man is proud of a∣ny gift of God, his pride will prove like the wild gourd, est mors in olla. Pride is the poyson of the soul, it soon swells a man, and then bursts him. And many times men of learning smart for their pride, God bereaves them of their senses and they doe even obrutescere with Nebuchadnezzar, who in the middest of his proud vainglorious boasting, was sent a grazing among the beasts of the field. And there is another sort of pride, which I dare not let goe unreproved (i. e.) the strange Exotick Garbes of these times, worse then former ages, mny cannot be content with the haire v. Mr. Pryn's unlovelyness of love-looks that God gives them, they like not the colour of it, but they bor∣row other folks hair, some are so phantasticall as to Crisp and Pow∣der their hair, and wear long Locks, fitter to be called Pride-locks then Love-locks. I cannot hold my peace, to see such vanities and prodigious sights, even like bushy Comets ptending some mis∣cheif to the place where they live. You shall not talk scarce with any Trades-man, but he will tell you, its a hard time, he hath much adoe to live: And many poore housholders have much adoe
to keep themselves alive: when as in the mean time a Phantasti∣call Gallant wears so many Ribbands (even all the colours of the Rainbow) in his Hat, so many Ribbands about his waste, so many Poynts about the knees, as the price payd for them would main∣tain many poore families a great while. Brethren, I speak these things sadly and seriously, when I consider such superfluityes and vanityes, which if they were pared off, and that money converted to the poor, it might supply the honest necessity of many a poor servant of Jesus Christ. Hopeing therefore of your Reformation, I proceed to a Second Vse for Exhortation. Let old men call to mind their youthfull sinnes, and mourn for 2 Vse, For Exhortation. Admonentur hic senes ut ipst delicta ju∣ventutis suae gnoscant, de∣testentur, illo∣rutn{que} veniam precentur. Da∣videm non im∣itantur, qui gloriando de praeteritâ suâ stultitiâ garri∣unt, & adhuc tales esse vel∣lent. Musc. in Psal. 25. Quidm ex hoc loco colli∣gun eximiam viri sanctissimi sanctitatem, qui in aetate jam confirma∣tâ & maturâ nihil sibi con∣scivit, Sanct. them: I am confident there are divers aged persons, that have re∣pented of their youthfull sinnes, which sins were they to commit again, they would not commit them for all the world. And doe not passe by the sinnes of your riper years: David prayes that God would charge neither upon him, but remember him according to mercy, Psal. 25. 7. Covetousness and Passion are amongst others two especiall sinnes that accompany old age. Beware of these in an especiall manner. These are beloved bosome sinnes, O subdue them: when Goliah was slain the Philistines were vanquished pre∣sently. When Covetousness and Passion (which are the champion∣sins, the accustomed sins of old age) are conquered, other sins of ordinary incursions will more easily be subdued. I have read of Bellarmine, that when the Priest came to confess him, he could not remember any particular sins of his present age, but was fain to call to mind the sinnes of his youth: put surely this man was a meer stranger to his own heart, he had not studied his own heart, o∣therwise he might have found many present sinnes to bewail, if he had not gone back as farre as his youth: owever the oldest Saints find matter of humiliation, for daily and hourely sinnes, and they lamn their sinnes committed in all ages, (viz) Infancy, Child∣hood, Youth and old age: nd to you that are yong, let me beseech you to give God the prime of your youth, consecrate your youth to God. A young Timothy O how delightfull is he to God, The time you have before you, O redeem it, and be good husbands of it, and improve every minute of time to the glory of God! and the best advantage of your precious soules. O labour with a holy greedi∣ness to get saving graces, faith, love, hope, patience, meekness and humilitie. Now you have a time of plenty, store up against a year
of famine. Now you have many prices put into your hands, to get wisdom withall, O that God would give you hearts to make a right improvement of them! You have strength nd marro in your bones, you are in the flower, and prince of your age, your spirits are vigorous, your memories mos retentive, O then consecrate all the members of your bodies, and faculties of your soules to the service of the Lord. We usually say Spes Ecclesiae in Juventute: There are many hopefull young plant in Gods garden, they must bring orth more favory fruit in their elder age. In a word, let me exhort you so to spend your time, as when you come to be old, you may look back upon your young dayes with comsort, and blesse God, that hath seasoned you with his fear from your youth: Both to old and young let me apply my self, and fasten on them these few moving considerations, which may be as so many  or preservatives, and meanes to prevent sinne. 1. Consider seriously the omniscience of God, so did Joseph 1 Consider the omnisci∣ence of God. † Metaphora ab animalibus dissectis, & excoriatis, Hyperius. Gen. 39. 9. This was a Monitour to Job, chap. 10, 14. and Heb. 4. 13. , as I may say naked and anatomized be∣fore him. Imagine God to be, as the Arabians fansied,  all eye to see thee, He knowes thy thoughs, penetrates thy secret∣est recesses, knowes the Meanders, windings and diverticles of thy heart. Did men seriously consider that they are alwayes in the presence of an Omniscient Lord; This consideration might pre∣vent sinne. 2. Consider, as God knowes thy wayes, so he keeps exact Records. 2 Consider God keeps exact re∣cords. Here is a Chirograph in the text for iniquities, and he keeps a Book of remembrance of the Saints religious conferences together, Mal. 3. 16. In a proper sense we cannot say that God keeps a Book, the formality of writing down is infinitely below God. This is a sigurative speech, the meaning is, that all that is thought, done, or spoken is alwayes before him. Conscience likewise keepes a Book that one day will act the part of witness, accuser, and judge. 3. Consider before hand what sinne will cost thee. Reckon the 3 Consider before hand what sinne will cost thee. cost of it. Rom. 6. 21 old, and young will have cause of shame, as Peter Martyr *observes. Who of understanding would be a slave to so un∣profitable a master as sin is? When you are tempted to sinne, aske † Si vel Seni vel Juveni aliquid revo∣cetur inmemo∣riam, quod non recte videatur factum, erubes∣cunt ob dolo∣rem dedecoris, in quod sevi∣dent incurrisse. Pet. Martin. thy self the Question, shall I displense an holy God? shall I defile my soul? wound my Conscience by sinne? will there not be bitter∣nes in the end? When thou art tempted to uncleannesse consider
ore hand that he that is abhorred of God is enticed of a Whore, nd wouldest thou be abhorred of God? I'have read that a young an thus tempted by a Whore, bit off a peece of his Tongue, that so he pain of it, might divert him from so wicked a Temptation. Say ot Whoedome is a Trick of youth, such youthfull tricks (unless epented of) will damne thy soule to all eternity. When thou art empted to Immoderate Drinking, consider before hand thy body hould be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, shall I make it a Tem∣le for Bacchus? will not dayes of mourning follow dayes of Jolliye nd Carrousing? will not cups of trembling follow cups of health∣ng? may not there be such an Hand-writing against me as was a∣gainst Belshazzar? In a word could men seriously premeditate a∣orehand, what sinne would cost them, they would not so rashly dventure upon it, to wound their conscience, and displease so ho∣ly a Lord God. 4. Consider the four last things, Death and Judgment, Hell and 4 Consider the four last things. 1 Consider Death. Heaven: 1. Consider Death, Its the statute law of Heaven: That all shall dye, and every one shal see death, as we read Heb. 9. 27. Psal. 8. 9 40. This life is of a short continuance; compared to a flower, a vapour, a Weavers Shuttle: Young dye as well as Old: Upon this moment depends eternity: And in eternity we return to the Land of the living. We all stand at the doore of eternity: we may be summond by death presently, for ought we know. So ought we to live every day, as if it were our last day that we may have nothing to doe but to dye. Wouldest thou have death call thee suddainly? art thou prepared? Dost thou so live, as thou canst look the King of errours in the face, and with comfort and confidence breath out thy soul unto Jesus Christ? O therefore cleanse thy soul, set upon the work of purification, Trimme up thy soul to entertain Je∣sus Christ. 2. Consider of the day of judgment, 2 Cor. 5. 10 Consider be∣fore 2 Conider the day of Judgment. hand that of Solomon Eccles. 11. 9. Consider there will come a day of account. As death leaves thee, so judgment will find thee. If thy peace be not made with God before thou dyest, Judgment will return thee an enemy to Jesus Christ: And if Christ be thy e∣nemy who is thy Judge, thou wilt wish that the hills might fall upon thee, and that the mountaines might cover thee from the face of the Lamb. Let the consideration of the day of udgment be al∣ways in your thoughs, and aske thy self the Question, Doe I that
which I can answere at the day of judgment? shall I not be called to an account for these things? 3. Consider the Torments of Hell, the lot and portion of all 3 Consider the torments of Hell. those who are unreconciled to Jesus Christ. Aske thy self the Question, doth not Whoredome, Drunkeness &c. lead thee away into the pit? will not cursed delights in burning lusts end in eter∣nall burnings? Will not sinne cry aloud for its wages, and bring with it but a dead pay? 4. Consider of the joyes of Heaven, the inheritance of the 4. Consider the joys of Heaven. Saints, noe unclean thing shall enter there; nothing that defiles shall ever enter into the new Jerusalem. Would I then be in Hea∣ven hereafter? Heaven must begin in me upon earth. Doe I desire happiness? I must labour to be holy: Mark to whom blessedness is appropriated Psal. 119. v. 1 To the undefiled and pure in heart, Matth. 5. 8. Every one of these considerations seriously layd to heart, may be preservatives against sinne. In the next place I must prescribe some Directions which that I may doe, Ile descend to A third Use, which shall be for direction: You that would Use 3. For direction gladly have this Chrographum in my Text cancelled, and be healed of the sores and wounds of sin, I prescribe these means. 1. e humbled to the dust for all your sins: Be afflicted and Dir. 1. Be humbled for all your sins. mourn, let your laughter be turned into heavyness, and your joy into mourning: Let there be such a bitter sorrow for sin, as for the losse of a first-born; like the mourning of Hadad-rimmon in the valley of Megiddo: Peter denyed shamefully, and wept bitterly: Da∣vid watered his Couch with his tears: Mary Magdalen, out of whom Christ cast seven Devils, washt Christs feet with her tears, and wip'd them with the hair of her head: Let it be bitter to re∣member, that thou hast been so undutiful to so gracious a God, that thou hast provoked such a merciful God to wrath, whose na∣ture is to shew mercy: O how this consideration should melt thy heart into a soul-reforming sorrow! Sins may be compared to the waters of Marah, so bitter as none could drink of them: Sin is a very bitter thing, it produceth bitter effects: But God shewed Dir. 2. Look through all Humiliations unto Jesus Christ. Moses a Tree, which made the Waters of Marah sweet. The bitter Tears of Repentance, and the most bitter afflictions which sin produceth, will end in joy to those that are truly penitent. 2. Though thou must be humbled (and he that was never hum∣bled,
never truly believed) yet thou must not rest in thy humili∣ation, but look unto Jesus Christ for a cure; Thou must be sensi∣ble of the stings and wounds of sin, and look unto Jesus Christ, by the eye of Faith, for a cure: He is our peace, Eph. 2. 14. No reconciliation but by him, 2 Cor. 5. 19. No way to get healing, pardon, salvation, but by him; sue then out a Pardon sealed by the Blood of Christ: O pray that be would cancel the hand-writing against thee, and that by his Blood he would Justifie, Sanctifie, and Save thee: No name, no Mediator, no Blood can make an Atonement for thee, but this Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks better things then the Blood of Abel. 3. Having got a pardon through the Blood of Christ, walk Dir. 3. Walk cir∣cuspectly. , Qui exacte vi∣vunt nolunt vel in minimis deficere. cedere, solent enim vel mi∣nutissima ob∣servare. Favo∣rinus. circumsectly in thy whole conversation, Eph. 15. 5. There is an Em∣phasis in the Adverb , bids be watchful and circumspect, take heed of re-acting thy youthful sins; ill be renewing thy repen∣tance, and pray for more manifestation of Gods love unto thy soul. 4. And lastly, To conclude, here is one word of comfort unto those, upon whom God hath poured the Spirit of Repentance: Old people, that have truly repented of their sins, shall have them imputed unto Christ, and Christs righteousness unto them for Justification; and let them read their blessedness, Psalm 32. 1, 2. Happy are they, whose souls are washt white in the blood of the Use 4. For Consola∣tion. Lamb: You that mourn for sin, you shall be comforted: You that bewail your sins and hate them, and endeavor to walk closely with God, in a holy conformity to his will, you shall have this hand-writing blotted out: And whether your sorrow be right and genuine, you must try it by those Apostolical Characters, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. Let no man apply comfort to himself, but upon Gospel terms: And to you that are young, upon whose hearts God hath wrought saving Grace in your tender years; I must pronounce comfort to you, Happy is it with you, that God hath begun with you betimes, and hath planted his fear in your hearts betimes: You have heard how dear youthful sins cost many in their elder years, O now be advised, take warning, fly youthful sins, labour to be grave and serious in your carriages: God hath done much for you, what will you do for him? speak good of his name, advance his glory, incourage your fellows to come unto God: Remember that counsel which Christ gives Peter, When thou art converted,
streng then thy brethren. I beseech you all in the fear of God, in the close of my Sermon, to beware of youthful levity: There is Mr. Jeremy Burroughs. a great deal of frothy with amongst young men. A Reverend Di∣vine, now with God, used to pray, That of all spirits, God would be pleased to deliver him from a frothy spirit: Beware of foolish Jest∣ing. Though the word  be allowed in Aristotle, yet it is condemned by St. Paul. Eph. 5. 4. Let young Timothy be a pa∣tern for your imitation, of whom Paul had such confidence: And always labor to cleanse your ways, according to that rule which I shall leave with you for a close of all, Psal. 119. v. 9. By taking heed thereto according to the word.
Iudgement and Mercy. Set forth upon Gen. 6. 3. And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. IN the precedent Chapter you have the Genealogy of the long Serm. 2. At St. Mary's Oxon. Jan. 12. 1652. Gen. 5. 27. liv'd Patriarchs of the old World: It's observable, that e∣very ones particular age is exactly reckon'd, and though they lived some more, some fewer years; yet every one agrees in the same conclusion, And he dyed. Methuselah, who lived the longest of all, lived nine hundred sixty and nine years, and he dyed: The longest livers saw death, and could not deliver themselves from the hand of the Grave. These ancient Fathers, though dead, may be said to live in their Posterities: They left behinde them a numerous off-spring, the Earth is full of people, and mankinde is now multiplyed into multitudes, v. 1. And as the People, so their wickednesses are multiplyed: The more people, the more sinners: O stupendious ingratitude! God multiplies their off∣spring, and revives their memory in the fruit of their loyns: For what are Parents of many Children, but themselves so much the more multiplyed; yet these wicked Wretches, by how much the more God encreased and multiplyed them in their Posterity, by so much the more they encreased and multiplyed their wickedness against him their Creator: And now their abominations are come to the full, and they are ripe for destruction. The Lord exercised Mercies, bowels of Mercies, patience, long-suffering towards them, waiting upon them many years, Preaching to them by the Patriarchs, calling them to Repentance, and notwithstanding all the loving kindnesses, forbearances, pa∣tient expectations of a gracious God, ye they remain obstinate, refractory, incorrigible, whereupon the Lord will not suffer his patience to be abused any longer, his Servants and Ministry to be contemned, his Holy Spirit to be grieved, v. 7, 8. The Creatures were made for the service of Man, both he and they should be
took away together: Man was the Lord over the Creatures, and when he was took away, what use would there be of them, as Chrysostome observes: Man had abused the Creatures over which he had dominion: Master and Servants both fall together; thus the whole Creation groneth, by reason of mans Apostacy from God. As the Beasts were made for Man, so they became subject , Quod subji∣ciuntur Contra ingeni∣um naturae suae agnoscamus naturam Dei quae cogit illa nostris usibus inservire. Pet. Mart. Poenitentia Dei est Mutā∣dorum immu∣tabilis ratio. August. Hunc adulte∣rinum & dege∣nerum pro meo jam agnoscere dedignor. Calv. in Loc.  om∣ni die . 70 Inter. Sedes vitae, se∣des animae & principium in∣tellectus, vo luntatis affe∣ctnum & mo∣um. to vanity and destruction. through Mans iniquity, Rom. 8. 20, 22. But this sharp Sentence God pronounceth with a great deal of re∣luctancy, he is said to repent in this verse, and v. 6. both to repent, and be grieved at his heart: This is an , repentance cannot in a proper sense be attributed to God: Repentance in God, is the unchangeable disposition of changeable things, as Augustine observes: God may will a change where he doth not change his will. There's no change in the Creator, the change is in the Creature; and here we may see how God takes upon him our affe∣ctions, and so condescends to our capacity: As we repent, and are grieved when any thing displeaseth us, so God here speaking after the manner of men, is said to repent and grieve: Hence we may observe what an hainous and abominable thing sin is, that cau∣seth God to grieve. Calvin, on the place, supposeth God plead∣ing on this wise: This is not my work, this is not the man created after mine Image, endowed with such noble faculties; this adulterous and degenerate world I scorn to own for mine. But wherein consists the greatness of the sins of the old World, against whom the Lord threatens destruction? You have a general charge given in by God himself, v. 5. com∣pared with Gen. 8. 21. It's said there, The imagination of mans heart is evil from his youth: They were habituated in wickedness generally, both heart and life stark nught; they were gray hair'd in wickedness. and now arrived at the , the highest point and degree of impiety; and the heart, which the Philosophers say is the seat of life, and Scripture saith; It is the seat of the soul, and principle of the understanding, will, affections and motions, this is depraved, and become the forge of all abominations: It's said, Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart were onely evil conti∣nually: Of this change in general, the Lord gives a clear proof by particulars, v. 2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, &c. By sons of God, some understand Angels: This was the conjecture of Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Clemens
Alexardrinus, and others: But Chrysostome urgeth that Scripture, which to me seems a full confutation of their opinion, Matth. 22. 30. In the resurrection, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. Others understand by sons of God, the sons of Princes, and those great Personages that liv'd in those days: I shall rather wave these xpositions, and con∣cur with Calvin, Luther, Musculus, Ainsworth, and other solid Commentators, who unanimously, by Sons of God, understand the Posterity of Seth, such as were the sons of God by external Profession, the men of the Church of God, and these took the daughters of men, (i. e.) The Posterity of Cain: The holy Seed mingled themselves with the prophane Seed, they looked at naught . Mus. . Chrys. . 70 Interp. else besides Beauty and satisfaction of usts. Beauty was the *ob∣ject of their Love: This desire of Beauty was the Harbinger of their ruine. It seems they took any Women whatsoever, having no regard to goodness, no regard to God, none to their Parents advice, they made their own choice: Beauty, Lust, Violence, their own will was the rule they went by, and might prevail'd above right: Violence and power carryed all before them, v. 4. some derive the word quasi, , sons of the Earth. This Etymo∣logy savors of a Poetical Figment, therefore I discard it altoge∣ther. The word in the Original is Nephilim, it comes from Na∣phal, to fall; they were Apoates and fell from God, and by rea∣son of their tyranny and cruelty, caused many to fall before them. It's said Haggibburim, they were mighty men. The Caldee calls them Gibbaraja, mighty men: So Nimrod was Gibbor, mighty, Gen. 10. 8. He hunted souls, he was a monstrous Tyrant and Per∣secutor of the Church of God. These men were famous, they had a great name, but they were famous onely for oppression and cruelty; their Will was their Lw, and their strength and might bore down all before them: They got power and a name by the Injuries and Persecutions which they exercised upon the Church of God. Calvin gives a remarkable observation, That it was the Haec prima fu∣it mundi nobi∣litas nequis longa & famo∣sa imaginum serie nimium sibi placeat, Calv. in Loc. first Nobility of the world, That no one should too much please himself with a long and famous series of Images of Ancestors. And Luther gives another note, writing of the fame of these wicked Gyants, and the renown they got by their Villanies; he compares them to the Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, who would not be called by those
names they deserved; they would not be called Tyrants, Impious, Qui salutantur principes & regna tenerent non Tyranni, &c. sed cle∣mentissimi, sanctissimi, re∣verendissimi appellantur. Luth. Sacrilegious, but Merciful, Holy, Reverend: So the renown of these Gyants is mentioned for their Villanies. They were famous Oppressors, cruel Blood-suckers, wicked Tyrants. And thus you have a draught of the old World set before your view: Their crying sins were prophaneness of heart and life, promiscuous Mar∣riages, Polygamies, contempt of God and Parents, Oppressions, Cruelty and Persecution: They had many warnings from God, many reproofs and admonitions by the Ministry of the Patriarchs, and all in vain, wherefore the Lord threatens in the Text, My spirit shall not always strive, &c. Which words are a Sermon Preach'd by the great God of Hea∣ven and Earth, to the old wicked World; which Sermon is a Pa∣tern, and the Archetipam for Ministers to Preach by, and consists of Judgement and Mercy. 1. Here's a dreadful Judgement, or a sad Commination of Divis. 1. A Judgement and the rea∣son thereof. the heaviest punishment that can befall a people on this side Hell: My spirit, &c. 2. Here's a strong reason to enforce: For that he also is flesh. In the Mercy contained in the Text. 1. You have something implyed: Its said, Not always, im∣plying, that it hath striven some time, and a long time too: In Justice God might cut sinners asunder in the midst of their re∣bellions, and send them to Hell: But O the infinite mercy and patience of God thus to strive at all, and to strive so long with rebellious sinners. 2. Here's a mercy exprest: It's wrote in such legible Charact∣ers, 2. A Mercy. as he that runs may read it: Yet his days, &c. The words have need of a Paraphrase: I shall open them brief∣ly in their order. By Spirit, Ainsworth understands that holy Spi∣rit of Christ, by which he Preached in the Patriarchs, and espe∣cially in Noah, to the disobedient spirits of the old World, and exhorted them by the Fathers to amend their lives; so I take the Lo-iiddon. Non vaginabit Pagninus & Grotius. . 70. Lo-jadon. sense to be: It followeth, Shall not strive. The 70 read it, My spirit shall not abide: But this I take not to be the meaning: the word hath many significations; it signifies, to judge, to chide and dispute: As if the Spirit of God should say, I have set Judges over you, I have chid you, reproved you, argued the case with you, sent my servants, Noah, Enoch, Methuselah, exhorting
you to come and repent, but you are incorrigible, impenitent, you are never the better, notwithstanding all my patience, forbear∣ance, waiting on you, trying you, therefore now my spirit shall no longer strive with you, I will take no more pains with you, I will dispute the case no longer, but send a Deluge to decide the controversie: And so I understand the words. In seculum, so the 70 read it, . Here you may see an  Chrysost. Abyss of kindness to mankinde: So Chrysostome: That the Spirit hath ever strove with any, is a great mercy: But if the Spirit strive by Messengers, rising early, and going to bed late, and by its motions and whispers, if the Spirit be still resisted and abused, it will leave striving, and leave a people inexcusable. Luther speak∣ing of this Text, saith, This was a publick Sermon, preached in a Fuit publica concio in pub∣lica Synodo proposita. Luth. publick Assembly: When those that were Gods Messengers spent their spirts in vain, and saw that the people were desperate, past all hopes of reclaiming, they let them alone to take their course, and to be filled with their own ways. Then here's a Reason given, For that he also is flesh: The word sets forth the corrupt nature of mankinde, and is here put by way of opposition unto the Spirit: It is the same with Animalis, or Conqueritur Deus tantope∣re turbatū esse ordinem dse positum ut image sua in carnem trans∣formata esset, Calv. Centum & vi∣ginti annos si fote conver∣antur. Cald: Paraph: Carnalis homo. Man that was created after the Image of God, hath defaced that Image, hath corrupted his way, and is become fleshly. This God complains of, That the order which he put is in∣verted, and his Image transformed into flesh, as Judicious Calvin observes. Lastly, Here's a gracious reprieval and space allowed for repen∣tance: Yet his days, &c. This is not to be understood as if an hundred and twenty years were the limited term of years for man∣kinde to live in this world: It's apparent, that many after the Flood lived longer: But the meaning is, that an hundred and twenty years shall be given them, if haply they be converted. This space God allows them for repentance, and they had Noah a Preacher of righteousness, and they saw the Ark a building, and every stroke strucken: The building of the Ark should have been a Monitor of repentance; this was great and wonderful long-suf∣fering, as we read, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. By which he went and preach∣ed unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah.
The words thus opened, contain two fundamental Doctrines. 1. That it is a most dreadful judgement upon a people, when the  Spirit of God refuseth to strive any longer with them. 2. That it is an exceeding great mercy to a people, when the Lord  vouchsafeth them time and space for repentance. I resume the first, and I shall cast the Heads of my Meditati∣ons Method of handling the Doctrine. into this plain and familiar method. 1. I shall assert the truth of the Doctrine from Scripture Testi∣monies. 2. I shall particularly represent unto you how the Spirit may be said to strive with man. 3. I shall enquire into the Grounds and Reasons for confirmati∣on of the truth. And lastly, Conclude with particular Application unto our selves. 1. To prosecute the first Head propounded, time would fail me 1. The Do∣ctrine pro∣ved by Scri∣pture Testi∣mony. in Scripture Quotations; but I shall gather sparingly from so great a cloud of Witnesses, mentioning some select Proofs, and leaving the rest to be supplyed in your Meditations. Now that this is so great a Judgement, for the Spirit of God to leave striving with a people, may be exemplified in several per∣sons, recorded in Scripture as signal Spectacles of Divine venge∣ance to Posterity. The Lord spared Sodom and Gomorrah a long time: Abraham undertakes, though dust and ashes, to intercede for them. He intreats, That if fifty righteous persons be found there, that they may not be destroyed: His request is granted, he abates five of fifty, and then comes down to forty, after that to thirty, from thirty to twenty, and at last to ten; and it is to be observed, that God never left off granting, till Abraham left off begging: They had good Lot to reprove and exhort them, and they vexed his righteous soul day by day with their unclean conversation; he spent his spirits, his counsels, admonitions, all in vain: Now God will spare them no longer, the Angel delivered Lot from them, and as soon as ever he was gone, the Lord destroyed Sodom & Gomorrah with Fire and Brimstone, Gen. 19. 24, 25. The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Hea∣ven, and he over-threw those cities and all the plain, and all the inha∣bitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground. The Lord waited a long time upon Jerusalem, sending his Prophets,
and warning them; he puts them in remembrance of his exemplary Judgements upon others, Jer. 7. 13. I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I call'd you, but you answered not, therefore I will do to this house, &c. as I have done to Shiloh: He ex∣postulates the case with them, Jer. 13. 27. I have seen thine adulte∣ries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine abo∣minations on the hills in the fields: Wo unto thee, O Jerusalem, Wilt thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? and Ezek. 18. 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves and live ye: The House of Israel was the Vineyard upon which God had bestowed so much pains, cost and charges, Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. My well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruit∣ful Haec omnia usu venisse populo Judaico, cum in Babylonica tum in Roma∣na captivitate, testantur pa∣lam Histriae, fieri hoc deni∣que quotidie testatur expe∣rientia. Time∣amus ergo Do∣minum, simus∣que palmites fructiferi, ne post hanc vi∣tam eliam tra∣damur igni sempiterno. Blling. hill, and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine-press therein; and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wilde grapes, &c. But all is labor lost, v. 5, 6. And now go too, I will tell you what I will do with my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be troden, and I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged, but there shall come up bry∣ars and thorns: I also will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. *They had many choice spirited Prophets, Isaiah, Ho∣sea and Jeremiah, &c. They were knotty pieces, wherefore the Lord hewed them by the Prophets, Hos. 6. 5. Therefore I have hew∣ed them by the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth, and thy judgements are as the light that goeth forth. They had warn∣ing upon warning, Prophet after Prophet; yet no more hope of doing them any good and working reformation upon them, then of changing the Aethiopians skin, or Leopards spots, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Aethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, who are accustomed to do evil. Now let us hear the doom, God will smite them no more, Isa. 1. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more; the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. God will not let them fare the better for those righteous persons that are amongst them, who are Ad∣vocates for them, Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood be∣fore me; yet my minde could not be towards this people, cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth: So Ezek. 14. 20. Though No∣ah, Daniel and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall
deliver neither son nor daughter, they shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness. Further, God will straiten the spirit of Prayer in his Prophets, Jer. 7. 14, 15, 16. Therefore will I doe unto this house, which is called by name, as I have done to Shiloh; and I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim: Wherefore pray not thou for this peo∣ple, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. Ephraim he is obstinate and incorri∣gible, I will strive no longer by reproofs and admonitions, let him be fill'd with his own ways: He is given to idols, let him alone. Hos. 4. 17. Luseris operā fi ad poeniten∣tiā invitaris, Ephraim Gra∣vissima est poe∣na relinqui à Deo. Vatab. It's a dreadful Judgement upon Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which be∣long unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. This is further implyed in the parable of the fruitless fig-tree, Luke 13. 7. Behold, these three years I come, seeking fruit on this fig-tree and finde none, cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? All these are Types and Examples, and as so many warning-pieces unto us. God wait∣ed a long time upon them, woed and intreated them by the Mi∣nistry of his Messengers to come in and repent; but they (as much as in them lay) tryed conclusions with God, and ungrateful wretches as they were, strove to tire out and weary the patience and long-suffering of God, wherefore his spirit would strive no longer with them; and when Gods spirit will no longer strive, what's the se∣quel, but ruine and destruction? Let us reflect upon our selves, in Israels glass we may behold our own faces, and they will gather blackness. The inferences we should make are set down, Luke 13. 5. I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: And Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel: Likewise I will adde, Zeph. 2. 1. Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired, before the decree bring forth, &c. Some Reverend Divines have given three Signs of night. 1. When the shadows grow long, when wilde Beasts go abroad, 1. When shadows grow long, it is a sign of night. and when Labourers go to their rest. Now he's a meer stranger in Israel, who knows not how of late years Shadows, fruitless and ridiculous Ceremonies, have been advanced and stickled for, and violence hath been offered unto many tender consciences: Hinc illae lachrymae: Many godly Ministers, with their Families, have
been ruin'd for non-conformity; and others have been forced to leave the Land of their Nativity, when as in the mean time the fundamentals of Religion, Faith, Repentance, Love, Regenera∣tion were neglected, and much discountenanced, and the zealous Preachers of these Doctrines, stigmatized with the odious nick∣names of Puritans, which in a proper sense, is that proud Heresie of Novatus, as Eusebius records in his Ecclesiastical History: But Euseb. Eccles. Hist. through the iniquity of the time, was used as a brand of Infamy to reproach the most strict and conscientious Professors. Secondly, Wilde Beasts went abroad: Then those of the Tyranni∣cal 2. Wilde Beasts go a∣broad. Prelacy persecuted the old Puritans, under the name of non-Conformists: May such persons never range again, under more plausible names and specious pretences; or more covertly, like wolves but in sheeps cloathing. I wish the Jesuite may appear bare∣faced, that we may know him, and beware of him: It is a plain Jesuitical design, to set Brethren together by the ears in circum∣stantial matters, and so make them almost dispute and jangle away their Religion. I wish what was blame-worthy amongst some, be not Preached and practiced by others that succeed them; though names may differ, yet if the same thing remain, it's to the same purpose. Melancton was desirous to die for two reasons: One was, That he might be with Christ: The other was, That he might be freed from those bitter contentions that were in the Church in those days. Thirdly, And likewise Laborers go to their rest: It is to be ob∣served, 3. Laborers goe to their rest. that within few years as many able men, both of the Ma∣gistracy and Ministry, have gone to their long home (as the oldest alive can remember in a greater space of time) so true is that of the Prophet, Isa. 57. 1. The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken from the evil to come. Methuselah, that godly longest liv'd Patriarch, dyed but the year before the Flood came: His name signifieth a Messenger of death: His death did presage the Flood. Thus Austin was taken away by death, immediately before the sacking of Hippo, where he lived. Pareus dyed a little before the taking of Heidelbergh. Luther a little before the Germane Wars: And we have many Reverend Preachers, the Cha∣riots and Horse-men of Israel (it were easie to give you a Catalogue of them) who of late years have gone to their Graves in peace. By all their Ministeries Gods Spirit hath stroven with us, and wait∣ed
for our amendment of life: We read Histories, that we may not be subjects of History. Herodotus tells us of an Inscription upon Legimus histo∣rias, ne ipsi fi∣amus historiae. . Herodo. Senacheribs Statue, Look upon me, and learn to be righteous. Per∣use the sacred Annals, read the History of the old World, the de∣struction of Jerusalem, the casting off the Jews to this very day; read the History of the Church in all ages, acquaint your selves with the History of Germany and Palatinate of later years, and be not like many Travellers, who are better acquainted with foreign Lands, then that of their Nativity. Take notice of the acts, the strange acts of the Lord in our Lnd: Hath not God, to this very day, continued many faithful Laborers in his Vineyard, notwith∣standing some of the Prelatical party suppressed (what lay in them) powerful Preaching: yet like the Palm-tree, The more it is pres∣sed down, the more it grows; o like Pharachs afflicting the Isael∣ites, Quo magis de∣primitur, eo magis emergit. the more he afflicted them, the more they multiplyed, and notwithstanding the subtile practices of many, what name to give them, I cannot tell, for they know not what names to give them∣selves, neither know they what they would have: I say, notwith∣standing their Stentorean voices, crying down Ministry, Sabboths, Ordinances, yet God graciously confirms them all in their liberty and purity; and if we improve not these prices of Grace put into our hands, if we hearken not to the calls and whispers of the Spi∣rit of God, if we neglect and despise this great salvation tendred in the Gospel, the Spirit of God will be gone, and take the Or∣dinances from us, or us from the Ordinances. The Spirit will threaten this dreadful judgement in the Text, to strive no longer: And that people are under a most dreadful Judgement, with whom the Spirit of God will not strive any longer: That Commintion runs paralell with this of my Text, Hos. 9. 12. Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; yea, woe also to them when I depart from them. And thus I have dispatcht the first Head propounded, namely, The assertion of the truth of the Doctrine from Scripture Tei∣monies: I proceed in the second place, according to my method propounded, to make a particular representation unto you, how the Spirit may be said to strive with man. The Spirit of God, though it be a most free agent, bloweth 2. The Spi∣rit of God strives seven ways. when and where it listeth; yet from experience we may discern, that it usually strives some of these seven ways, viz. By its motions
and whispers. By the Ministry of the Word. By the checks and convi∣ctions of conscience. By the tenders of mercies. By the exercise of pa∣tience and long-suffering, by inflicting of sgnal, exemplary judgements upn others: And if none of these will prevail by the execution of personal judgements upon our selves: Thus ordinarily upon a ground of experience, we may discern the several strivings of the Spi∣rit. For the enlargement of these particulars. 1. The Spirit of God 1. The Spi∣rit of God strives by its motions and inspirations. strives by its motions, inspirations, and sweet whispers, when we hear, as it were, a voice behinde us, telling us, This is the way, walk therein: Thus the Spirit of God infuseth holy thoughts, ho∣ly motions into us: We have not one good thought, we cannot of our selves think one good thought without the inspiration of the holy Spirit. The Spirit of God rebukes sin in us, quickens us to our duties, moves, woes, beseecheth us to try conclusions no long∣er with God, nor to offer any violence to the Spirit of Grace, but to cherish its sweet motions, and hearken to its whispers. We may know the Spirit of God from the spirit of delusion the same way we discern good Gold from counterfeit, by examining them by the touch-stone of the word of God, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is be∣cause there is no light in them: The Spirit of God directs thee to the rule of the word: It is not any rule that will serve, but it is this rule, Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. But the Spirit of error directs thee to devised ways, it counsels thee to be wise above what is written. The word of God is the just Standard, we must not adde to it, nor take away from it, if we would escape that dreadful curse, Rev. 22. 18. I testifie to every one that heareth the words of the Prophecy of this Book, if any man shall adde unto these things, God shall adde unto him the plagues that are written in this book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things which are written in this Book. There be many that pretend to voices, dreams, reveltions, now adays, they would have a Platonick Christ, and fain a teaching of the Spirit besides, and contrary to the written word: Many of them are led like Absoloms followers, in their simplicity, knowing nothing for whom we must pray, as the Prophet did for his Servant,
Lord open their eyes that they may see, and let them read with fear and trembling, that dreadful Anathema from the written word, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: I'le be your remembrancer of one story, 1 King. 13. 17, 18, 19. It was said unto me by the word of the Lord, Thou shalt eat no bread, nor drink waer tere, nor turn again to goe by the way that thou camest: He said unto him, I am a Prophet also, as thou art; and the Angel spake unto me, saying, Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water, but he lyed unto him: So he went back, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water. The man of God had a sure word of Prophesie, the word of God was in his mouth; yet he must be hearkning after a new devised word, a new pretended light or revelation from the old Prophet, he forsook the true word, and believed a lying word; what a sad Catastrophe befell him, v. 24. When he was gone, a Lyon met him by the way and slew him, and his carcase was cast in the way, and the 1 King. 13. 24. Ass stood by it, and the Lyon stood also by the carcase: Yet notwith∣standing extraordinary Revelations, Dreams, Visions, Extasies, Enthusiasms, though they have ceased long ago, and we have no warrant to expect them, because we are to keep close to the re∣vealed will of God written in his holy word: Yet I say, we are to take notice of the sweet motions and spiritual illapses upon our souls: Though Prophesies cease, yet there are manifold discove∣ries of Christ unto the soul: The secret and intimate acquaintance of the soul with Christ, the souls ravishing consolations, the break∣ing in and flashes of heavenly light upon the soul, the heavings, aspirings, and harmony of the heart with Christ, experience of mercies, issues out of temptations, protections of Angels; all these are Heavenly, constant revelations out of the Word of God, manifested to the souls of the faithful by the Spirit, according to the word: Let us therefore embrace and cherish the gracious mo∣tions of the Spirit of God: Where the spirit of Grace is in the heart, it cannot be idle or lie dead, but it's exceeding operative. The Spirit gives light to teach thee, it gives heat to warm and com∣fort thee: It is a spirit of burning and purging, to burn up the stubble of corruption, to purge out thy sins: It is a spirit of refi∣ning and purifying: Therefore when the spirit of God strives by its gracious motions, inlightning, purging, inflaming, comforting,
wooing thee to walk closely with God, bidding thee beware of wounding thy conscience, of resisting the light, and going against known truth: O beware of grieving this holy Spirit of God! Do not, O do not force the spirit to depart sadded and grieved from thee. This is one way whereby the spirit strives, viz. by its mo∣tions and whispers. A second way whereby the spirit strives, is by the Ministry of 2. The Spirit strives by the Ministery of the Word. the word: It is said, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. The Spirit of God knocks at the doors of your hearts by the hammer of the word: The spirit knocks louder and louder, and the Ministers are to cry aloud and spare not, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew thy people their transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins. The Lord calls upon us by every Sermon we hear: Why will ye die? Why will ye bolt the door against the frequent knockings of the Spirit of God? The Spirit of God hath strove with some of us ten years, some twenty, some foty, some sixty years: How many years have we lived under the sound of the Gospel, having heard the voice of the Turtle crying in our Land? How many powerful Preachers have spent their strength, their breath, wasted their spirits, wooing, intreating, beseeching us to be reconciled unto God? many of them are gone to their rest, their works praise them in the Gate, their memory is blessed, and their name is like sweet Oyntment poured forth: How many are yet alive to this day, who Preach Jesus Christ faithfully and experimentally? how do they pray and wrestle with God? how zealously do they preach? how many admonitions, reproofs, ex∣hortations, warnings, do they give us? And if we will not take warning, the Ministers shall deliver their own souls, and our blood will be upon our own heads; and the time will come, when it shall be known that we have had Prophets amongst us. I shall make an allusion to that Scripture, Deut. 20. 11, 12, 13. It shall be if it make thee answer of peace and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee: And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it; and when the Lord hath delivered it into thy hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword. Just so God proclaims peace, and the Mini∣sters
are Ambassadors of Peace, and deliver their commission af∣ter this manner, Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to Luke 10. 5, 6. this house: And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest up∣on it; if not, it shall turn to you again. The Lord now beseeth your hearts by the Ministry of the word, and offers you peace and reconciliation; if you will submit unto his Scepter, and cast down your rebellious weapons, the Lord will have mercy on you; but if you hold out the flag of defiance, and will not come in to Je∣sus Christ, what remains but utter ruine and destruction? Every Sermon you hear, is like the water of Jealousie, when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that if she be defiled, and hath done trespass against her Husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter, Num. 27. 28. and her belly shall swell, &c. but if she be not defiled, she shall be free: When the word is received into an honest and good heart, it doth it good and makes it fruitful, when into a corrupt heart it rots it, and makes it worse. Its an observation of a Reverend Di∣vine, That it is an indignity beyond all apprehension to the spirit of Dr. Ed: Rey∣nolds, grace, when we suffer him to wait daily at our Bethesda's, our houses of mercy, and all in vain, to spend his sacred breath in the Ministry of reconciliation, in doubling and redoubling his requests unto our souls, that we would be content to be saved: Yet all this while we harden our hearts, and stop our ears, and set up the pride and stoutness of our own reasonings, till we even weary the spirit of God, chide him away, and cause him to depart sadded and grieved from us. O my Brethren, despise not prophecying, undervalue not the Ministry of  Thess. 5. 20. reconciliation: An indignity or affront offered unto Christs Mes∣sengers, Christ takes it as done unto himself, Luke 10. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me; and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. Be then exho∣ted to set an high price of the Gospel, and make much of the motions of Gods holy Spirit in the Ministry of the word. Ursin relates, in his Preface to his Catechism, That those godly Vrsini Praf. Catech. Protestants that fled beyond the Seas for their Religion, in that Marian quinquenium of Persecution, acknoledged, That that great innundation of misery came justly upon them, for the neglect and unprofitableness under the Gospel in King Edward the sixth's days. And if they were so severely punished for a few years unprofitable∣ness under the means of Grace, of how much forer punishment
shall we of England be accounted worthy, who well nigh a hun∣dred years have enjoyed the purity of the Gospel, and yet we are barren and unfruitful: Let us every one acknowledge his own un∣fruitfulness, that notwithstanding fatning Ordinances we have lean souls; and let us every one pray in particular, Lord, lay not my unfruitfulness under the Ministry unto my charge. The Spirit will not always strive and wait at those Bethesda's. God may in judge∣ment say, I will take this kingdom from you, and give it to others who will bring forth the fruits of it: I will no more suffer my ser∣vants to be abused, no more suffer my word to be despised; I'le rain Mannh no more round about your tents, if you have so cheap an esteem of it. Let us all deprecate this dreadful judgement which the Pophet Amos threatens, Amos 8. 1. Behold a basket of summer-fruits, and he said, What seest thou? and I said, A basket of summer-fruit; then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel, I will not again pass by them any more: This is the second way whereby the Spirit rives, viz. By the Ministry of the word. A third way whereby the Spirit strives, is by the checks and 3. The Spirit strives by the conviction of conscience. Multi habent scientiā, pauci vero conscien∣tiam. Bernard de interiore domo. In corde puri∣tatem, In ore verita∣tem, In actione re∣ctitudinem. Bern. de inter∣domo. convictions of conscience. Bernard makes a sad complaint in that excellent Tract, De interiori domo: Many haue knowledge, but few have conscience. He lays down there three choice qualifications of a good conscience, To have sincerity in the heart, truth in the mouth, and rectitude in the conversation: These are distinguishing Notes for tryal and examination. Now the spirit of God strives by the checks of conscience: Conscience flew in Judas his face, a legal qualm came upon him, I can call it no better: It sprang from the horror of the wrath of God, and Hell fire flashing in his face: It was no Evangelical repentance: Judas got thirty pieces of silver, but con∣science forced him to a restitution. Conscience is a reflect act, it looks back upon a mans self: It is like a Musket over-charged, it will recoil upon a sinner: It is like a Blood-hound that will follow by the scent, and will never leave searching till it hath descryed the Delinquent. Wherefore Brethren, let us take special notice of the checks of Conscience: Let us keep faith and a good conscience joyn'd, as the Apostle exhorts: Let us not break Gods link. Let Pauls (Here∣in I exercise) be our continual Monitor, Acts 24. 16. Herein I ex∣ercise my self, to have a conscience void of offence towards God and
towards men. A Christian may have a pardon in the Court of the Judge, and yet not discern it in the Court of his conscience: In case of desertions, withdrawings and suspensions of Gods gracious countenance, a Christian may not be able to apprehend Gods re∣conciled countenance; but in this case there are incouraging, sup∣porting promises, Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay up∣on his God: We read likewise Psal. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart: and Psal. 112. 4. Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: God is gracious and full of compassion, and righteous in all his ways: But what shall we say when a sinner is condemned both in the Court of the Judge, and of conscience? how great is that condemnation? Spira had a check of conscience, and a voice forbidding him, O do it not! He paid full dear for the wounding of his conscience. It's an observatian of an excellent Divine, in a precious Book, called, Moses self-denyal: We had better (saith he) have all the world Mr. Burroughs Moses Self∣denyal. cast shame in our faces, and upbraid us, then that our consciences should cast dirt into them: It's better to endure all the frowns and an∣ger of the greatest Potentates on earth, then to have an angry conscience within our breast: It's better to want all the pleasures that earth can afford, then to loose the delights which a good conscience will bring in: O let the Bird in the breast be always kept singing, whatsoever we suf∣fer for it! We all subscribe to this in The, whether we do thus in Hypothesi, let's examine our awakned Conscience: Let us e∣very one deal impartially with his own conscience: All our hearts are naked unto him, with whom we have to deal. Let every one pray, study, confer for the information of his own Conscience; nothing may be done doubtingly, for that is not of faith, and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. In the whole course of our lives, let us bring all our actions to the rule of the word of God, and let that decide the controversie. Here's a four-fold infallible rule. Let A four-fold rule for the examining of conscience. 1. Every one be perswaded in his own heart. 2. Let us abstain from all appearances of evil. 3. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. 4. Hold faith and a good conscience.
Let us keep close to these known, plain rules, discarding carnal policy, carnal interests, which are the devised ways of men, and then let our resolution concur with Luthers: I bear this title, I Hūc gero titu∣lum, cedo nul∣li. Luth. yeild to none. Now then when the Spirit thus strives by the checks of consci∣ence, let us not resist nor stifle those motions, let us not shut our eyes against known light breaking in upon us. This is a third way whereby the Spirit strives, viz. by the checkings and convictions of Conscience. A fourth way wereby the Spirit strives, is, by the tenders of 4. The Spirit strives by the tender of mercies. mercies and loving kindness, openings of bowels of compassion towards poor sinners: These mercies are tender mercies, and there is a multitude of them, Psal. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindeness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions: They are the sounding of Bowels, the fountain opened, Zech. 13. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Here is a free tender of Je∣sus Christ, and the riches of his mercies; The spirit makes ma∣ny Proclamations and Invitations to come in to Jesus Christ: One is, Isa: 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price: A second is, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. A third invitation is, John 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Rev. 22. 17. A 4th is, The Spirit & the Bride say, Come, and let him that heareth, say, Come, and let him that is athirst, come, and whosoever will, let him take of the waters of life freely. The lst I shall name, is the most prevalent obtesta∣tion in all the world, Rom. 12. 1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. Put forth thy labor to make a Catalogue of the mercies of God, they exceed all Arithmetick; measure them, their dimensions are infinite. The Apostle makes four dimensions, breadth, length, heighth, and depth, Eph. 3. 18. The mercies of God reach to the Heavens, his faithfulness to the clouds: All the pathes of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep his covenant and testimonies, Psal. 25. 10. His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting, his mercy is above all his
works. Had we the tongues of Men and Angels, we could not sufficiently set forth the mercies of God; yet let us summon up all the members of our Bodies, and all the faculties of our Souls, to praise the Lord for his mercies, and tell the wonders which he hath done for the children of men. How many National mercies and signal deliverances have we received, and we yet are in peace, even to a miracle of mercies, our fleece is yet dry, whil'st others are wet with blood? Thousands have faln beside us, and ten thousand at our right hands, and no evil comes nigh our dwelling. What variety of personal mercies do we receive? How many deliverances have we received from the Grave, being ready to fall in, and yet we are reprieved, and have space to repent? How many deliverances have we received from Fire, Water, Pobbers, unreasonable men, and all the plots and projects of Malignant E∣nemies unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Further, What mercies do we receive for our souls? Do we not injoy Sabbaths, Ordinan∣ces, publick assemblies? Blessed be God, our eyes yet behold our teachers, and our Gospel is not driven into corners: How many mer∣cies, Quot miseri∣cordiae tot ora. Isa. 30. 20. so many mouthes: All these mercies, have so many mouthes calling upon us to thankfulness and amendment of life. Now the holy Spirit of God strives by all these mercies to win us to repen∣tance: It is our obliged duty, as God strives with us in mercy and loving kindness, so we should strive with him in our return of thankfulness and reformation of our lives: Every mercy should be a Lord-stone, to draw us up to Christ: Every mercy should be as a foot-stool, to raise us up higher to Heaven: Every mercy should be as a Looking-glass, wherein we should behold the visible resem∣blances of the loving kindness of God. O then, take heed of neglecting the voice of the Spirit, when he calls by mercies: For if he be neglected when he speaks in the sweet musick of mercies, he will speak terrible things in the thunder of judgement. 5. The Spi∣rit strives by the exercise of patience. 5. Yet further, The Spirit strives by the exercise of patience, forbearance and long sufferance towards sinners: God is not wil∣ling that any should perish, but that they should repent and be saved: O the unwearied patience of a merciful Father! How long did God bear with the old▪ world, with the Amorites, Jerusalem? The Lord waits to be gracious, he delights in mercy: It is his nature to be merciful: Judgement is called his act, his strange act, Isa. 28. 21. The Lord will rise up, as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth,
as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act: This is to shew his unwil∣lingnes to punish sinners till needs must: He is said to hyer a Ra∣zour to shave them, as if he had none of his own, Isa. 7. 20. In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the King of Assyria, the head and the hair of the feet: See and admire the wonderful patience of God, though we provoke him every day: O wonderful patience! that the Drun∣kard dies not in his vomit, that the Swearers & Blasphemers tongues fall not presently out of their heads: Still the Lord waits knock∣ing at the doors of our hearts, exercising infinite patience and for∣bearance towards poor sinners: He whets his Sword and bends his Bow, Psal. 7. 12. He might cleave us asunder presently, but there we have experience of singular patience: God was but six days in creating the world; yet (as Chrysostome observes) he was seven days in encompassing the Walls of Jericho, before he destroyed it: Patientia laesa fit furor. but let us take heed of abusing patience; patience abused, breaks forth into extremity of fury: Mercy pleads, I am slighted, I am a∣bused, I will no more have mercy on them; then patience inter∣poseth, I will wait longer, but patience being abused, it pleads, I will be no longer tired out nor abused: At last comes long-suffer∣ing, I am gentle and merciful, and I will wait longer and longer; but if long-suffering be wearied out, What will plead for us? What will become of us? The long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, whilest the Ark was preparing, as the apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his pro∣mise (as some men count slackness) but is long-suffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance: We should account the long-suffering of the Lord our salvation, Rom. 2. 4. or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of the Lord leadeth thee to repentance. 6. The Spirit of God strives by many signal exemplary Judge∣ments 6. The spirit strives by many signal and exem∣play Judge∣ments inflict∣ed upon o∣thers. inflicted upon others: We have read of the Wars of Jeru∣salem in Josephus, but more pathetically set forth in the ook of the Lamentations: We have read of the heavy Judgements of God upon Germany and Palatinate: We have read of the barbarous butch∣erings of those blood-sucking Caribals in Ireland, upon the Protestant Party: We hear now of a Sword letting out blood in Scotland, good
blood and bad blood being let out together, the Sword destroying one as well as another: We hear of sad breaches and heart-divisi∣ons widened more and more in England: You hear a general com∣plaint of poverty and decay of Trade: By all these Judgements the Spirit of God strives with us, and woes us to repentance, to Dan. 4. 27. break off our sins by repentance, that our tranquillity may be lengthned, and that there may be a healing of our errors. The use we are to make, is that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 6. Now these things were our examples to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted: Let us not pass uncharitable censures upon others, as great∣er sinners, for greater sufferings, but remember, that except we Luke 13. 5. repent, we shall likewise perish. Seventhly and lastly, Let us consider how the Spirit of God 7 The Spirit strives by personal judgements. strives by personal Judgements inslicted on our selves: There is a Judgement of chastisement, and a Judgement of revenge. God sends Judgements by way of revenge upon the wicked of the World, but by way of chastisement unto his own children: When God takes away thy riches, and other outward comforts, as a childe, a wife, &c. by these the Spirit of God strives with thee, and sends thee to God to inquire into the cause, and walk more closely and humbly with God; and thy duty is, to pray to God to teach thee what thou understandest not: If God send thee a sore disease, a grievous pain; suppose the Stone, Strangury, Collick, &c. by all these the Spirit strives with thee, and reads thee a Lecture of thy Mortality, and warneth thee to make a serious and speedy prepa∣ration for death. Afflictions are sent by God, as Scullions, to scour away the rust and canker of Gods children: They are the Shepheards Dogs, to bring home the straying Sheep: Luther saith, Afflictions teach us to understand Scripture: Where God teacheth with the rod, there he bestoweth a choice blessing, Psal. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy Law. God sends affliction on an errand: Go affliction, take down such a mans pride: goe, awaken another from his security: Affliction is Gods Ordinance, and with the same hand he gives Je∣sus Christ, that he gives correction to his own children: Thus the Spirit strives by personal judgements and afflictions. The use we must continually make, is Heb. 12. 5, 6. My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art re∣buked of him; for whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth
every son whom he receiveth: Hence saith the Apole, Rom. 5. 3. We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, and Jams 1. 2. My brethren count it all joy, when ye fall into divers tem∣ptations: The rod hath a voice, and we are call'd upon Mich. 6. 9. Hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it. Thus you have heard how Gods Spirit strives, by its motions, by the Ministery of the Word, the checks of Conscience, ten∣ders of Mercy, exercise of patience and long-suffering, inslicting of exemplary and signal Judgements upon others, and personal Judgements upon our selves. Now the Lord give us his Grace, and teach us to make much of, and cherish the strivings of his ho∣ly Spirit, and let us all deprecate the fearful judgement in the Text, My spirit shall no longer strive with you. Iudgement and Mercy. Set forth from Gen. 6. 3. HAving dispatcht those two Particulars, according to my Serm. 3. at St. Mary's Oxon, Jan. 19. 1651. Three Rea∣sons of the Doctrine. Reas. 1. From the Text, be∣cause man is flesh. method propounded in the unfolding of this Text: In the third place, I am to enquire into the Grounds and easons for the further confirmation of the Point. Amongst ma∣ny that may be given, I shall reduce the Reasons of the Text into three Heads. The first shall be drawn from the very reason in the Text, for that he also is flesh. Man is corrupted by reason of sin. Man was created, statu integro, in integrity and innocency, resembling the Image of God in righteousness and holiness; but now statu cor∣rupto, by reason of Adams prevarication, he became depraved in the faculties of his soul, and all the members of his body, and they are become instruments unto wickedness. The Holy Ghost sets forth sinful man in a full Character, Psal. 14. 1, 2, 3. The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God, they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth good. The Lord look∣ed down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see whether there
were any that did understand and seek God: They are all gone aside, they are become altogether filthy, there is none that doth good, no not one. Suppose we heard the Lord thus expostulating the case: Is this man? Is this he that I advanced to the highest rank of visible Crea∣tures? whom I created after mine own Image, whom I endowed with noble faculties, an understanding, the bright luminary of the soul to know his Maker, and a will to obey him: Is he now be∣come flesh, fleshly in his imagination, fleshly minded? Doth he walk after the flesh, minding the things of the flesh? Hath he thus turn'd Apostate, & rebell'd against his Lord and Maker? This charge being all very true, wherefore should I have any more to do with him? wherefore should my Spirit strive with vile sinful flesh? Thus God might plead, and in judgement withdraw the strivings of his holy Spirit: Betwixt the spirit and the flesh, what agree∣ment can there be? The Spirit will not thus be unequally yoaked; since man is become thus fleshly, thus depraved, such a degenerate Plant, so corrupt, its just with Gods spirit to strive no longer with man. By flesh, in Scripture, is comprehended a Mass of corruption, Apostoli verba docent haec duo affectuum genera esse opposita. Quae ut intel∣ligamus, con∣stitutū fit, af∣fectum carnis nihil aliud esse, quam u∣sum virium humanaru semotâ gra∣tiâ. Affectus autem spiritus est impulsus divini affla∣tus, & usus gratiae Christi. Pet. Mart. in Loc. man in his worst estate, Rom. 8. 5. They that are after the flesh, doe minde the things of the flesh: What is predicated of it, v. 6, 7, 8, 9. To be carnally minded is death, because the carnal minde is enmity a∣gainst God: So then, they that are in the flesh cannot please God. And what an Antithesis is there between flesh and spirit, v. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through the spirit, do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. The same disproporti∣on there is, as between death and life, heaven and hell, salvation and damnation: That God strives with any, is a great mercy, that the Spirit waits knocking at our doors, when as he might knock us down dead: O great mercy! But when the Spirit strives, and flesh resists its motions; the Spirit spends his sacred breath, wooing us, and inviting us to do good unto our own souls, and the carnal minde bids defiance unto the Spirit of grace, when notwithstand∣ing all the beseechings, wooings, and sollicitations of the Spirit, the flesh rebels, carnal men will not hearken to the voice of this spiritual Charmer, though he charm never so wisely; what then re∣mains but utter ruine and destruction, but that the Spirit should leave striving, and fall a destroying rebellious sinners, and carnal minded persons? This is one reason, He also is flesh; the spiritual
part that is obliterated, he hath degenerated from his original, hee is become corrupd, he also is flesh. Another reason may be, because the Spirit is a most free agent. Reas. 2. Because the Spirit is a most free A∣gent. This holy Spirit moveth when and where it pleaseth. The Spirit of God is bound to none. The Spirit is not at our command and beck; yet vile man puts the Spirit of God to the condition of a slave: for so the Lord complains, Is. 42. 24. Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with mony, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sa∣crifices, but thou hast made me to serve with thy sinnes; thou hast wea∣ried me with thine iniquities. It's more than the Spirit owes any of us to move once; he may move once, and may never move more; he may chuse whether he will move at all: God now shootes war∣ning-pieces; the Spirit woes you to come in and make your peace with God, to break off your sins by Repentance, no longer to stand out in opposition unto Jesus Christ, if you will not take warning, God may suddenly shoot his Murdering-pieces and destroy you. The Spirit cries, to day, to day, now is the accepted time, now is the . 2 Cor. 6. 2. day of salvation; if we accept not of this golden opportunitie, and now e come not in and embrace this great salvation tendered, for ought we know the Spirit may be gone, and never make a further tender of grace unto us. Though the Spirit it self is most free, and limits not, nor ascribes to it self when and where to work, but calls some sooner, some later into the vineyard; yet the Spirit li∣mits and prescribes us a time of repentance: Again, he limiteth Heb. 4. 7. a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time, as it is said, to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. It's a common observation; He that hath promised time to the penitent, hath not promised a morrow for repentance: Wherefore wee are Qui poeniten∣tibus promisit veniam, diem non promisit crastinum. Gerr. Medit. Isa. 55. 6. . Antipat. Act. 24. 25. commanded, Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near: and Acts 17. 30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent. The Spirit now knocks by its motions, by the Word, by conviction of Conscience, and invites you to come presently to Jesus Christ. When a Treatise of Happynesse was brought to Antipater, he an∣swered, I am not at leisure; a lamentable case not to be at leisure to read a Treatise of Happynesse. Felix would hear Paul at a con∣venient time; we never read that he sent for him any more. In proverbial speeches we say, Strike whilst the Iron is hot; When there is a fair gale hoyst up thy sayles; and delayes are dangerous.
Shall we then neglect the present opportunity upon a presumption of a future? Shall we presume either of space  grace, neither of them being in our power? God is not bound to give space; he struck Ʋzzah dead in the place for meddling with the Ark: It's said, the 1 Chr. 13. 9. Oxen stumbled: Ʋzzahs intention might be good, but a good in∣tention cannot justifie a bad action: He invaded the Priests function; his work was to drive on the Oxen, not to touch the Ark. God struck Ananias and Saphira dead for their hypocrisie: So often times God strikes dead the Drunkard in his vomit, the Lyar, Swearer, Blasphemer with the lye, oath, blasphemy in each mans tongue. But suppose (which is uncertain) God gives thee space, yet often times where he gives space he denies grace, as it was said of Je∣zabel, Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to repent of her fornication, but she 2 Tim. 2. 25. repented not. There is a peradventure put in, 2 Tim. 2. 25. In meek∣nesse instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure may give them repentance unto the acknowledging of the truth. My bre∣thren, consider in your most serious and composed thoughts, that we deal for life and immortality, and our negotiations are for the great things of Eternity: Shall we dally in such weighty matters? Shall we procrastinate our Repentance? And shall we stop our ears, bolt the doors of our hearts when the Spirit calls and knocks? In matters of worldly employments, what post-haste, what expedition do men make? they fear delayes may much prejudice them: And shall we be thus wise for the world, and such errand fooles for our soules? Shall we be penny-wise and pound-foolish? Shall we be so industrious to grasp the trash and pelf of the world, and neglect our soules? Every ones soul being a precious jewel is more woth than the world in all its pomp and bravery. Let us lay hold on the golden season of the present time, the time which the Spirit limits. If thou neglectest this day, for ought thou knowest, thou mayst be in hell to morrow. Whilst thou art dallying and delay∣ing God may be a swearing in his wrath, that thou shalt never enter into his rest. The third reason, and the last, that I shall name shall be drawn Reas. 3. Drawn from the rule of divine Ju∣stice. from the rule of divine justice. It's most just when people neglect Gods limited time for God to allow them no more time, when people squander out Gods seasons and mispend their choice oppor∣tunities, it stands with justice to deny any further opportunity. When the season is past, it is like an Arrow out of the Bow, like a
swift stream, not to be called back. Theres a dreadfull judgement threatned, Prov: 1. 24. because I have called and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hands, and no man regarded, therefore I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear commeth. God u∣sually payes sinners in their own coyn, and punisheth them by way of retaliation; As appears in Adonibezeks confession, who said, Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and great toes cut off ga∣thered Judg. 1. 7 thered their meat under my table, as I have done so hath God requited me. God punisheth number with number, according to the number of their cities so were their gods. Jer. 2. 28. Where are thy Gods which thou hast made thee? let them arise if they can save thee in the time Jerem. 2. 28. of thy trouble, for according to the number of thy cities, s are thy gods, O Judah. And the Lord numbred them out to the sword, and left them few in number. God punisheth choice with choe; they chose new gods, and the Lord in judgement left them to their choice, and in their extremities bade them goe to their gods, and see whether they would deliver them. The Lord punished con∣trariety with contrariety; If ye will not be reformed by these things, Lev. 26. 23. 24. but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary to you, and punish you yet seven times for your sinns. And when we refuse to hearken to him when he calls, he will refuse to hearken to us in our greatest extremities when we call upon him. It's a broken, but a very pathetical speech of Christ to Jerusalem, O that thou hadst Luke 19. 4. known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. There is a Critical day set down; there is a dreadfull judgement upon those that brought not the Lords offering in its season: The man that is clean, and is Numb. 9. 13. not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passeover, even the same soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sinne. The old world gave no heed to Noahs Preaching, they neglected the time that God allowed them for repentance. No moe time was Matth. 25. 10 . allowed, when that was once expired, a deluge overwhelmed them. The five foolish Virgins slmbred and slept, when they should have been preparing of their lamps, they went to buy oyle, and in their absence Christ came and perpetually shut them out. Esau sought Heb. 12. 17. enedictionem illam exquisis∣st. Beza. the Blessing carefully with rears, yet hee was rejected, hee came when it was too late: How many mischiefs befall men for neglecting their opportunities? All these considerations should
be as so many warning-pieces unto us, and as so many prevalent in∣centives to cherish the whispers of the Spirit, to take the benefit of the season: Now whilst the Lord bids us, seek his face, our hearts must eccho back, Thy face, Lord, we will seek. Let us hearken to the motions of the Spirit, and the checks of our conscience, let us make much of the Spirit, let us take heed of quenching and grieving of the holy Spirit whereby we are sealed unto the day of redemption. An Angel swears in the Revelations, There shal be no more time. How soon Revel. 10. 6.  time may cease, & the Spirit cease working, we cannot tel, and time may be swallowed up in Eternity. And therefore take this Caution as a word spoken in due season: Beware of sadding the Spirit, drive him not away from you; for once having a repulse, for ought you know, he may come no more. And th have dispatch'd three Heads propounded of my Me∣thod: I have asserted the truth of the point from Scripture eti∣monies, plainly evidencing the greatnesse of the Judgement when the Spirit of God departs from, and will strive no longer with a people. I have shewed how many wayes the Spirit usually strives with a people, I have given in the reasons for the confirmation of the point. In the next place it remains that I should reduce al home unto point of Practise, by way of Use and particular Application. This Doctrine affords six special Uses: For Information, Exhor∣tation, Reprehension, Examination, Direction, and Consolation. In the first place, this serves for Information; what a dreadfull Ʋse 1. For Informa∣tion. judgement lyes heavy upon any person whatsoever, with whom Gods Spirit will strive no longer. Was it not an heavy judgement when Gods Spirit left Saul, and an evil spirit was sent to torment him? Was it not an heavy case, and dreadfull, when the Phili∣stines made war upon him, and the Lord was departed from him: And Samuel said to Saul, why hast thou disquieted me to bring me up? 1 Sam. 28 15 And Saul answered, I am sore distressed, for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by dreames, therefore I have called thee, &c. When Gods Spirit quite leaves a soul, then the evil spirit takes possession of it. Satan entred into Judas his heart, and set him on work to betray Christ; and when conscience gave him a bang, and made him throw down the mony, he felt Hell-fire flashing in him, and betook himself to a desperate remedy, to be his own execu∣tioner. So I have read of Julian after he had departed from God,
and turn'd Apostate, he had in his conscience more blows and butche∣rings. Plures ictus & laniatus. At last, when a dart hit him, and gave him his fatal wound, no man knowing from whence that dart came (for it was a signal blow from heaven, and was indeed the immediate hand of God) at last he confest, Thou hast overcome, O Galilean, thou hast overcome. Vicisti, Gali∣laee, vicisti. Now a little to set forth the greatnesse of the judgement upon those with whom Gods Spirit will strive no longer, Ile represent it you in these ensuing aggravations. When God takes away his Spirit, he usually takes away his Or∣dinances. Whilst the Palladium remain'd with the Trojans, they Aggrav. 1. When God takes away his Spirit, he usually takes away his Or∣dinances. thought themselves secure. The Jews put great confidence in the Ark, they fet the Ark, and went to battle with it against the Phili∣stines, and afterwards cryed up, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: Herein they were superstitious, they filed in putting too much confidence in the Temple: They were Idolaters, and followed Baal and Ashtaroth, and thought the Ark would secure them. The Ark would no more shelter prophane, idolatrous people, than the horns of the Altar would secure and shelter a Murtherer: Yet questionlesse the Ark of Gods presence was a very great mercy and priviledge. The Ark was kept away twenty yeares, and they thought it long, and the Text saith, all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord. The sad report of the losse of the Ark, brake Elies heart first, and he fell down backward and his neck brake: He heard 1 Sam. 7. 2. of the death of his sonnes, their death went near, but the losse of the Ark went nearer: and Phinehas his wife named the child Iha∣bod, saying, the glory is departed from Israel, because the Ark of God was taken. She fell in travel upon that sad news, and dyed present∣ly. 1 Sam. 4. 18, 21, 22. The taking away Ministers, Ordinances, Sabbaths, are dread∣full judgements upon a people: This the Prophet Amos foretels of; Behold the daies come, saith the Lord, that I will send a famine in the Amos 8. 11. land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. And Christ himself threarens, The kingdom of Matth. 21. 43. God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And these judgements God oftentimes inflicts up∣on those that contemne his Ordinances, and often imes causeth a people to know the worth of them, by the want of them. Aggrav. 2. God will not suffer his Spi∣rit to woke in the Ordi∣nances. Or secondly, if God continue his Ordinances, and a people still resist the strivings of his Spirit; this is another aggravation, that the Lord wil not suffer his Spirit to work in the Ordinances. What's
the Word without the Spirit but a dead letter? The Word is the seed, it is the Spirit that quickens it. Now when God denieth his Spirit in an Ordinance, and people hear onely a bare sound, which goeth in at one ear, and out of another, and reap no profit, and are never a whit wrought upon by an Ordinance, this is a la∣mentable condition. Enthusiasts cry up the Spirit, and cry down the Word. Formalists cry up the Word, they keep their Church well (that's their own phrase) but they regard not the workings of the Spirit. This is Argumentum à bene conjunctis ad male divisa. We have no warrant to leave the bright shining light of the Word, and to follow a wild rambling light of our own. The Spirit works by the Word, and tyes us to the rule. New devised lights may Levit. 10. 2, meet with the same judgement as Nadab and Abihu met withall for offering strange fire unto the Lord. Neither may we (as For∣malists doe) rest in our comming to, and hearing of Ordinances; we must examine the working of Gods Spirit upon our soules: When God gives quickning Ordinances, let us pray for the energetical effectual working of Gods Spirit. Deadnesse of Spirit (saith Mr. Greenham) is the grave of spiritual graces. Between a lazy and a fervent performer of duties, you may see the difference, Greenham. 2 Kings 4. 31, 32, 33, 34. Gehazi went on in a carelesse formall manner, and layd his staffe upon the child, but there was neither voice nor hearing: But when Elisha put his eyes upon the childs eyes, and his mouth on the childs mouth, the flesh of the child waxed warm. O beware of slighting, or resising the pirit in an Ordinance, lest in judgement God may give thee a bare Ordi∣nance, or resting contented with a bare outside formall service, without any lively workings of the Spirit upon thine heart, and that will be but as a carkasse when the soul is gone. When people drive away Gods Spirit and will not regard its stri∣vings Aggrav. 3. God gives o∣ver those that resist his Spi∣rit unto a spirit of delusion. then God gives them over in judgement to a spirit of delu∣sion. 2 Thes. 2. 11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they shall believe a lye. VVhen Ministery, the Lords-day, and other Sabbath-Ordinances are trampled under feet, when the plain infallible rule of the Scriptures is laid aside, when some flatter themselves with high swelling conceits of their own gifts, upon pretence of a Light within them, Dreams and Revelations, then God in judgement gives them over to a spirit of delusion. The Devil works upon their fancies, and puffs them up with pride, and
their pride swels them and bursts them. Beware of Pride, and a∣bove all Pride of spiritual Pride. Beware of itching eares after novel Doctrines. Upon pretence of new truths many suck in an∣tiquated, long since exploed rrours. And if it be an errour (though I take it not so) yet account it an errour of love, I advise, especially young beginners, to beware of Scepticism, & high-slown curiosities in the study of divinity. It's a ground of experience, Scep∣ticism Rom. 14. 1. Quod si obser∣vassent Scho∣lastici non tot spinosas & salebrosas ne dicā impis & sacrilegas quae∣stiones in eorn̄ libris habere. mus. P. Mart. Aggrav. 4. God gives those over to a hard heart, who resist the motions of the Spirit. frequently produceth Heresie, & eree terminatesin Athe∣isme, and my counsel is grounded upon the known rule; Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but not in doubtfull disputatons. Would Schoolmen (saith Pet. Martyr) had observed this Scripture. Study Fun∣damentals, & get a Body of Divinity in your heads and hearts, before you venture upon Polemicals. Be well provided and furnished with weapons from the Principles of Divinity, before you grapple with gain-sayers. A fourth and last aggravation I shall mention is this; when Gods Spirit hath stroven long, knockt and waited, and is abused and resi∣sted, then God gives over such persons to an hard heart, and a re∣probate mind: And an hard heart and a reprobate mind is an hell upon earth. Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed. It's cited by all the four Evan∣gelists, and in the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistle to the Ro∣mans, by such frequent repetition of the self-same thing, aggrava∣ting the greatnesse of the judgement. It's accounted the grand curse of the Gospel, Joh. 9. 39. For judgement am I come into this John 9. 39. world, that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be made blind. When men have been a long time under the sound of the Gospel, and the Spirit hath moved and woed, beseeching us to amend our lives, and walk in an holy obedience and confor∣mity to the will of God; and yet we stand out, and bid defiance to the Spirit of Grace, then it is just for God to say, hard heart, seize upon such a one, reprobate sense, take hold of another, let them be Sermon-proof, and Judgement-proof, let them remain in∣sensible, let their consciences be cauterized. O wha a fearfull judgement is this, as the Apostle mentions! But after thy hardnesse Ro. 2. 5. and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgement of God. May these
aggravations make deep impressions upon all our spirits, and make us fear and tremble any more to withstand the sweet motions and whispers of the Spirit of God. A second use is for Exhortation: I entreat, beseech, exhort, con∣jure Ʋse 2. For Exhor∣tation. you by all the motions of the Spirit, by all the tenders of mer∣cies, patience, and long-suffering of God, that you would take heed of quenching, resisting, sadding the holy Spirit of God, but che∣rish, embrace, make much of all the strivings of the Spirit of God with your soules. To day the Spirit calls, hear his voice; to day the Spirit woes and would make a contract with your soules, O now accept of him; to day the Spirit invites, lay aside all excuses and come. It's the Embassie that Gods Ministers are sent upon: Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech 2 Cor. 5. 20. you by us, we pray you in Christs stead be ye reconciled to God. Or commission may be out of date to morrow: Christ now waites till his locks be wet with dew, now he calls sinners to repentance. He hath sent me on an errand this day to invite thirsty soules to come unto him, and he will give them drink; to invite those that are heavy laden, and he will give them rest. It's my businesse this day to tender Jesus Christ, the Fountain opened; to presse home the Exhortation of the Holy Ghost, Let the wicked forsake his way, and Isa. 55. 7. the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Now what answer shall I return unto him that sent me? Suffer I beseech you (Fathers and Brethren) the word of exhorta∣tion, not to suffer the holy Spirit to spend his sacred breath in vain: You have many prizes put into your hands, improve them in your several capacities to the glory of God, and mutual edification one of another. Let Rulers rule with diligence, let Governours, Tu∣tours, Masters of Families, all unite their endeavours to promote the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and put Joshua's resolution into pra∣ctise, but as for me, I and my house we will serve the Lord. O that Josh. 24. 15. we could be spirituall Fathers to those that are committed to our charge. Governours and Tutours should look upon themselves as Pro-parents, and upon the Scholars under them as children, and therefore ought to have special care over them, and principally to enquire how it fares with their soules, what knowledge they have of Jesus Christ: What a comfort will it be another day when we can say, Behold, Lord, here we are, and the children which thou hast given
us. Thou ord hast made us spiritual Fathers unto these young Pu∣piss. Now whilst the Spirit stayes waiting upon us, whilst we have time, talents, and opportunities vouchsafed unto us, whilest we live under the sound of the Gospel, and hear admonitions, re∣proofs, and many Exhortations to repentance; let us not put off the Spirit with any more delatory answers, but resolve with the full purpose of our hearts to cleave unto the Lord. I have two or three plain moving considerations to adde, for the better setting home of my Exhortation. Consider the brevity of our lives: What's our life but a bubble, Consid. 1. The brevity of our lives. John▪ 4. a flower, a vapor, a shadow? By these resemblances, the Holy Ghost sets forth the shortness of our lives: We had need be a working while day lasteth: I must work the works of him that sent me, while day lasteth; the night cometh, when no man can work: A night of death is coming, wherein no man can work, and we must always remember, that the Spirit strives not always, not during the whole course of our lives: It moves when it pleaseth, and on a suddain ceaseth; yet at the most it moveth no longer, nor striveth no longer, but this little moment of time, whilst we are on this side the grave. After death there will be no more warnings, no more admonitions, no place left for repentance, no Purgatory, that's a Popish dream: He that dieth filthy, will so remain unto all Eternity. Now then, my Brethren, considering you have but a little time, and upon this moment depends Eternity, and after death there will be no further tenders of Grace and Mercy, let us husband this time to the best advantage: Let us prize Sermons, Sabbaths, and all those Evangelical Dispensations vouchsafed to us, more then ever we did: Let us redeem the time, as we are exhort∣ed, Eph. 5. 16. . Eph. 5. 16. buying out, or making a good market of the sea∣son. Every thing is beautiful in its season; there's a season ac∣ceptable, and there's a season perilous: Let's come when God calls, that's the accepted time; let's not prescribe a time of our own, that's the perillous season; let's not account time a slight matter, for each minute ought to be valued. A second consideration shal be drawn from the uncertainty of the Consid. 2. The uncer∣tainty of the spirits stri∣ving. Nil pretiosius tempore, & heu nil hodie vilius invenitur. Bern. Veniet tempus quo vel unam horam ad resiiscendum redimere, mirum quantum optabimus. Otho Casmannus. spirits strivings: If the holy Spirit be rejected, its uncertain whether ever he will come again: The Spirit will not always bear reproaches & indignities: If we refuse to give God the glory of his mercy, he
will shew upon us the glory of his Justice and Power: If we will not open when God knocks at our doors, he will not open when we knock at his door: Unkindness will drive away a friend from our houses: When the Spirit invites himself unto us, if we will open, he will come and dine, and sup with us; if we refuse this Hea∣venly guest, how shall we escape? our destruction will be inevi∣table. This Spirit is often compared to fire, nothing more com∣forting, nothing more consuming than fire: If thou wilt not suf∣fer the Spirit to purge and refine thee, it will consume thee: No∣thing more comfortable then light, warmth, and witness of the Spirit: Nothing more terrible then the bondage, conviction and condemnation of the Spirit: Therefore beware of resisting any good motions that the Spirit of God puts into thy heart this day, lest if the spirit have a repulse, he may go away and never return any more. 3. Thirdly, Consider the certainty of the day of Judgement, 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the judgement seat of Consid. 3. The day of Iudgement. Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, accord∣ing to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad: Then there will be an account to be given for all the Sermons which we have heard, for all the Sabbaths we have enjoyed, for all the motions of the Spirit, for all the admonitions, reproofs, Gospel opportu∣nities and advantages that we have received; we should therefore hear a Sermon now, as for ought we know, we may be presently summon'd by death to appear before the Judgement-seat of Jesus Christ: Let us imagine that now we hear this day, as if it might be our last day: We hear for Eternity: Preachers and Hearers shall be called to an account at the great Assise: The Lord grant that we may all give up our accounts with joy. The third Use shall be for reprehension of those who resist or Use. 3. For repre∣hension. stifle the strivings and the sweet motions of the holy Spirit: To come to particulars. 1. How sad is their condition, who are contemners of the sweet motions of Gods Spirit: Let them read Rom. 8. 9. If any man hath not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Such as quench the Spirit, which is forbidden 1 Thess. 5. 19. such as deride pray∣ing by the spirit, such as slight and scorn men of the spirit; I mean such as are of a pretious annointing, in whom the Spirit of Christ dwells: O how sad will their Audit be!
2. It reproves barren and unprofitable hearers, who notwith∣standing all the strivings, wooings and waitings of Gods Spirit by the Ministry of the Word, yet remain barren and unfruitful: The Apostle tells their doom, The earth that drinketh in the rain, that Heb. 6. 7, 8. cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth a blessing from God; but that which beareth thorns and bryars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: When Christ found nothing on the Fig-tree but leaves, he said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever; and Matth. 21. 19 Luke 13. 7. presently the Fig-tree withered away: And the Vine-dresser said, Behold, these three years I come, seeking fruit on this fig-tree, and finde none, cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? 3. It reproves secure persons setled on their. Lees: Let Gods Spirit strive never so often, it is all in vain: They think all is well with them, they conceive their Estates very good: Multitudes now adays are possest with a spirit of slumber and drousiness, and this is a dreadful sin, and a judgement both, Rom. 11. 8. God hath given them a spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear to this day: Is not he a desperate fool that dares sleep upon the top of a Mast? Is not he much more, that notwithstanding judgements threatned in Gods Word against re∣bellious sinners, yet is secure, heedless, and satisfied in his present condition? This is that carnal security mentioned, which is un∣der such terrible woe, Deut. 29. 19, 20. It shall come to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart to adde drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not spare him; but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousie shall smoak against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. 4. And lastly, This reproves all impenitent persons, who not∣withstanding all the Sermons they hear, notwithstanding all the reproofs, admonitions, wooings, knockings of Gods spirit, yet re∣main impenitent: Impenitency is that great soul-damning sin. Christ tells us, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, Rev. 3. 20. Ezek. 18. 31. if any man open to me, I will come in and sup with him: And the exhortation of the Prophet runs, Cast away from you all your trans∣gressions, for I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, where∣fore turn your selves and live: So God expostulates the case with
them: Though by our own strength we cannot stand, not by our own powe will any good thing; yet we may doe much more good then we do: Can not the same legs carry a man to the Church, which carry him to an Ale-house o Tavern? Its want of a good heart and love to the Ordinances of God, that make men so negligent of the good of their souls: Who forceth thee to swear? thou saist thou can not leave it, custom is become another nature: Is it not thine own corrupt heart that causeth corrupt communications? The Devil cannot compel to sin, he perswades and enticeth, nei∣ther doth God tempt any man, Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed, then Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15. when lust hath conceived it bringeth forth sin, and sin when it is finished bringeth forth death: Tremble and stand amazed, thou impenitent person that resiste so many strivings of Gods Spirit, so many checks of conscience, so many warnings from the word: O that thy heart might be touched with remorse and repentance for thine impenitency! yet thou livest under the sound of the Gospel, who knoweth but the spirit may this day once more move, woe, and beseech thee to be reconciled? O do not refuse! O do not slight these invitations! A City besieged (as we read) Deut. 20. 11, 12. If it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, thea the people that are found therein shall become tributary unto thee; but if it will make no peace with thee, then thou shalt besiege it, and smlte every male with the edge of the sword. Just so now the Lord besiegeth thy heart, offers thee peace, intreats thee to re∣pent of thy Oathes, Sabbath-breakings, contempt of the Gospel, Drunkenness, Uncleanness: If thou wilt not receive such a graci∣ous offer of peace, to thy peril be it, thou art the murtherer of thine own soul. 4. I proceed to a fourth Use, which is for examination: Three Ʋse 4. For Exami∣nation.  Quaeries by way of tryal, I shall propose and answer. Q. 1. How may we distinguish of the strivings of Gods spirit from a spirit of error and delusion? I answer in this wise. 1. Gods Spirit strives by the Ministry of the word, and directs  1. Gods spi∣rit strives by the Ministry of the word. us according to that rule, Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God: But a spirit of delusion deviseth ways of its own, and is wise above what is written, whereunto a curse appertains, Gal. 1. 8.
Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach aother Gospel then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. 2. Gods Spirit leads into all truth: It is a sirit of truth: But 2. Gods spi∣rit leads into all truth. the spirit of delusion leads us into all errors: God will send strong delusions, that they shall believe a lie, 2 Thess. 2. 11. 3. Gods Spirit makes us humble, meek, gentle: A spirit of de∣lusion 3. Gods spi∣rit makes us humble and meek. makes us to swell with pride and pride and passions: Gods Spirit meekens our spirit: An Antichristian deluded spirit makes us boy∣steros, inodinate in our affections. But secondly, The Quaery will be, How we may distinguish the  strivings of Gods Spirit, from the strivings of our own spirits or natu∣ral conscience? I answer thus. 1. A natural conscience acts from a principle of A natural conscience acts from a principle of fear. fear, of punishment, and upon legal convictions; hence come many torturings and strivings in natural mens consciences, as in Ahab, &c. Herod feared John Baptist: But Gods Spirit strives and moves the soul to act from a principle of love to Jesus Christ; when the love of Christ constrains to duty, that is genuine altogether. 2. The striving of a mns own spirit, and a natural conscience, 2. The stri∣vings of a mans own spirit, are pacified with natural means. are pacified with natural means, eating, drinking, sleeping, idle company, vain pleasures quiet meer natural convictions: But where Gods Spirit strives, the soul cannot be quieted but by supernatural means; the in omes of God, the ravishing consolations of the holy Ghost, a white Stone, a pardon sealed; no mirth, sports, company, can satisfie a wounded conscience, onely one remedy is reserved for a perfect cure, and that's the Medicine made up of the Blood of Christ. 3. The strivings of a mans own spirit are flashy, suddain, and soon gone when the judgement ceaseth: As soon as the judgement 3. The stri∣vigs of a mans own Spirit are flashy and suddain. is removed, the strivings cease; but when Gods Spirit strives, it is solid and serious: If the Jvdgement be removed, and the sn unpardoned, there can be no quiet: If the Judgement be over, Pharaoh is quiet; but no quiet in Davids spirit, till the sin be re∣moved. Q. 3. A third Quaery is, How may we know whether Gods Spirit   hath effectually stroven and prevailed with us. 1. When we hearken to the call of Gods Spirit, Psal. 27. 8. Thou 1. Wh we answe the call of God spirit. saidst, seek my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
2. When we have the testimonie of Gods Spirit, as Rom. 8. 16. The spirit it self beareth witness with our spirits that we are the 2. When we have the spi∣rits testi∣mony. children of God. 3, When we have the sealing of the Spirit, Eph. 1. 13. In 3. When the spirit seals. whom, after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of pro∣mise. 4. When we have the earnest of the Spirit, Eph. 1. 14. 4. When we have the ear∣nest of the Spirit. 5. When we have the spi∣rits anoint∣ing. 6. When we have the fruits of the Spirit. Use 5. For directi∣on. 1. Pray for the Spirit. 2. Set a high price on the Spirit. 3. Cherish the motions of the Spirit. 4. Observe the call and knocking of the Spirit. 5, When we have the anointings of the Spirit, 1 John 2. 20. Ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. 6. When we have the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23, 24. Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. The fifth Use is for direction. 1. Pray for the Spirit to sanctifie and cleanse thee: No work of sanctification but by the spirit. 2. Set an high price of, and be a diligent attendant of Gods word: The Spirit usually works by the Word: The Spirit and Word agree together. 3. Cherish the sweet motions of Gods Spirit, make much of every holy motion and inspiration: O do not grieve nor sad! O do not quench the Spirit of God, but account Gods long-suffering your salvation! God waits, and is patient: O do not provoke, do not abuse his patience! 4. Observe all the calls, knockings and invitations of Gods Spi∣rit: The Lord calls by his word, by checks of conscience, by mer∣cies and by judgements, do not then bolt the doors of your hearts, nor stand out against all the warnings, threatnings and promises; all these are upon record, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neg∣lect so great salvation. Lastly, Here's one word of comfort unto all those who make Use. 6. For comfort. much of the strivings of Gods Spirit: These shall be filled with the consolations of the Spirit: The Spirit will comfort, support, help them: In Prayer, The Spirit helpeth their infirmities, Rom. 8. 26. The Spirit purgeth and purisieth them: The Spirit of God is their Counsellor in doubts, their Comforter in all distresses; and the Spirit will guide them by his counsel till he bring them unto glory. Doct. 2. Its a ex∣ceeding great mercy, &c. I now proceed in a few words to the second Doctrine: That it is an exceeding great mercy when the Lord vouchsafes unto any
person time and space for repentance: Here the Lord alloweth to the old World 120 years, so long it was that the Spirit of God strove with the old World. We read in Gen. 18. 24, 25. the Lord staid communing with Abraham; making abatements from 50 to 45, from 45 to 40, from 40 to 30, from 30 to 20, from 20 to 10: Was it not a great mercy for the Lord to bear so long with the Amorites? They had a long time of forbearance: Thus did the Lord deal with Niniveh, Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty days, and Ni∣niveh shall be overthrown: So the Lord waited long on the Israelites, Psal. 95. 8. Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness: So Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42, 44. If thou hadst known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes: The five foolish Virgins had a time allowed; both wise and foolish slept and slumbred, but the foolish wanted oyl, and lost the ac∣cepted season: Jezabel had time alloted her, Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to repent of her fornication, but she repented not. The Reasons are. 1. To glorifie the riches of Gods mercy: Mer∣cy Reas. 1. To glorifie the riches of Gods mercy. waits upon us, wooing and alluring us to repentance: The Lord invites, Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, let him come, &c. He calls sinners to repentance: He entreateth by his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. He waits to be gracious, Rev. 3. 20. 2. To glorifie the Justice of God, and to leave a people without R. 2. To glorifie Gods justice, excuse: When mercy, patience, goodness, graciousness, long-suffering, are all abused, what remains but destruction, never fruit grow on thee more, Cut it down, I will take this kingdom from you, I will send you a famine of the word: These are terrible threat∣nings. 3. The Lord oftentimes is pleased to spare a people longer at the R. 3. God spares a people at the request of his servants. request of his servants, Luke 13. 8. The Vine-dresser prayed, Let it alone yet longer, till I dig about it and dung it: Gods Mini∣sters pray hard, and tug hard at the oar, they cry night and day, Lord, spare, try this people a little longer, exercise a little more patience towards them; let thy Word work upon them, they live under the sound of it, let it effectually prevail with them. The Uses are, 1. For admiration: O admire the infinite mer∣cies of God, who doth thus bear with sinners! notwithstanding Use 1. For admira∣tion. their provocations, yet he tryes, waits, and allows them a great
deal of space, when as in Justice he might cut sinners assunder in the midst of their sins. This breathes terrors unto all presumptuous sinners, who presume Ʋse 2. For terror. of space and grace, neither of which is in their own power: To some God gives space, others he destroys presently, in the midst of their rebellions: But admit he gives space, though he is not bound unto that; yet he denys grace to many to whom he vouchsafes space, as unto Jezabel; and we read of a peradventure 2 Timo∣thy 2. 25. In meeknesse instructing those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God may give them repentance. This Doctrine speaks terror unto all them that procrastinate repentance: Ile lay down these convictions. It argues exceeding great folly and madness: Do we not see how Convict. 1. Its great fol∣ly to put off repentance. many are cropt off in their buds? how many are cut off in their sins? we are wiser for the World: In gainful bargains we make haste, saying, Do not delay for fear of danger; and yet we are stark fools for our souls. 2. It argues a great contempt, an high affront and indignity a∣gainst Convict. 2. It argues great con∣tempt. God, Mal. 1. 8. If ye offer the blinde for sacrifice, is it not evil? &c. offer it unto your governor, will he be pleased with thee? 3. It argues high presumption, to presume of patience, mercy, Convict. 3. It argues high presum∣ption. and long-suffering, when as we abuse them all, Rom. 2. 4, 5. De∣spisest thou the riches of his goodness, forbearance, and long-sffering, not knowing that the goodness of the Lord leadeth thee to repentance: A terible curse will follow, if we neglect Gods time when he calls, when we call he will neglect our time, Prov. 1. 24, 25. Be∣cause I have called, and ye have refused, &c. therefore ye shall call, but I will not answer. The third use is for Exhortation, to lay hold upon the present Use 3. For Exhor∣tatin. tenders of Grace, and make the best of this opportunity: Defer not thy repentance a moment longer; lay aside all excuses: ne pleads for his Oxen, another for his Form, another for his Mer∣chndise: All these are unfit guests for Christ: Now therefore come into Christ. Is it not a great mercy that thou art yet alive, on this side Hell and the Grave? Now then close with God, set an high price of Gods mercies, and let the riches of his mercy lead thee to repentance. Consider, 1. Now is the Spirits striving time.
2. Now is the limitted time, Heb. 4. 7. To day if you will hear  his voice, &c. 3. Now is the accepted time, thy soul-saving time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. 4. Now once past cannot be recalled: I therefore now beseech you by the mercies of God, by all the Sermons and Invitations of Christ, to make your peace with God, to embrace the mercies ten∣dered, to break off your sins by repentance, and to regard the stri∣vings and wooings of the Spirit of God. The fourth use is fo caution. 1. Beware of presuming of fu∣ture Use 4. For caution. 1. Beware of presuming of Grace. offers of Grace, James 4. 13, 14. Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, whereas ye know not what shall be on the morow. The fool in the Gospel was cut off in the midst of his presumption, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee: Esau mist his Luke 12. 20 season: The five foolish Virgins mist their seasons: The old world presumed of life, never thinking of a Deluge; but when the Flood came, How did they wander? some got upon House-tops, some upon high Mountains, some would, questionless, have been entertained in the Ark, but the day of Grace was expired, the com∣mission of Preaching of Repentance, was but for 120 years, that's past, and a Flood over-whelmed them all. O my dear Brethren! be perswaded to lay hold on the present season of Grace, lest ruine overtake you whilst you procrastinate. 2. eware of sadding the Spirit of God, and resisting the sweet motions thereof, Eph. 4. 30. The Spirit invites, calls, woos, in∣treats 2. Beware of sadding the spirit of God thee to be reonciled and make thy peace with God: Thou hearest a voice behinde thee, saying, This is the way, walk there∣in: Hearken to the voice of this spiritual Charmer, which charm∣eth so wisely. 3. Beware of low and mean thoughts of the Ordinances of God, 3 Beware of low houghts of Ordinan∣ces. Heb. 2. 3. The Israelites slighted Mannah, but they paid dear for it: Gods Spirit strives by the Word, by Prayer, by the Sacra∣ments: Take heed of undervaluing all these ways of striving: Sometimes God strives by an affliction, for that's Gods Ordinance likewise, and calls upon thee to learn instruction, to smite upon thy thigh. 4. Beware of neglecting observations of particular experien∣ces: 4. Beware of neglecting observations, &c. Sometimes God strives with thee in a way of mercy by ten∣ders of Christ, sometimes by threatnings; neglect not these stri∣vings,
but make a review of them, observe Gods dealings with thy soul, how the Lord woos, invites, and waits on thee, how some∣times thy heart hath been opened, like Lydia's, to close with God; sometimes thou art quick, other times dull; sometimes thou hast hold of Christ, other times thou wantest his presence: This is the lot of Gods people, sometimes they are in an ebb, someimes in a float; sometimes their Faith is strong, other times they know not whether they have any at all or no: This was David's case, and thou must apply Davids remedy: Why ar thou cast down, O my Psal. 4. 2. v. ult. soul, and why art thou disquieted within me, still trust in God: Be∣ware of trusting to thine own resolutions: O say some, I resolve hereafter to repent and close with God. This is that which ru∣ines multitudes, because they presume in their own strength: What are our resolutions, but as the early dew which soon passeth away? What are the best of men, if God leaves them unto themselves? we must therefore take heed of sacrificing to our own nets and drags, trusting to our own strength; but come off from all those, and act in the strength of God: We can do nothing without him, but all things through Christ that strengthens us: Samson said, He would go out and shake himself, as at other times; And he wist not Judg. 16. 20. that the Lord was departed from him. 5. Beware of pride and stoutness of heart. Lastly, Beware of pride and stoutness of heart, trying conclusi∣ons with God, and reasoning and counter-striving against God: The proud men would not believe the Prophet, saying, Thou speakest falsly, the Lord our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Ae∣gypt to sojourn there, Jer. 43. 2. Use 5. For admoni∣tion. The fifth Use shall be for admonition: O that we could account the long-suffering of God our salvation! And O that the goodness of God, and the riches of his mercy, might lead us to repen∣tance! In few words be admonished: 1. Take the benefit of the season, To day: Repent speedily, 1. Repent speedily. 2. Repent seriously. Isa. 55. 6. Heb. 4. 7. 2. Repent seriously and Evangelically, make not a slight matter of so great a work, neither rest satisfied in a legal repentance, ex∣torted from the fear of Hell, and the wrath of an angry God; but let it be done Evangelically, from the love of God, the consideration of the displeasure of so good a God, and the sinfulness of sin; let those considerations melt thee into tears, and cause thee to mourn ingenuously.
3. Be continually renewing thy repentance, and when thou hast 3 Be renew∣ing thy re∣pentance fre∣quently. felt a pardon, get it fairer transcribed and renewed through the Blood of Christ: His blood cleanseth from all sins: And there is redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins. 4. Be thankful for the space that God gives thee, thou canst ne∣ver 4 Be thank∣full for the space given thee 5. Improve e∣very mercy to more saith full perform∣ance of duty. acknowledge enough the patience and forbearance of God, who gives thee time, and allows thee space, and whers his Sword, and bends his Bow to give thee warning to escape the blow: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his mercies and loving kindnesses? Will Eternity be enough to praise the Lord? 5. Improve every mercy to more faithful performance of du∣ties. The last Use is, for comfort unto those who make much of the strivings of Gods Spirit, and make the best improvement of the Use 6. For consola∣tion. time that God alots them for repentance: This will yield them comfort in their lives, & on their death-beds, 2 Kings 20. 3. Remem∣ber, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And to all Eternity, Happy are they that have hearkned to Gods call, and made a good use of all the means of Grace, and spent the allotted time to Gods glory. Here they shall reap the first∣fruits of Joy and Comfort, and hereafter the full Harvest, unto all Eternity. An Ingagement unto Holyness, from the consideration of the Day of Iudgement. Unfolded from 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conver∣sation and Godliness? THat Christ shall come to Judgement, is an Article of our Ser. 4. at St. Maryes Oxon July 27 1651. Faith: We profess we believe it, yet how many deny it in
their practices: Some put far from them the evil day, or think not of a day of account; like desperate Bank-rupts, adding more to the score, not considering an after reckoning. Hence multitudes live as they list, without God in the world, running into all ex∣cess of riot, frolicking it in all manner of Epicurism and Volu∣ptuousness, thus denying the Day of Judgement by the wicked∣ness of their lives: Others are much offended because the day is so long a coming, because Christ stays so long; they are hot-spurs, and will not wait: If Gods clok strike not according to their Dyal: If the Resurrection, Day of Judgement, Christs second coming, be not assoon as they expect, they call all in question, and propose a question full of Blasphemy and Infidelity both, ver. 4. Where is the promise of his coming? These blasphemous Scoffers, ver. 4. Arg. 1. Ver. 5. the Apostle consures by several Arguments: The world was created by the word of God, v. 5. It was not ab aeterno, (as Philosophers dreamed) now the Argument is valid; The same God who by his word made the world, can by his word destroy it when he pleaseth. A second Argument is drawn from experience, v. 6. By the De∣luge Arg. 2. Ver. 6. the old world was destroyed: God bade the water over-flow, and destroy man and beast, and it did so: And the time will come, that he will bid the fire to destroy this visible World wherein we no live, and it shall be so, v. 7. A third Argument is drawn from the Eternity of God: We Ver. 7. Arg. 3. poor Creatures measure things by time, we speak of days, weeks, moneths, and years, of times past, present, and to come, thus we apprehend; but time past, present, and to come, are all one in God; His Decree delays not: He's not measured by time, Ver. 8. v. 8. If God seem to defer this day, yet this is an argument of singular patience, mercy, and loving kindness, not of any slackness, Ver. 9. v. 9. Gods long-suffering should be our salvation; Gods patience and waiting upon us, roads us a Lecture of Repentance: O infi∣nite forbearance! bowels of mercy opened; when as the Lord might cut us asunder in the midst of our rebellions, and send us to Hell immediately; yet he wooes, invites, and beseecheth us to re∣pent; and he waits, and trys us, whetting of his Sword, bending of his Bow, that whil'st the Sword is a whetting, and the Bow a bending, we should prudently fore-see and take warning, that so we might escape the blow.
The fourth and last Argument, to confute those scoffers, who  are over curiously inquisitive, hasty, unbelieving, rashly expostu∣lating, Where is the promise of his coming? This, I say, is drawn Ver. 10. from the manner of Christs coming, v. 10. Hoc additum est (saith Calvin) ut semper sint in excubiis fideles, nec crastinum sibi promit∣tant. This may be considered three manner of ways. 1. It's unexpected, as Thieves come unlook'd for, when men 1. are asleep and most secure, then the Thief comes. When the old World was secure, in the midst of their jollity, then came the Flood and swept them away. 2. There will be a change of the whole frame of the Universe, 2. Matth. 24. 38. 39. Beza. Erasmus.  3. v. 10. The heavens, &c. Impetum veluti Sibillantis procella declarat: So Beza, In morem procellae, in manner of a storm: So Erasmus. 3. There shall be an utter conslagration of all things, even of those wherein worldlings place their happiness, The Mannors, Lands, goodly Buildings, the Wonders and Idols of the World, shall be burnt up at that day. Now it will be our wisdom, neither to question the truth of these things (for Truth it self, the Lord Je∣sus Christ, hath told us that these things shall come to pass) nei∣ther ought we to be curiously inquisitive after the particular time, when, (as some of the Jewish Rabbins have been too bold in this pa∣ticular) neither ought we to be impatient or querulous, because its not yet accomplished. 4. Our duty to wait and believe: And our main duty and wis∣dom will consist in this, to make preparation, to be in Procinctu, 4. Hab. 2. 3, 4. to have our Garments girt about us, to have our Lamps burning, and Oyl enough in them against that great day. Far be it from me to raise a dust, or rake into the Dung-hill of those ancient lately   Hereticks, who deny the Resurrection, the Day of Judge∣ment: Hac fide vivo, the rule of the Scripture is clear and infal∣lible, there shall be a day of Judgement: All this world shall be dissolved: This is a Doctrine most true; My Text makes the Ap∣plication, , &c. Divis. Which words contain a Supposition and an Inference. 1. Here's something supposed, Seeing, &c. Its a Principle un∣doubtedly 1. to be believed, That the Heavens and Earth shall be dis∣solved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent eat: Compare this
with Psalme 102. 25, 26, 27. Let's not introduce, nor beleive vain Philosophy which holds amongst many other dotages, Quod coe∣li sunt incorruptibiles. To me it's out of question that he that made them by his word, will one day by his word destroy them: Now whether the heavens are so perfectly made as in their own na∣ture uncapble of corruption, is not here to be disputed of; or whe∣ther the coelestiall influences be as vigorous as at first (though a learned Dr. of our own holds the affirmative, in that excellent Dr. George Hackwill in his Apology. book entitled The Power and Providence of God in the government of the world) Yet I shall wave this Question, being loath to intermixe any Philosophicall dispute, in matters of faith. We beleive it, We have sure ground, plain scripture for our assertion, that all these things shall be dissolved. 2. Heres an inference , Jts infer'd by way of admira∣tion, what manner of persons (i. e.) we should be eminent in holy∣ness, we should act in an extraordinary manner, we should be rare, singular, even a non-such for pietie; its Diodats observation upon the place. If heaven and Earth be purified by fire, what care ought Diod. in loc. Calvin in loc. we to take to be purged and clensed from our corruptions? An ergo nos in terra demersos esse convenit &c. saith Calvin on the place? The heavens & earth shall pass away, and shall we be sallowed up in the earth, and not rather meditate on a holy and a godly life? The argument I may thus frame; There shall at the day of judgment, be a dissolution of this visible Globe of heaven and earth, there∣fore we ought in an especiall manner to labour after holyness: This is the argument of the Text of incomparable strength. But why is it in the Plurall number ; This is an Hebraisme; when the Scripture would express a thing with a greater emphasis, it useth the plurall number, so Cant. 1. 4: We will remember thy loves, thereby inhancing the greatness and mul∣titudes of Christs loving kindness: Likewise we read Psal. 20. He is the God of our Salvations (i. e.) that he is the God from whom all Psal. 110. 3. salvations come in the most high and eminent way. And the Psal∣mist further specifies Psal. 100. 3. Thy people shall be a people of will∣ingnesse, to shew their singular readinesse and willingness, as if they were all made up of a willing mind and ready spirit for Jesus Christ. Thus in the text in all holy conversations and Godlynesse: Which ex∣pression, some referre to dutyes of both tables: its most true that a godly man respects both, and labours to keep a Good conscience
both towards God and men. For the genuine sense of the text, Beza gives me full satisfaction: Ʋsurpatur numerus multitudinis ex Haebreorum more, ut pietas significetur omnibus suis partibus constans, quam pro viribus sectari nos oporteat. The scope of all I conceive to be this, as if the Apole should thus inlarge himself. You are secure and careless, you shall be suddenly surprised: The day of the Lord will come as a theefe in the night: You commit Idolatry with the world, your hearts are married to these outward things, on a sudden all shall be consumed, all wherein you trust shall be burnt up: owever you put the day of judgment farre of, yet its a coming, its nigher then you are aware of, and the heavens and the earth shall be dissolved: At that day none but holy persons can hold up their heads with comfort. Therefore seriously bethinke your selves; anticipate the terrour and sorrow of that day, by an holy conversation: Make timely provision for that day, Labour for holynesse, and then you need not fear, notwithstanding the burn∣ing up of the present world, you that are holy here shall behold that day with comfort: Therefore now have that day in your eyes, in your thoughts, in your frequent meditations, in your prayers, that you may be found blamelesse at that day. The words thus divided and expounded, presents unto you one entire, plain, and practicall Doctrine. That the serious consideration of the day of Iudgment should in an e∣speciall  manner ingage us unto an holy life and conversation. For the unfolding of this excellent and practicall poynt, my work will be 1. To prove it by scripture testimonies. Method. 1. 2. 3. 1. For Scrip∣ture Testi∣mony. 2. To confirme it by evidence of Reason. 3. To improve all to your consciences by particular application. 1. For Scripture, it contributes abundant testimony to the proof hereof, I shall gather sparingly from so great an heap, select∣ing only some more eminent proofes, leaving the rest to be supply∣ed in your serious meditations: Peruse v: 14 of this chap. . But can any walk so? Yes Zechary and Elizabeth walk'd so, they were both righteous before God, walking in all the comman∣dements and ordinances of the Lord blamlesse. It was Pauls exercise, Acts 24. 16. goe thou and doe likewise. Labour to make strait paths. Labour to approve thy heart to God, always walking as in the pre∣sence of God; Begge strength from Christ, and thou canst doe all
things through Christ that strengthneth thee. Another proof we have 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. The consideration of our latter end, should be a forcible argument to perswade us unto sobriety and watchfull∣ness. That's a pregnant proofe of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10. Vpon this consideration he layeth down those 3 adverbs, , hopeing to gain them over to the practise of them, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. This was a motive to him and the rest of the saints, to have their conversation in heaven, because hence they look for the Lord Jesus Christ. You read of a sacred Irony Eccles. 11. 9. The meaning is, rejoyce in God, walk in the wayes of Gods commandements, that Ironicall speech commands the contrary. Now what's used by the wise man, as a moveing consideration? But know that there will be a day of judgment. Entertain frequent and serious thoughts concerning it, which through the grace of God, set home upon thy heart, may prevail with the circumspect walking in all holy conversation and Godlyness. The consideration hereof should make us look better to our hearts and lives and keep strict Luk. 16. 2. sentinell over both. That saying give an account of thy stewardship, should be still ringing in the ears of Ministers, Governours, and Tutors: We shall one day be called to an account, let's labour to be faithfull Stewards, that so we may give up our account with joy and not sorrow. It's a known story, that the young man committed by Euseb. Hist. the Apostle to the Elders care, was dissolute and a companion of Theives, and is there termed a dead man, (i. e.) dead to God and goodness. O let it not be our default, our negligence, that any under our charge are dead souls. As the Captain beseeched, that his life, and the life of his fifty might be pretious in the Prophets eyes: 2 Kings 1. 13 Whe her we have more or fewer, let their souls be pretious, and let us put forth our selves in all our places and capacityes to give one another a lift toward heaven: A day of judgment is coming, let that be a Frontlet before our eyes: upon this consideration let Christians doe brotherly offices, and manifest their love to the souls of their brethren. Hereupon we are exhorted, to avoid rash judgment Rom. 14. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Theres wisdome, understanding, consideration all joyned together. Deut. 32. 22. Its a patheticall speech, and he's a wiseman in the esteem of the Holy Ghost, who considers his of latter end. We should all of us fix this meditation up∣on our hearts, & entertain serious thoughts, what will become of our
our precious souls to all Eternity? Will not a day of Judgement come? May not thou or I be summon'd forthwith at that impar∣tial Tribunal? This being so, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? In the second place, to confirm the Point by evidence of Rea∣son, why the consideration of the Day of Judgement should en∣gage us unto holiness. 1. Because onely holy persons shall be able to stand in Judge∣ment: Reas. 1. Because only holy persons shall stand in Judgement. When the wicked, the Goats that stand on the left hand, and shall wish that the Hills might all on them, and that the mountains might cover them from the face of the Lamb: Then shall the godly lift up their heads, and behold Christ who is their Judge, their Redeemer: This comforted Job on the Dung-hill, Rev. 20. 6. Job 19. 25. Matth. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. I Know that my Redeemer liveth. They that are holy here, shall be happy to all eternity. They onely shall be partakers of the blessed Vison. Now its much controverted, whether the Saints shall have their sins mentioned at all at the day of Judgement; some conceive, that their sins shall be brought in onely as a cancell'd ond; others are of opinion that they shall be mentioned, that Gods mercy may the more be glorified in the greatness of the Pardon: And others say, they shall not be mentioned at all, because in several Scri∣ptures the Lord saith, He will remember their sins no more; and that he will cst all our sins into the depth of the Sea; and that he cast∣eth Isa. 43. 25. Mich. 7. 19. Isa. 38. 17. our sins behinde his back: without all controversie that shall be done that conduceth most to ods glory, and their happiness: There's no condemnation to the Saints, the day of Judgement will be a day of refreshing to them, an addition to their happiness, soul and body being re-united, and made companions in bliss unto all ternity. Seeing then holy persons shall be able to look the Judge in the face, since they onely shall stand in judgement, the consideration of this great day should sink deep into our hearts, and make deep impression upon our spirits, exciting, alluring, and prevailing with us to a sanctified life and conversation. 2. ecause the time of this life, is the onely Season appointed 2 Reas. This is the present time. by God to labor after holyness: The Exhortation runs in the pre∣sent ense, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1 John 3. 3. Q. 3. But can we be perfectly holy? A. We must have perfection of parts (i. e.) Sincerity:
In Heaven there will be perfection of degrees; we must have truth of holyness, we must begin here, and strive after more: In Heaven we shall attain the complement thereof; we may not content our selves with what we have attained unto, but we must labor after perfection, pressing forward toward the mark, for the price of the high calling that is in Jesus Christ, as Id qui faciunt fructum colli∣gent satione, sua dignum, co∣acervabunt e∣nim quod male dispereat. Calv in loc. Gal. 6. 8. the Apostle did, Phil. 3. 14. Now then consider, the time of this life is the Seed-time, the Harvest is reserved in Heaven: As you sow, so you shall reap: If you sow to the flesh, you shall of the flesh reap corruption; if you sow to the spirit, you shall of the spirit reap life everlasting: Therefore in your most serious thoughts, con∣sider that you deal for life and immortallity; your negotiations are for the great things of Eternity. In this World, in this pre∣sent time of life, you must labor to be holy. Purgatory is a Blas∣phemous Popish dream: No purgation left for another World: No Prayer, no Sermon will work upon thee after this life: Here then holyness is wrought, lay these things to heart. 3. Because Judgement returns us just as death leaves us: As the 3. Reas. Because judg¦ment returns us, as death lest us. Tree falls, so it lies; and as death leaves us, so judgement will finde us: He that is filthy, let him be filthy still: He that dies un∣reconciled to Jesus, shall be so returned: The day of Judgement is most impartially just in all proceedings: And Judgement returns none, neither better nor worse, but as death leaves them. Now then, if thou livest and diest in an unregenerate estate, so thou wilt remain unto all Eternity. After death, no tears, no crys will pre∣vail: There's no door of hope, the damned are without hope, and this heightens their misery: Time is past, time is past; The Judge hath vail'd his face, having past a Sentence irrevo cable: No whilest you are alive, on this side Hell and Eternity, there's hope left, you are under the sound of the Gospel, and the Ambassado are sent, offering unto you terms of reconciliation, We pray you, in Christs stead, be ye reconciled to God. O follow after holyness! , pursue it hard, give not over: This day is a working 2 Cor. 5. 20. Heb. 12. 14. day, and it's but short; a day of Judgement (which is a day of restitution and recompense) is approaching: So live, as you desire to die: Do you desire to be happy in your deaths? Labor to live ho∣ly in your lives. Thus much for the Doctrinal part: Now to set all home by par∣ticular Application: I have five Uses to make of this Doctrine:
for Terrour, Exhortation, Examination, Direction, and Conso∣lation. 1. This Doctrine breathes forth terrour and dreadful Judgement Use 1. For Terrour. unto all unholy persons: If the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall all unholy persons appear? If onely holy persons are blessed, surely then unholy persons are cursed: If holy persons shall be admitted into Gods presence, and enjoy communion with God, and see God the Father reconciled, God the Son their Re∣deemer, God the Holy Ghost their Comforter, where shall un∣holy persons appear? They shall stand without; they are the dogs whipt out of Gods presence; they shall see God no otherwise then the Malefactor a Judge condemning of him: Then all the Attributes of God shall plead against prophane persons; My mercy (saith God) my patience, my loving kindness, my goodness, have been despised: All the Sermons they have heard shall plead a∣gainst them; so many Sermons of Repentance; so many Sermons of Reconciliation, of Holyness, bring in black Bills of Indict∣ment against them: All the Messengers of God plead, We have spent our breath and strength in vain; We have labored all night, and caught nothing: We have tendred Christ, offered to these prophane Wretches terms of peace and reconciliation, but they have scorn∣ed them all, and undervalued the glorious excellencies of the Lord Jesus: All the passages of Providence will come in against unho∣ly persons. Providence will plead, I have cloath'd and fed thee, I gave thee the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth; I su∣stain'd, preserv'd thee, but thou hast abused all the Creatures, not eating for health, but for gluttony; not drinking for strength, but drunkenness: All thy friends will plead against thee, such as have been real friends to thy soul, as have spent their spirits in Exhor∣tations, Counsels, Admonitions, all these are upon Record, and will cry out for vengeance against thee: O that God would smite the hearts of all unholy persons, and loosen the joynts of their loyns, as Belshazzars were, and make their knees smite one against another, that now, in this time of life, this short day, they might be effectually wrought upon to a holy conversation! This Use in an especial manner reproves those that scoff at holy∣ness:  I would there were none such in the Walls of Athens: That which is the true Believers honour to be a Saint, is cast by some prophane persons into the teeth of Professors, as if it were a Cha∣racter
of infamy, These are your Saints. In the Act; and Monu∣ments, v Fox Acts Mon in Q. Maries dayes a Martyr reproved a proud Prelate for Swearing: He an∣swered prophanely, I am no Saint: What was he then, surely an incarnate Devil? If you be no Saints here in the Militant Church, you shall never be Saints▪ in the Triumphant Church: What shall we say to such as deride holyness, and exercise their wits to cast a flam or a jeer upon Religion, and make a mock at praying by the Spirit: Let them read that dreadful Sentence, each word is a thun∣der-bolt, Rom. 8. 9. If any man hath not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his; whose are they then? the Devils questionless; either Christs or the Devils; If none of Christs Sheep, then surely of the Devils Goats: Of all others, a Scoffer is hardest to cure, sel∣dom are such brought home; if they are, it costs them dear. If any such be present (though I hope better things of you) let me tell you, when you come to die, holyness will be holyness indeed, then holy persons will be holy persons: Then when conscience is awakened, you will wish you were in their stead whom you so much contemned, you wil wish your tongues had fallen out of your heads when you spake against holy persons. You that make Gods children, even real Saints, your subject of obloquy, What will you say at the day of Judgement, when they shall be at the right hand, and the Judge shall say, Come ye blessed; and you shall be on the left hand, and the Judge shall say, Goe ye cursed; when you shall Luke 14. 28. see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Saints in the kingdom of Heaven, and you your selves shut out of doors: Are any such pre∣sent, are any young wanton wits, that will rather loose a friend then a jest, rather loose the friendship of a good conscience, then the frothy issue of a scurrilous wit? To such let me speak, with a∣bundance of love to their souls: Non est tutum ludere cum sanctis: It's not safe to make a jest of holy persons, or holy things: If ever Qui ludit in Cathedra, lu∣gebit in Ge∣henna. they belong to God, they will with Austin make Confessions and Retractations. University sins, abuse of wit and parts, contempt of holyness, neglect of seasons of Grace, will cry loud, and make such a gash in the conscience, as may be a long time clawing off. 2. This Doctrine reproves Hypocrites: These seem better then they are, and put on a Vizard of sanctity; these are painted Se∣pulchres, rotten at the core, gilded rotten Nut-megs; and by how much they pretend to Religion, they are so much the worse, be∣cause
they satisfie themselves in a bare pretence. There shall be a day of Judgement, and that will be a day of terror and vengeance unto them: Seldom (as a Reverend Divine saith) an Hypocrite dies undiscovered. It pleaseth God to unmask him, and discover his Tor shell of Hypocrisie. counterfeit profession before he dieth. so that usually in this world a ypocrite is discovered. However, in the world to come, all shall be laid open; his glozing formalities, outside, glorious shews, all his painted dresses shall be made known to men and Angels: And what's the portion of Hypocrites? If there be one place in Hell lower then another, any torment greater, that's his portion, Matth. 14. 15. 3. This Doctrine reproves all secret sinners, who by reason of their secret cunning conveyance, hope for impunity: They little think of the all-seeing eye of God: Could a Homer say,  Homer Il. , and shall not Christians believe that the God of Hea∣ven knows all things? All thy Reservations, Equivocations, sub∣tile Distinctions and Evasions, are obvious and naked to the All∣seeing eye of God. The Adulterer waits for the twy-light, he would fain escape the sight of men, but he cannot escape the sight of God: Speculative, as well as practical defilements, are all known to God: Thy Curtain, Closet-sins, thy Imageries in the dark, the sins that no man living knows of, are made manifest unto God: The Trades-mans Sophisticated Wares, his false Lights, scant Measures, all his mysteries of Cousenings in the Trade, are appa∣rent unto God; the Lyars obstinate standing in a lie, cannot escape Gods knowledge; all his tricks of wit and collusions, to baffle his conscience, will not serve his turn at the day of Judgement. The Popish distinctions of , will not ac∣quit them at Gods Trinal: The cheating of the Laborer in Gods Vineyard, upon pretence that his maintenance is Jwish or Anti-Christian, will not be excused at the day of account, when as co∣votousness and self-interest is the usual moving cause of defrauding the Ministers: It plainly appears, that many, like Water-men, look one way, and row another; they serve the Ministers in these days, as the Pagans did the Primitive Christians: They put them first into Bears skins, and then they worryed them: For there are many who stigmatize their alling and Maintenance, as Anti-Chri∣stian, that so they may the more securely run away with their maintenance. Just like Demetrius and the Crafts-men, who cryed
up Diana, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; but he had more minde to Act. 19. 34. ver. 25. the Silver Shrines, By this craft (saith he) we get our living: Now all these things one day shall come to light, even the most hidden things of darkness: All the Machivialian politick juglings of men; all the secret designs men drive at for advantage; all the Hypocritical defalkations and reservations, such as were in Ananias and Saphyra; all the Meanders, Windings, Diverticles, shall all be made naked at the day of Judgement; then unjust persons, Hy∣pocrites, Time-serving Politicians, false-hearted persons, shall appear pourtrayed forth in their proper colours, and be the asto∣nishment and open disgrace  men and Angels. But I proceed to a second Use, and that is for Exhortation: I Use 2. For Exhor∣tation. beseech you, in the fear of God, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, to labour after holyness, , &c. Let the motive of the Text be set home upon your hearts, What manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness; You that are young, vigorous, and have marrow in your bones, labor to be holy, Remember now your Creator in the days of your youth: God loves the Eccles. 12. 1. Mich. 7. 1. first ripe fruits, our best service, away with that wicked Proverb,—Angelicus juvenis senibus satanizat in annis: The Sun cannot rise too early, unless it be to a sluggard: You cannot begin too soon. Defer not a day, not a moment longer: O that in this Garden of Learning there might be a great increase of Plants of Righteous∣ness, that as Plants, planted in Gods garden, they may bring forth more fruit in their elder age: It's usually said, Spes Ecclesiae est in ju∣vetute: Far be it from me to envy, but I desire to be thank∣ful, and rejoyce to see a sprinkling of holy young men, who are grave, serious, and studious, and breath after God, and bend their studies to attain to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ: The Lord of heaven adde unto their number an hundred-fold. Its oftentimes observed, that the Universitie proves the marring or making of ma∣ny; insomuch as a Scholar hath a censure given him, like that of Origen, Ʋbi bonus nemo melior, ubi malus nemo pejor. Look to it, you are in your prime and fresh green years: O consecrate your selves unto the service of God. It was the exhortation of Joshuah, Josh. 3. 4. Sanctifie your selves; for the Lord will do wonders amongst you. The Lord may imploy you in great services, and make you instruments of great good; What a wonder is it for a young Timothy to be able to grapple with the old Leviathan, and throw him on his back. Con∣sider with your selves all your Philosophical learning (though I
discard not, but commend in its due place and distance) will doe you no good at the great day. It's holynesse, an holy life that will comfort you when you come to dye. It's the knowledge of Jesus Christ that will stand you in stead, when all vain Philosophy will Mat. 27 3. doe you no more good than the High Priests did Judas, They said, what's that to us, see thou to that, Mat. 27. 3. O therefore now in your youth labour to be holy: Happy is it for any of you, with whom God begins betime. And to you that are old I addresse my Exhortation, you should be examples of holyness; you are Beacons Job 32. 7. set upon a hill, the eyes of thousands of young ones are upon you: Let daies speak, and multitude of years teach wisdom. You have one foot in the grave, would you have comfort in your death, O labour to lead holy lives: Would you die the death of the righteous, O la∣bour to live the life of the righteous: your riches, your dignities, your learning will doe you no good when you come to dye; you shall then be degraed, levelled, stript naked of all, and if you have not the robes of Christs righteousnesse for your cover, you had bet∣ter never have been born. What was that which comforted Heze∣chiah when he received the sentence of death, you may read it to be the walking before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart. This 2 King. 20, 3 is that which will give you comfort, and this alone, even the re∣membrance of an holy lise. The assurance of a God reconciled in Christ, will cause you to bid welcome to the King of terrours. That which the Philosopher accounts , will be your Marriage day, the welcome day that ever your eyes beheld: And because I love from myheart plain dealing, give me leave yet a litle more plainly & particularly to set home a seasonable word of Exhor∣tation. You Fathers and Brethren whom God hath made ulers in Israel, Govern: in the University, O labour for holyness your selves, and to plant holynesse in your societies: Root out scossing Ishmaels, prophane Esaus, suffer not a scoffer at holynesse to be within your walls: Let Joshuahs resolution be your continual Monitor, I and my house will serve the Lord: Set up holy Ordinances, Preaching, Di∣vinity Lectures, and a plain way of Catechizing; what abundance of good may this doe? Some doe give good examples in this kind, I hope the rest will follow after, that all our societies may be called Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there: In your Elections principally look after holynesse; Incourage such as have the Image of Christ stampt on them, and are willing to receive Instruction.
You that are Tutors have great prices put into your hands; you have young, tender twigs, flexible, tractable, they are some of them instar tabulae rasae, in some sense; pray with your Scholars, Cate∣chize them, ground them in the Principles of Religion, and season them with grace betimes—Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit o∣dorem testa diu: Trouble not young heads with disciplinarie Contro∣sies and doubtful Disputations: Instruct them in the mystery of Regeneration, in the Doctrines of Holynesse, Faith, and Repen∣tance and Self-denial, these are the most needfull things. In doing good to one Scholar, you may do good to a whole City or Parish; if you quit your trust and be faithfull, and play the men, thousands may have cause to praise God, and rise up and call you blessed. You that are Masters of Families, be exhorted to set up Holynesse in your Families: Teach your children and servants to know God, keep up your authority, give not liberty to them under your roofe to live as they list; Abraham gave no toleration, he commanded his houshold to keep the way of the Lord. Let all sorts and sexes, old and Gen. 18. 19. young, learned and unlearned, lay this Exhortation to heart: I presse holynesse upon you all. O that the Priests Motto were writ upon your hearts and lives, Holynesse unto the Lord. You cannot say as Sheba the Son of Bichri said, We have no portion in David, &c. as if this concerns not us, but holynesse concerns you all, you must all follow after holynesse. To excite you to your duty, I'll lay down some moving conside∣rations. Consid. 1. We are elect∣ed unto holi∣nesse. 2 Thes. 2. 13. 1. Consider you are elected unto holynesse; not for holynesse, nor through praevision of holyness, that's a false Arminian glosse, but unto holynesse. 2. We are created unto holynesse. All the members of our bo∣dies Consid. 2. We are crea∣ted in holy∣nesse. Ephes. 4. 24. and faculties of our soules should be instruments of holynesse: The tongue should speak holily, holy communication should drop from the tongue; the heart and hand both should be clean, as James specifies c. 4. 8. The feet must keep the wayes of Gods commande∣ments; Consid. . We are re∣deemed to be holy. Luk. 1. 74. 75. the understanding, will, affections, the whole man, all must be holy; to this purpose they were created. 3. Consider we are redeemed for this end and purpose, that we may be holy. 4. It's Gods will that we should be holy, 1 Thes. 4. 3. Now our Consid. 4. Its Gods will that we should be holy: wils must be subject unto Gods will: He commands us to be holy,
we should pray for his grace to enable us to perform his command: Holynesse is suitable to Gods will, and wee have an encouraging promise, 1 Joh. 5. 14. 5. olynesse is our calling, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1 Thes. 4. 7. Wee can Consid. 5. Holyness is our calling. have no comfort, but when we are in a lawfull calling; when our wayes are according to Gods wayes, wee may hope for Gods graci∣ous protection according to the promise, Psal. 91. 11. When any commit wickednesse, are unclean, drunk, associate themselves with wicked persons, they are out of their calling, and so out of Gods special povidence. Consider this seriously when you are tempted to Whoredom, or any oher sin, God hath not called you unto un∣eannesse, but unto holynesse. 6. Heaven is an holy place only appointed for holy persons: No∣thing Consid. 6. Heaven is a holy place. thats defiled shall enter there, Rev. 21. 27. Onely holy per∣sons shall be acquitted before Christs Judgement-seat: They only shall enter into the new Jerusalem. 7. In heaven there shall bee no other but holy employment, Consid 7. In Heaven there is holy employment. singing Hosannahs and Hallelujahs to him that sitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. A prophane person hates holy Ordi∣nances and holy employments here on earth: Were it possible for him to be in heaven, hee would be weary of the employment; whereas the Saints shall have their hearts put into such an high and excellent frame, as they shall without molestation, weari∣ness, or intermission, be ever setting forth the praises of the Lord. 8. And there will be in heaven the most holy company, the holy Consid. 8. In heaven there is holy company. Trinitie, God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, the most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity. There will be holy An∣gels, the spirits of just men made perfect, holy Martyrs, holy Mi∣nisters, holy people: No company there but all holy com∣pany. 9. And lastly, to close up all: Now whilst we live on earth is Consid. 9. The present time is the time to labor after holynes. the time or never to labour after holynesse: now I mean in this time of life we must make provision for eternity: This is Gods summons, to day if you will hear his voice. Delay not a minute longer: Re∣sist not the movings of the Spirit; great is the danger of resisting the Spirits movings. The Lord set home all these considerations upon your hearts; and if hereby the Lord should be pleased to gaine any soul to the love and practise of holynesse, I should never be e∣nough
thankful for the mercies of this day. The third Use is for Examination and Tryal: Every one will Use 3. For Exami∣nation. plead for himself, and pretend to an holy conversation: As it was said, When the Son of man comes shall he finde faith on the earth? So shall he find an holy conversation; a formal Professor, a Christian at large, are every where to be found, like Sycamoes in the valley for abundance; but the power of holynesse, an holy, circumspect walking are rarely found. Now then, because its the grand Mini∣sterial duty to distinguish the precious from the vile; according to that high commendation and priviledge given, as to be the mouthes of God, Jer. 15. 19. And because God hath gone forth in a signal ex∣emplary blessing upon this way, which hath been so frequently used by old Disciples, faithful, labouring Ministers (whose plain Prea∣ching would it were more revived now adaies) It shall therefore be my task to lay forth some distinguishing characters and signs of a gracious, sincere heart, whose life is accordingly ordered in an holy conversation, and by them you may put your selves upon the test and tryal, as in the presence of God, whether you are such manner of persons, in all holy conversation and godlinesse. The first sign is spiritual poverty; and this consists in the emp∣tying Charact. 1. Spiritual Po∣verty. of the heart of self-confidence, self-opinion, self-sufficiency, and self-righteousnesse; whereby a Christian becomes nothing in himself, altogether lost, undone, blind, miserable, poor and naked: He is thoroughly sensible of his own misery and wretchednesse: He is apprehensive of his own undone condition, and what need he hath of a Saviour; such an one Christ pronounceth to be in the state Mat. 5. 3. of blessednesse. 2. There followeth the highest prizing and estimate of Jesus Charact. 2. High prizing of Jesus Chr. Christ: That soul which is spiritually poor, accounts Christ the greatest treasure; it apprehends it self blind, that Christ may give it eye-salve; miserable and lost, that Christ may save it; naked, that Christ may cloath it with his righteousnesse: See what an high price the Spose puts upon Jesus Christ, Cant. 5. 10, 11, 12, &c. He is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. a plant of renown, Ezek. 34 29. Such an high price had the wise Merchant, to sell all for him, Mat. 13. 45, 46. So Moses, who preferred the reproach of Christ before Egypts treasure: Bradford wept often, even at meales, because he could not bring his dul heart to love Jesus Christ; so the Martyr in the flames cried out, None but Christ: Thus highly did John
Baptist testifie of Christ, Joh. 3. 30. so Christ may be exalted, hee cares not what becomes o himself: So every faithful Minister puts the highest value upon Jesus Christ; so Christs honour may be ad∣vanced, Christs cause and interest promoted, he cares not what suf∣ferings, what persecutions he mees withall: Though he encoun∣ter with Beasts at Ephesus, Sons of Anak, and frie at a stake, none of these things move him, so Christ may be glorified in him, and by him. It's a signe of true grace to prize Christ highly, and en∣haunce his esteem and honour above all things besides. 3. The heart is in love with holynesse for it self. olynesse is Charact. 3. The heart is in love with holyness. the image of God, Ephes. 4. 24. and there is beauty in Gods imge to enamour the soul. What was said of Moral virtue, may be much more said of Theological, Si erreno oculo possit cerni, admirabile sui desiderium excitaret. Could we discern by a spiritual eye the lustre and excellency of Holynesse, O how would our hearts bee in love with it! Multitudes followed Christ for the Loaves, and accounted gain their godlynesse. Self-seeking interests, cove∣tousnesse is that Master-wheele that sets many on working; but a true Beleever accounts Godlynesse his gain, Christ his honour, e∣ligion his preferment: His eye is single, his heart sincere: He'l do his duty, do his work faithfully, and trust God for his wages: Nay Jsa. 49. 4. Psal. 119. 7 the work is a reward: O how I love thy law, saith David: It was his delight: he loved the Commandements above sine gold: And what was the Law? it was holy, just, and good: Holynesse was the object of his love. To love God for himself, Holynesse for it self, is a good sign. 4. There must an ingenuous sorrow for sinne: I call it ingenu∣ous, Charact. 4. An ingenuous sorrow for sinne. in opposition to all slavish howling under the rod. There is a vast difference between Ahab and Paul, between that sorrow which is , and that which is , 2 Cor. 7. 10. and you have there seven Apostolical characters of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11. There's a vast difference between the howling of dogges and crying of children; between the crying of wicked persons, as Pharaoh, Ahab, Cain, under a heavy judgement, for the punish∣ment and smart upon them, and the crying of Paul, Peter, and Mary Magdalen: Pharaoh said, Take away this plague; the plague of Locusts, Caterpillars, &c. he never was affected with the plague of his heart, which was the greatest plague of all: But take away my sinnes, cries David: Wash me throughly from mine iniqui∣ty,
and cleanse me from my sinnes, heres a  of godly sorrow; it mourns for sinne more than the punishment; it mourns for sin be∣cause it is sinne, because it is a breach of Gods holy Law, because thereby God is dishonoured; this sorrow is kindly, ingenuous, when the heart is melted and mourns, and is broken for displeasing so good and gracious a Lord God. 5. There wil be a cordial mourning for others sinnes: This af∣fection Charact. 5. Thheres mourning for others sins. Psal. 119. 136 was singular in David, Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy Law. A godly man layes to heart the sins of the times and the place where he lives. It grieves him at the heart to see God dishonoured by any. Bradford, that rare spirit∣ed man grieved at the miscarriages of one of his Scholars, and laid the fault upon himself for not looking better to him. If he so charged himself, surely our faces will gather blacknesse, and a great deal of guilt will lye at our does for not discharging our trust as we ought to doe, concerning so many Scholars, as so many Deposi∣tums committed to our charge: But let's doe our duties, and mourn over them that are refractory, and keep them strict to discipline: Lets pray for them, and mourn over them, and questionlesse praiers and tears are prevalent weapons. When thou hearest a man swear, feest him drunk, break Sabbaths, & takes no heed, nor makes any con∣science to walk in the way of the Lord, O mourn for him, and weep that God is dishonoured, and reflect upon thy self, thy nature is as bad as his: Who art thou that differs from thy brother? What difference there is, it is not of thy making, it's Grace, free Grace that makes all the difference. 6. The heart approves it self to God, so did David, put himself Charact. 6. The hearts approving it self to God. upon Gods Examination: Such a one walks alwaies as in the presence of God; knowing that God is all eye to see, all ear to hear, all hand to write down all: He stands not to mans day, and mans judge∣ment, he appeales to God the searcher of all hearts, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun. Hereupon Job raised a ground of comfort and confidence, because his Redeemer was his Judge; he that was his Saviour should acquit him, his Witnesse was on high: See his excellent protestation, that his heart should not reproach him, Job 27. 4, 5, 6. Now when a Christian is hardly cen∣sured and condemned by the world, yet if he can approve his heart to God, that hee hath walkt before God with an upright heart, here's ground of abundant comfort; If God be for us, who can bee a∣gainst
us? If God speake peace, who can speak trouble? It's God that justifieth, who's he then that condemneth? Let's all then labour to tread even paths, to keep close to the rule of the Word, alwaies Rom. 8. 31. to set the fear of God before our eyes, that whatsoever evil entrea∣ties we may meet withall from abroad, wee may have comfort at home, having approved our hearts to God, who searcheth all hearts, and tryeth the reins, and rendereth unto every one according to the fruits of their doings. 7. There wil be a pressing forward toward perfection. A heart Charact. 7. There will be a pressing forward to∣wards per∣fection. that approves it self to God, as it labours for truth of every grace, so it labours for growth of them: Joshuahs Sun stood stil, Heze∣chiahs Sun went back: Neither of these are for their imitation; but they are like Davids Sun, which like a Giant refresht with wine runnes its course. I wel know, that there are Lambs as wel as Sheep, weak as well as strong Christians, Christians of the Lower and of the Vpper Form, and that Faith admits degrees; yet every true Beleever contents not himself with that measure of grace where∣unto he hath attained, but labours after perfection, as you may see Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. Psal. 48. 6, 7. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. There are many things which a godly man finds lacking in his Faith, Love, Humi∣lity; and therefore he desires and endeavours after the encrease of every grace, more Faith, more Love, more Humility; thus hee cries as the Horsleach's daughter give, give. 8. Theres a careful strict watch set upon the heart & life against Charact. 8. Ther's a care. full watch o∣vr the heart and life. bosom sins: Be they ancient customary constitution, complexion sins as dear as a right hand, and a right eye, they must be cut off, pluckt out; David profest, I kept my self from mine iniquity, Psal. 18. 23. Be it peccatum in deliciis, an Herodias, a Delilah, away with them; be it a Gibeonite, a pretending sinne, mke no league with it, be it a Benhadad, an Agag, give no quarter to them, bid adieu to every sin, though delightful and pleasing to flesh and blood, say to it as to a menstruous cloath, get thee hence. Let Josephs resolution be as a Monitor, and as a Frontlet before thine eyes, How can I doe this great wickednesse, and sin against God? 9. Yet further, the desire and endeavour must be universally extensive as to hate and turn from every sinne, so to have respect to Charact. 9. The desier & ndeavour must be vni∣versall. every commandement, Psal. 119. 101. It is an argument of a gracious heart, neither to divide in duties nor commands; neither to pleade a dispensation in the first nor in the second Table: This
was Pauls exercise, he as it were drove that trade . And this is consonant to the doctrine of the Gospel. Universali∣ty is a divisive difference, it distinguisheth a Sheep from a oat, a true from a formal Professour; and a constitutive difference, to con∣stitute Act. 24. 16. Ti. 2. 11, 12 Psal. 119. 6. a child of God. The universality respects (as I now men∣tioned) the object, the whole Law, all Gods Commandements; the subject, the whole man, at all places, and in all companies, to walk closely with God all the daies of our lives. 10. The Spirit is without guile: Heres an Israelite indeed with∣out Charact. 10. A spirit with∣out guile. Psal. 32. 2. Joh. 1. 17. guile, such was that excellent commendation that Christ gave Nathaniel. There are three words whereof a godly man is compound∣ed  singlenesse of heart,  simplicity, and , sincerity: You have two of them in one verse, and thence was matter enough of rejoycing, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This we must labour for, even singleness, simplicity, and sincerity, and acting upon these principles, wee may with comfort look the King of terrours in the face, when all carnal Machiavilian policies wil prove Physitians of no value. 11. There wil bee the practise of Mortification and Vivisication, Charact. 11. The practice of mortifica∣tion. The mortifying of the deeds of the body, and the quickning of the graces of the Spirit, these are fruits of Regeneration and Repen∣tance, Col. 3. 5. Rom. 8. 13. Never dream of a shorter cut to ha∣ven than the rule of the Word prescribes. Mr. Perkins saith, He that was never truly humbled, never truly believed. O set upon the practise of Mortification, put to death these brts of Babylon, cru∣cifie, slay, mortifie thy corruptions: et this day be a slaughter day for thy sins; spare not an anient sinne; let not thine eye pity thy most delightful sinne, butlet thy ow be like the Bow of Jona∣than, that never returned empty without the blood of the slaine: This is a severe way, but theres comfort in it. The Apostle useth two words,  (i. e.) the making of the body black and blew, and the bringing it into subjection. There may be no toleration of any sinne. Take heed of easie, lazy wayes, pleasing to thy corrupt nature, they are dangerous wayes. Follow the old light of the Word, that presseth Repentance, Humiliation, Morti∣fication, that's Gods Law: Take heed of any Antinomian Ignes fatuos, which decrie so row for sin; if thou followest them, thou wilt follow a blinde guide, and if the blinde lead the blinde, both will fall into the ditch.
12. And lastly, there wil be a burning in love to Jesus Christ; Charact. 12. There wil be a burning in love to Jesus Christ. such a love as many waters cannot quench, nor stood-gates drown it, Cant. 8. 7. The love of Christ wil conrain him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. He wil doe and suffer out of a principle of love to Jesus Christ: This man loves Christs image, holynesse, Christs Members, Joh. 13. 35. Christs rdinances they are his delight and counsellors, Christs Messengers, the appearance of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 8. Tit. 2. 13. He longs for Christs comming, Rev. 22. 20. By all these signes and discriminating characters, we may judge of the Tree by the fruit, and conclude that heart to be a gracious heart that can produce these evidences; and where the heart is upright and holy, the conversation cannot but be suitable; when the heart is inlarg∣ed, the feet wil runne the wayes of Gods commandements. Put your selves to these Tryals proved to you from the Word of God, and your own consciences. The forah Vse shall be for Direction, how we shall make the best Use 4. For directi∣on. use of this day of Judgement: In pursuance of this consideration, what rules of directions must we observe, that from hence we may be engaged to a holy conversation? amongst many I shall presse six Rules to be reduced to point of practise. 1. Pray for the Spirit of Sanctification: It's Gods will our Sanctification, we must pray that his will may be done in us, and by Rule. 1. Pray for the Spirit of Sanctificatiō. us; that Christs kingdome may be within us, that Christ would love and wash us, and make us Kings and Priests unto God. This is a new creation, and requires an omnipotent hand, Psal. 51. 10. This is the Apostles prayer for the Thessalonians, that the God of peace would sanctifie them. This is the prayer suitable to Gods will, and if e ask any thing according to Gods will he heareth us. We read of a spi∣rit of holynesse, Rom. 1. 4. and sanctification of the spirit. Pray hard for holynesse, wrestle with God, be importunate for Grace, and when it's begunne pray for the consummation of it, that hee that hath begun a good work will not leave it unfinished till the day of Jesus Christ. 2. Be much employed in washing and cleansing thy heart. This Rule 2. Be much em∣ployed in washing thy heart. God calls for, Jer. 4. 14. There's a great deal of filthinesse that lyes lurking in thy heart, many foul corners, O wash and rinse thy heart: there are many vain and wicked thoughts, theres in thy heart a stye, a sink of filthinesse, a cage of uncleane birds: Many nasty rotten thoughts, and wicked imaginations doth this womb
conceive: Try thy heart throughly, be better acquainted at home; doest thou hope to have benefit by Christ, see to thy duty to purifie 1 Joh, 3 3. Jam. 14 8 thy self, to cleanse thy hands, and purifie thy heart; this is a need∣full study, its time well imployed in searching our hearts, in wash∣ing and purifying of the inward man. 3. Be much exercised in divine meditation: Meditate frequent∣ly Rule 3. Be exercised the divine in art of medi∣tation. of the four last things, Death, Judgement, Hell, and Heaven Entertain frequent, and serious thoughts of ternity. It's a poynt: of understanding and wisdome to consider our latter end. Meditate what a holy place heaven is, what holy company, and what holy employments aret here. Nothing that defileth shall ever come there Get up into the Mount with Moses; let thy affections soare aloft, being carried aloft with the wings of heavenly meditation. This was Isaacs practise, Davids, and Pauls: Were you acquainted with the singular benefit of Meditation, you would not lye groveling here below; your words, thoughts, whole conversations would bee in heaven. 4. Consider the omnipresence and omniscience of God; whi∣ther Rule 4. Consider Gods omni∣presence. canst thou goe from his presence? how canst thou escape his knowledge? If I sinne, (saith Job) he marketh me, Job 10. 14, 15. God seeth thy secret sinnes, hee knoweth all thy reservations and cunning conveyances. All things are naked unto him with whom thou hast to deale, and without holynesse thou shalt never see the face of God with comfort. The serious consideration of the Om∣nipresence and Omniscience of God, through the grace of God may prevaile with us to a circumspect, and holy conversa∣tion. 5. Set an high estimate upon, and frequent diligently the holy Rule 5, Consider Gods Ordi∣nances. Ordinances of God: They are called, The beauties of Holynesse, Psal. 110. 3. There is a cleansing virtue in the Word of God, Psal. 119. 9. Gods face is beautifull, his holynesse is his beauty. Now by the face of God, Calvin understands the Ordinances of God, Psal. 27. 8. Wait then, O▪ Christian, at the posts of Wisdoms gate; lye in the way where Christ comes by; tarry at these Bethesdaes. The Ordinances are the golden Pipes to conveigh the golden Oyle; take heed of sitting loose from them: Blesse God that your eyes behold your Teachers, and that your Gospel is not driven into corners: Improve these prices and spiritual advantages for the good of your precious souls.
6. And lastly, associate your selves with holy company: Love Rule 6. Associae your selves with holy company. where God loves; now the Lord loveth his Saints: It was Davids profession, that his delight was in the Saints, Psal. 16. 2, 3. Bee a companion to those that fear God. If a dead coale be neare a live cole, it may be inkindled by it; but if two live coales be toge∣ther, what abundance of heate will they give? We read, Mal. 3. 16. That they that feared the Lord spake often one to another. Let not Christians be strange and shie of one anothers company: But let's unite as one man to conserre all our interests to give each other a lift to heaven: Make them thy companions on earth whom thou ho∣pest to enjoy in heaven to all eternity. The last Use (and so in a few words to conclude) is a word of Use 5. For Consola∣tion. Consolation, unto holy persons, true beleevers, the adopted sonnes and daughters of God, when the day of Judgement comes, and the whole world is in a flame, they shall bee of good comfort: That day which will be a day of terrour and revenge to the wicked, shall be a day of refreshing and restitution unto them. The Saints that sleep in the grave shall be awakned at the sound of the Trumpet, and their bodies and soules shall bee reunited, and they shll re∣ceive the consummation of their happynesse: The Saints that are alive shall be caught up together with those that are dead in Christ in the cloudes to meet the ord in the air, and so shall be ever with the Lord. The inference the Apostle makes should be ours; where∣fore 1 Thes. 4. 18. comfort one another with these words. O but I cannot see this in me, I would be holy, yet I cannot find this growth of holynesse in me. Is this thy case? goe thy way to God, challenge him with his promise; put his bond in suit: Hee commands, make you a clean heart, but doth he not promise to give it, Ezek. 36. 25. Comfort thy self with Christs praier to the Fa∣ther: He prayes, Father sanctifie them through thy truth. And know, there may be grace where feeling may be wanting. Its an excellent Joh. 17. 17. Eph. 1. 13. saying of Mr. Greenham, We hold Christ by faith and not by feeling: Feeling is an after thing: After ye beleeved ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. Is it the desire and endeavour of thy soule to be holy? Notwithstanding infirmities, yet is thy heart single and without guile, be of good comfort thou shalt hold up thy head with comfort at that great day of accompt, when the wicked shall wish that the mountains might fall upon them, and the hills cover them from the face of the Lamb, thou shalt behold Christ in the
face with comfort, when all these visible things shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, thou shalt be glad and rejoice at that day, and enjoy eternall felloship with the blessed Trinity, in whose presence there is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Did we but seriously consider of Psal. 16. 11. these things, wee should desire to bee dissolved, and to be with Christ; we should cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: we should have the Moon under our feet, we should negotiate for the great things of eternity. May all things that have been said, make deep impression upon our spirits, and prevaile with us to the love and practise of holynesse, looking for, and hasting unto the comming of God. Though at that day the world be on fire, we shall be safe, though there shall be a general Assize wee shall be acquitted, and that day of Judgement will be the Saints refreshing day; Christ is their Redeemer and Intercessour. VVho would not now be in love with holyness? holyness will be holyness indeed at that day. Only holy persons shall hold up their heads with comfort, they on∣ly shall be able to stand in judgement: God onely that made the heart can cleanse it; Christ doth love and wash his people: Lets therefore pray for holynesse, follow after holynesse. Thus our fruit being unto holynesse, our end will be happynesse.
The Necessity of the Knowledge of Regeneration. Discovered from Joh. 3. v. 10. Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a Master of Israel and knowest not these things? THE report of Christs Miracles being famous every where Serm. 5. at St. Maries Oxon. Aug. 14. 1654. v. 1. (insomuch that multitudes followed him) at last, one of an eminent Rank comes to visit and conferre with Christ, v. 1. By degree he was a Doctor, by his Sect a Pharisee, by his place and calling a Ruler, (as is supposed) an Ecclesiasticall Go∣vernour, one of the Jewish Sanedrim; his name was Nicodemus: The time when he came to Christ was by night. VVhat? a Tene∣brio, a night Bird? surely he was afraid to be seen or known by his fellow Pharisees. He had riches, honours, dignities to lose, and therefore he would carry his designs with all privacie, for feare of being put out of the Synagogue. Thus preferments, riches, degrees, Joh. 9. 22. dignities, fear of men, are oftentimes as so many fetters and shackles to clog men, and keep them off from comming unto Christ. Now followeth a Dialogue between Christ and Nicodemus. First Nicodemus makes a declaration of his faith in Christ, grounded up∣on v. 2. v. 3. the great Miracles that he wrought, v. 2. Christ give him an answer concerning Regeneration. A Sophister would cavil, as if this answer had been impertinent, and not suitable to what Nico∣demus spake, but indeed it was the most pertinent Answer that ever was given: For Christ spke to the spiritual necessities and wants of Nicodemus: Hee knew wherein this Learned Doctor was ignorant, and therefore Christ teacheth him his A, B, C, the Lle∣ments and first udiments of Christianity. Christ took the Doctor out of the School of the Pharisees, and he himself becomes his
teacher,  &c. Here is a vehement asseveration in a mat∣ter of highest importance: Its said : From above, some Beza Erasm. red it , From Heaven. Beza and Erasmus,  and  again, and the second time come to the same pass, all which produce this fundamental assertion: No Re∣generation, no Salvation. Now Nicodemus proposeth an ignorant and un-doctorlike question, v. 4. concerning entring the second time into his mothers wombe: Christ takes yet more paines to in∣struct him, v. 5. of being born of water and of the Spirit. The Spirit of God is the sole Author of our Regeneration. The Spi∣rit sanctifieth and worketh like water: As water washeth away the filth of our bodyes, so the Spirit besprinkleth us with the blood of Christ, and washeth away the filth from our soules: This washing of water is mentioned Ezek. 16. 9. Hence some understand these expressions of Water and the Spirit, of Spiritual water opposed to the ceremoniall washings of the Pharisees, to which Nicodemus a∣scribed too much, or else, which is in effect all one to the Spirit work¦ing like water, and thus Calvin and Musculus understand the words Aqua nihil aliud est quam interna Spiritus Sancti purgatio, so Calvin, Calvin. in loc. Musc. in loc. Omnis regenerationis operatio est Spiritus Sancti, so Musculus. Aqua tanquam operationis Sancti Spiritus Symbolum ac Signum adhibetur. Further Christ confirmes his assertion, in 2 Propohtions v. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. By Flesh we are to understand the corruption of our nature, by reason of original sinne, by Spirit the renovation of our nature by the holy spirit of God. Here Christ distinguisheth of a two fold birth, Natural and Spiritual, to instruct Nicodemus, who though a Doctor of the Law, and had read Jeremy, Ezekiel and other Scrip∣tures speaking of a new heart, a heart of flesh, and circumcising of the heart, washing of the heart, yet understood not at all what those Scrip∣tures meant, and was altogether ignorant of the distinction of a na∣turall and spirituall birth. Christ leaves not his Scholar suddenly, but takes more paines yet to teach him to understand so hard a les∣son, v. 7, 8. Christ sets it out by a similitude of the wind: Motum scimus, modum nescimus; a man may be regenerate, and yet not know, how and when he came to be so. How a man is made in his mothers wombe, who can tell? How a man lives may be told by the effects: and so we may tell we are regenerate by its ef∣fects and operations, as the tree is known by its fruit. Som know
how and when they came to be converted: so Paul & Lydia: others say (as was said of the blindman) we know he was born blind, but by what meanes he now sees we know not: Notwithstanding all that hath been said, Nicodemus is still ignorant, and cannot by his reason Joh. 9. , 21. understand these things: though he cannot gainsay and disprove what Christ said, yet he holdeth his conclusion, and proposeth a question full of doubting and unbeleife, v. 9. How can these things be? Now Christ deals roundly with him, and sharply rebukes him, him that was a Doctor of the Law, an Interpreter of Moses and the Prophets, a man ocherwise of great learning, and yet unlearned in the main fundamentall doctrine, A man that was a teacher of o∣thers, and yet one that needs a great deal of teaching himself in the maine principle of Religion.  &c. Which words contain a person reproving, a person reproved, and the Crime for which he was reproved. 1. The reprover is Jesus Christ, the great Prophet and Teacher, Division. 1. The Per∣son reprov∣ing, Christ. he that spake as never man spk He is a reprover, and an Instruct∣or both to Nicodemus: Christ knew with whom he had to deal, with a Pharisee, one that stood upon outward righteousness and le∣gall ceremonies, one that was a teacher of others, and yet had need of teaching himself. 2. The person reproved is Nicodemus, described by his degree and imployment. The Article presixt is Emphatical , 2. The Per∣sons reprov∣ed. Beza in loc. ille Doctor, hoc loco videtur Articulus suum pondus habere, quo significatur Nicodemum non modo pro doctore, sed etiam pro excellen∣ti Doctore habitum fuisse ab Israelitis. So Beza. Nicodemus was the Master , a Doctor of the greatest repute and eminency among the Jewes; he was not a Disciple, but a Master, the re∣nowned teacher of all Israel, as if all Israel had been his Scholars, and yet this great Schollar must goe to School to Jesus Christ. He Jun. in loc. that was ille doctor Israelis tanta authoritate & existimatione (as Ju∣nius observes) yet was ignorant in the maine things. 3. For what was Nicodemus reproved? Ans. For his grosse ig∣norance, 3. The things reproved. and that not in circumstantialls, but in Fundamentalls, not in smaller matters, but in the greatest of all,  (i. e.) knowest not thou these things concerning regeneration, this birth from heaven, the new and second birth, this being born of water and of the spirit. Tu es ille magister Israelis, magister insignis ad Israelitas verbo Dei erudiendos Praefectus: ideo{que} indignissimum est &c.
so Calvin on the place. Because the Scripture so often incul∣cats Calvinus in lc. this doctrine, the lowest Scholar ought to know it. And therefore its insufferable that hee who professeth himself a Doctor in the church, should be ignorant of that doctrine. Cogitemus hic quanta caecitas necessario obtineat in eo populo, in quo Doctoribus ipsis Musculus in loc. potest objici, rerum ad ingressum Regni Dei necessariarum ignorantia: so Musculus. What blindness must there be in that people, when their very teachers are ignorant of the most necessary things. These things being pemised for the opening of my text, I shall ground my discourse, upon this experimental truth of doctrine, That There may be, and are, many men, otherwise of great Learning,  yet grosly gnorant in the maine Fundamentall Doctrine of Rege∣neration. The instance of my Text is instar omnium, and it sufficiently proves my assertion: yet notwithanding I'le adde thereunto other instances out of the word of God. Paul was bred at the feet of Gamaliel, of the strictest sect, a Pharisee, as touching the law blame∣lesse, and yet all this while he knew nothing of Christ, and Regen∣ration, until Christ met with him by the way, as he was going to Damascus: His confession is upon record, That he was a Blasphemer, 1 Tim. 1. 13. a Persecuter, and injurious, 1 Tim. 1. 3. The Pharisees were of great learning, and knowledge in the Lawes, they stood strictly upon outward washings, yet were unacquainted with the washing of the heart. Luke 11. 39. The Pharisees were the Rabbies and learned Doctors of their time, they boasted much of outward righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 3. 19.  Act. 17. 18. yet their righteousness came short, and was exceedingly defective. Our Saviour tels them  Matth. 5. 20. Those  of Greece who attained a great measure of knowledg, were ignorant of this great point, and therefore their wisdome hath the brand of foolishness put upon it, by the learned Doctor of the Gentiles, I Cor. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 20, 21. Simon Magus did so bewitch the peo∣ple, and was accounted of such great abilities, as he was esteemed the great power of God, Act. 8. 10. and yet he was a man unregenerate, for he was in the Gall of bitterness, and Bond of iniquity, v. 23. Ter∣tullus was an eloquent Orator, yet never did man abuse his parts more then he, who pleaded with strength of eloquence, in so bad a cause against Paul. What need I adde more? The Magicians of Aegypt, the Wise men of Babylon, the old Heathen Philosophers, the Epicure∣ans and Stoicks were all ignorant of Christ, and the great work of
of his spirit to regenerate souls. They accounted Paul but a Babler, and they would in all probability have asked the same absurd question as Nicodemus did, can a man enter into his mothers womb the second time? By all their ratiocinations they could never evince a second birth, this : This subject came not as a  in their disputations, it was beyond their ken and cognizance, and this was never spoken of in Aristotles Lycaeum, Zeno's Stoa, nor in Plato's Academy. I shall now descend to the Reasons of the point, and then con∣clude Reas. 1. Drawn from the nature of Regeneration with some usefull Application. There are 3 Reasons or Arguments drawn a fortiori, viz. From the Nature of Regeneration, Of unregeneracy, and the free working of Gods spirit: and in relation to these three, you will clear∣ly see the assertion proved abundantly. 1. et's consider the nature of Regeneration, what it is, which being discovered, it will plainly appear, that there may be a great deal of Learning and other kinds of Knowledge, even to admirati∣on Jer. 4. 4. Rom. 12 2. Rom. 12. 2. Ephes. 4. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 5 7. Gal. 4. 19. Joh 3 6. Mat. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 2. of the world, whilest in the mean time, men may be mere strangers, to this great work of Regeneration. Let's enquire how the scripture speakes of Regeneration. Sometimes its compared to circumcision, Jer 4. 4. its called the renovation of the mind, Rom. 12. 2. The renewing in the spirit of the mind, Eph. 4. 23. The new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. The divine nature, , not  2 Pet. 1. 4. a new Lumpe, 1 Cor. 5. 7. The forming of Christ in the soul, Gal. 4. 19. To be regenerate is to be born of the spirit, Joh▪ 3. 6. to be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and fire, Matth. 3. 11. And these are new born babes, 1 Pet. 2. 2. This gives a man esse supernaturale, a supernatural heavenly-born being. Regeneration lookes at the inward man, the hidden man, and there makes a blessed change. All the documenta, principia  (as they are called) of the strictest Philosophers could never bring any: to understand what Regeneration meant. Their counsells tended only to the reor∣mation of the outward man, to keep men in a decorum, and within bounds of morality, to follow those dictates, which were , but they never aimed at heart-pollution, heart-reformation, the searcing out of Spiritual filthiness, vain thoughs &c. The best of your heathen Philosophers, were Mole-ey'd & bat-ey'd, they could not see nor understand, what purification of the heart meant. Now then Regeneration being a supernatural work, as is forementioned
by plain scripture Testimony, its no wonder that many men of excellent parts, who act upon dictates and principles of nature on∣ly, that they are strangers unto this great mystery of the new birth. 2. Another argument may be drawn from the nature of unrege∣neracy. Reason 2. Drawn from the nature of unregeneracy The state of unregeneracy, is a state of impurity, enmity, blindness and deadness. First its a state of impurity. Original sin is an universal polluti∣on Psal. 51. 5. Job 14. 4. An unregenerate man is a compound of all sin, he is a Cage of unclean Birds, a Sink of impurity: He is (as a Reverend Divine gives a fit expression) A Pitcher of earth, fill'd up to the brim with the poysonfull liquor of Hell. Originall sinne is Mr. Wheatly of Banbury. on the new Birth. that spawn, whence is multiplied an innumerable fry of actuall re∣bellions. What is corrupt nature but a filthy dunghill of all abo∣minations? The heart is the Devills Magazine to store up all man∣ner of wickedness, the tongue is set on fire of hell, a fountaine of all sorts of evil communication: The hand an instrument of de∣ceipt and violence, The eyes windowes and thorowfaires, to let in all sorts of impurities, the feet swift to run the divels errand, and the whole life is a continued trade in sin, to use the expression of the same pretious Divine, now with God, The life of an unregenerate man is one continued Webbe of wickedness, made up by the divell and the flesh, an evill spinner and a worse weaver. This is that estate which the Psalmist mentions Psal. 14. 1, 2, 3. 2ly. The state of unregeneracy is emnity against God: Naturall 2. A state of Enmity. men are  Rom. 5. 10. That's the concrete; but we read it in the abstract . Rom. 8. 7. An unregenerate man is Gods enemy, and no greater opposition then between God and his enemies Is. 1. 25. Luke. 19. 27. To have a po∣tent man thy enemy is sad, but what is it to have the great God? All the attributes of God put forth themselves against his enemies, his Justice, truth, power, holyness, abused patience. His justice in pun∣ishing, his truth in makeing good all his threats against them, his holyness, abhorring impurities, his power in mustering up all his forces against them, his abused patience, that hath so long forborn, now breaks forth into extremity of fury. 3. The state of unregeneracy is a state of blindness : He neither doth nor can perceive. A beast may as soon understand rea∣son, 3. A state of blindness. as a natural man, qua talis, the things of God. So we read
2 Pet. 1. 9. , nihil prul cernens, as Stephanus Steph. Beza. and Beza observed, which word, according to Stephanus, is derived from,  connivere, and  oculus. Dicuntur , qui oculos saepe claudunt quadam debilitate visus, quod vitium aliquando naturale est, Aretius. as Aretius observes. Vnconverted persons are in a state of dark∣ness Eph. 5. 8.  darkness it self in the abstract, Act. 26. 28. & Eph. 4. 18. They are said to have , callosam con∣cretionem, Gerhard Har. as Gerhard observes in his Harmony: its a kind of hard∣ness that is joyned with this blindness. 4. This estate is a state of death. An unregenerate man is a dead 4. A state of death. man, Eph. 2. 1. 1 Tim. 5. 6. , and some will have it from Spahale, which signifieth ornamenta mulebria, or  which is cibus delicatior. She that lives thus luxuriously is a dead woman: So Jude describes ungodly unregenrate men by this Character v. 12 . This is the second reason. A third reason shall be drawn from the free workings of Gods Reason 3. Drawn from the free working of Gods spirit. spirit. The spirit bloweth where it listeth. God is a most free agent, and his gifts are various: to some he gives humane wisdome, to other divine wisdom; to some he gives speculative head-know∣ledg, to others practical heart knowledge. His gifts are free, some had skill given from God to be builders in the Arke, notwithstand∣ing they themselves perished in the waters. You know Saul had a spirit of Government and Prophesy  both for a time, yet he was a wicked man. The Philosophers of Athens, were men of great learning, but they were ignorant of Jesus Christ; and those wise men of Greece, accounted the Gospell foolishness. Though the world accounted them wise men, and cryed them up for men of e∣minent learning, yet they were fooles in matters of Christ and e∣ternall salvation. Theres a vast difference between Parts and Gra∣ces: God gives plentifully many times great parts, where he gives not one dramme of saving grace. How many know the misteries of nature, and yet know not of the new nature? Many are acquainted well with moral and intellectual virtues out of Aristotle, and yet ig∣norant altogether of Theologicall graces, such as are Faith, Repot∣ance, Love, Humility and the like. Put then all these Reasons together. Is Regeneration such a supernaturall work, and is an un∣regenerate man in a state of Impurity, Enmity, blindness and dead∣ness? Doth Gods spirit work freely, dispensing gifts and graces when he pleaseth, being a most free agent, tyed to none, then my
Assertion will prove it self; That many Learned men are ignorant of the great work of Regeneration. This is hidden from the wise and learned of the world. Now to conclude all with some usefull Ap∣plication. There are 4 Principal uses, which I purpose to make of this Do∣ctrine. Use 1. For Exhor∣tation. viz. For Exhortation, Information, Examination, & Direction. 1. Then here is an use of Exhortation: And this I shall direct to two sorts of persons (and so take in my whole Auditory) viz. to Teachers, and to Disciples; my endeavour shall be with all plain∣ness of speech to press your dutyes home to you, and so to divide to every one their portion. 1. To Teachers; was Nicodemus a Doctor, a profound Scholar, 1 To Teach∣ers. and the cheif Rabbi amongst the Jewes, and yet ignorant of Rege∣neration; Then let me press two dutyes upon you that are Teach∣ers of others, In the First place let me beseech you all that are Teachers of o∣thers, 1 Let Teach∣ers goe to school to Christ: that you would all goe to Schoole to Jesus Christ, to learne this grand fundamentall Doctrine of Regeneration. Of all others Ministers should be acquainted with this Doctrine of the new birth. The maine end of the Ministry is to be∣get men a new unto God, to convert souls unto Jesus Christ; And he is the fittest to comfort others, who himself hath been comforted, with those things in particular, which hee communicates unto the comfort of others. Of all others, Ministers should be men of knowledge, Mal. 2. 7. An ignorant Minister is none of Gods making, the lame and the blind may not be offered in Sacrifice. Where God gives a calling, he gives gifts, and there∣fore a Teacher of others, ought to have the tongue of the Learned. Gualterus in locum. Isa. 50. 4. Blind guids are not of Gods approbation: For if the blind lead the blind, both must fall into the ditch. It's Gualters observation: Admonemur non modo vulgus hominum, verum etiam ip∣sos Bullingerus in locum. Doctores propter ignorantiam atque inscitiam argui at que corripi de∣bere. And Bullinger gives an excellent note upon the place. In Ec∣clesia nihil est melius, utilius, praestantius Doctoribus sive Pastoribus si∣deibus, & solide doctis. Such then as are unskilfull and ignorant of  this soul trade, are unfit for a Ministeriall imployment, and it's high time to give a vomit to all such, who make the sacrifice of God to be abhorr'd. No we are to distinguish of a twofold know∣ledge of Regeneration, Theoreticall and Experimentall: A Theore∣tical
knowledge is when a man is convinced by argument, & study of Scripture that there is a necessity of Regeneration; but this Theoreticall knowledge is not like Aarons oyle, that descended from the head to other parts; it only lodgeth in the brain. A natu∣rall mn (its possible) may preach for it, discourse of it by strength of parts, reading and study. Nicodemus came not so farre, and many there are that come short of him. But besides this specu∣lative, there is an experimentall knowledge of Regeneration, when a man findes the sweetness, and lively power thereof, upon his own soul: when a man apprehends the image of Christ, which consists in righteousness and holyness stampt upon him: when a man findes a reall, powerfull and effectuall change upon his heart and life; this is the knowledge a minister ought cheifly to have. Let him study the Theory, and be able to instruct others what this new birth is; but above all let him labour for the practical and ex∣perimentall knowledge thereof, in his own heart, that he may feel it operative, and active in his own heart, and so be more able to discourse from observations, out of the book of his own heart, 2 Teachers should teach frequently doctrine rather then out of the choicest writers that handle that subject. 2. You that are Teachers of others, let me beseech you in the bowells of Jesus Christ, to preach frequently this fundamentall Doctrine of Regeneration. his is a most needfull Lesson which can be never enough taught, never enough learned: Christ crucifi∣ed, Faith, Repentance, Holiness, Regeneration, are maine ne∣cessary doctrines to be Preach't, in season, and out of season: doe not throw away and wast your time about unnecessary con∣troversies, vaine nglings; doubtfull and curious disputations, where the scripture it silent. It was said of old, Elias cum venerit solvet dubum. And we say now, that where Gods spirit is silent, our curiosity deserves a check. Let such as bend their wits to force blood out of the Scriptures, and coyn new interpretations at the Mint of a whimsical brain, let them be convinced of their great folly: and O that for the future, such would preach Regeneration more, and in all their Preaching hold fast the forme of sound words. A preach∣er will doe more good (through Gods blessing) by preaching one Sermon on this Argument, from an experimentall feeling of Gods spirit upon his heart; then if (to pleasure any wnon ears of A∣thens) he preach a thousand Sermons full of high-flown Poeticall expressions. Fathers and Brethren suffer the word of Exhortation:
Round about the country, neere to the Vniversity, the poore people cry for your help, as the man of Macedonia, come and help us. Cha∣rity binds you, Conscience binds you. In some places you have Impropriations, these help to feed you with corporall food, and in conscience you are bound to feed them with spirituall food; Why then stand any of you idle in the Market? Why doe not you arise & be doing, and travel, East, West, North and South, preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? And when you goe, doe not stuffe up your Sermons with fragments of Poets, and fag-ends of Philosophicall distinctions. It was the nne of your Predecessours removed late∣ly, sometimes to preach strong lines, uncouth Phrases, at some Nei∣bouring Parish, and this they call'd, Ayring of a Pauls, or a Court Sermon, and so they seemed to the people no better then Barbari∣ans, preaching in an unknown tongue. High-flown Poets formerly, and Familists of late, (both unsit for a Pulpit) amuse the people with sublime non-sensical straines, speaking as the Apostle Jude ude 16. saith, . Take heed none of you be such. Therefore let it be the  to preach Christ crucified; Shew men their misery by nature, the necessity of Regeneration, The excellency of Christ, thisis that unum necessarium. Governours, Tutors, Masters, Parents, all in their places had need take more paines in examining those under them, concerning the Doctrine of a new birth. You will upon search find many men that can discourse of State Controversies, and Church Controversies, that can discourse of Discipline, that can readily fall upon the Ministry, and Vehe∣mently cry down their maintenance, as Jewish or Antichristian &c. and yet oft times such are very ignorant in the maine necessary Point of Regeneration. This is the grand point that should be more preach't then it is now adayes. 2. To Disciples, the other part of the Use respects them. Let me beseech you to lay aside itching Ears, after novell Doctrines: 2. To Disci∣ples come not here with an appetite to have your fancy tickled: Be not like those of old Athens (of our Athens we hope better things) ever expecting some new thing, some Brain Fancy, some Chimara or Ens rationis, some new coyn'd Interpretation, besides, and against the rule of the word of God: But rejoyce in plain preaching, and delight in that which tells you plainly of the necessity of holyness; new creature, interest in Jesus Christ. This is the life of preaching, to preach Christ crucified, in the demonstration of the Spirit. And
this is the life of hearing to yeild ready obedience thereunto. Let every one say, let the plain, powerfull, profitable preaching come, let it come, let it come closly, particularly and effectually into my soul, let Gods word finde me out, divide unto me my portion, and separate between the joynts and marrow, even between my self and my bosome corruptions. Some of you are the sonnes of Nobles, Antient Families, O remember wherein consists your best Nobili∣ty; and that's in this New Birth. The Bereans were . The Kings Daughter is said to be glorious within, her clothing is of Act. 11. 12: Psal 45. 13. wrought Gold. The graces of Gods spirit, Faith, love, meekness, temperance, goodness, and the like, these ennoble your soules, these make Nobility it self truely noble: And these will last when ho∣norable persons shall be degraded, and all honours lye in the dust: Therefore labour for this true Nobility. It was Ignatius his saying, Nobilitas & Antiquitas mea Jesus Christus. It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavyer Emperour of Germany, Hujusmodi com∣parandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent. Such goods are worth getting, that when a shipwrack happens, will swimme along with us. And these are the riches of Christ, the graces of his spi∣rit, this great grace of Regeneration. When stormes, and tempest, even Euroclydons, the most blustering windes come, when concussi∣ons, overturnings, and hurlyburlyes come, theres safety, for that man who hath made God his portion, who hath an interest in Christ, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings, because his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; he hath the name of the Lord to go unto, a rock of ages to shelter himself upon, and so shall be safe. Bre∣thren, I speak to many men of great learning, well skill'd in Arts and Sciences; I acknowledge singular use of them, and I know none that will speak against them, unlesse such, of whom the Apo∣stle speakes, they speak evil of that which they know not; yet notwith∣standing here is a Science that out bids all your Sciences, and that is the knowledge of Christ. Paul the learned Doctor of the Gen∣tiles thus determines 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined to know nothing a∣mongst you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. And he calls other things in comparison of this knowledge Phil. 3. 8, . Above all knowledge, labour to get this knowledge, and above all your gettings, labour to get this understanding. And unless you be newborn, you can never attaine unto a savory knowledge of Christ. An ignorant person will ask, what is thy beloved more then an other
beloved? but the Spouse answered, my beloued is white and ruddy, the cheifest of ten thousand. Here lyes our duty to pray for the spirit, and wait upon God in his word; the word is the seed, the spirit that formative vertue that makes it effectuall. O prize Gods ordinan∣ces, and wait upon God in them. Happy will it be for any of you of whom it can be truely said, Loe there was he born, Loe there was he new born, and wash'd with the laver of Regeneration. In such a place, and at such a Sermon, God came in, and chang'd the heart. This is the Nail we are a driving, we let down the Cast∣ing-net of the Gospel, hopeing to catch some: and it's the desire of our soules to be instrumentall, to beget soules unto Jesus Christ. Let's all doe our duties faithfully, and leave the success with God. The 2d Use is for Information. To handle this use more di∣stinctly, 2 For Infor∣mation. my work will be. 1. To shew you negatively, what Regeneration is not. 2. To shew positively, what it is. 1. Negatively, and this I shall discover in these ensuing parti∣culars. 1. It consists not, as Nicodemus grosly apprehended, in a se∣cond 1. Regenera∣tion is not understood in Nicode∣mus his sense. entring into the wombe. Suppose that a naturall man could be born in a natural way, a thousand times over, yet there is such defilement in his naturall being and birth, by reason of Origi∣nal sinne, that it's infinitely different and disagreeing with spiri∣tual Regeneration: this natural birth would be but flesh, and our Saviour tells us, that which is born of the flesh, is flesh. 2. Regeneration consists not in a New Physicall being, (i. e.) to 2 Regenera∣tiom consists not in a Phy∣sicall being, loose the essentials we had of a soul, and the faculties thereof. We have some Familists, and vain Dreamers, who talk of being God∣ed and Christed, and tell of a strange Deification, of being made God with God: This is Blasphemy in a high measure, see 1 Pet. 1. 4. . We have by Christ not a new sub∣stance put into us, but new qualities. In a Theologicall sense, he is wholly a new man, who is changed in quality from bad to good, yet the substance remaines still the same. The alteration is not in the essence, but in the operations and qualities of a man. 3. Regenera∣tion is not Civility, and morall ho∣nesty. 3. Regeneration is not civility and morall honesty, though civility and moral honesty are both commendable, and a shame for any Christians to be strangers to them; yet men may be
morally honest, just in dealings, and yet not outstrip heathens, who never heard of Christ. A Socrates, a Plato, a Regulus, a Fabritius by their principles may goe a great way, & walk inoffensively to the eye of the world, and yet may be a meer Ignoramus of Regenerati∣on. What's the reason, the Apostle will tell us, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man receives not the things of the spirit of God. Hea∣thens have called the new moulding of their life, a new birth. Se∣neca tells us, Nobis ad arbitrium nostrum nasci licet. Yet this is farre short of that heavenly birth, which the Scripture discovers. How were Heathens new moulded, but according to those  common naturall principles, according to those institutions which they had in the Schooles of Plato, Zeno and Aristotle. Its the pro∣perty of Gods word only to beget this new nature: It's call'd In∣corruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Now not only a proane man must be born again, but a civill man, Joh. 3. 3. It's spoken Indefinitely, except a man be born again &c. A man outwardly vertuous, a man of a sweet disposition, a man of a good nature, he must be born a∣gaine. It was a Blasphemous Hyperbole, used in commendation of Bonaventure, In hoc homine non peccavit Adam; yet let the nature be nere so ingenuous, it must be born from above. 4. Regeneration consists, not in great parts, and abilities. Many 4. Regenera∣tion consists not in great Parts and A∣bilities, may have great learning, both naturall and acquired parts to ad∣miration, and yet remaine altogether ignorant of Regeneration. The learned Orators and Philosophers, attain'd unto a great mea∣sure of knowledge, and yet were ignorant of the mystery of Rege∣neration. Where Regeneration is, ther's a wonderful change wrought upon the heart, the inward man is purified, the thoughts are sanctified, the heart cleansed; But all the Documenta and Prin∣cipia of the cheifest of Philosophers and Orators mention not one syllable of heart cleansing, heart purifying; they direct no further then the outward man. 5. Regeneration consists not in common graces. There may be a 5. Regenera∣tion consists not in com∣mon Grace. cōmon Faith, a cōmon Love, and a cōmon Hope in such as are unre∣generate. To have a temporary, opinionative Faith, to have a cōmon verbal Love, a presumptuous Hope, these are common to those that perish: But to have a Faith that purifieth the heart, a Love without dissimulation, a Hope that maketh not ashamed, these ap∣pertain only to regenerate persons. 6. Regeneration consists not in a bare profession of Christ, and 6. Regenera∣tion consists not &c.
acknowledgement of the Gospel. Many have an external professi∣on, and profess that they believe in Christ, and yet cannot tell what this New birth means. Many may be turned from Paganism to Popery, from Popery to Protestantism, and yet be unregenerate all the while. There must be a conversion from an outward pro∣fession at large, to a holy conversation. There must be a saving work of grace upon the heart. Wee must not onely be externally professors, but internally, and really changed in our natures; we must be took off the old stock, and planted into the new; we must not be contented to be accounted nominal professors, unlesse we be really wrought upon, and throughly changed. Now as I have shewed you in six particulars wherein Regenera∣tion is not, I shall now endeavour to shew in six particulars wherein it consists, viz. in a new Nature, a new Understanding, new Will, new Affections, a new Heart, and a new Life and Conversation. 1. For the new Nature, this is called , Eph. 4. 1. Theres a new nature. 24. , 2 Cor. 5. 17. , 1 Cor. 5. 7. This con∣sists not onely in the change of some particular actions, but the change of the whole Nature. 2. There's a new Understanding, Eph. 4. 23. Rev. 3. 18. 1 Joh. 2. A new un∣derstanding. 2. 20. when Saul was converted he had a new understanding; he was another manner of man, he was inspired from heaven, and had divine illumination. 3. There's a new Will, Psal. 110. 3. Paul askt, Lord, what 3. A new will wouldst thou have me to doe? after Christ met with him by the way. 4. New Affections, Col. 3. 2. 4. New af∣fections. 5. A new heart. 6. A new life 5. A new Heart. It's commanded Ezek. 18. 31. and promised Ezek. 36. 26. 6. A new Life; there are new paths, there are new waies; the fruit of Regeneration is newnesse of life and conversation; the fruit of a regenerate man is to holynesse; he brings forth fruits meet for repentance, as we are commanded, Mat. 3. 8. I proceed to another Use, for Exhortation, to exhort and excite Ʋse 4. For Exhor∣tation. every one, to search and enquire, and let every one ask his own heart, whether or no he be regenerated. This is a matter of eternal consequence, and therefore we should make it a Question, and ask every one himself particularly, Am I regenerated yea or no. For Motives consider, 1. The necessity, Joh. 3. 3. No comming to heaven withou  Regeneration.
2. All the Actions, Services, and Duties performed by unrege∣nerate  men, can no waies be acceptable and pleasing unto God; For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin: Now the most gaudy, specious pretences of unregenerate men arise not from a Principle of Faith; there's Self-love, Vain-glory at the bottom. Now without Faith ere is an utter impossibility of pleasing God, Heb. 11. 6. 3. Nothing defiled shall ever enter into heaven: Now an unre∣generate  person is unwasht, left to lye in his blood and pollution, his wayes are foul, his mind and conscience are defiled: No sink so filthy as the state of unregeneracy. The fift Vse is for Direction. Ʋse 5. For Directi∣on. First, Pray hard for Divine Wisdome, Jam. 1. 17. All Secular Learning, all the accomplisht knowledge in the Arts and Sciences, are not able to teach this Mystery of Regeneration. It comes from heaven, it's the work of the Spirits illumination to open the under∣standing, to bring a soul from darkness unto light. 2. Wait upon God in his Word; the Word is the eed of Rege∣neration; it's immortal, incorruptible Seed. 3. Pray for the Spirit; the Spirit causeth this Seed to fru∣ctifie. The sixth Vse is for Consolation: O how happy are their con∣ditions Ʋse 6. For Conso∣lation. Rev. 1. 5. who are savingly wrought on by the Spirit of God! It's God that hath loved them, and washt them, and made them Kings and Priests unto God. They are new born, and are of the family of the First-born. Not flesh and blood, not the greatest birth, nor accom∣plisht parts hath revealed this Mysterie of Regeneration; this is onely the work of Gods Spirit. Now what's the Duty of regene∣rate persons? 1. To praise God, and tell of his goodness: So did Paul, reci∣ting the History of his Conversion, break forth into Praises, 1 Tim. 1. 17. 2. To walk as becommeth converted children, Eph. 5. 8. Rege∣neration must be evidenced by the fruits of a sanctified conversa∣tion. 3. To set an high price on so great a distinguishing love and mer∣cy, That God should change thy heart, and purifie thy nature.
This is 1, a work of an Omnipotent God. 2. In instanti. 3. Ex nihilo; it's a pure Creation; pray then with David, Psal. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Unconverted must pray for Regeneration, and Con∣verted must pray fo further Manifestations and Evidences there that this great work is effectually wrought upon their soules.
The Feasts of Purim: OR, Two Solemn Festivals instituted, & ordained in remem∣brance of that wonderfull Deliverance from Hamans bloody Plot, applyed to our Anniversary Comme∣moration of Gods gracious Deliverance from the GUN-POWDER TREASON. upon Esther c. 9. v. 27, 28. The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joyned themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep these two dayes, according to their wri∣ting, and according to their appointed time every year. And that these daies should be remembred and kept throughout e∣very Generation, every Family, every Province, and every City, and that these dayes should not faile from among the Jews, nor the memoriall of them perish from their seed. THE Text and Solemnity of this day of Thanksgiving an∣swer Serm. 6. at St. Maries Oxon. Nov. 5. 1654. each other, as in water face answers face. The Jews having obtain'd a signall deliverance from a barbarous Masscre, plotted and contrived by Haman the sonne of Hammeda∣tha the Agagite, their inveterate and implacable Adversary, set a∣part by way of gratulatory Commemoration, the forteenth and fifteenth day of the Month Adar, that they should make them daies of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor. Ver. 22. And wee of this Nation, being wonderfully delivered from a Romish, Devillish design of the Gun-powder Treason, are here on pur∣pose
met to commemorate with thankfulnesse this fifth of Novem∣ber, when the Blow was intended to be given, but through Mercy was disappointed. Some Parallels might easily be drawn between Hamans hortid Assassination, and the bloody Butchery intended this day, though in many things this Popish Plot wants a parallel: Haman was an old enemy to the Jews; he was an Aggite, of the Family of Agag King of Amalek, and therefore, upon an old grudge, the greater enemy: And this Haman was a avorite in the highest degee of King Ahasuerus, and so in a fitter capacity to bring his mischief to ass. The occasion of the first quarrel, was but a petty, trissing, inconsiderable matter, Mordecai did not bow, nor do reverence to Haman: The want of a bended knee first blew Esh. 3. 2. the col of contention, fir incensed Haman against Mordecai. Se∣veral Questions are raised, whether Haman expected from Mor∣decai more than a civil worship? or whether Mordecai refused to do reverence because Haman was a Persian, and (as their custome is) had the Sun pictured in his breast? or because he was of the Family of Amalck, with whom God would have War from generation to generation? Exod. 17. 16. Hence there are raised several disputes, and many cōjectures, neither is it necessary to be too peremptory in our determination, seeing the Scripture is silent; but Human thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, Esth. 3. 6. Aquila non aptat muscas; he aims at the utter ruin of Mordecai and all his people: Tutum est ne∣scire quod te∣gitur. Ambr. He complains to the King against the Jews, pleads an argument, ab inutili, that it's not for the Kings profit to suffer them, Esth. 3. 8. The King gives Haman his ing, and gives the Jews into his hand, ver. 10. The Scribes write the Letters, the Posts carry them with expedition, the day of their Massacre was appoint∣ed, viz. on the thirteenth day of the Month Adar. The news hereof was cause of great sorrow and perplexity to the Jews; Esther and her Maids fasted, Mordecai cries and rends his cloathes, but withall Mordecai puts Esther in mind to do what she could for pre∣vention, Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdome for such a time as this? Esth. 4. 14. A very good argument to make the best use of that providence and prize put into her hands, to bee the Jews Advocate: After fasting and praying, she is steel'd with cou∣rage and heroick resolution, and so she resolves, then will I goe in unto the King, which is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish, Esth. 4. 16. She goeth into the inward Court, the King holds
forth the Golden Scepter, he asks her what her request was? shee invites the King and Haman to a Banquet, the King and Haman go to her Banquet, the King bids her make her request, she invites the King the second time, and in the mean time Haman braggs of that great honour put upon him, whereas the banquet indeed pro∣ved but a snare to him. The Queen impeacheth Haman of a bloody Plot, the King was wroth with Haman, they cover Hamans face, the Chamberlain informs of a Gallows that Haman had made for Mordecai, by the Kings appointment hee was forthwith hanged thereon: Further yet to reverse the mischievous device of Haman, upon Esthers supplication the Scribes were called, and the Posts sent with letters to give liberty to the Jews to stand upon their guard. Hamans ten Sons were hanged; so that the devices of that wicked Haman fell upon his own pate: now the day of sorrow being turned to a good day, from a day of mourning to a day of joy and rejoycing, it's high time to set a special mark upon so special a de∣liverance, to set time apart for the commemoration of so eminent a deliverance; and this was their practice in the words of the Text. The Jews ordained, &c. which words containe an institution of Divis. two Festivall daies in memorial of that wonderfull deliverance from Hamans intended massacre, wherein you have, first, the names 1. The Names. given to the solemn Feasts, or Eucharistical dayes, Purim (i.) Lots, Pur the Persian word signifies a Lot, in Hebrew it signifieth to dis∣appoint, and in Greek it signifieth fire; the Lot was cast for destru∣ction of the Jews, but it fell not on those upon whom the enemy would have cast it, it was disappointed, and therefore (as a Learn∣ed B. Andrews. man wittily observes) that the God of the Hebrews gave an He∣brew Pur to the Persian Pur, disappointing the Persian Lot, so though it was cast it was not suffered to light upon the people of the Jews; and  which signifieth fire, which was intended to blow up the Parliament (blessed be God) did not singe any of their garments, neither did the smel of fire passe upon them. Secondly, the strict observation of those daies, it's said, should 2. The obser∣vation of the dayes. not fail among the Jews, &c. The 70 render the words, . They take care that they and their children after them, every Generation, Family and Province, and City should keep these dayes; thus they hand them over to Posterity, and transmit these Records of Deliverance to their chil∣drens
children, and would have the memory of them perpetuated from generation to generation. Thus you have heard the deliverance, and the duty ensuing thereupon, from the example of the Jews in my Text, I commend one observation unto your practise, which compriseth the sense of the Text: That its the duty of a delivered people to keep mercies upon record, and make a thankfull remembrance of signall deliverances, and  perpetuate the memoriall thereof from generation to genera∣tion. This takes in the scope and drift of this Text: It's a word spo∣ken n due season, the Lord make it as profitable for us as it is spoken seasonably unto us: Neither doe we tread in untrackt pths; I might enlarge my self in a cloud of witnesses: We have many Parallel examples of Nations and persons delivered, who in perpe∣tuam rei memoriam have set a mark upon the place, and upon the day, resolving never to let slip the remembrance of the mercies or deliverances vouchsafed; never to pass an Act of Oblivion of the loving kindness of the Lord. As for instance, the Israelites made Songs of Thanksgiving in memorial of their deliverance from Pharaoh, Exod. 15. and from Jabin and Sisera, Judg. 5. Jehoshaphat and his people met together at the valley of Beracah to raise the Lord. Goliahs sword was kept as a trophy of victory, 2 Chr. 20. 26. The Israelites set up stones as Pillars for the remembrance of the drying up of Iordan: they used to set a mark upon the place, and call it Eben-ezer, 1 Sam. 7. 12. And for personal deliverances, sometimes they gave significant names, as Laeah called her fourth Sonne Judah, Now (saith she) will I praise the Lord. Hezekiah made a Poem of gratitude, Is. 38. 9. David made multitudes of Psalmes for peculiar deliverances, as we may read, Psal. 7. Ps. 18. Ps. 34. Ps. 52. Ps. 54. Ps. 57. Ps. 59. and least his memory should faile, the 38 Psalm and the 70 Psalm have one and the same inscription, A Psalme of David to bring to remembrance: I need adde no more examples, you have here given you good mea∣sure, full prest, and running over: Let us goe and do like∣wise. Likewise we have variety of Scripture precepts in this particu∣lar; theres a special injunction Deut. 32. 7. Remember the dayes of old. There was a special command, Deut. 16. 1. Observe the Month
of Abib: And to remember Amalek, as we may read Deut. 25. 17. 18. compared with Exod. 17. 14. The self-same numerical day must be Chronicled, Ezek. 24. 2. Balack's and Balaam's mischievous plot are to be remembred, Mich. 6. 5.  Chronicle is required, Ps. 102. 18. And now let's enquire into the grounds of this Doctrine: Some reasons thereof may be these. 1. Because the name and honour of God is from eternity to e∣ternity; Reas. 1. Because Gods name and honour is from eterni∣ty to eternity and its an evidence of our love to God, when wee desire that Gods name may out-live ours. Wee poor creatrs, dust and ashes, live but a little while in this world, and whats our life but a vapour, a hands-breadth, a flower, swister than a Weavers Shuttle? e must therefore tell of the goodness of God in the ears of our chil∣dren, and let them tell it in the ears of their children; let's make a Chronicle of Gods deliverences, and leave behind us a standing Record, that when we are dead and rotten, the memoial of Gods deliverances may be reviv'd. and the remembrane of them never faile. The Mariners used to hang up after their deliverance, Vo∣tivas Tabulas, as Monuments of gratitude for their deliverance. VVhat are we to offer but Thanksgiving? Ps. 50. 14. what are wee to render but the Calves of our lips? Hos. 14. 2. No if wee thus I bour to eternize Gods name, he will have regard unto our names: if we honour him, he will honour us: so he declares, Them that ho∣nour me I will honour, 1 Sam. 2. 30. Secondly, a gratefull commemoration of Mercies and Delive∣rances Reas. 2. Thankfulnes is Gods Tri∣bute. is that Tribute that God requires, that Homage due unto him. VVe are all indebted to God, nec solvendo sumus, whatever we can doe at the best, holds no proportion with the mercy recei∣ved, yet the Lord is pleased to accept of a thankfull heart, and where it is, graciously rewards it. VVhat speciall notice doth Christ take of the thankfull Samaritan? and the Apostle joynes unthankfull and unholy together: what a brand of infamy lyeth on the ungrate∣full? Impudence and Ingratitude goe together: How many are like Swine, that eat the Acorns, but never look up to the Tree? what great ingratitude was charged on Ieshurun, to forget the Rok that made them, and lightly esteem of the Rock of their salvation? Now what a poor pittance is this Rent-penny, and acknowledgment to vouchsafe unto the father of Mercies? Shall we not return a drop of Praises for an Ocean of Mercies? wheres Davids, Quid retribuam, What shall I render? &c. Psal. 107. 8.
A third Reason shall be drawn from the excellency of the duty: Reas. 3. From the ex¦cellency of the duty. to record Mercies, to speak good of God, and blesse his name, to tell what God hath done for thy self, and for others, what natio∣nal, what personal mercies he hath heaped on thee, and to be exu∣berant in the praises of the Lord, this is an excellent service: To set thy Hosannahs and Hallelujahs on the highest Key, and to break forth into the praises of God: This is a good thing, Psal. 92. 1. and as it is a good thing, so it is a pleasant thing, Psal. 147, 1. further, it's a comely thing to tell of Gods mercies, and to say, blessed be God, is in discourses a comely Parenthesis. The Apostle tels us, Eph. 5. 14. that filthiness, foolish talking, and jesting, are unseemly, and in∣convenient; but what's to be used in their room? it followeth, but rather giving of thanks, but adde further, praise is permanent; for praise is to all eternity, we shall for ever be praising of the Lord, we shall sing praise, honour, and glory unto him that sitteth on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore: David professeth, Ps. 146. 2. that he will praise God whilst he hath any being: we should thus exercise our selves in that language on earth, which will be our employment unto all eternity. Reas. 4. Drawn from many obliga∣tions. 1 A Bond of Creation. A fourth Reason shall be drawn from those many obligations that lye us upon: As 1. Vinculo creationis, God it is that made us, and not we our selves, Psal. 100. 3. Now we should be to the praise of God, and set forth his praise, we should be thankfull unto him, and blesse his name: as Rivers return unto the Sea whence they first came; so wee should returne all wee have to the praise and service of God: Auius Fulvius said to his Sonne when he found him in Catilines conspira∣cy, Non ego te Catilinae genui, sed patriae: So doth God say, I gave thee not a soul and body to serve sin withall, but to serve me with∣all. Quot membra tot ora, So many members of our body, and so many faculties of our soules are as so many mouths to call upon us to praise the Lord. 2. Vinculo Redemptionis, here's matter of praise for ever, and e∣ternity 2 A Bond of Redemption. will be too little to praise God for Jesus Christ our Redeem∣er, who hath delivered us from our enemies to this purose, That we might serve him in holynesse and righteousnesse all the daies of our lives, Luk. 1. 74, 75. So that Thanksgiving is a special service due unto God. Quot inimici tot ora, so many enemies as we are delive∣red from by Christs death, call upon us to serve Christ for e∣ver,
and to blesse God for the riches of his mercies in Jesu Christ. 3. Vinculo Gratitudinis, Quot beneficia tot ora, wee receive mer∣cies 3 A Bond of Gratitude. at our lying down, and ring up, we are compassed about with varieties of mercies, mercies on the right, and mercies on the left hand: mercies for our bodies, & mercies for our souls; so that every mercy is a mouth to call upon us to be thankfull. Haman plotted most mischief, and was counterplotted, and the Jews accounted themselves bound even by the bond of gratitude to keep a solemn remembrance of so great a deliverance; so the Romish un-pow∣der raytos plotted the destruction of Protestants, and layed their designes as low as Hell. God hath vouhsafed a gracious delive∣rance unto the land of our Nativity; wherefore the very bond of Gratitude engageth us to keep this day, and offer unto God praise and thanksgiving de unto his name. 4. Vinculo gloriae divinae promovendae. What lyeth in us, we should 4 A Bond to promote Gods glory. unite all our members and faculties to advance the glory of God: Now this is a way of gloryfying God, he is glorysied by the praises of his people: or he that praiseth God glorisieth him: Psal. 50. 23. Now put all these together, and you'll conclude what good reason we have to keep in memory divine Deliverances, and ascribe un∣to the Lord the praise and glory of his Deliverances. I shall insist no longer in this proof of the Doctrine, but make a Applicat. seasonable improvement thereof in some usefull Application: I shall onely insst on three ses, for Infomation, Caution, and Ex∣hortation, and accordingly apply the point unto the solemnity of the day: Lend me (I pray) your patient attention, whilst I make a suitable application of all. 1. This serves to inform us of the warrantablenesse of our pre∣sent Use 1. For informa∣tion. meeting upon this day, and what good grounds we have to set apart this day for an Anniversary Thanksgiving: Gods people for∣merly upon like occasions, kept a day of remembrance; so did the Jews here in the Text keep the Feast of Purim; and truly we of this Nation have as great cause as ever any had to keep this memorable day, wherein the hand of God was eminently seen in our delive∣rance, wherein his own right arme wrought a glorious salvation for us. Now to make you more sensible of the greatnesse of the de∣liverance, I coneive it very proper to my businesse that lies before me, to make a brief Narrative, and acquaint you with the istory
of this day. In pursuance whereof I shall observe two heads, into which I shall cast my following Narration. 1. We are to consider a Popish, Devilish designe and plot con∣trived. And secondly, a seasonable and gracious deliverance vouch∣safed. 1. For the Popish devilish designe, we are to consider these eight particulars: v. z. Length of time in proecting: Ʋnwearied Industrie: Cunning Conveyance: Inveterate Malice: the Persons active: the Persons that were intended to be passive: the place or stage whereon they acted: and the horrible cruelty intended. Review but these eight circumstances, and follow me as I goe along, and you will conclude it to be a Treason not to be paralleld in our Age, not the like to be heard of by the eldest person that is alive. 1. Lets consider the length of time in projecting: This Trea∣son Circumst. 1. Consider the length of time in pro∣jecting. was a long time a brewing, and the Traitors were as long with child of this Treason, as an Elephant was with young: the Trea∣son was originally intended against Queen Elizabeth; shee desied the Pope, and made strict Laws against the Papists: whereupon Pius quintus (more properly, called Impius quintus) to shew his dete∣station of her, set forth his Bulls, one whereof was fixt upon London∣house, and he excommunicated the Queen, and under an Anathe∣ma absolved the people of England from their obedience: The first designe was to bring in an Army, Anno 1601. Garnet wrote to Creswell the Legier Jesuit in Spain, and Winter and Tesmond were employed to negotiate with the King of Spain to invade England: First the King of Spain entertain'd the motion, withall the Pope sent two Bulls to Garnet, and gave his Blessing both to the Clergy and Laity of England, that were Catholicks: But before they could ripen their designes, the Queen dyed, and then, being dis∣appointed of their firstintention, they thought of this hellish de∣signe of blowing up the Parliament with Gun-powder: For the first designe was not against King James chiefly; for in the two first yeares of his Reign, he did nothing against them, but it was first of all designed against Queen Elizabeth; but because they feared that the King would act against them, as that renowned Queen his Predecessor did; and likewise some of the Jesuits ray∣sed a loud Lye (the common trade they drive) which was carried up and down, that there was a designe on foot to cut all the Catho∣licks
throats; wherefore, though the Queen was dead, yet they resolved to goe on in their design. In the second place note their unwearied industry; they digg'd Circumst. 2. Unwearied pains. a long time under ground; these Romish Pioneers were indefatigable in their endeavours, they wrought oftentimes both night and day; they stuck at no paines, nor cost, no charges; their labour might be called Labor improbus in the most proer sense, these wicked persons wrought a deceitful work. 3. Note their conveyance, the Traitors took an Oath of secrese, Circumst. 3. Cunning conveyance. neither directly nor indirectly to disclose their design. They wrought under ground, layd Barrels of Gun-powder in fashion of Barrels of Beer, covered them with Faggots, hired a Cellar on purpose, that so they might work without suspiion; these were their Romish deeds of darknesse: Here are under-ground villanies, wickednesse in the dark, Mysteries of Iniquity, a Vault, a Cellar, a close Cavern in the earth, where they might act their wickednesse and not bee seen nor discovered by any man: Just like those adversaries of the Jews, mentioned Nehem. 4. 11. and those Psal. 10. 8, 9. and so confident was Faux, that Arch-Pioneere of the Devill, of the successe, in that he feared no discovery, as the words of his Letter run, that they shall have a great blow, and rot know who hurt them; the danger is past as soon as you have burnt the Letter. 4. Note their inveterate malice, it was prepens'd and implaca∣cle; they were enraged against Protestants, and cried against the Circumst. 4. Inveterate Malice. Protestant Religion, as the children of Edom did in the day of Je∣rusalem, Down with it, down with it, even unto the ground. The Po∣pish Traitos acted from a Principle of Malice and htred aginst the Protestant eligion: they resemble the Scorpions, who (as Ply writes) put forth their sting every moment, so they are continually ptting forth their sting, and would fugn sting to deth the ∣stnt Religion: Ganet being askt whether it was lawfull to deoy the innoen with the noent? peremptorily resolved, no oubt it was, if the good comming thereby mgt make recompense: ee never thought of the Apostles ule, We may not doe evil, that good may come thereof, Rom. 3. 8. But he, and the rest of his devillish fternity, were acted by th principle which Augstne chrgeth upon the old Hereticks, the Manichees, Pereant amici, modo pere∣ant inimici. A suitable, blasphemous speech I have read of a bloody Assassinate, Occidite eos omnes, quia Deus novit quinam e us sint.
5. Consider the persons acting in this business, and they are Circumst. 5. The persons acting. Jesuits, and other Papists, inverate enemies to the Protestant Re∣ligion. The names of the principal Counsellors were Garnet, Tes∣mond, Creswel, Gerrard, Hammond, Hall, and other Jesuits with them were joyned, fit Agents for the villany, Birds of the same Feather, Faux, Winter, Catesby, Rockwood, Piercy, Digby; and these acted according to the counsel of Garnet, the Superiour of the Jesuits; and to these thus acted by the Jesuits counsell, wee may apply that common Prove b, They must needs goe whom the de∣vil drives. Faux was a desperate ngineere of Satan, Catesby such another, of whom this character is given of him, Erat homo sub∣acto & versuto ingenio & profundâ perfidia, and so fitter for the sevice: For the more wicked they were, they were the more fit instruments to doe the Devill servie in this design. Faux after his apprehension professed, that he repented for nothing more, but that he had not done the fact; and had he not been so suddainly surpri∣sed, he would have given fite to the powder, though he knew that he should be burnt in that slame; and its the special remarkable hand of God to discover this Hellish plot; for had it took effect, the Jesuits, who are Maers of the Art of Lying, would have layd all upon the Puritans (although none more abhorred such villanies than the Puritans did) but God prevented this their wicked inten∣tion likewise; and though some few were onely apprehended and executed, yet the whole Conclave of Rome, Pope, Cardinals, Je∣suits, Priests, even all that black Regiment of Hell joyned hearts, heads, hands to promote this design for the good of the Catholick cause: How many Masse, how many Prayers did their Priests put up? The Actors were absolved, had the Popes blessing, they should have been Canonized for Saints: nay Faux is put long since (as its reported) and so stands to this day (for ought I know) in the Romish Calendar. Strange kind of Saints these, who were in∣deed Limbs of Antichrist, and Members of the Synagogue of Satan; but its no new thing for Hereticks and Sectaries to look upon their Patrons as Saints; Ignatius Loyola, Becket, &c. such are the Papists Saints, Machiavel the Politicians Saint, John of Leyden the Ana∣baptists Saint, Henry Nicholas the Familists Saint: If such as these Circumst. 6. Note the persons a∣gainst whom. be Saints, I know not what are Incarnate Devils: Such kinde of Saints (falsly called Saints) inlarge atns kingdom. 6. Note the Persons against whom all this mischief was fram'd,
against King, Queen, Prince, Lords, Judges, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses; and after they were destroyed, their design was to de∣stroy the Protestants throughout the Land; what else doth that prayer of Garnet intimate; Gentem auserte perfidam credentium de finibus, ut, Christo laudes debitas persolvamus alacriter: They would have destroyed the Protestant Religion root and branch that (as farre as in them lay) there might be no memorial thereof. What Amilcar, the Father of Hannibal said of his sonnes, may bee ap∣plyed to Seminary Priests and Jesuits, hee confest that hee bred them, tanquam Leoninos catulos in perniciem Romani Imperii, as Ly∣ons Whelps for the destruction of the Roman Empire: Hannibal when he was but nine yeares old, swore upon the Altar, that he would be a deadly enemy unto the people of Rome. So the esuits are Conurati Hostes Ecclesiae & Reipublicae Protestantium, and there∣fore they leave no stone unturned to destroy Protestantism; through the sides of both Houses of Parliament they shot at the whole body of Protestants throughout the kingdom. 7. Note the place which they purposed to blow up, and that Circumst. 7. Note the place. was the Parliament House, first built by Edward the Confessor; their rage was not only against men but walls: within the Parliament wals many severe Laws and just were made against them, and therefore their rage was against those very walls. Thus Polymnestor struck blind, out of rage to Hecuba, sought to murther all the women he could meet withall. Thus Fulvia, by thrusting Needles into the Tongue of cero, after he was dead, sought revenge of his sharp Invectives against her Husband Anthony; and Anthony himself af∣ter Caesars death, warred against the very walls of the Senate ouse of Rome; this was the mad humour of these savage beasts, to destroy buildings and walls. 8. And lastly, note their cruelty: an Epithete I cannot sudy Circumst. 8. Ne heir cruelty. bad enough: Shall I call it Savage, Farbarous, Stupendious, nay rather, Romish, Jesuitical, Devillish: This was their designe at one blow to destroy Kings, Lords, and Commens. This exceeds Hamans cruelty, they were to be put to the sword, so it was possible that some might scape, here all had gone at a blow; these Senatours had been serv'd as Nero would have serv'd his, even all had been cut off at one blow, not one had escaped. The Sicilian Vespers, the Parisian Massacre were monstrous cruelties, but ther some escaped with their lives, and were brands pluckt out of the burning; here it was most
probable (had the blow been given) not one could have esca∣ped. Abimeleck slew with one stone threescore and ten persons of Gideons sonnes, yet Jotham escaped. Saul flew fourscore and five Priests, yet Abiathar escaped. Athaliah destroyed the Seed Roy∣all, but Joash escaped. The Devil himself left one Messenger live alwaies to tell Job bad tydings. Job had more favour from the De∣vil than the Parliament should have had from these desperate vil∣laines; but heres such a mercilesse cruelty, that not a man had esca∣ped, had this Plot took; what a Vesuvius, an Aetna, an Aceldama, a Golgotha had there been? What huge piles of torn bodies, what havock of Royal and Noble blood? What multitudes of Carksses so mangled, as not to be discerned whose they were? This fact be∣speaks them not men but Monsters, not Monsters but Tygers, not Tygers but Incarnate Devils. The Rhetorick of Oratours, the fabulous phansies of Poets are here at a stand, and out-stript in their own art. Hell was broken loose, and all the Devils in Hell were the inventors of this horrid Treason: Had this took place it had exceeded Joels day of blood, it had brought all the Kingdome into a Chaos, it had been the most dismall, ghastly sight that ever eye beheld; and when we had been in a maze and perplexity, even at our wits end, then some forraign force had invaded the land, and captivated it to Popery, this was the design, thus was the plot layd according to the eight forementioned circumstances: It was layd as low as hell, but when we know not of any danger, then appear∣ed deliverance; and though we slept, the Keeper of Israel neither slumbred nor slept: Inter pontem & fontem, inter calicem & labra, between the match and the powder, the Lord himself appeared, and wrought a great salvation for us, In the next place (as I promised) lets in two or three particulars discover what a gracious deliverance the Lord was pleased to 2. A great deliverance. vouchsafe unto our fore-fathers. And here wee are to note, 1. The means of Discovery, and that was first of all by Auri∣cular 1. The means of Discovery. confession: I well remember what I heard this day fourteen years in this lpit, by the learned and worthy Primate of Ireland, how that Delrius wrote five years before of the Powder Treason, and tels of this discovery by Auricular Confession—Consitotur ma∣leficus se posuisse pulverem in tali limine, & magnum inde periculum venturum. Dr. Iames Ʋer. A. B of Amagh. It's much to be observed, that Auricular Confession which they layd as a Net to catch others, caught themselves:
—Lex non est jusior ulla Quam necis Artifices a rte perire sua— 2. Observe the seasonbleness of a full discovery of this horid 2. The seaso∣nablenesse of the Discovery Treason; that which was discovered by Auricular Confession id not mention the particulr place but the night before this horrid villany was to be acted, though the miscarriage of a Letter, and the Kings Interpretation thereof against Grammatical construction, this was discovered, and the Devils grand ioneere, Guido Faux, apprehended. 3. Observe the just retribution of Gods judgments unto evil men, 3. Just retri∣bution. causing their iniquities to fl upon their own pae, so that destructi∣on befell them who aimed at the destruction of the Parliament. It's recorded of a prophane Pince, that he said, that he would ride his horse up to the belly in the blood of the Lutherans; but through the just, and seasonable revenging hand of God, the same night hee was chokt with his own blood. Thus Haman was hang∣ed on the Gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai. This is the Lords doing, and it should be marvellous in our eyes: This is the day which the Lord hath changed, from mourning to joy, from de∣struction to salvation: If we then forget the memory of this day, may our tongues cleave to the rooss of our mouthes. But I proceed to a second Use, which is for abundant Caution: Ʋse 2. For Caution. Beware of men (saith the Apostle) Beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, saith Christ. Beware of the leaven of Popish Do∣ctrines; I will not now make a Catalogue of the Murthers, Adulte∣ries, Soomies, Witchrafts, of Hildebrand, Boniface, Silvester, and o∣ther Popes; neither wil I at the present rake into the Dunghil of the lewd & abhominble lives of many riests and Jesuits, &c. To nsack this age of unclean birds, this den of Theeves, to rake into this Augaeum stabulum, being so filthy and loathsome, as it is, will require a large volume. I referre you to whats recorded in the Acts and Monuments, there you will find their Murthes, Treasons, Perse∣cutions: Bonner, Gardiner, Story, and other Popish blood-ounds are recorded in that Marian Quinqunrium, who hungred after the v. ox Act. & Monum Maryes reign. flesh, and thirsted after the blood of Protestants, and persecuted them with fire and faggot: I referre you likewise to Platina, who writes of the lives of the Popes: like wise you may see more of the Papists Lives and Tenets in the Romish Bee-hive, and in a Book call∣ed the Genealogie of Monks and Friers; there are many more that Lewis Owen
might be named, but I forbear quotations of other Authors be∣sides those I have by me, & have had occasion more or lesse to per∣use. What shall I say further? beware of Popery, beware of Ido∣latry, save your selves from this wicked Generation, Enter not into the way of these wicked men, avoyd them, passe not by them, turn from them, and passe away. But it will be said, There is no fear of Papists now adaies; I would there were not: For hee's a meere stranger in Israel, that knows not what broyls & disorders Jesuites have made, and are still a somenting in this Nation. Sir Edward Coke, that learned Lawyer profest in his Speech at the Araignment of the Gunpowder Traytors, That there was never any Treason committed See Sir Edw. Cokes speech. in England, but a Popish Priest had a hand therein. Do not Jesuites set people together by the ears? Doe not the Heresies and damna∣ble opinions of these licentious times gratifie the Jesuites? These are meat and drink to them. Doe not they love to fish in troubled waters, hoping to catch a prize for the Popes coffers? Do not Je∣suites go up and down like the Devil, encompassing the earth, acting in Courts, Cities, Countries, Universities? Will they not become Church-members (as one Ramsey was lately detected at Newcastle) that so they might promote the Catholike cause? I will repeat to you the words of a dying man upon the Scaffold, not an hour be∣fore he was to give up his account to God: his words are these, The Pope (saith he) had never such an harvest in England since the Refor∣mation W: Lawd A. B. of Cant. as ow, for by reason of the errors and opinions of the times, the Kingdome is like an Oak cleft in pieces with wedges made of its own body: But of the increase of Papists Ile give you a late, and (que∣stionlesse) a true information, in a Speech spoken by a great Perso∣nage; these are the words, even totidm verba, We know very well, that Emissaries of the Jesuits, never came in those swarms, as they L Prot. speech, Sept. 4. 1654. have done since these things were set on foot, and I tell you, that di∣vers Gentlemen here can bear witnesse with me, how that they have had a Consistory abroad, that rules all the affairs of things in England, from an Arch-bishop with other dependants upon him, and they had in Eng∣land (of which wee are able to produce the particular instruménts in most of the limits of the Cathedrals) an Episcopal power with Arch∣deacons, &c. and had persons authorized to exercise and distribute those things which pervert and deceive the people: These things being so attested, wee had need look about us; we had need be circum∣spect, and not associate our selves with Papists; we had need take
heed lest we bite at the devils bait: lets not be so Fool-hardy as to venture into their companies, lest (as Peter ventured into Cai∣aphas his hall) we return with a wound upon our consciences. That you may detest Popery, have but a little patience, and I will tell you the opinions of some of their Champions. One is, that the Pope is Christs vicar, head of the Church, not on∣ly  in spiritualls, but sometimes in temporall things: one of the Popes threw his keyes into Tybur, and took his sword, and said, If Peters keyes would not keep him, Peters sword should. Another opinion is that the Pope hath power of binding and  loosing, of forgiveing of sinnes. 3ly. That the ope may depose Princes at his pleasure, for He∣resie,  and Protestantisme is Heresie in the Popes accompt. 4ly. That Hereticall Princes (and so are Protestants in his ac∣compt)  may be excommunicated. 5ly. That Princes that are Protestants: excommunicated by the  Bellarm. c. 5 Officio Principis Pope may be murther'd by their subjects, Simanca, Creswell, and Ma∣riana hold this opinion: And Bellarmine tells us, Princeps subditus esse debet suo Episcop, non Episcopus Principi. 6ly. That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks: John Husse that  holy Martyr by experience found this to be their doctrine, for he, notwithstanding a safe conduct promised, at Constance was burnt to death. 7ly. That Equivocation is lawfull: and indeed Equivocation is one great pillar to support Poery: their principle is Jura, perju∣ra,  secretum prodere noli: If you ask a Jesuite, is such a one at his house? Though he knowes him to be there, he'll say no, and keep a mentall reservation, no, that is, not that he meanes to tell you of. Ar∣rius Diaboli Primogentus, who was ancienter then the Jesuites, taught v Mason of Equivocati∣on. them this art of Equivocation. And we may say , he profest that he acknowledged the Orthodox faith, and laid his hand upon his bosome, and there were written papers hid, con∣taining his Arrian Heresies, which he accounted for the Ortho∣dox faith: I herily wish that there were not a  of the spirits of Jesuties into many of these times, who account themselves Protestants, and yet are Interpendent, hanging between Ignati∣us Loyala, and Machiavell: their words are so amphibologicall, such Legerdemain is in their actions, as a man knowes not where to have them, nor what to make of them, whether they be for you, or against
you: you know whence that Oracle came, Ibis redibis nunquam per bella peribis. And what was the event of that Amphiboly without a comma, but to put a period to King Edward his life—Ed∣vardum occidere nolite timere bonum est? Let all vizards be plukt off, let men appear in their colours, lets not come too near the Camp of our adversaries, let's not act the Jesuites part, nor ply their game for them. What shall I tell you further of their seven Sacraments, and other Trent Doctrines, viz, Justification by work, Pur∣gatory, Indulgences, Transubstantiation, the Masse, praying to Saints? I would not at this time conjure up these devils, unlesse I had more time to lay them down, by a particular confutation: I referre you to the learned confutations of Chamier, Dr. Whitaker, and Dr. Reynolds, each one the glory and onament of his niverty, and our Nation: One of them kills his enemy and hewes him to peeces: Another bu∣ries him: I will give in a few Principles, which are not my judgment only, though I heartily subscribe thereunto, but of many others whose ookes I am not worthy to carry after them. One is that the Pope is  the Antichrist, let's not be a∣fraid 1. The Pope is the Anti∣christ. v. G. Down∣ham. to give him his right name, ad call a spade a spade, a Whore a Whore, Antichrist Antichrist. Learned Downham in severall demonstrations abundantly proves the Assertion, its a book worthy your perusll. K. James ask'd Sir Francis Bacon whether the oe were Antichrist, he returned this answer, that if a hue and cry were made after Antichrist, and he should apprehend the Pope, he would make him clear himself of the markes of Antichrist before he would let him goe. A Second Principle is this, that a Papist cannot goe beyond a 2. A Papist can∣not goe be∣yond a Re∣probate. v. Mr. Perkins Reprobate, I referre you to the Learned and satisfactoy tract of judicious Mr. Perkins, who will give you (if you be as willing to reeive) abundant satisfaction in this particular. A 3d. Principle is, that there ought to be no Peace no econci∣liation with ome: I am herein fully of that Reverend Drsoinion. 3. There ought to be no peace with Rome. B. Hall. tht there ought to be no peace with ome (though I cannot agree with him in saying that Rome is a true Church, no more then I can say that a womn is honest, who is know to be a common Whore) As for Cassander of old, Sancta Clara of late, who would be recon∣cilers, and joyn the Ark and Dagon, Rome and England together (for ought I know) they may as well reconcile the two Poles, as unite those that differ in severall fundamentals: A Pottle of Tyber
and a Pint of Thames will make a strange Medley, Ballderdash, Gallimaufrie (what shall I call it?) Christ and Antichrist will not bee thus yoaked, Protestantisme and Popery, Rome and Ge∣neva can agree, no more than fire and water, Frigida cum calidis pugnant, humentia siccis, Lead and Gold cannot agree in the same Furnace, no union with Antichrist, no peace with Jezabel, no reconciliation with Baby∣lon. A fourth Principle is this, That a Papist living and dying in 4. A Papist living & dy∣ing in the trusting to his Merits cannot bee saved. 5. Babylon is Rome. the opinion of his own Merits, cannot be saved, because he over∣throweth the Foundation, cuts off that Bough whereon he should lean, he overthroweth the Righteousnesse of Christ, and without Christs righteousnesse no salvation. 5. That Babylon is Rome, Ʋrbs septicollis, and shall bee de∣stroyed: Rome is that Mother of Fornications and Witchcrafts: and herein you have the consent of the most Orthodox and learned In∣terpreters of the Revelation, who concurre in this principle: These are the Principles which I am not afraid to own, and I am pers∣ded that few or none of you differ from my judgment, but beleeve these Principles to be true. I will have but one word more for a close of all, in my last use, Ʋse. 3. For Exhorta∣tion. which is for exhortation, and then I shall dismisse you: My Bre∣thren, you have heard of the Mercies of this day, singular Delive∣rances, singular Testimonies of the loving kindness of the Lord: Now what eminent things shall we doe for God? What shall we ren∣der unto the Lord for all his benefits? Let me be your Remembran∣cer, after what manner we should remember the mercyes of this day, and then I shall commend you to the grace of God. 1. Remember to transmit the memory of this day to your Poste∣rity. Let this Anniversary solemnity be kept in record; let it bee told by the Father to the children, and to the childrens children, from Generation to Generation: Because some question the truth of the day, and look upon it but as a politick invention, and Trick of State, let us bee more diligent to keep it in memory, let us speak one to another of the mercies of this day, be well acquainted with the History of the day, and let us speak of this deliverance in the house, in the field, at our down-lying, and rising up, what things of old, what ancient mercies the Lord hath vouchsafed to our Fa∣thers,
and to us in them. May this day be wrote in the Kalendar in Letters of Gold, which the Papists would have wrote in letters of blood. 2. Remember and praise God for this miraculous deliverance, 2. Praise God for the Mer∣cies of this day. let our mouthes be filled with the praises of the Lord, Ps. 107. 8. Lets take up the Ps. 124. and make application; let our lips praise the Lord, and let us say the name of the Lord be praised: let our hearts praise the Lord, let all that is within us bless his holy name. 3. Remember and be vigilant, watch against Papists, trust them 3. Remember and be watch∣full. not, we know their equivotions, we know their blood-thistyess, lets ever deprecate and bhorre any Toleration, any connivance or compliance with them; no moe trusting to them than to Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity, in whose habitations were instruments of cruelty, Gen. 49. 5, 6. Be cutelous, come not near the brinke, venture not upon Arminin, Fmilistical, and other mungril opi∣nions, which partly speaks in the language of the Jews, and partly in the language of Ashdod: Give the Devil his Option, he would have for his Agent a. Familist as soon as a Papist: for a Familist can aequivocate, and tell you he means Christ and him crucified, when as he means not the Christ crucified at Jerusalem; but a phansie of his own addle brain, a Christ in him, or a Platonick Christ. 4. And lastly, shew some tokens for good of your joy and re∣joycing 4. Shew some token of thankfulness. in the mercy of this day. This day is a day of Thanks∣giving, let it be a day of Almes-giving, to cloath the naked, and feed the hungry, that their loyns may bless you; send to such for whom nothing is prepared: This day is a feasting day, and there ought to be a sending of portons one unto another: I come in a good day, I hope you will not say me my; there are many pooe Housholders, and poor Scholars too, it's farre more charity to help them than your wandring Peggars. In Florence (as I have read) there was speciall provision made for such housholders as were poor, and ashamed to begge; let these be the objects of your charity: Florioes View of Tuscany. Doe good to all, but especially unto the houshold of Faith; this is the speciall duty of such a day as this is, to honour God with our substance, to distribute our bread to the hungry: Wherefore forget not this duty, it's a sacrifice where ith God is wel-pleased. I commend this duty unto your practice, and the Lord stirre up
your hearts, and cause you to draw forth your hearts to the reliefe of the distressed, afflicted, especially the poor members of Jesus Chri, that this may be a good day, and a day of rejoycing to you, and a good day, and a day of rejoycing to them; and let the memoriall of this day be Monumentum aere perennius. Lets imitate the Jes in the Text, and use all the care we can, that such dayes as these are, may never faile, nor the memoriall of them perish from our seed.
The Day of Iudgement Discovered from Rom. 2. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Iesus Christ according to my Gospel. A Serious discourse of the day of Judgement, is both season∣able Serm. 7. at St. Maries Oxon. Decemb. 9. 1655. 1. This Do∣ctrine is sea∣sonable. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and profitable; seasonable, because (as the Apostle in∣formed long agoe) there shall come in the last dayes scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his comming? There have been of old multitudes of Hereticks, who have decried, and endeavoured to expunge this Article out of the Creed concerning the day of Judgement: Such were the Sad∣duces, Epicures, Dositheans, Samaritans, Marchees, Prodanitae, Floriani, Symmachiani; and of all these Sects the vilest were the Borboritae, against whom Augustine made an elaborate Confutation. Aug. lib. de Haeresibus ad Quod vult Deum c. 6. V. Act. & Mon. vol. 1. Near of kin to those filthy beasts were the Harlots (against whom there was long since by King Hen. 2. a Proclamation sent into North∣hamptonshire) and the lewd Ranters, their genuine, abhominable off∣spring, in these last and worst of times. Now adaies Hell it selfe is broke loose through the variety of Hereticks, who though differing from one another, yet all agree against the truth, like Herod and Pilate, who of enemies were made freinds, and they both agreed to∣gether against Christ. What shal we say when Scepticks, Antiscriptu∣rists, Atheists in print and practice, in their works and deeds deny the day of Judgement? Surely, as at all times, so now especially, the Preaching of this Doctrine of the day of Judgement is exceed∣ing seasonable. 2. This Doctrine is as profitable as seasonable: And this will 2. This Do∣ctrine is pro∣fitable. be evidenc'd by two Reasons, which are of great weight and conse∣quence.
1. Because the Preaching of this Doctrine is an incentive, and a 1. Because it is an Incen∣tive to godli∣nesse. speciall motive to excite unto the practice of godlynesse: Why doth God command all men to repent? there's a strong reason used by the Apostle to perswade, Because hee hath appointed a day it the which he will judge the world in righteousnesse. And from the con∣sideration of the day of Judgement, the Apostle draws a strong en∣gagement unto Holyness of life and conversation, Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought wee to be in all holy conversation and godlynesse, looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God? 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. 2. Because this Doctrine of the day of Judgement is the foun∣dation 2 This Do∣ctrine is the foundation of comfort. of comfort unto the godly. Hence Paul triumphed; I have (saith he) fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is layd up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, &c: 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. Such as have been troubled, who belong to Christ, they shall have rest (as the Apostle saith) When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Agels: and the righteous∣ness of God is engaged for performance, 2 Thes. 2. 6, 7 Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trou∣ble you, and to you who are troubled rest with us. Now to come nearer the words: Their connexion and depen∣dance is upon ver. 12. For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law: And as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. Although they had not the Moral Law pro∣mulgated to them by the Ministery of Moses, yet they had the Law of Nature written in their hearts: And the Law of Nature, though unwritten in Tables of stone, shall condemn them that sin∣ned against the written Moral Law. What else is the Moral Law, but a Transcript, more fairly wrote, of that Law of Nature, which was first wrote in Adams heart? Those likewise that sinned against the written Law (as the Jews did) shall be judged by it: For there is a dreadfull curse threatned, Deut. 27. 26. Cursed is he that con∣firmeth not all the words of this law to doe them. Now if the Questi∣on be propounded, When shall this judgement bee executed upon Jews and Gentiles? My Text gives in the Answer, In the day, &c. Which words containe a plain assertion, and an evident proof of a grand Article of our Faith concerning the day of Judge∣ment:
Wherein wee may observe, 1. A Fundamental Doctrine asserted, That at the day of Judge∣ment the secrets of all mens hearts shall be judged by Jesus Christ. 2. Here's a full proof of this assertion, , according to my Gospel: Which is not to be understood as if Paul Secundum quod annuncio per Jesum Christum. Hier. Suum appellat atione Mini∣sterii. Calvin. was the Author of the Gospel, but onely the Publisher thereof. Jerome thus understands the Apostle, According to that which I de∣clare by Iesus Christ. And this the Apostle calls his own (as Calvin observes) in respect of his Ministry. So that I conceive Paul may be thus understood, as if he should say, This is the Gospel that Christ, my self, and all the Apostles have taught: This and no other Gospel I preach unto you. The words thus opened and divided contain three Doctrines. 1. That there shall be a day of Judgement. 2. At that day the secrets of all mens hearts shall be judged. 3. Iesus Christ shall be the Iudge at that day. I resume the first Doctrine in order, according to this Me∣thod. 1. To lay down evident proof for clearing of so great a truth. Method. 1. 2. 2. To make some usefull improvement of all by particular Ap∣plication. For proof hereof, Scripture and Reason both contribute abun∣dantly The Doctrine proved. to the evincing and stablishing of us in this Article of ou Faith, I begin with Scripture Testimony, which is instar omnium: And I shall select some principall in the Old and New Testament not mentioning so many places, as might easily be produced, les quotations onely fill up my Sermon. 1. For the Old Testament, read with deliberation, Psal. 9. 8, 9. Eccles. 11. 9. Eccl. 12. 14. Dan. 7. 22. 2. For the New Testament; in the Text it is said , ver. 5. And . It's called , that day, Luk. 21. 34. 2 Tim. 4. 8. It's called , a day of Judgement, , the judg∣ment of the great day, , a day of Redemption, , a day of refreshing and restitu∣tion. Christ himselfe foretels of this day, Luk. 13. 41. Mat. 26. 41. Mat. 26. 64. His Apostles foretell thereof, Paul, Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Phil, 3. 20. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Apostle Jude quotes Enoch, ver. 14. St. Iohn, Rev. 1. 7. chap. 20. 11. And he
cites the testimony of Christ in the conclusion of his book. c. 22. 7. and v. 20. Surely I come quickely. To scripture testimonies I might adde Fathers, Councils, Confessions. It were easy to call in heathens for witnesses as Hydaspes, Hermes, and such like, mentioned by Eusebius de praeparatione Evangelica, or I might quote the Sybils, according to Lactantius his Relation: But that I judge it superfluous to light a candle to the Sun. To Scripture proofe I'le adde some evidences of reason, or Arguments a fortiori, for confirmation of the Doctrine. The first Argument shall be drawn from the decree of God: Arg. 1. Drawn from Gods decree. Heb. 9. 27. It's the statute law nd decree of heaven, which can∣not be reversed. God is immutable and changeth not; Omnia alia futura quae praedixerat Spiritus Sanctus, evenerunt &c. saith Austin. All other predictions are fulfilled, concerning the coming of Christ, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and this also con∣cerning Christs second coming, shall come to passe, God hath ap∣pointed a day to judge the world in Act. 17. 31. Gods decrees and purposes cannot be disappointed nor disnulled. Truth it selfe hath spoken, the word is gone out of the mouth of God, and therefore undoubtedly shall come to passe, Balaam giveth a true testimony in this particular, Numb. 23. 19. Hath he said, and shall he not doe it? A second Argument shall be drawn from the justice of God: Arg. 2. Drawn from the Justice of God. Gods children have not their portion in this life, it's reserved for them in heaven. The best of Gods children meet with many hard∣ships, they are afflicted, persecuted, tormented, killed all the day long. This question posed heathens, as Seneca and others, Car bonis male sit, & malis bene fit? It put David to a stand, to see the prospe∣rity of the wicked, Psa. 73. 12. He never had his judgement rightly informed, till he went into the Sanctuary Psal. 73. v. 17. The day of judgement will set all things right and straight; shall not the Judge of the world doe right? read 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8. We read Isa. . 10, 11. That it shall be well with the righteous, and ill with the wicked. In this world it goeth often very ill with the righteous, they are made a prey unto wicked men, and the wicked are advanced. The rich man went in sumptuous apparrel, and fared deliciously every day, when Lazarus wanted the crumbs to sustain nature. Pharaoh was in prosperity, whilest the poor Israelites endured slavery at the brick-kiln. Ioseph was in prison,
Daniel in the lyons den, Jeremiah in the dungeon, the city Shu∣shan in great perplexity whilst the King and Haman were at a ban∣quet. But at the day of judgement the scene will be altered, the righteous will be happy, the wicked miserable. The godly shall be at Christs right hand, the goats at the left. In die judicii cum Aug. in Psal. 72. justi introducentur in regnum Dei, injusti autem abjicientur foras, tunc justitia Dei ostendetur, saith Austin on Psa. 72. The righteous are misjudged, accused falsly, and maliciously persecuted: at that day they shall be cleared. Luther used to say, At the day of judgement John Hus and Jerom of Prague will appear to all to be faithful and holy martyrs, When the Pope and his Cardinals, will appear to be vile wicked wretches. It is a good observation of Bernard in his Epistle Bern. in Epist. ad Nepotia∣num. ad Nepotianum, Veniet, veniet, qui male judicata rejudic abit dies. There will come a day, there is a day comeing wherein all ill∣judged cases and causes shall be reviewed and rectified, when all perverse judgements shall have judgement against them. A 3. Argument shall be drawn from the convictions of consci∣ence. Arg. 3. Drawne from the conviction of consci∣ence. Lipsius . 2. de Constantia. The bangs of conscience, those ictus & laniatus, which Ju∣lian the Apostate had; these (which are assidua & domesticae Furiae, as the Orator speakes) doe testify a judgement to come. Haenc conscien∣tiam Deus impiis imposuit, in quá poenas luant, priusquam luant, so Lip∣sius. But read the verse preceding my Text. Conscience gave Judas a bang, and made him restore the thirty pieces. The horrour of con∣science made Cain to roar, and changed Pasur's name to Magor Missabib, a terrour round about, a terrour to himself. When the Doctrins of righteousnesse, and temperance were preached by Paul to Felix, he fell a trembling: A strange change, that the very Judge should tremble before a despised prisoner. However men commit sin never so secretly, and think that no man living knowes thereof, yet conscience lasheth fore. The consideration of a day of judgement makes the sinner afraid of himself. Hereupon the wick∣ed Arg. 4. Drawn from the conne∣xion be∣tween the resurrection and the day of judge∣ment.  Mat. 25. 33. Heb. 6. 2. Heb. 9. 27. flee when none pursue. Conscience when it's awakened slies into the face of the abhominable sinner. It makes him afraid where∣ever he goes. His fansy is so troubled, that he thinketh every bush to be a man, every man an executioner to hale him before the judge∣ment feat of God. A 4. Argument shall be drawn from the near dependence and connexion between the resurrection and the day of judgement. The resurrection goeth before, the judgement must needs follow after.
The general judgement is a necessary consequent of the resurre∣ction: Christ will come to rayse up the dead and judge them. Re∣surrection and judgement are coupled together, and death and judgement joyned together. And that place Joh. 5. 29. wherein we read of a resurrection of judgement; Gerrard conceives that  may be fully rendred per . A 5 Argument shall be drawn from the general expectation of the Saints, Rom. 8. 19. It is an emphatical word , It's Arg. 5. Dawn from the generall Resurrection of the Saints. derived  caput &  videri: it signifieth the looking for something with the lifting up of the head, or strerching out of the neck, with earnest intention and observation. Thus doe the Saints long for the appearance of Christ, Heb, 9. 28. it's not an ordi∣nary looking for, it's said . And the Saints cry Rev. 22. 20. Come Lord Jesus. The Saints looke for a better life, 2 Cor. 15. 10. a howse not made with hands. Their desire is to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and when their bodies are in the grave, their souls are in heaven. They wait for a glorious re∣surrection, and at the day of judgement it will be known who are Saints, who are not. Many that the world accounts hypocrites, will prove reall Saints then: Many that the world accouneh Saints, will then appear to be painted hypocrites. Those whom the world hath falsly condemned shal then be acquitted, and those whom the world hath unjustly acquitted shal then be condemned. That Tribu∣nal is impartial and just, no false judgement can be given there, no unjust sentence, no wrong Verdict shall be given by that Judge; wherefore the Saints long for that day, they earnestly desire the appearance of Jesus Christ. And these breathings and longings are not invain, for the elects sake Christ hath promised to shorten these dayes of sin and misery. The 6 and last argument shall be drawn from Gods glory. To Arg. 6. Drawn from Gods glory. this purpose was man created to glorify his maker unto all eter∣nity. Now, God will be glorified either in our salvation or dam∣nation. God hath ordained mankind to an eternal condition, ei∣ther of happyness, or misery. Now God will glorify himself in the fight of men, and Angels, in an eminent manner at the day of jud∣gement, when Christ shall passe a sentence of eternal absolution, and say, Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. Then will be glorified the mercy of God, & when he shall say, go yee cursed, then will be glorified Gods justice. Thus you have heard the Doctrinal part of
the Text proved by Scripture and reason: It now remains that I should improve all unto our consciences, by some useful Applica∣tion. A 3 fold Use I shall now make of this Doctrine, for reproof, Instruction, and consolation. 1 Use, For Reproof. 1. For Reproof. This brings heavy tidings to all ungodly per∣sons, who live as if there were neither death nor judgement, hea∣ven, nor hell. Because this great day is not yet come, they put it far from them. How soon a particular judgement may befal them, as it did Korah, Dathan and Abiram, Sennacherib, Herod, and o∣thers none can tell. And how soon the general judgement may come, is a secret locked up in Gods Cabinet. As for Prognostica∣tors and Wizards who determine the time when, we are not to put the least confidence in such presumptuous persons, who are no better then the Devils Chaplains. But here's the great wickedness, that people consider not how soon they may be surprized: They have not this day in their thoughts; drunkards, swearers, adulte∣rers, oppressours, voluptuous persons, they run on in their mad careere, and think not of this day. Flagitious profligate sinners adde iniquity unto iniquity, and treasure unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the righteous judgement of God against them. What shall we say of hereticks and blasphemers? who like that horne (which was Antiochus▪ , or ) Dan. 8. 12. which cast the truth to the ground. Desperate hereticks are broke loose, Socinians, Familists, Enthusiasts swarm like those flyes of Egypt, and make the whole land to stinke. But there will be a day of visitation, a day of recompence, all their varnishes, pretexts and dissimulations willly open to the sight of men and Angels. Manes, Arrius, and others, met with dreadful particular judge∣ments in this life. However at the general judgement Macedonians, that deny the Diviny of the Holy Ghost, Arrians, that deny the Divinity of Christ, Circumcellians, whose apes the Quakers are now adays, and tread their steps, all these shall appear before that judgement seat, which they now dread not, that God whom they now vilify, shall judge them. What shall we say of loose Liber∣tines, Jovialists, Epicures, dissolute livers, who are mighty to powre in strong drink, game, and carouse away many pretious hours? what shall we say of hypocrites, who dawb, juggle, dissemble, whose words are smoother then butter, but within are sharp swords? What shall we say of Apostates that desert their profession, and relinquish
their Principles, and fly from Christs colours, and fight under the banners of Arrius, Macedonius, Donatus, or some of the same bran? What shall we say of abominable livers, Antinomians, Athists, and who overthrow Laws, Rule, Government, and live as they list, who run into all sorts of lasciviousness, and follow sin with greediness? Let me tell all such that they are already dead, dead to God and goodness, they are dead in sins, and follow Satan their chief commander, they dance after his pipe, go when he bids go, come when he bids come. But a day of judgement will come, then thou wilt be called to account for those cups which thou hast been mighty to poure down thy own throat, and for those which thou hast forced on thy brother: Then thou wilt be called to an ac∣count, for thy secret whoredomes, and abominations committed in the darke: Then thou wilt be called to an account for those Ser∣mons, which thou hast scoffed at, and gave no heed unto, for those Sabboths which thou hast profaned, and for all thy mispent time, for all those precious seasons which thou hast squandred away. All the creatures will bring in their Indictments against thee, Impri∣mis, For gluttony and drunkennesse, thou hast eaten not for health but gluttony, drunken not for strength, but drunkenness: The cloaths thou wearest will come against thee; Thou spendest more for superfluities then would cloath many poor servants of Jesus Christ: Thou followest thy fansy, the Garbe, and fashion of the time, these thou art curious to observe, and thou harkenest after all the new fashions, but in the mean time considerest not how many of Gods children want cloaths for their nakedness. All thy books in thy study shall come and witness against thee, such great helps thou hadst, such prices were put into thy hands, but they were prices put into the hands of a fool, for want of a heart to improve them. All thy parts and gifts shall witness against thee, thou hast hidden all thy talents in a napkin, thou hast let thy gifts lye rusty for want of using. All the Sermons, Sabboths, exhortations, admo∣nitions, waytings, treaties, and striveings of the Holy Spirit will come and preferre a black bill of Indictment against thee, who not∣withstanding these pretious means, yet didst not regard thy eter∣nall condition. Thou didst not consider in that day those things that concerned thy peace. Now if at that great day of judgement the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and sinner appear? What will be the doome of ungodly men? The Apostle
tells us 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and the Holy Ghost tells us of their doome, Rev. 21. 8. Rev. 22. 15. At that day however wicked men have been flattered and idolized in this world, they will appear vile and abominable. The swearers are those dogs, that are whipt out of the presence of God. The drunkards are swine, unclean beasts, these shall not come to heaven. The unclean persons are the goats, these stand on Christs left hand, and shall hear the sentence of condemnation pronounced against them. Then will the wicked sinners wish that the mountains might fall upon them, and that the hills might cover them from the face of the Lamb. The wicked shall appear in judgement, but they shall not be able to stand in judgment. I might further inlarg this Use, but there are many who have in print bestowed fruitful pains on this argument, as Carthu∣sianus, Drexelius, Gerrard, Vossius, Alsted. Among our own country men, Babington, Perkins, Smith, Bolton, &c. In an especial manner I commend to your serious reading and meditation that powerful and patheticall application concerning the day of judgement, by the reverend and learned Dr. Hackwel in his 14th chapter, and 8 Hackwell A∣pology. ib. 4. c. 14. last sections of his 4th book of the Apology for the power and provi∣dence of God in the government of the world. I must professe that I conceive that Application which that worthy Dr. there useth, to be one of the most full, pithy and particular Applications of any that ever I met with-all on that argument; I commend the perusal of that to you. And in the second place I proceed to an use of instruction: Let the Ʋse. 2. Instruction. cōsideration of the day of judgment be our instruction, and put eve∣ry one of us according to our several stations & capacities, in mind of the great duty incumbent upon us. Let Magistrates from the con∣sideration of the day of judgement, be instructed in their duty, to be a praise unto them that doe well, and a terrour unto evil doers. Let them execute justice impartially; let them in the distribution of justice be like Levi, who knew neither father nor mother, nor bro∣ther nor sister. Let not a Magistrate shew more pitty to a blas∣phemer then to a murtherer or theef, considering that those that murther souls are the worst of murderers, and those that robbe God of his honour are the worst of theeves. Let Ministers be in∣structed in their duty to cry aloud and spare not, to speak as the oracles of God, to divide the word aright, and walke aright. Such as are Pastors and Doctors let them discard that Antiphrasis,
Pastores, à non pascendo, & Doctores à non docendo. That rotten di∣stinction per se & per alium, will not excuse a lazy Minister at the day of judgement. Let Governours, Tutors, and all that have the inspection over others remember the day of judgement. It is Apo∣stolical counsel, Rom. 12. 8. , whether he be Secular or cclesiastical Ruler, the duty is of weight by both sorts to be put in practise; The Maxime is most true, Every on∣that ruleth ought to rule with diligence. Let there not be any among you, who (as Diogenes his servant was called Manens à non manendo; because he used to run away) I say, let not any be called Prafecti, à non praeficiendo, and Tutores à non tuendo. emember the day of judge∣ment. Then those young-ones, those Deposita, Parentum charissima Pignora, will be required of you. Let all tradesmen be instructed in their duty, from the consideration of the day of judgement, to deal justly, to use a just weight, a just measure, a just ballance, & a just phah. Sophisticated wares, false lights, false weights, adul∣terated wares, cousenage in the trade, will ly heavie upon their ac∣count at the day of judgement. Let young schollars whose witts are green, wanton, and frothy, remember the day of judgement, then they would not adventure upon Platonick fansies, vain speculations, and bend their wits to mintain them after they have discovered them, for no other reason but that they are new discoveries, like some new African monsters. It's a sad thing to consider that men now a daies bend their wits to be sceptical, to defend any Chimaera or abortive issue of their sterile brains. Men are so sool-hardy as they will venture upon any opinion, any notion that so (as Simon Magus designed) they might be accounted some great ones, like Erostratus that burnt Dianas Temple to get himself a name. Many that have parts care not whether they imploy them for the truth or against it. Hence it comes to passe that Judaisme, Sociniaisme, Familisme, Enthusiasme all these shall have their patronage. Many will plead for them and defend them with eagerness. I will tell you a story (though I use very few stories in a Pulpit) which is re∣corded by Matthew Paris an historian of good repute among us. There was one Simon Carnatensis a Master of Paris Anno 1201, who having most subtilly and acutely disputed about the Trinity, some of his familiar friends perswaded him to put his disputation in writing, that so the memorial of such excellent things might not be lost, whereupon he proudly brake forth into this blasphe∣mous
speech, O little Jesu! how much have I confirmed and advan∣ced thy Law in this Question! but if I list to deal crosly, I know how with stronger reasons and arguments to weaken, and disprove the same: Which proud, blasphemous speech was no sooner spoken, but hee was strucken dumb, and became an errand I deot, and stark fool, and so made a Ludibrium, a laughing-stock to all that saw him. Let all wanton Scepticks, Novelists, and Platonicks take heed by this sad ex∣ample: Let this be their Warning-peece. Now that I may more particularly set forth your duty, I shall commend these serious lessons of special concernment for your in∣struction and practise. 1. Let us entertain frequent and serious thoughts and medita∣tions Less. 1. Entertaine frequent and serious thoughts concerning the day of Judgement. . Chrysost. Bosil. concerning the day of Judgment: It was a saying of Hierome, that learned Father, Whatsoever I am a doing, whether eating, drink∣ing, reading, or writing, me-thinks I hear the shril sound of the Arch∣angels Trumpet, summoning all flesh to appear, and crying aloud, Sur∣gite, mortui, & venite ad judicium. Chrysostome profest, that what∣ever others doe think of it, for my selfe, it makes me often tremble when I consider of it; wherefore upon this very Text he saith, that its a dreadful Judgment, and a Tribunal to be trembled at. When thou art tempted to sin, be it Pride, Passion, Uncleanness, Covetousness, Oppression, Dissimulation, &c. O! consider seriously there will be a day of Judgment, wherein thou shalt be called to an account for all by thoughts, words, and deeds. It's excellent counsell which Basil gives, Cum senseris te ad aliquod peccatum provocari, ad mentem re∣voca formidabile illud judicium, & hoc quasi fraeno & paedagogo u∣tere (i. e.) when thou art tempted to sin, call to mind the dreadfull day of Judgement, and this will be as a bridle to curb sinne, and as a School-master to instruct us in our duty. Let this be a Moni∣tor, a Frontlet before thine eyes, a perpetual vade mecum. In all places and companies consider there will be a day of an account, a day of Judgement will come. O that this consideration were more frequent in our thoughts! Through the grace of God it would be a special preservative against sin. 2. Let the consideration of the day of Judgement engage you to Less. 2. Labour to be holy. holyness of life and conversation. That's the practicall use which the Apostle commends to our practise, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. Onely holy persons shall be able to stand in judgement. This consideration
moved the Saints to have their conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. 3. This consideration should read us a Lecture of Patience. A∣midst Less. 3. Learn Pa∣tience. all sufferings, persecutions, losses, crosses, hardships, evill entreaties, amidst all perils at home, abroad, and among false bre∣thren: Let us consider that a day will come which will make a∣mends for all sufferings: Be patient (saith the Apostle) for the comming of the Lord draweth nigh, Jam. 5. 8. Let us therefore bee patient under crosses; yet a little while and the day of the Reve∣lation of Christ will come, when the righteous shall be delivered out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in their stead. Learne hence by patience to possesse your souls. 4. Hence let us be put upon continual watchfulness. The time Less. 4. Learn watchfulness of Christs coming is (like a theif) in the night. We know not the time, to the intent we should alwaies keep strict sentinel, alwaies stand upon our watch, and be in procinctu, like the wise Virgins, with our Lamps trimmed, and oyle in our Lamps: Watchfulness is commended at all times, Mark 13. 33, 34, 35, 36. Shake off all se∣curity and drowsiness. If the Watchmen sleep, the City will soon be surprized. Invadunt urbem somno vino{que} sepultam. Let our Saviours caution ring aloud in our eares, Luk. 21. 34. Take Less. 5. Learn to fear God. heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged, &c. 5. Hence learn to fear God, Rev. 14. 7. Ungodly men (though Preachers amplifie these things) looke upon them, but as so many Scare-crows: But that which they now fear not, shall make them tremble, and wish that some Rock would so much favour them, as to fall on them, and hide them from the wrath of a sin reveng∣ing God. O Christian! fear God, and walk in his fear all the day long; tremble at the consideration of this day, and let it be thy , to work out thy salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12. Less. 6. Learn com∣passion and charity. 6. And lastly, hence learn compassion and exercise of Charity towards the poor Members of Christ. Not a cup of cold water but shall be rewarded in that day. The visiting the sick, the cloathing of the naked, the releeving of the distressed shall be all remembred in that day; Christ brings them all to remembrance, Mat. 25. Let us then cast our bread upon the waters, and after many dayes we shall finde it, Eccl. 11. 1. The Apostle prayeth for Onesiphorus, his benefactor, that he might find mercy in that day, 2 Tim. 1. 18. What
day was that, but the day of Judgement and recompense? Then God will remember all the Saints good deeds, but all their bad deeds shall be blotted out of the Book of Remembrance, or brought in only like a cancell'd bond for the further manifestation of the riches of Gods mercy. And now heres onely one Vse more of the Doctrine, which shall Use 3. For Consola∣tion. be for consolation unto the godly. In these respects the considera∣tion of the day of Judgement administers unto them abundance of consolation; I shall name a few particulars, and so conclude this Doctrine. 1. From the nature of the day, the Saints reap comfort; for that 1 Comfort from the na∣ture of the day. day is a day of Redemption, a day of restitution, a day of deliverance. Wherefore in expectation of this day, they lift up their heads, Luke 21. 28. This is the day of the appearance of Christ, and this is the foundation of the Saints comfort, Col. 3. 4. 2. Heres comfort in respect of the Judge, and that is Jesus Christ, who is their Head, their Husband, their Elder Brother, their 2 Comfort in respect of the Judge. Advocate, their Intercessour. He is their Judge who is their Sa∣viour, and he will pronounce the sentence of Absolution. Christ is their Judge, who hath loved them and washed them in his blood: Rev. 1. 5. Christ is their Judge who is their peace and reconciler, Eph. 2. 14. 3. Heres comfort in respect of the sentence which Christ shall pronounce; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome pre∣pared 3 Here com∣fort in re∣spect of the sentence. for you before the foundation of the world. 4. And lastly, their happynesse shall be to all eternity, Psal. 16. 11. 4 This com∣fort shall be to all eterni∣ty. And of this presence the godly shall be partakers. They shall see the blessed vision, enjoy an uninterrupted communion with the holy Trinity. Ile close up the first Doctrine with leaving you to meditate upon 1 Thes. 4. 16, 17, 18. And so much for the first Doctrine. I proceed to the second Doctrine, That at the day of Judgement the secrets of all mens hearts shall be judged. Though men digge ne∣ver  so deep, yet shall they never bee able to hide any thing from God, God will bring every work to judgement, Eccles. 12. 14. The reasons of the Doctrine may be drawn, 1. From the Omniscience of God, Psal. 44. 21. Hee knew the secret whoredomes of Aholah, and Aholibah, all the chambers Reas. 1. From Gods Omniscience.
of imagery, and all their wickednesses done in the darke, Ezek. 8. 12. Darkness and light are both alike to him, Psal. 139. 12. All things are naked unto him with whom we have to deale, Heb. 4. 13. God knoweth all things, 1 Joh. 3. 20. So that words secretly whisper∣ed, actions secretly done; nay more, thoughts, purposes, intenti∣ons, before ever they are thought, purposed, and intended, are fully known to God: Thou hast set (saith the Psalmist) our iniquities be∣fore thee; our secret sinnes in the light of thy countenance, Psal. 90. 8. A second Reason shall be drawn from the Justice of God, which is to render to every one according to the fruit of their doings. And Reas. 2. Drawn from Gods Justice. this is the end of our appearance before Christs Judgement seat, 2 Cor. 15. 10. It's impossible but that the Judge of all the world should doe right; secret Murders, secret Adulteries, secret Thefts, secret Abominations, secret Cousenage, secret malicious Heart∣burnings, Murtherous intentions, secret Back-bitings, Detractings, Calumniatings, all these shall be made manifest at the day of Judg∣ment. Now Justice requireth, that as the sinner soweth so hee should reap, that as he hath sowen seeds of wickedness, so he should reap the fruits of destruction. 3. The secrets of men shall be judged for the vindicating, ac∣quitting Reas. 3. For the ac∣quitting of the godly. and clearing of the godly. What seret wickednesses are unjustly and falsly layd to their charge? What calumnies, forgeries are invented to blast the name and reputation of those that feare God? The Primitive Christians in their night meetings were slandered, and such horrible aspersions cast upon them, as the Father of Lyes could invent: What horrible slanders have been cast on Luther, Calvin, and other eminent Pillars of the Church? How are the Prayers, Fasts, strict walkings of Gods children traduced, re∣proached, and scandalized? How do the men of the world reproach the Saints for hypocrisie, false-heartedness? but at the day of Judg∣ment the innocency of the Saints will be cleared. What hard mea∣sure doe the godly meet withall from the wicked of the world? They are buffeted, tormented, slain, all the day long. All they say, think, and do, are misconstrued and reproached. But at the grand day of Accompt God will clear where men have reproached; God will justifie where men have condemned; so that secret Prayers, Fasts, Watches, secret communion with God, will appear, and be openly known and made manifest to the honour of the Godly, and to the
shame and infamy of their malicious enemies. 4. The secrets of mens hearts shall be judged for the further Reas. 4. For the fur∣ther condem∣nation of the wicked. condemation of the wicked. All their cunning conveyances, secret pollutions, all the impure abhominations of their hearts shall bee layd open in the sight of men and Angels. We read Psal. 50. 21. I will reprove and set them in order before thine eyes. God will at that day set all a mans secret villanies, and closset abhominations in or∣der before him. And this will adde further to the condemnation of the wicked, that their most secret wickednesses shall be disclo∣sed to their eternal confusion and horrour. These things being pre∣mised, I shall inferre three Uses; for Terour unto the wicked, Comfort unto the godly, and Counsel to both. 1. For terrour unto the wicked. Is it so, that at that day the se∣crets Ʋse 1. For terror unto the wicked. of all hearts shall be made manifest and judged; then in vain doe hypocrites digge deep, and seeke to hide their counsell from the Lord, as if they thought themselves secure, and undiscovered. Though no eye of man can see them, yet the eye of God, which is tenne thousand times brighter than the Sunne, will descry and dis∣cover all. Then will all varnishes, painted glosses, vain pretences, and out-side professions be discovered, and all such who plead for them appear in their colours. In vain doe Adulterers wait for the Twi-light, as Job speaks, c. 24. 15. Though the doors be bolt∣ed, and though it bee dark night, yet the All-seeing eye of God findes out all. What shall wee say of secret cheating Tradesmen, who thinke themselves secure, because man cannot find them out? Yet let them know that all their mysteries of cousenage in their Trade, all their secret, fraudulent dealings shall be discovered at the day of Judgement. When men professe one thing, and practise another, pretending friendship with their mouthes, but meditating ruine and destruction in their hearts: When men make but Religi∣on a stalking-horse, for getting a prey, and as a cloak to cover wick∣ed projects. When men have no regard to the All-seeing eye of God, so they can but escape the eye of men, what shall we say of them, but put them in mind of the words of the Wise man, Eccl. 11. 9. But know thou, that for all these things God wil bring thee to judgement. Then every vain thought, every idle word, every lascivi∣ous glance, all mental reservations, all hypocriticall collusions, all time-serving complyances, self-interests, ends, and aims, shall be all
called to account, and laid open in the sight of men and Angels. 2. Heres matter of comfort to the godly. At that day, their se∣cret desires, breathings, longings, and pantings after God shall be Ʋse 2. For comfort to the godly. discovered. The broken prayers, fighs, cries, inward compuncti∣ons of heart shall be all made manifest. The imputations, scan∣dals, ignominies cast upon the Saints shall then be wiped away. Many that have been condemned by men, shall be at that great day pronounced innocent. Holy Martyrs that laid down their lives for Christ, against whom the wicked of the world pronounced a sentence of condemnation, shall at that day have a sentence of absolution pronounced by Jesus Christ, and bee acquitted before that impartial Tribunal. It's a ground of great comfort to Gods children that God knows their hearts, how vehemently their de∣sires are towards him, as Psalme 42. 1. Isaiah 26. 9. Though the Saints cannot ofttimes expresse how their hearts stand affected, and are not able fully to discover themselves, and open their con∣dition to man, yet God knoweth their inward groanings, their secret breathings, vehement desires after Christ: Now all these are regarded by God; for there is not a tear, nor a desire, nor a sigh, which are not taken notice of by the great God of Heaven and Earth. The secret, closset devotions, fastings, prayings, me∣ditations, which the world knows not of, nor understand the value of such divine services, all these shall be made known at the day of Judgement. Thou seest one chearfull, thou knowest not why: It's neither corne, nor wine, nor oyle, nor any thing of the world that revives his spirit. It's onely the light of Gods countenance, Psal. 4. 6. that's the cause, hidden to thee, but a childe of God knows it. Thou seest another sad and troubled, though he may have riches and honours in abundance, yet there is a secret damp upon his spirit, a secret cause of grief. It may be God hides his face from him; it may be thou art the cause of his grief; he seeth and heareth God dishonoured by thee, and this is matter of mourning and sadness to his spirit. Let then Gods children amidst all sorrows, comfort them∣selves with the consideration of a day of refreshing, a day of restitution, a day of redemption and consolation, which will one day be at the great and general Assize of the just Judge of Heaven and Earth.
Thirdly Here's matter of counsel, both to the ungodly & godly: Ʋse, 3. For counsel to the un∣godly. 1. To the ungodly: Will there be such a day then. 1. e counselled to break off your sins by repentance. Be sensible of the evil of your doings. 2. Kisse the Son; hast and delay not to make your peace with Jesus Christ, for he is our prayse, Eph. 2. 14. 3. Make choice of other paths, enter into the way of holyness, Isa. 35. 8. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Then to the godly, Here lyeth your duty, 1. To have your thoughts, meditations and desires fixed on that day. Be longing for the sight of Christ coming in the clouds; and pray, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. 2. Comfort your selves with the assurance of Gods love to you, so was Paul comforted. 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. 3. Let your conversation be in heaven, Phil. 3. 20, 21. 4. Bee not afraid of death, for to the Saints death is a conquered enemy, the sting is taken away; the Serpents teeth are knockt out. What need they be afraid of death, who shall be acquitted before the Judges. And their Judge is their Advocate, their friend; their Redeemer Jesus Christ, which brings in the last Doctrine. That at the day of judgement Jesus Christ shall be the Judge. In handling of this Doctrine I shall give clear proof from Scri∣pture and Reason; then answe several Queies and Objections; and conclude with particular Application. 1. For Scripture proof. That Christ shall be judge is plain from 1 The Do∣ctrine pro∣ved by Scri∣pture. several Scriptures, viz. Joh. 5. 22, 27. Act. 10. 42. Act. 17. 31. Mat. 28. 18. John. 5. 21. Christ for this purpose rose again, that he might be Lord over quick and dead, Rom. 14. 9, 10. and part of his dominion is the last judgement. The Reasons why Christ shall be Judge, are drawn: 1 From equity Reas. 1. From equity and retalia∣tion. & retaliation. Christ shall judge those that judged him. Christ shall judge Pontius Pilate, the High Priest, the Jewes &c. And this will be for the confusion of Christs enemies, that though Christ was reproached, buffered; crowned with thornes, and crucified, set at nought by the wicked of the world, yet now he shall be in triumph and be the judge of quick and dead, Joh. 19. 37. They shall looke upon him whom they have pierced. Reas. 2. For the com∣fort of the godly. Reas. 3. For the ter∣ror of the wicked. 2. Christ shall be Judge for the comfort of the godly, Heb. 2. 11. Eph. 5. 30. Christ is their head, redeemer, elder-brother, inter∣cessour; Christ hath promised everlasting life. Joh. 3. 36. Joh. 5. 24. 3. For the terrour of the wicked, Rev. 1. 7. But in the next place, here are many questions to be resolved.
Q. 1. Is the Father excluded from judgement? I answer. Neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost are excluded. The Father is said to judge by the Son, Act. 17. 31. Now judgement is peculiarly by a kind of appropriation ascribed to the Son, Joh. 5. 22. Pater occul∣tus, Filius manifestus (as Austine observes) , to the whole Trinity: , to the Son this judge∣ment appertains. ut 2. It will be asked, How shall Christ appear at that day? Ans. e shall 1. Appear visibly. This judgement the Father hath committed to Christ, God and man. nd Chris shall not onely judge according to his divine nature, but also according to his hu∣mane nature. So that Christ shall be seen vissibly and locally. Act. 1. 11. Mat. 24. 30. 2. Christ shall come gloriously, and this will be cleared in sour Particulars, 1. Hee shall come in the glory of his Father, Mat. 10. 27. 2. With an innumerable company of Angels, Mat. 25. 31. 3. With the sound of the trumpet, 1 Thes. 4. 16. 4 With Power. Mat. 24. 30. 3. Christ shall come suddenly, as a theef, Mat. 24. 4. As a snare, Luk. 21. 34. Unexspectedly, Luk. 12. 46. 1 Thes. 5. 2, 3. A 3. Question is, whom Christ shall judge? Ans. The Scripture is evident; Men and Angels. 1 For Men, universally, all Men, Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. both quick nd dead, Act. 10. 42. 1 Pet. 4. 5. 2 Tim. 4. 1. 2. For Angels, Jude v. 6. Rev. 20. 10. A 4. Question is, What will be the manner of Christs jud∣ging? To answer this Question, we are to consider the preparation to this judgement, the Proceeding of this Judge, and the ule of judging. 1. For preparation. That will appear in these particulars, 1 1 Consider the prepara∣tions to the day of jud∣gement. There will be a transmutation of heaven and earth, Rev. 21. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 3. 10. 2. Christ will appear in a throne of glory, Mat. 19. 28. 3. There will be a summoning of all sorts of men; quick and dead shall be summoned to appear before the judgement seat of Christ. Joh. 5. 28, 29. 1 Thes. 4. 16, 17. 4 There will be a se∣paration and division, a placing of the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the left hand, Mat. 25. 32, 33. 2 Consider the procee∣dings of the judge. 2. Let us consider the proceedings of the Judge. Wherein we are to note 1 The books shall be laid open, Rev. 20. 12. The de∣vil
shall accuse, Angels shall be witnesses. And no need of their accusation, or witness; for each mans conscience, shall be accuser, and witness, and judge. Every book of conscience shall be open∣ed, and there shall be either excuseing or accuseing, and Dan. 7. 10. There's a book of Gods remembrance mentioned, Mal. 3. 16. And there is a book of a mans owne conscience, which shall be opened at that great day. This is the book for rectifying whereof all other Ideoscribuntur omnes Labri, ut unus emen∣detur consci∣entiae. Bern. books were written. Now there lyeth no appeal from these books, no possibility of falsifying Gods book, and the book of Conscience. And if any one should plead not done, not guilty, conscience, as good as a thousand witnesses, would protest against it. 2. In Christs proceeding we are to consider of a different sen∣tence, one of absolution, the other of condemnation; 1 For the sentence of absolution, Mat. 25. 34. Come, there is a gracious in∣vitation, ye blessed, there is a comfortable appellation, of my Father, there is a glorious adoption, inherit, there is their title and dona∣tion, the Kingdome, there is the royalty of it, prepared, there is the predestination, for you, there is the propriety of the Saints, from the foundation of the World, there is the antiquity, the antient tenure, before the creation of Adam; 2 There is a sentence of condemnation, Mat. 25. 14 Depart, there's a barre of exclusion; a dreadful dismission; from mee, there is the punishment of losse, the heaviest of punishments. Qui te non habet (Domine Deus,) totum perdidit, saith Bernard. Ye cursed, there's their brand of infamy; Into Bernard. everlasting fire, there's poena Jensus, exquisite unspeakable torments, there's fire to burn, and torment, and eternal fire, no mitigation of pain unto all eternity; prepared for the devil and his Angels, there's their wicked company. And just it is that Associates in sin should be Associates in suffering. 3 There followeth the execution of these sentences, Mat. 25. 46. Joh. 14. 3. 1 Thes. 4. 17. Thus you have heard the proceedings of the Judge. In the third place we are to consider the rule whereby all shall 3 The Rule of Judging. be judged. The sentence shall be given according to Law and Go∣spel both, Joh. 5. 45. Joh. 12. 48. Rom. 2. 16. The godly shall be principally acquitted according to the Gospel, Joh. 3. 18. And this their acquittance shall be approved on by the Law, Mat. 5. 17. Gal. 3. 13. The condemnation of unbeleevers shall be chiefly according to the Law, Deut. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. And be con∣firmed by the Gospel, Joh. 3. 19. Absolution shall be pronounced
of singular grace, for Christs merits. And the sentence of con∣demnation shall be pronounced out of gods severe justice, and the sinners own deserts. I proceed to a fifth Question. What signs and forerunners of this day of judgement are set down in Scripture? Ans. 1. The publishing and receiving of the Gospel throughout the world, Mat. 24. 4. 2 The Apostsy of some Professors, 1 Tim. 4. 1. 3 The revealing of Antichrist, 2 Thes. 2. 3, 4, 8. 4 Com∣mon corruption in manners joyned with security, as in the dayes of Noah and Lot, Mat. 24. 12, 37. 2 Tim. 3. 1. 1 Thes. 5. 3. 5 Warres and troubles both in the World and Church, Mat. 24. 6, 9. 6 False Christs attended with false Prophets, and armed with false miracles, Mat. 24. 24. 7 The calling of the Jewes un∣to the faith of the Gospel, Rom. 11. 25. Whether their call shall be ordinary or extraordinary we cannot determine. 8 Signes in Heaven and Earth, and all Elements, as the trembling of the Earth, the roaring of the Sea, the darkening of the Sun and Moon, Mat. 24. 20. Lk. 21. 25. Yea the firing of the whole frame of Hea∣ven and Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 12. 9 The appearance of the son of man, (i. e.) Christ, God-man, whereby his comeing shall then be clearly apprehended of all men, Mat. 24. 30. I proceed to the 6 Question, Why God desers the day of judge∣ment, and prolongs the time? Ans. 1. There are these reasons 1 For the exercise of the faith, hope, patience, and prayers of the children of God. They must be∣lieve, wait and stay Gods leasure. Though the vision be dark and seem to stay, yet they must wait for it, Hab. 2. 3. 2. God defers this day to give space of repentance, and leave all impenitent rebellious sinners without excuse, Rom. 2. 4. Rom. 9. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 8, 9. But for the elects sake he is said to shorten them, Mat. 24. 22. That they may neither be broken by grief, and sorrow, v. 21. nor seduced by Impostures, v. 24. 3. That all the elect may be gathered together into the Church. Joh. 10. 16. Rev. 6. 10, 11. The 7 Question is, whether it be within the power of a mans un∣derstanding to tell the determinate time when this day shall come? I answer, No, Mar. 13. 32. This day wee read, shall be in the end of the world, Mat. 24. 3. But of that houre, day, moneth, year,
no man knoweth. Jewish Rabbins, Astrologers, &c. are abominable, who are so saucy and presumptuously inquisitive into the secrets locked up in Gods cabinet. There are special reasons why the par∣ticular time is hid from us, and God will not let us know when this day of judgement shall be. 1. Reason is for the exercise of our graces, Mat. 6. 10. Jam.  5. 7. Rev. 22. 17, 20. Another reason is to bridle our curiosity, Act. 1. 6, 7. A 3 reason is, to keep us in our duty, Mat. 24. 42. Luke. 21. 34, 35. A 4 reason is that the wicked may take heed, and by no means defer their repentance upon hope of a longer time. Because they know not the houre thereof, they must be provided al∣waies, Mat. 24. 43. Mat. 25. 13. Luk. 19. 13. The 8 Question is, Whether we must desire this day? I answer, We may, 1 Because this is a Character of discrimina∣tion to difference good from bad. At the day of judgement there will be a separation between good and bad, Luk. 21. 26, 27, 28. Rom. 14. 10, 15, 16, 17. 2 We have the command of Christ, Mat. 6. 10. Rev. 22. 17. 3 We have the example of the Saints, Rom. 7. 24. Phil. 1. 23. 4 Because this is the day of redemption & deliverance of the Saints. Luk. 21. 28. In the next place we must answer severall objections; amongst  others these are the principal. 1 It's said that Christ shall not be the Judge, because he said he came not to judge the world, Joh. 12. 47. For answer, We are to distinguish of a twofold coming, a first  and a second coming, Christ speakes there of his first, and not his second comeing: in the first he was judged of others, in the next he shall judge others, according to that of Austin, Sedebit judex, qui stetit sub judice, & damnabit veros reos, qui factus est falsus reus. He that stood at the barre to be judged of others, shall there sit on the bench and judge others. He that was causelesly found guilty here, shall finde others justly guilty there. But 2. It's objected, that the Apostles shall judge the twelve  Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19. 28. How then is Christ the onely judge of the world. Answer, The Saints shall be Christs Assistants, by way of suf∣frage  and approbation, they shall assent unto Christs judgement, but the absolute power of judging and pronouncing sentence, the father hath committed unto the son.
A 3 objection is that the beleever shall not come into condem∣nation,   Joh. 5. 24. how say we then that all shall appear before Christs judgement seat? For answer, we are to distinguish of a twofold judgement, of ab∣solution and condemnation. A beleever shall not come into the judgement of condemnation, but only of absolution. But a 4. objection will hence arise, He that beleeveth not is judged already, Joh. 3. 18. Answer, Wicked men and devils are already judged, 1 By 2. 3. 4. Gods decree, Jude, 4. 6. Mat. 25. 41. 2 By the revealed word, Joh. 12. 48. 3 By their own consciences, Matt. 8. 29. 4 By the beginning of their punishment here on earth, Rev. 12. 9, 10. But at the day of judgement they shall have a compleat judgement, and receive the full measure of their sufferings, the sentence shall be pronounced, and it shall never be recalled, no repeale, no rever∣sing of that sentence. In stead of urgeing more objections, I shall betake my selfe to a threefold application, viz. For Comfort to the godly, Terror to the wicked, Exhortation to all. Use, 1. For Com∣fort. 1. For Comfort. Here's abundance of consolation to the Saints of God, that Christ is Judge. He that is our elder brother, Heb. 2. 11. A man as we are, Phil. 2. 8. Sin only excepted, our advocate 1 Joh. 2. 1. It's Bernard's observation, Vult per hominem homines judicari. Hence we may securely expect the comeing of our Judge, in so much as our Advocate is gone before us, and is already re∣tained on our side. Quia Advocatum praemisimus, securi judicem venturum speremus. v. Joh. 14. 23. Christ is the life of the Saints, Col. 3. 4. Christ is the end of our hope, whom the Saints look for: His appearance the ground of the Saints hope and strong consolation. So that the day of judgement, will be a day of refreshment, delive∣rance, restitution, redemption, the most comfortable day, that ever the eyes of the Saints beheld. Use, 2. For Terror. 2. Here's Terror unto the wicked. They are enemies unto Christ, and they that have peirced him, shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. But they shall see him no otherwise then a malefactor the Judge, to their terror and condemnation. Ʋse, 3. For Exhor∣tation. 3. This may serve for exhortation to prepare for the comeing of Christ. In order whereunto, these speciall exhortations I presse home unto us all, 1 Kisse the Son, Psa. 2. 12. Make your peace
with Christ speedily, we are commanded to agree with our adver∣sary quickly. 2 This should stir us up to sobriety and watchful∣ness, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Prayer, sobriety and watchfulness are joyned to∣gether, 1 Thes. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 3 This should excite us to re∣pentance, Act. 17. 30, 31. 4 This should excite us unto holiness, Joh. 3. 36, 2 Pet. 3. 11. 5 This should strengthen our faith in the promises. Beleevers shall not come into condemnation, He that beleeveth shall not come into condemnation, But I am a beleever therefore I shall not come into condemnation. 6 And lastly, This should make us long for the coming of Christ, Tit. 2. 13. Rev. 22. 20. Christs appearance is the Saints day of rejoycing, That day we should beleeve, hope for, & desire with all earnestness. This conside∣ration that Christ shall be the Judge is matter of singular consola∣tion unto the Saints. Christ is the Saints Redeemer, hee Adopts them, he's their Intercessor and their Judge, and will plead for them, and pronounce a sentence of Absolution at the day of jud∣gement.
ETERNAL LIFE Unfolded from Mark 10. 17. Good master, what shall I do that I may in herit eter∣nal life? IT will be requisite before I give in the sense of the words to Sermon 8.  S. Maryes Oxon. April. 13. 1656. take into consideration the Harmony of the Evangelists in re∣lation to this History, S. Matthew. c. 19. v. 16. sets it down on this wise. And behold, one came and said unto him, Good master, what good things shall I do that I may have eternal life? He dreamed of Pha∣risaical righteousness, of salvation by works: He doth not aske sim∣ply by what way and means he must be saved? but, what good he must do? As if his own righteousness contributed to his salvation. This was a gross error among the Pharisees then, and is still re∣tained and improved among Papists, and Ignoramus's now a dayes. S. Luke sets down this history, And a certain Ruler asked him, Luk. 18. 18. He was not one of the common sort, but a man of chief authority; and he came not as many did to tempt Christ, but to learn of him. And it's remarkable, that he a great man, a person of quality among the Jewes, in the time of his youth, did busy himself in such excellent things, as to inquire after his eternal con∣dition: He was said to be , a young man. It's the young man's duty to remember his Creator in the dayes of his youth. Now Eccles. 12. 1. let's consider the History as related in the Text. Before he pro∣pounds his question, we are to observe his great diligence and re∣verence, 1 His diligence, he came running, he made hast to 1. His dili∣gence. Christ, willing to be quickly resolved in a great question. Lest Christ should have been gone before he came, he mended his pace. This shewes his frvour, desire, and eagerness to meet with Christ. And this in a young man, and a Ruler, was the more remarkable.
2 His reverence, he kneeled to him. He cometh as a petitioner to 2 His reve∣rence. aske that which most of all concerned him. This posture shewes his humility, and what high estimate he puts upon Jesus Christ. These things being premised, he propounds this question, which is of the greatest moment. ; &c. What answer Christ gave him, and how he replied, and how Christ rejoyned, and what was the pro∣duct thereof are not my present busyness. The inlargement of these things by way of Paraphrase with observations upon them, would take more then the allotted time. My work intended is to fixe up∣on the maine scope and substance of the Question. That which was in the eye, aime, and designe of this young man was what should become of him to eternity. Wherein you have, 1 An end propoun∣ded, eternal life. 2 The means inquired after, what shall I do? Or Divis. what good thing shall I do, as Matthew relates the story. Here he failed grosly in the standing upon his own works, dreaming of Pharisaical righteousness. He was a young man, and had learned from the Pharisees school to be confident of self-righteousness, and plead for his own merits, as afterward it followeth how he boasted v. 20. But when Christ touched him to the quick v. 21. he discovered how far he was from that perfection whereunto he pretended. 3 Of whom doth he inquire? To whom doth he pro∣pound this question of the greatest consequence? Unto Christ, whom he calleth, Master, a Teacher, one whom he thought able to instruct him, and he add's this Epithete, Good, Christ checks him v. 18. Christ doth not refuse the name of Good, sed eo sensu quo Carthw. Harm. Calv. Harm. Adolescens intellexit, ideo repudiavit, quia in Deum solum compe∣tebat. The young man took Christ to be no more then a man. Si in me nihil altius agnoseis, quam naturam humanam, falso, elogium boni, quod soli Deo convenit in me transfers, so Calvin (i e) If thou knowest no more then a humane nature in me, thou falsly ascribest to me the name of Good, which belongs to God alone. Aut ergo Grth. Harm. agnosce me Deum, aut a boni titulo abstine, so learned Gerrard. Notwithstanding this young man failes in the manner of propoun∣ding the Question, and prescribes his own works, his own Phai∣saical righteousness, which was his gross error, took upon trust from the Pharisaical Rabbies: Yet it's worth our special observa∣tion (and it's that which is my chief design in the choyce of this Text) that this young man, a Ruler, who came with an intent to be instructed of Christ propounds no frivolous impertinent que∣stion,
but one of the greatest concernment in all the world. He had enough for the present world; but hee looked for afterwards; what would it availe him to live delicately here, and miserably to all eternity? Wherefore he inquires after his everlasting estate, a Question worthiest of all our inquiry, paines and diligence. What I purpose (through Christ that strengthneth me) to speak on this Scripture, I will comprise in this Doctrine That the maine Inquiry and business of Christians ought to be im∣ploied  concerning their eternal condition. The great question worthiest our asking, studying & stateing is this, What shall we do to inherit eternal life? In the unfolding of this great point, my Method shall be, 1. To inquire into the nature of Eterni∣ty, Meth. 1. or Eternal life, what we are to conceive of it? 2. Give in the proof of the Doctrine. And lastly, conclude with some useful Ap∣plication. 1. To resume what I first propounded, To inquire what Aeter∣nity is, is to lanch into a boundless Ocean. The well is very deep, 1. What Aeternity is. and we have not wherewith to draw. Men and Angels are at a stand admireing what they cannot sufficiently comprehend. We cannot shaddow it forth, but very imperfectly, and as for the perfect ap∣prehension thereof, we must leave it till we come to Heaven. Con∣cerning eternity, the Scripture by these names expresseth it. It's called  in the Text. Rom. 1. 20. . in Isa. 57. 15. God is said to inhabit eternity: That is the highest expres∣sion. And elswhere its called a Crown of glory, and emphatically , 1 Pet. 5. 4. , 2 Cor. 4. 17. This is that glory that shall be revealed, Rom. 8. 18. This is that house in Heaven not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 11. And this is said to be , Mark. 10. 30. And what's that life but eternal life, as followeth in that place: This is called Sal∣vation, Heb. 5. 9. and Redemption, Heb. 9. 12. It is called the in∣heritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. Eternal life is Christs purchase and the Saints inheritance: And this inheritance hath these singular Epithetes , 1 Pet. 1. 4. incorruptible, undefiled, never fadeing; and if you aske where this is, the next words specify [reserved in heaven for us] What need I seek out more expressions of the same thing? Abrahams bosome, the Kingdome of Heaven, the blessed vision, fulness of joy, rivers of plea∣sures, the right hand of God, all these ar hrases setting forth the
eternal condition of happiness, or that life eternal which is the in∣heritance of Saints. And because these things cannot sufficiently be exprest positively, the Apostle by way of negation tells us. 2 Cor. 4. 18. The things which are not seen are eternal. Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, neither hath it enter'd into the heart of man to conceive &c. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Further to represent unto you, what Eternity is, or that Eternal life, which is the portion of Gods children, I'le lay down these ensuing propositions, which I shall propound by way of ne∣gation. 1. Eternity admits no succession of time. Time is defined by Prop. 1. Eternity ad∣mits no suc∣cession of time. the Philosophers, to be . But eternity hath no first and later estate. It's an Identical condi∣tion, simul & semel. Time past, present, and to come are no parts of eternity: For all these shall be swallowed up in eternity. There shall be no distinct seasons of the year, no observation of moneths, Scotus. daies, and years. Scotus himself will tell us, Aeternitas tota simul. Aeternitas est indivisibilis nec habet partes sibi invicem succedentes, Bonav. So Bonaventure. The Angel in the Revelation sware . Rev. 10. 6. And this is in eternity. Numerus which is Species quantitatis discretae hath no reckoning in eternity; For there's no Arithmetick, no numeration of Centuries, or Millions of years. The greatest number (if the greatest could be given) in Arithme∣tick, stands but as a Cypher in comparison of eternity. 2. Eternity admits no alterations. Alterations are in quality ei∣ther Prop. 2. Eternity ad∣mits no alte∣ration. from better to worse, or from worse to better. The Saints shall neither lose their graces nor their glory. In this world the evidences of the Saints may be dimmed and darkened. They may lose the luster and sense of their graces, though they cannot lose the seed abiding in them, nor the truth of their graces. But in heaven there shall be all light, no darkness, no fears, no clouds, no weak faith; for they shall injoy the blessed vision, no faint hope, for there they shall have a perfect fruition. All the glorified Saints shall keep their ever-abiding mansions; They cannot change from better to worse: Neither can the damned change from worse to better. The darkness of the damned shall never alter into light. Their sorrows shall never be changed into joy. Origen dreamed that there should be a relaxation for the damned after a thousand years; but this is an old, exploded error. They that are holy shll remain so, and they that are unholy
shall so remain in Eternity. Their condition is unalterable, as wee read Luke 16. 26. They which would passe from hence to you cannot, neither can they passe to us that would come from thence. There is no feare of worse times to glorified Saints, nor any the least hope of better times to the damned: Weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth shall be the everlasting curse of the damned: Triumphing, singing Hosanna's and Hallelujahs shall be the everlasting blessed∣nesse of glorified Saints: 3. Eternity admits of no augmentation nor diminution: Where Prop. 3. Eternity ad∣mits no aug∣mentation nor diminuti∣on. is augmentation and diminution? that's in the Predicament of Quan∣tity. All things in Eternity are at their . All things are in the superlative degree. No mixture of joyes with sorrows: No damp upon the spirits of Saints in heaven; nor any diminution of the damneds punishments in hell. In eternity, the Saints enjoy a kingdome, they are all Kings and Priests unto God. They are not in such a condition as may be better'd? For they enjoy the height of happinesse, the price of Christs blood, an inheritance by him purchased for them. They shall see God, and this can bee no ordi∣nary happinesse: it is indeed the perfection of the Saints happi∣ness: And therefore Augustine upon Psal. 85. propounds the Question, Quid quaeris, ut ascendat in linguam, quod in cor non a∣scendit? Nothing shall be there in a moderate mean condition, but all shall be stretched out to a superlative capacity, either height of happiness, or height of misery, either transcendent joy, or tran∣scendent sorrow. 4. Eternity admits of no revocation. Wee cannot call back an Prop. 4. Eternity ad∣mits of no revocation. Arrow out of a Bow, we cannot call back the least minute of time: Deeds of Lands are made oftentimes in this world with power of revocation: But mans eternal condition admits of no revocation. When once death hath dissolved and put a period to our life in this world, then we are lanched into the ocean of Eternity, and there's no possibility of returning to the shore of this world; no new life to re-act in this world. After this life ends we shall be in a never∣ending condition. The Saints shall no more returne to the world: for the world was their prison, Death is their Goal-delivery. Mul∣titudes of sorrows and sufferings they have met with in the world; now in Eternity they are freed from all, and shall never returne to re-act all those Tragedies and sufferings which they brake through in this life. Neither can the damned  any relaxation, or revo∣cation;
for they are in a hopelesse and Christlesse condition: They sinned against an infinite God, and in Justice he proportions infi∣nite punishments for sinning against so infinite a Majesty. Thus you have heard what Eternity cannot admit of, by way of negation, I have shaddowed it forth in those Propositions. Now what Eternity is, I shall positively thus define unto you. Definition of Eternity. Eternal life is the perfection of happynesse, given by Christ unto the Saints in glory, whereby they have an everlasting fruition of God, and communion with him. To open this Definition. 1. I call it the perfection of happynesse. It's the aggregation of 1. Eternity is the perfecti∣on of happi∣nesse. all good things, the comprehension of all blessednesses. Many Stars make a Constellation, many waters make a sea: All good things put together make up this happyness. There's no imperfection, no decay, no alteration: Eternal life takes in perfection of joy, per∣fection of glory, perfection of degrees. 2. This is given by Christ unto the Saints, Joh. 10. 28. I (saith 2. Eternity is Christs gift. Christ) give unto them eternall life. God the Father gives eternall life by the Sonne, and the Sonne by the Spirit. God the Father, the fountain and author of all life, gives this life. God the Sonne laid down his blood, a price abundantly sufficient to pay to the uttermost farthing for the purchase: And God the holy Ghost seals and gives assurance, and applyes the love of God the Father, and the love of God the Sonne with all his meritorious sufferings unto the Saints. 3. I said, by this eternall life the Saints in glory enjoy fruition 3. The Saints enjoy fruiti∣on of, and communion with God. and communion with God. Here they enjoy some glimpses and parcels of this communion, they have tasted how good God is: But in Heaven, in Eternity, in the fruition of, and communion with God, there will be these singularities. 1. They shall enjoy God immediately. They shall enjoy the 1. They enjoy God immedi∣ately. blessed presence of God, communion with the holy Trinity, not as here, by ordinances and means, but immediately, 1 Joh. 3. 2. they shall see him as he is. If it be so sweet to enjoy a Sabboth, and communion with God in Ordinances, and communion with his children here on earth, Oh! how ravishing must that sweetness be to enjoy God in heaven. Si adeo dulcis quaerenti (saith Bernard) quid erit invenienti! If wee meet with sweetness in our way, what shall we doe at our jouys end in our country?
2. They shall enjoy God fully, In thy presence is fulnesse of joy, Ps. 2. They enjoy God fully. 16. 11. God will never hide his face, he will never withdraw his comforts. There wil be no low ebbe, but it shall be full tide alwaies: Every vessl shall be as full as it can hold, even brim full of glory. 3. They shall enjoy God everlastingly; At thy right hand there are, pleasures for evermore, Psal. 16. 11. Eternity admits no period 3. They shall enjoy God everlastingly. of time, no conclusion. A Ring, which is an emblem of Eternity may be broken to pieces, and will wear away. The Vestall fires are quenched. Methuselah, that long-liv'd Patriarch, dyed. But E∣ternity admits no conclusion. As long as God and Christ is, so long shall the Saints be happy, and that's to all Eternity. Non beatitudo esset, si certum Sancti non haberent se ibi semper futuros. Aug. de Civit, Dei. Having now given you some glimpses of Eternity; and having, though but darkly, represented to you that which is indeed incon∣ceivable and inexpressible, but by those who are partakers of it; I come now in the next place to prove my assertion, That this ought to be our inquiry & grand business, the , the work of works, to examine what shal become of our souls & bodies to all eternity, I shall give attestations to the truth delivered, 1. From Scripture Examples. 2. From Scripture Precepts. 3. From Scripture Reasons. 1. From Scripture Examples. This was the maine Question of 1. From Scripture examples. those that were touched at Peters Sermon, Men and Brethren, what shall we doe? Act. 2. 37. And of the convert Goaler, Sirs, what shall I doe to be saved? Act. 16. 30. Eternity was in the eyes of E∣noch, Gen. 5. 24. And in the eye of Moses, Heb. 11. 26. This was in the meditations of David, Ps. 17. 15. When I awake I shall be satis∣fied with thy likenesse. This was that Country which those renowned Patriarchs sought after, Heb. 11. 16. This was in the heart of Paul, Phil. 1. 23. and he speaks in the name of all the Saints, Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is in heaven, whence we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ. The worthy Martyrs, of whom the world was not worthy, laid down willingly this temporal life for an eternal, Heb. 11. 35. And what's the great ground of consolation, 1 Cor. 5. 1. but a house eter∣nall in the heavens. It were easie to give a Catalogue of many rare precious servants of Jesus Christ, who have made this their designe and businesse to enquire concerning their everlasting condition. But this that hath been said may suffice. 2. For Scripture Precepts: To this purpose tends the weighty 2. From Scripture precepts. exhortation of Christ, to lay up treasure in heaven, Mat. 6. 19. 20. to
seek first the kingdome of God, Mat. 6. 33. Joh. 6. 27. to labour for that which endureth unto eternal life. And those of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 12. 1 Tim. 6. 12. v. 19. the word is , which is not a bare ta∣king, but a laying hold with both hands: Wee must make it our businesse to get assurance of our eternal condition. 3. I will lay down some Scripture Reasons, and they shall bee 3. From Scripture Reasons. considered under two heads, either privatively what we are freed from by our interest in this eternal life, or positively what wee gaine by the fruition thereof. There's great reason to perswade us to labour and secure our everlasting estate, if we consider, 1. When once wee are in eternity, consider what we are freed from. There are severall privative Immunities which glorified  Saints are partakers of, and Militant Saints have onely in their eye, heart, desires, and expectation of that happy, welcome day. These things are in the desire, hope, and earnest longing of Mili∣tant Saints; but gloryfied Saints have their desires accomplished, and the fruition of that which on earth they hoped for. And what are these privative immunities? 1. Freedome from sinne: Nothing that defileth is in heaven; . We are feed from sinne. there is no conflict between the flesh and spirit, no struggling a∣gainst lust, no combating with the flesh: It's the greatest desire of Gods children, that they may sinne no more. In this world the best of Gods children are subject to many infirmities; they carry about with them a body of sinne: But then there shall be no infirmities, no corruptions, no lusts to conflict withall, as appears more fully from Isai. 44. 22. Jer. 50. 20. All which Prophesies have reference unto the Triumphant Church, Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all. 2. We shall in eternity be freed from all tentations to sin, from 2. We are freed from all tentations the Flesh, the Devil, and the World. 1. There we shall not be troubled with corrupt flesh to lust against the spirit: There we shall not be troubled with the deeds of the flesh, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Heresies, Variances, &c. Here we are in part carnal, there we shall be wholly spiritual. 2. There we shall not be troubled with the Devils temptations, his methods, snares, depths, shall doe us no harm. In this world he is a Lyon let loose, running about, seeking whom he may de∣voure; there he is a Lyon chained, shut up; he may (like as dogs, bark at the Moon) rayle against the Saints, but he can doe them no
harme: This Accuser of the Brethren is shut up. In this world the Devil is busie to winnow the Saints as Wheat; but in the world to come, the Saints are like Wheat layd up in the Garner, out of his reach and meddling withall, as we may read Rev. 20. 10. 3. The Saints shall be freed from all the worlds temptations; what's in the world is reckoned up 1 Joh. 2. 16. viz. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. But in that day the world shall be burnt up, and be dissolved. There shall not remaine a wicked world to seduce the Saints. The Devil cries, come to me, but he will deceive thee. The flesh cries, come to me, but it will assuredly faile thy expectation. The world cries, come to me, but it will destroy thee: But in the world to come there will be nei∣ther a devil to deceive, nor a flesh to faile, nor a world to flay. And lastly, we are freed in heaven from all punishments of sin, 3. Wee are freed from punishments. all sorrows, calamities, afflictions of all sorts and sizes, Rev. 21. 4. Heaven is a place of rest: There the weary goe to rest: Heaven is a place of security, no enemy can pursue thee there, no persecutor can reach thee there, no slanderous tongue can there do thee harm; there thou shalt be hid from the scourge of tongues; there shall be neither thirst, nor hunger, no sorrow nor mourning: All teares are then wiped away, sorrow and mourning shall flee away. In heaven thou shalt not bee troubled with an aking head, nor with a sad heart: None shall complaine there of fainting fits, nor of stone, chollick, gout, strangury, tooth-ake, or such like pains full of do∣lour and anguish: Nay more than this, after once thou art in hea∣ven, thou shalt no more tast of death; a temporal death thou suffe∣redst before, that was the wages of sinne; but a second death thou shalt escape, as we may read Rev. 20. 14. When once thou gettest in∣to heaven thou art out of gun-shot, out of all dangers, out of the rage and malice of wicked men; the Whip, the Rack, the Block, the Gib∣bet, all the threats of ungodly men, can do thee no harm. Thou hast a life secured from the malice of men and devils: it's a hidden life: 'tis in the safest custody, Col. 3. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God. These are privative immunities. But in the second place, another Reason to perswade us to the Reas. 2. Drawn from Positive Be∣nefits. search, study, and inquisition after eternal things shall be drawn from those positive singular benefits, which the Saints shall reap in eternity. Particularly. 1. They shall enjoy the blessed presence of the holy Trinity, the vision and fruition of God. This is a trans∣forming
sight. They are like unto God so far as a creature can be capable of assimilation unto a deity. Though Saints are not deified & become Gods, yet they are in an eminent manner partakers of the divine nature. They shall see in heaven, God the first being of all, and their gracious Father reconciled to them in Jesus Christ. They shall see Christ, God and man in one person, their Redeemer and Intercessor, and they shall see the holy Ghost their comforter. Nei∣ther shall they as strangers and travellers see other mens Lands, or as men by maps see farre Countries, wherein they have no interest; But they shall see the blessed Trinity as haveing themselves a special interest therein, God as their God, Christ as their Redee∣mer, the Holy Ghost as their Comforter. Tolle meum (saith a Fa∣ther) & tolle Deum. In My God and my Lord, there lith the great consolation. 2. Glorified Saints enjoy the society of Saints and Angels, the 2. Glorified Saints enjoy the society of Saints. spirits of just men made perfect. There they shall see Abraham the father of the faithful; David, a man after Gods own heart, Moses and Job, Mirrours of meekness and patience; Paul, the great Dr. of the Gentiles. There the godly Pastor, and godly People, the godly Husband and godly Wife, the godly Father and godly Children shall meet together. O what pretious company is there! None but holy persons are admitted into the new Jerusalem. Whether the Saints shall know one another in heaven, who have been so well acquainted on earth, is a question much controverted. But there are two Scriptures that make much for the affirmative, viz. Mat. 17. 4. At Christs transfiguration which was a type and glimpse of heaven, Peter knew Moses and Elias, who were dead many hun∣dred years before. Another is 1 Thes. 2. 19, 20. For what is our hope or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our glory and joy. 3. The glorified Saints shall be busied in a rare transcendent 3. Glorified Saints shall be busied in a high em∣loyment. imployment. In heaven they shall be for ever praysing of God, and Selah shall be put to the end of each prayse. Their spirits shall be raised and fitted for that great imployment. Their work will be their delight for ever, to sing Hallelujahs unto him that sitteth up∣on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever more. Thankfulness runneth parallel with the longest line of eternity. It's the language of mili∣tant saints on earth, and of triumphant in heaven to celebrate the praises of God, and blesse his name. Praise is comely. It's both
good and pleasant to express the praises of God. Eternity it selfe will be too little to speak forth the pralses of God. 4. This imployment shall be in our Fathers house. When once 4. This em∣ployment shall be in our Fathers house. we come to Heaven we have fixed mansions, never to be removed. There we shal not sing the songs of Zion in a strange land, but in our fathers house. Oh! how sad a reproach was it when the men of Ba∣bylon tauntingly called upon the children of Israel, sing one of the songs of Zion, v. Psa. 138. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5. And lastly, Glorified Saints shall keep an eternal Sabboth in Heaven. They shall have but one Sabboth in eternity, but that 5. Glorified Saints shall keep an Eter∣nal Sabboth in Heaven. shall be continued, and never cease. And in that Sabboth there shall be no tediousness: Their spirits shall be suited for the greatness of that imployment. There shall be no intermission, nor interrup∣tion: But there shall be one continued strain, one constant act of glo∣rifying God to all eternity. There will be no complaining of double duties, of wearysomeness of the flesh, there shall be no tireing of the spirits. In this Paradise all the spirits of the Saints shall for ever be fresh and green: There shall be no decay of strength, abi∣lities, and fitness for such high imployments. Now put all these things together, consider what we are freed from, and what we get by this future condition of glory, who of understanding would not be in love with these things? who is there that hath but once tasted, that would not desire to drink deeper of these rivers of pleasure? Who is there that knoweth what an excellent life that is which is to come, that would not study, enquire, and labour to get assurance of it? And yet this is the madness and folly of the men of the world, that preferre dross before gold, the transient base things of the world before the pretious treasures of eternity. What now remains, but that I should set all home in an Usefull Use. Of Exhort. Application, and so at present dismisse you. Men, Fathers, and Brethren suffer the word of Exhortation, to make it your business, inquiry, and care to make sure of your eternal condition. O eter∣nity! eternity! This word eternity should ly upon our hearts, it should be in our frequent serious thoughts, and in our retired me∣ditations. In our conversings with men in the world, the conside∣ration of eternity should abide upon us: In our studies let us study for eternity. It was a boasting speech of a Painter that said, Aeter∣nitati pingo: I am sure we ought to study and drive our designes for eternity. We should so improve our time, husband our talents, and
so lay out the gifts and graces which God gives us, as we may take comfort therein to all eternity. O! that men addicted to pleasure, would consider that all the pleasures of sin are bitter sweets, And for all these things God will bring them to judgement, Eccles. 11. 9. And, what? Will yee be such fooles as for a few paultry, vaine, pleasures to hazard your immortal pretious soules unto all eter∣nity? O! that covetous Mammonists would take the consideration of eternity into their thoughts, Wherefore doe you spend your mony for that which is not bread? Isai. 55. 2. How greedily doe men graspe riches, how doe they make hast to be rich, and put both their hands and both their shoulders to purchasse great estates, and never think they have enough, like the horse leaches daughter crying still give, give. And all this while they set their hearts upon perishing things, upon that which is not. v. Prov. 23. 4, 5. But eternity co∣meth not into their thoughts; Transient riches take up their thoughts, heart, all; but eternal riches, a durable substance is no whit regarded. There is a sad example of that miserable rich fool, of whom you may read Luk. 12. 19, 20, 21. O! that all dissem∣blers and hypocrites would lay the thoughts of eternity to heart! How many dissemble and bely their consciences, and pretend one thing openly, when as they intend another secretly. Their hearts give their lips the ly. Did these consider of another world, of an everlasting estate either in happiness or misery, surely they durst not baffle their consciences, and turne any way for temporary ad∣vantage, and in the mean time wound their consciences? Questi∣onless if eternity was more in our thoughts, we should be better in secret, we should pray with more faith and fervency, and be more watchful over our hearts, more conscientious in all our carriages. Did we entertain in our hearts the frequent thoughts of eternity, we should be better in our capacities and relations, better masters, and servants, better parents and children, better husbands and wives. It was the Motto of Meursius a learned man Aeternitate cogita. Did we think of eternity, we should not be so loath to lay out our selves for God; did we consider often how fraile our life is, as a vapour, a bubble, swifter then a weavers shutle, swifter then an arrow out of a bow, swifter then a post, then a thought: Certain∣ly we should not then be so hardly entreated to labour in Gods vineyard. Did such who are intrusted with the inspection of others consider of the account they must give in another life, they durst
not neglect those Depositums, the parents choycest jewels commit∣ted to their trust, and excuse themselves with a distinction per se & per alium, which in eternity will prove an unsound rotten di∣stinction, and will not in the least helpe them out, who eat the bread of idleness. If this consideration of eternity were in the tradesmans thoughts, hee durst not vend sophisticated waes, and couzen in his trade (as if in his trade a mystery of over-reaching were tolerable) O miserable gaine to be penny wise, nd pound foo∣lish, to get a little petty profit in the trade, and in the mean time adventure the losse of an immortal soul for ever! Behold, Brethren, we all stand at the dore of eternity; Thousands of diseases, casual∣ties, molestations may dispatch us; and send us to our long home. Here lieth our great wisdome and understanding, in making ti∣mely provision for our eternal condition. This should be o study, this should be our inquiry, to aske, what means must we use to in∣herit eternal life? What must we doe to be saved? How must we make our peace with God? Yet a little while and our soules shall be separated from our bodies. Yet a little while and grisly death the King of terrours will seize on us; Here then must we be inquisi∣tive, what will become on our souls afterwards? We see God wri∣ting vanity on all sublunary things, and they are full of vexation. The greatest riches are uncertain, and perishing; All the honours, and riches in their greatest estate and confluence, cannot helpe a man in the evil day, nor satisfy an immortal soul, nor bring a man to eternity. Wherefore our great care and wisdome should be, to get an endureing substance, to get assurance of the love of God in Christ, and his love isan eternal love. We should be exhorted in the language of the Apostle, Col. 3. 2, 3. Set your affections on things above, and not on things below. For ye are dead, &c. Let me, in a few words (to press upon you the study of eternity,) adde these Mo∣ving considerations. 1. This study of eternity is an honourable study. It's a most sublime, noble study, suitable to the soul. The understanding of 1. Consid. This is an honourable study. man is a noble faculty of the soul, and what more suitable for such a noble faculty to contemplate, then the thoughts of eternity? God and Christ, and Glory, the blessed vision, communion with the Father and the Son, these are objects fittest for the con∣templations of an immortal soul. What a degenerate sordid thing is it, for Princes children to converse with base persons? All Gods
children are children of the great King of Heaven and Earth, and for such to have their thoughts stuffed with trash and pelfe of the world, O how unsuitable and unworthy is it! The Lapwing is ac∣counted an embleme of infelicity; because she feeds on dung, though she weares a Coronet upon her head. Shall then our hea∣venly-born-being soules be prostituted to Mammon? shall our thoughts be low and creeping? Our thoughts and negotiations ought to be on life and immortality, even the great things of eter∣nity. Our studyes and meditations should be on the things above, heavenly treasures, an inheritance that's immortall, undefiled, that fa∣deth not away. This is that noble, that honourable study, wherein we ought to be imployed. 2. This study of Eternity is a most sweet, delightsome, soul∣ravishing 2. Consid. This study is sweet and delightsome. study. Job on the dunghill was comforted with the con∣sideration of a better life, and a glorious resurrection, Job 19. 25, 26, 27. For I know that my redeemer liveth; and this comforted Stephen, when by the eye of faith he saw Christ, even when the Acts 7. 55. stones were about his eares: his temporall life was then a going a∣way, and he was hastening to a better. That life was transient, this permanent. Oh! how sweet is the meditation of a God reconciled, of a crowne of glory, the price of our high calling. This makes the Saints desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. The consider∣ation of heavenly consolations, sweeten the bitterest pills of afflicti∣ons. For one moment in heaven will abundantly make amends for all our sufferings and sorrows on earth. This serious consideration of Eternity will be a cordiall in all troubles: I have read that Q. Ele∣anor suck'd the poyson out of the wound of the King her-husband I am sure the meditation of our everlasting estate, will suck the poyson out of those wounds which affliction bring. Oh! how de∣lightfull is the thought of a haven to such as are tost up and down with stormes and tempests: This world is a tempestuous sea, rough and troublesome, how delightfull is this meditation to a child of God, to think, I am passing through the rough sea of the world to an eternall Harbour. 3. This is a most profitable study. We read of treasures, crowns, 3. Consid. This is a most profita∣ble study. high places, inheritances, layd up for the saints. In this world riches fail, in heaven is an induring substance. In this world ho∣nours lie in the dust, many are degraded, in Heaven no degradation. That honour is permanent, Godliness hath the promise of this life and
that which is to come 1 Tim. 4. 8. Wherefore then should we carke and care and turmoile for the pelfe of this world, and in the mean time neglect eternal riches? What a doe? What a hurry? What sollicitous turmoyling is here to get estates in this world? What projecting, torturing of mens braines, complying with men and times, to get honours and riches in this world? Whereas all these things are not bread, they are not the true treasure nor abideing substance. But in the mean time how few are there that labour for spiritual riches, and lay up their treasures in heaven. No treasure like this, this onely inricheth the owners. 4. And lastly, this is a seasonable study. What are our lifes but Consid. 4. This is a most seasona∣ble study. a blast? Our breaths soon depart, and then all our thoughts vanish, every affliction, every disease puts us in minde, that here is not our rest, here we have not an abideing citty. Revolutions of Pro∣vidence; read Lectures to us of the changeable condition of the world. What then more proper and more seasonable then to have our hearts took off these transient things, and fixed upon permanent things? There is no certainty here, but there is in another world. The world with all it's bravery passeth away: And there shall be a dissolution of this frame visible to our eyes. How nearly doth it concerne us, and how seasonable a duty is it, to minde heavenly things, to fix our thoughts, meditations, totum hominem, totumque hominis, upon those excellent things of eternity. Let's study this subject more then ever, and let us make more diligent inquiry after our eternal condition.
THE MALE IN THE FLOCK, OR The best must he offered to God, Unfolded from Mal. 1. 14. But Cursed be the deceiver which hath in his Flock a Male and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, saith the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadfull among the Heathen. THe first word (But) imports a Connexion on what went be∣fore. Serm. 9. at S. Mary's Oxon Octob. 21. 1657 1 Gods love. 2 The peo∣ples ingrati∣tude. 1. Wherefore I hope it will be time well spent, to pre∣mise a brief Analysis upon the whole chapter, before I fall upon the words of the Text: The whole chapter may be divided into two parts. The former whereof containes a Protestation of Gods abundant love unto the people of the Jewes: The latter con∣taines a sad complaint and charge against them for their stupen∣dious ingratitude: Then here's abundantly declared Gods singular love unto them and to their father Jacob, v. 2. I have loved you saith the Lord; yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? was not Esau Jacobs brother, saith the Lord? Yet I loved Jacob and I hated Esau, Jacob was elected, and Esau was reprobated. Neither the election of the one, nor the reprobation of the other was upon praevision of workes. All such Arminian Glosses which corrupt a good Text are quite overthrowne by the Apostles Determination Rom. 9. 11, 12, 13. Where this numerical Scripture is quoted and expoun∣ded, 2. 1. Contempt of God. 2. Here's set down the ingratitude of the Jewes. And this brand is set upon their foreheads in legible Characters, as may ap∣pear by these ensueing instances: 1. Their signal contempt of God. v. 6. 12, 13. A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: If then I be a father, where is mine honour? And if I be a master, where is my fear? Saith the Lord of Hosts unto you, O Priests, that despise my name: And ye say, wherein have we despised thy name. v. 12. But ye have profaned it in that ye say, The table of the Lord is
polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible v. 13. 8. Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of Hosts, and ye brought that which was torne, and the lame, and the sick: thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of Proved by 2. Aggravations Aggrvv. 1. From their Relation. your hands, saith the Lord? The aggravations are great. 1. From their Relations, they were sons, and servants, yet though sons, hono∣ured their fathers, and servants, their masters, yet those Jewes were undutiful: Nay they had neae. Relation then this, as Priests conse∣crated after a peculiar manner Quicunque vult: Every one might not take upon him the Priests office; As they might not then, so neither may every one now take upon him the Ministers office. God hath set some Pastors, some teachers in his church Eph. 4. 11. Some cannot signify all, Now the fault was the greater, because they being Priests polluted the table of the Lord, as may appear by comparing v. 7. and 12 together v. 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and ye say wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, the table of the Lord is contemptible: v. 12. But ye have profan'd it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible. A 2. Aggravation is their insensibility v. 6. They expostulate the case, Wherein have we despised thy name? Aggravat. 2 The In∣sensibility of sinne. Thus sinners are apt to excuse themselves, & are not easily brought to an acknowledgement of their offences. And of all others, those staines which are in a linnen ephod are most conspicous: It's a common saying—Nugae in ore Laicorum sunt blasphemiae in ore Mi∣nistrorum. It's Calvins observations—Non levatur culpa populi Calvin in loc. 2. Proof of the Evidence etiamsi gravius sit crimen Sacerdotum: 2. You have the evidence proved v. 7. 8. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar, and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, the table of the Lord is contemptible. v. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? And if ye offer the lame and the sicke, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy governour: Will he be pleased with thee or accept thy person, saith the Lord of Hosts? 3. At last followes the dreadful punishment and 3. The dread∣full Punish∣ment. 1. vengeance of God upon them for their sins, Amongst others three Judgements are most remarkable. 1. Rejection of their prayers and persons both. v. 9. And now I pray you beseech God, that he will be gratious unto us: This hath been by your means: Will he regard your persons, saith the Lord of Hosts? 2. A transferring of Gods worship  to the Gentiles v. 11. For from the rising of the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the gentiles, and
in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering; for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts. 3. A terrible curse in the Text: So the Anathema is pronounced, Cursed be the deceiver &c. Divis. 1. 2. 3. Not to detaine you any longer in the context, The words may be divided into these ensueing particulars. 1. A dreadful curse threatned, or woe denounced. 2. The person decypherd upon whom this curse justly falls (i. e.) The deceiver, hypocrite, jugler. 3. The greatness of his crime which is amplified by these aggravations, 1. He sacrificeth a corrupt thing. 2. This was not done acciden∣tally,  or unawares, but deliberatly. He binds himself with the re∣ligion of a vowe, He voweth and sacrificeth that which is feeble, corrupt, vile, contemptible, and useless. 3. All apologies of ina∣bility, poverty, and indigency are remooved out of the way. Had he been poor and had never a better in his flock, his willing mind had been accepted. In case of integrity of heart the Lord accepts the will for the deed. But this sordid spirited-man, Dolosus Ma∣chinator (as he's usually termed) had a male in his flock, and in contempt to God offers that which was vile and refuse. Wherefore this circumstance aggravates his sin beyond all degrees of compa∣rison. As if the Lord should say, what vile, unthanke-full wretch dost thou thus requite me for giving thee of the best, to make re∣turns of the worst unto me? Do'st thou thus requite me, foolish and  unwise? Lastly here's strength of Reason to inforce the premises: And this is a double one drawn from the Majesty and Soveraignty of God, For I am a great King, saith the Lord of Hosts. The other is drawne from the dreadfulness of Gods name among the Heathen, and my name is dreadful among the Heathen. There may be many choyce Doctrines raised from the words. But I conceive it needful to premise a brief Paraphrase upon the words, which I shall endeavour to doe, by giving resolutions to these three ensueing Inquiries. 1. We are to inquire what we are to understand by the deceiver 1. Drus. in loc. in the Text? For answer Drusius thus brands him. Qui aliud vultu & in oratione prae se fert, & aliud pectore clausum tenet (i. e.) He is one who in his pleasing countenance and speeches pretends one thing, but in his heart intends another. The Psalmist gives such hypo∣crites a remarkable Character Psal. 55. 21. The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart: His words were
softer than oyle, yet were they drawn swords. Now this Deceiver in the Text, which (according to the version of the Interpreters) is call∣ed Quadruplator, Impostor, Machinator, &c. is an errand Hypocrite, who makes many fair pretences, and thereby flatters himself, hoping to collude, and cousen God, conscience, and the world: Hee is a crafty, subtle, dissembling fellow, who is most in semblance, least in substance; greatest in pretences, least of all in intentions: One he is (in a word) that's a Nominal Professor, and a real Atheist: None more forward than he to professe Religion, none more back∣ward to practise what he professeth: wherefore Mr. Calvin on the place giveth him this brand of infamy, Qui ergo putant se posse elabi Calv. in loc. ex Dei judicio talibus artificiis eos Propheta maledictos esse dicit: Such who by such tricks and juglings think to escape Gods judgement, they are accursed persons. In the second place we are to make enquiry what's to be under∣stood  by having in the flock a Male? A. By Male wee are to understand the best of the flock, such as the Law required without blemish, Lev. 1. 3. 10. This Male must have these properties according to Vatablus his observation; It must be Integer, immaculatus, abs{que} ullo vitio. The 70. renders the words  (i. e.) that man that is able to give a better sacrifice: A man of ability to give a Male, and offers a vile contemptible sa∣crifice, O what a horrible affront and indignity is this to God! Haec Hierom. autem dicendo ostendit eos habere quae optima sunt, & offerre quae mala sunt: So Hierome on the place. They had the best in the flock, and yet offered the worst; such are accursed persons, who carry them∣selves thus contemptuously towards the great God of Heaven and Cyril. Alexan. Earth, , so Cyril of Alexandria. This is nothing lesse than contumely and injury offered unto God. 3. What are we to understand by a corrupt thing? A. By a corrupt thing we are to understand that which is weak, vile, feeble, and contemptible: Cyril on the place thus expresseth them; : Such things as seem of no account and reckoning: Such was the basenesse of their spirits in those daies that they thought any thing good enough for God. No Vows, no Ingagements held them fast, so great was their falshood and hypocrisie that they offered the refuse and worst to God: They loved a cheap religion, easie duties, sleight services, wherefore if they could find out any thing more cheap, easie, and contemptible
than another, that these base hypocrites offered to the Lord. These are the deceivers, and notorious juglers which come under the A∣nathema of the Text: I wish there were not an Anabaptistical spawn in these daies, who love a cheap Gospel, and decry Ministers and their maintenance: Some are best pleased with that portion which they have robbed the Ministers of. Insomuch that many will brand Ministers with the odious names of Jewish and Antichristian Priests, though onely for demanding their lawfull dues: And fur∣ther though a Minister demands onely his own (he having as good a right to his tenth part, as any other have to their nine parts) yet the iniquity of these times are such, that many make no conscience at all of defrauding the Minister, Siquid blaeum, siquid debile, si∣quid distortum, that they will allot for the Ministers share: But such cheaters of Gods Messengers will thrive by their fraudulent dealing, no otherwise than the Eagle which stole a peece of flesh from the Altar, and with it took a live coale, which burnt up her own nest. And now the Paraphrase of the words being premised, Here are four Doctrines which lye obviously in the words. 1. All such as deale deceitfully and hypocritically in Gods service,  expose themselves unto the dreadful curse of God. 2. In all our services, it's Gods expectation, and our obliged duty to  offer the best we can possible unto the Lord. 3. It's a high contempt and indignity, to offer any thing vile, refuse  and corrupt unto the Lord. 4. The greatnesse of Gods Majesty, and the estimation that Hea∣thens  have of a Deity do abundantly condemne the contemptuous carriages of seeming Professors, who offer a contemptible sacrifice unto the Lord. Of these I shall fixe onely on the second, as comprehending the rest, which I shall lay down for the ground work of my ensuing Me∣ditations. The other Doctrines will fall in either as Reasons or Ʋses. For the inlargement of the point of Doctrine propounded, my Method shall be: 1. To make strict enquirie, how must our services be performed Method. in the best way, which we ought to offer unto the Lord? or what is that Male in the Text which wee ought to sacrifice unto the Lord?
Then in the second place I am to prove my assertion by Scrip∣ture Testimony. And then thirdly, and lastly, improve the premises in some usefull Application, and I hope so to conclude with the assistance of Gods Spirit, as to prevaile with you to put this Doctrine into practise. (i. e.) To give God your best services, best endeavours, even such as will be acceptable unto the Lord For what was first propounded, The Inquiry being, how must our services be performed which we ought to offer unto the Lord? I shall by way of character give in my Answer in these six distin∣guishing Qualifications. 1. What we do, even all we doe, must come from, and be per∣formed Charact. 1. Al must bee done from the heart. with a pure heart. Purity and Integrity of heart are prin∣cipally lookt after, and esteemed of in Gods accompt. The heart God calls for, Prov. 23. 26. My Son, give me thy heart. And this heart may not be divided; It must be one heart, Jer. 32. 39. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear mee for e∣ver, for the good of them, and of their children after them. It must be the whole heart, Joel 2. 12. Therefore, saith the Lord, Turne yee unto me with all your heart, with fasting, with weeping, and with mour∣ning. It must be all the heart, Josh. 22. 5. But take heed diligently to doe the Commandement and the Law which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to walk in his waies, and to keep his Commandements, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul. Lo then a single, sin∣cere, undivided heart must be offered up to God: And whatsoever we doe, we must do it heartily, as unto the Lord, Col. 3. 23. Quod cor non facit non fit: When one of the Roman Emperours offered a Beast in sacrifice, and it wanted a heart, their Augures upon the observation foretold some strange misery to ensue: I am sure whate∣ver we offer unto God, if wee bring not our hearts with the offer∣ing, all will be rejected. Wherefore the sacrifice of the wicked is abominated by God, because he offereth it with a naughty heart, Prov. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked mind? Charact. 2. We must have regard unto the beauty of the season. 2. In all our services we must have regard to the Beauty of the season; for every thing is beautifull in its season: And a dreadful curse is threatned against all those who brought not the Lord
an offering in its season, Numb. 9. 13. Of this season the Prophet tels us, Is. 55. 6. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Now is the season to come in and close with God, now to agree with thine adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, so we are exhorted Mat: 5. 25. You that are youngest, ought to offer your Male to God, your marrow, vigour, best strength, even all: Consecrate your fresh green years to the service of the Lord, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember now thy creator in the daies of thy youth, while the evil daies come not, nor the yeares draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them, and Micah 7. 1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the Summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the Vintage: there is no clu∣ster to eat: my soul desired the first ripe fruit. O that from your childhood, with Timothy and Samuel you would labour to know and fear the Lord! You that are old, give your old age to God, and be more serious; bewaile with teare; of blood your youthfull sinnes: In good earnest seek the Lord, now though it be the eleventh hour, come and work in the Vineyard; and because you have delayed the longer (which is your great wickednesse) you had need for the future work the harder. And O! that your last daies might bee your best daies. Its an observation of a Reverend Divine, That a Greenham. young man should honour God with his youth, a middle aged man with his strength, an old man with his wisdome: Wherefore lay aside all delayes, demurres, apologies, and vain excuses; and now take the benefit of the season, now lay hold on the golden opportunity, and labour in this thy day to entertain serious considerations of those things which concern your everlasting peace. 3. We must make Religion our businesse: Let this be , the work of works to serve the Lord. The service of God, must be Charact. 3. Wee must make Religi∣on our busi∣nesse. performed seriously and supreamly, Mat. 6. 33. Doe not make an  in matters of Religion: All other things must bee subordinate and subservient unto the Worship of God. Wherefore be exhorted to give God the morning and evening sacrifice. Seven times a day, saith David▪ I will praise thee: Daniel prayed three times a day: Let's not deale so contemptibly with God, as to leave the worst of our time, that part of the day for God, when we are most indisposed for service, shuffling over a few prayers between sleep∣ing and waking, as if such sleight services would be sufficient. Be not deceived, God is not, God will not be mocked: God requires the best of the Flock. I have often been offended, and it hath been
sad upon my heart, to hear mock prayers of Beggars from door to door mumbling over a few prayers: And I have ever thought it a a shame, that such vile wretches should be suffered so to prophane the Ordinance of Prayer, and take the Name of God in vain: But much more are such to blame, who have gifts and abilities, and yet content themselves with a formal service, and a lazie, easie way of worship; such tye themselves to forms, and prescriptions of Anti∣quity, and will force themselves to crutches, not making tryall whether they can goe without. The Spirit is worth the asking for; and there's a comfortable promise, that God will give the Spirit to those that ask him, Luke 11. 13. God promiseth good things to those that ask him, Mat. 7. 11. and questionlesse the Spirit of God is a good thing. 4. Whatever we doe, we must do in Faith; if we pray, we must Charact. 4. Wee must doe all in faith. pray in Faith, Jam. 5. 15. If we hear, we must hear in Faith. What's the reason of barrennesse and unfruitfulnesse in hearing of the Word? It proceeds from the want of Faith, Heb. 4. 2. If we receive the Sacrament we must receive in Faith; for Faith is the maine qualification in a Receiver. The Scripture compares Faith to an eye, Zach. 12. 10. to a hand, Joh. 1. 12. If we want Faith, we have neither eye nor hand: Christs body and blood is meat and drink indeed to the Faith of a worthy Communicant. Now if Faith be wanting, theres a mouth wanting to feed on Christ. The Apostle tels us, Heb. 11. 6. That without Faith it is impossible to please God, and whatsoever is not of Faith is sinne: No services of an unbeleever are accepted in the eyes of God. 5. Whatever we doe, we must do in the Name of Jesus Christ. Charact. 5. All must bee done in the name of Christ. Faith makes not God to be ours, but in Christ: Christ is the object of our Faith, the author and finisher thereof. No services can bee accepted but in Christ; for God will no other way shew mercy but through Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Christ is our peace, Ephes. 2. 14. He is the Mediator between God and Man; He alone hath trod the Winepresse of his Fathers fury. Christ is that brazen Serpent to whom we must look with the eye of Faith, else we shall never bee cured of the stingings of the fierie Serpent. Christ was typified by the dead Bird; the living bird must be dipt in the blood of th dead bird, otherwise no atonement could be made. Christ is that tree, whose leaves convey healing to the Nation; the fountaine o∣pened for sinne and for uncleannesse: Christ is that Shiloh Jacob
prophesied of, that Star Balaam mentioned, that Messias prophesied by Daniel, that great Prophet foretold by Moses. Christ is that great brazen Altar before the Throne, whereon all our Sacrifices ought to be offered. Christ is the beloved Son, in whom the Father is well pleased. He is the new and living way: He is the way, the truth, and life. I insist the longer on this, and am your Remem∣brancer of these things (though ye know them already) and the ra∣ther to settle you in the truth, against those wicked opinions of some, who phansie a Platonick Christ, and of others, who tell us of a Postern-door for Heathens, and are so lavish in their charity as they will bestow a Dowry upon Pagans, I shall urge onely two Scri∣ptures for confutation, Act. 4. 12. Joh. 17. 3. 6. And lastly, let's performe all the services of God with Re∣verence Charact. 6. All must bee performed with reve∣rence. and godly fear; Heb. 12. 28. Wherefore we receiving a king∣dome which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God with reverence and godly fear. The serious consideration of Gods Majesty and Purity should mightily prevaile upon our hearts, and strike in us an awefull reverence of the great and glorious name of the Lord our God. Whether it be Altar-worship, Will-worship, or Men-worship, I look upon them all as abominable. Yet not∣withstanding when I cry down superstitious gestures (farre bee it from me) to cry up irreverent gestures in the worship of God: For any in time of Divine worship to be laughing one upon another, it argueth a slight and vain spirit. To have ones hat on one side ac∣cording to the swaggerers fashion; or partly off, according to a carelesse slovenly fashion, hanging in their eyes, is a scan∣dalous, irreverent, offensive gesture, whilst the Preacher is a pray∣ing. Not a Governour among you would approve of such a ridicu∣lous gesture in your inferiours, when they come before you: Nei∣ther would any of you take such gestures for capping you, and go∣ing bare within the Precincts of a Colledge: And yet this unseem∣ly irreverent carriage is used frequently in publique Assemblies, e∣ven in time of Prayer. I mention this with a hope and earnest de∣sire of Reformation for the future; upon serious thoughts I recom∣mend unto you a reverentiall frame of spirit. Consider the pre∣sence of God and of Angels; how many eyes are over you, both of good and bad; wee ought neither to give offence to Jew nor Gen∣tile, nor the Church of God. Remember the Apostles counsell, Phil. 4. 8. —Amongst other things the Apostle chargeth us to regard such things as are of good report.
I have now dispatcht my first head of Discourse, which in∣deed may serve as an Use of Tryal and Examination, Whe∣ther wee offer unto God a Male, the best of our services? doe wee offer all from the heart? doe wee lay hold upon the Lords season? do we make Religion our businesse? doe we in good earnest set upon the service of God? doe we all in faith, and in the name of Christ, with reverence and godly fear? If in truth and sin∣cerity we can as in the presence of God, give affirmative Answers unto these Interrogatories, then questionlesse we offer unto God a Male; not that there's any worth or merit in our services; for when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants; for there's neither dignitas operis, nec dignitas operantis, sed dignatio Domini, when there is a willing mind, it is accepted. By Faith Abraham offered Isaac; God knew the willingness and integrity of his heart, and it was all one in Gods esteem, as if he had actually sa∣crificed him; for God accepted the Will for the Deed. Now in the second place, I must make good the proof of my as∣sertion; and this I shall briefly doe, by giving in evident testimo∣ny 2. The Doctrine proved. 1. From Scripture. from the Scripture. For Scripture testimony, peruse the whole Levitical Pedagogy: In all Sacrifices the best was consecrated to God; particularly, a Lamb must be without blemish, Levit. 3. 7, 8. This was for a Peace-offering: For a Burnt-offering the Lamb must be of the first year, Lev. 3. 9. Why of the first year? but because it was esteemed the best; and it's there added, it must be without blemish: So likewise fine flower mingled with oyle, must be offe∣red for a Trespasse-offering, Levit. 14. 21. the best of the flowre, and the best of the oyle must be offered unto the Lord. In all offerings of Beasts it's observed, that God gives a special com∣mand, that the inwards and legs should be washt, Lev. 1. 13. A young Bullock ought to be without blemish, Lev. 4. 3. A Ram ought to be without blemish, Lev. 6. 6. The Priests ought to wash themselves: What great purification was required before the re∣ceiving of the Passeover? All these Types proves this Truth, that the best and purest service ought to be offered up unto the Lord: Abel brought the firstlings of the flock, and the fat thereof, Gen. 4. 4. He brought God the first fruits of his encrease, and the best, and fattest of his flock; whereas Cain, like a niggard, cared not what he gave, as though any thing would serve the turn; wherefore Abel was accepted, and Cain rejected. Further, to instance in all
Spiritual sacrifices whereof Carnal sacrifices are but a type: what ever duty or services we performe to God must be with the whole man, so David profest, Ps. 119. 10. With my whole heart have I fought thee. And our love to God must be with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the might, Deut. 6. 5. It's the high com∣mendation of David and all Israel that they played before the Lord with all their might. 1 Chron. 13. 8. And its a singular commenda∣tion of Hezekiah 2 Chron. 31. 21. That in every work he began in the service of the house of God and in the Law and in the Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart and prospered: And to the same purpose we have a parallel commendation of Josiah that rare King 2 Kings. 23. 25. That he turned unto the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might. We read of examples of great sincerity and industry among the Saints of God: We find Daniel upon his watch and fasting, and praying, David mourning, and watering his Couch with his tears, Jacob wrestling with the Angel, and how did he wrestle the Prophet, Hosea informes us. cap. 12. 4. Yea he had power over the Angel and prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him. Let no man deceive himself, for it's not so easy a matter to serve God as he requires: It must be no lazy, careles service: The Apostle gives thanks in the behalfe of the Thessalonians for their work of faith, labour of love, and patience of hope 1 Thess. 1. 3. We read of a straight gate, and a narrow way to heaven: That the Kingdome of Heaven must be took by violence, and onely the violent take it by force: We have a work to work, and we must work it out. Phil. 2. 12.  &c. And there is  2 Pet. 1. 10. We have a battle to fight, and a race to run. We have Methods of Satan to discover, strong holds to beat down, depths to beware of, and devices to find out: All these require singular paines and diligence. Wherefore we had need take unto us the Divine Panoply; we had need to the utmost bend our selves to the service of the Lord: We had need conferre our endeavours to the utmost to offer to God a Male, this best sacrifice and service unto the Lord. Many uses might be made of this Doctrine, as for Exhortation, Reproof, Examination, Instruction and Consolation: I shall at pre∣sent onely six on one onely Use. Use 1. For Exhor∣tation Ʋse 1. Which shall be for Exhortation. Men, Fathers, and Bre∣thren, suffer the word of Exhortation, to give unto God back again
what he hath given unto you the best parts and abilities and en∣dowments, the best sacrifices and the best services: My exhorta∣tion shall be first to all in general, and then to two sorts in a special manner. 1. To all in general, Let me exhort you to give God your mar∣row and strength of your age, the morning of the day, your first thoughts in the morning, let them be consecrated unto the Lord: And if the first fruits be holy, the whole lump will be sanctified. Pub. Scipio first went into the Senate to pray before he went into the Capitol to consult: Christ was at prayer a great while before day. Mark. 1. 35. David prevented the night watches. The Jewes divided the day into three parts, the first was for prayer, the second for the study of the Law, the third for worke. I have read that King Alfred the founder of the ancientest Colledge in our Univer∣sity, divided the day into three parts, eight houres for prayer, study and writing, 8 houres for eating, drinking and sleeping, and eight houres in the affaires of the estate. My Brethren let's all make it our business to serve the Lord with all our hearts. Lets in good earnest with all the members of our bodies and faculties of our souls give up our selves to God: Let's offer all we are and have even a whole burnt offering unto the Lord. Let's give God the best of the best. Let's not sleep away a morning Sermon, and be in our beds when we ought to be in the publicke Congregation: Cannot we rise early enough for our secular interest, and shall we neglect in the mean time the eternal good of our immortal soules? The Queen of Sheba came from the uttermost parts of the earth, and the wise men came from the East &c. And shal any be so lazy as not to step over their thresholds to hear a Sermon? Will men loose this Manna for want of gathering it? Men ought to labour more to be good then to bee great, and to be more careful to discharge their places of preferment, then sollicitous to procure them; What seek∣ing, riding, solliciting, undermining, what scandalizing, supplant∣ing, perfidious dealings are every where to be found? These waies of unbrotherly dealings are very frequently practiced in these evil daies. These things (my brethren) ought not so to be. I fear those times and practises are revived now a daies against which the Prophet Micah complains chap. 7. 3. That they hunt every man his brother with a net: Thence an exhortation is inferred v. 5. Trust not in a friend, put not confidence in a guide. But here lies our duty to doe
all we can to promote the honour of God, to lay out our selves, In∣terests, and all to advance the Gospel of Jesus Christ. We seek our selves every where, our own honour, ease, and Interest: How greedy are many to get more riches, how sollicitous of increaseing their substance? But how careless are men of doing their duties, and discharging the great trust reposed in them? Wherefore the other part of my Use shall in an especial manner be directed to two sorts of Persons, viz. Magistrates and Ministers. 1. Let Magistrates doe their best in their capacity to promote 1. To Magist∣rates. the glory of God. They have great advantages put into their hands, and let them remember that they bear not the sword in vaine: A Magistrate in Gods cause should be like Levi, who knew neither Father nor Mother, nor Brother nor Sister. Of all others a Magi∣strate should be a man of zeale and courage, he should bring the wheel upon the wicked: Be they honourable or worshipful, he should not spare them in their wickedness. Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Sabbath-breakers; these should be punished, and Blasphemers who are as bad as the worst: For their abomination is never the less, because they have so many to plead for them. It's an old Moral Law, never yet repealed, that he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord should be put to death. Lev. 24. 16. What abun∣dance of good may Magistrates doe? How many prizes have they put into their hands to serve God in their places? Let none be afraid to be good: Let them have this Motto or Monitor in their serious thoughts; Those that honour God, he will honour, but as for those that despise him they shall be lightly esteemed. 2. To Ministers. 2. Here's one word to Ministers and so for the present I shall conclude. Must God have the best, then let Ministers offer to God their prayers, studies, best paines. Luther used to say that prayer Meditation and Tentation makes a Preacher, And Bernard used to say Bene orasse est bene studuisse. Let all Ministers pray much; let them first study their own hearts, and then study their sermons, which they preach to their Auditors. The Preacher studied acceptable words. A Minister must be an Interpreter one of a thousand: Gods mouth to distinguish the pretious from the vile: He must have the tongue of the learned to speak a word in due season. I have often thought of Davids resolution to Araunah that he would not offer to the Lord, that which should cost him nothing, Questionless, transcripti∣ons, Extemporary effusions, vain fancies, forced Allegories, Wire∣drawne
Expositions are unbecomeing a Pulpit. There's a curse, upon all those that doe the work of the Lord negligently. Let's all endeavour to approve our selves workemen that neednot to be ashamed. Thanks be to God, There's a choice company of young men, who usually supply this lecture. Their spirits are serious, and their language savory, and they preach solid, Orthodox and soule∣saving Doctrines. I must admire and can neuer enough bless God for the same. The saying is no more common than true, that the hope of our Church is in our young men. I will make no comparisons, I wish from my heart that we were all better, that we would preach more solidly and more frequently. And sor mine own part I am of opinion that those who preach most frequently haveing a single eye at Gods glory, these are the best and most profitable Preachers, and doe most good to poore soules. Let none of us hide our talents in a Napkin. Let's not hide our Candle under a Bushel: But let's imploy frequently this sword of the spirit and draw it out, lest Ducentas octo∣ginta sex Con∣ciones quot∣annis habuit Calvinus ad Popu'ū, Lecti∣ones vero cen∣tum, & octo∣ginta sex, prae∣ter Epistlas, Disputationes &c. Beza in vita Calvin. by keeping it in the scabbard it grow rusty for want of using. When we read of Chrysostomes . I (saith he) preacht yester∣day and to day: And of Calvins indefatigable paines, (as * Beza writes in his life) we may be ashamed that we do no more. Let not any ordained Minister especially stand idle in the market place, and say none hath hired me: There are many pulpits empty both here & in adjacent Parishes. Yo have places enough to visit, were you but of the rare spirit of Amaziah the son of Zichri, who did willingly offer himself unto the service of the Lord. Brethren I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: And in love to your soules, I am your remembrancer of these things. Liberavi animam. And so for the present I conclude; heartily desireing, that what hath been spoken may abide by you, and leave deep impression upon all your Con∣sciences. Serm. 10. At S. Mary's Oxon Nov. 1. 1657. HAveing lately made some entrance on this text, in this place I proceed on in the same use of Exhortation to drive the naile to its full head, pressing upon you all this great duty of the weightiest importance (i. e.) to give God your Male without blemish, that is, in all your services, worship, and
duties that you performe, to give the best of the best unto the Lord. To set this use home, Ile press somewhat closer the duty of the text in these seven ensuing considerations. Consider the transcendent greatness and majesty of God. In my Consid. 1. Thetranscen∣dent majesty of God. text he is called a great King and Lord of Hosts; which sets forth the majesty and soveraignty of God, who is absolute Ruler, Go∣vernour and Commander of all. All the Creatures are made by God; all are sustained and preserved by him: Therefore it's a co∣gent reason ro ingage all creatures to subjection and obedience to their Creatour and Governour. Seneca was wont to say, when we are about a business of great consequence, we should imagine that Scipio, Cato, Laelius &c. were our Overseers: Much more ought we to remember the soveraignty, Dominion, and omnipresence of God. Such serious considerations might prevaile with us to offer the best sacrifices, and services unto the Lord. Gods greatness and power commands our fear and reverence. It's an excellent obser∣vation of Mr. Calvin on the place. The greatness of God ought so to Magnitudo Dei debet nos hu∣miliare, ne e∣um colamus pro sensu carnis nostrae; sed offe∣ramus tantum quod ejus coele∣sti gloria dign̄ est. Calv. in loc humble us, as not to worship God according to our carnal sense: But to offer to him what beseemes his heavenly Glory. Constantine the great, Valentinian and Theodosius called themselves Christs vassls; and well they might, because he is absolute Monarch . All other things are his servants; All creatures are at his sole command. According to our capacities there's but a shaddowing forth and that very darkly of the glory of God. Ezek. 1. Isai. 6 Dan. 7. The Throne is there said to be stately, costly and magnificent. Hence Bernard infers a good note, Omnino oporlet nos orationis tempore &c. i. e. At prayer time when we enter into the Court of Heaven where the King of all Kings sits in state, we should approach with reverence, humility and fear, considering that we are dust and ashes and we make our addresses unto the great God of Heaven and Earth. A second consideration shall be drawn from the infinite Holines Consid. 2. Drawn from the holyness of God. of God. This layeth a strong ingagement upon us, in all our servi∣ces to put forth our selves to the utmost to present unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice. The Lord is holy in his essence, holy in all his wayes; his name is holy, his word holy, his people holy, his worship holy: in Levitical ordinances, all ought to be holy. As for instance the flesh was holy Lev. 6. 27. Whatsoever shall touch the
flesh thereof shall be holy; and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprink∣led in the holy place. The Instruments holy, Numb. 31. 6. And Moses sent them unto the War, a thousand of every Tribe, them, and Phineas the Son of Eleazar the Priest to the Warre, with the holy Instruments and the Trumpets to blow in his hand. The Vessels holy, 1 Chron. 22. 19. Now set your hearts and your soules to seek the Lord your God, build the Sanctuary to bring the Ark of the Cove∣nant of the Lord, and the holy Vessels into the hose that is to be built. The Offerings holy, 2 Chron. 35. 13. They rosted the Passeover with fire; but the other holy Offerings sod they in pts, &c. The ifts holy, Exod. 22. 38. The Oyntment holy, Exod. 30. 25. The Garments holy, Exod. 35. 21. So likewise in Evangelical Ordinances all must be holy, as we may read, Zech. 14. 20, 21. All this is to be un∣derstood of the spiritual service in the Christian Church. The in∣graving of the Priests Mitre, was Holynesse unto the Lord. And this Motto must be upon our hearts and lives. We serve a holy God, who is infinite in holynesse, of purer eyes than to behold the least iniquity. Holynesse becomes his house, his day is holy, his service must be holy. God will be sanctified in all that we approach un∣to him. His Name ought to be sanctified by us, let's not then be so vile as to offer unholy services to a holy God; let's not offer the lame and the blind to the holy Lord God. A third consideration shall be drawn from the equity of the Duty. Is it not most equall, to return, by way of gratitude to God Consid. 3. From the e∣quity of the duty. again that which he hath given unto us? All the cattel on a thou∣sand Mountains are at Gods disposing; all the parts and abilities thou hast are Gods gifts; all strength, vigour, marrow in thy bones are Gods bounty and largenesse to thee; What hast thou which thou hast not received? The Male in the flock is Gods great bounty to thee, and wilt thou not give it back again unto God: Wee read how David prepared with all his might for the house of God, as Brasse, Iron, Silver, and Gold, and precious Stones: Read his humble acknowledgement, 1 Chron. 29. 14, 16. Now shall not we render a Mie in returne for Millions received? shall not we ren∣der a drop of Praises for an ocean of Mercies? Quid retribuam? saith David: David thought no cost great enough for od: Solo∣mon spared for no cost in building the Temple; no more ought Christians to love cheap services and lazy wayes of devotion. We
must think nothing good enough for God: An onely sonne Abra∣ham would offer, Gen. 22. 12. Hast thou a good memory? is that thy best treasure? then employ it to remember thy Creator; hast thou a great judgement and understanding? labour more and more to know God, thy self; and communicate what thou knowest, for the edification of thy brethren. Hast thou strong Affections, as Love, Joy, Desire, &c? let them be placed on God, as that onely centrum quietativum. Hast thou great substance in the world? Con∣sider thou hast the worlds goods but lent and entrusted to thee as a Steward for a little time, and therefore thou must honour God with thy substance, by dealing out thy bread to the hungry, and relieving of the distressed members of Jesus Christ. In a word, whatever thou art or hast, all the members of thy body and faculties of thy soul must be employed as instruments in the service of God. All come from God, and must be employed for God; what he gives to us must be given back again: Wherefore we conclude this Motive with that Apostolical Doxology, Rom. 11. 36. For of him, and through him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. I shall adde a fourth consideration, and that shall be drawn from Consid. 4. Drawn from the credit & reputation of Christian Religion. the Credit and Reputation of Christian Religion, which we should with our lives, livelyhood, and all, endeavour to uphod. Shall Heathens think no cost great enough, no paines, no service suffici∣ent for their false Gods, and shall we grudge at every thing which we doe in the worship of the true God? We read in the Text, that the name of God is dreadfull amongst the Heathens (i. e.) Gods greatnesse is astonishing amongst the Heathen: They have some dread and fear of a Deity, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar and others Drusius in loc. have been forced to confesse the power of God: Quod merito vo∣bis pudorem incutere debet: so Drusius on the place, (i. e.) This consideration ought to make you ashamed, that ye who are my peo∣ple, doe not reverence me; yet the Gentiles reverence and fear my name. The Christian Religion gives not its Professors a Writ of Ease, but presseth upon us running, racing, fighting, wrestling, striving to enter in at the strait gate, contending for the Faith, ta∣king heaven by violence, working out our salvation, giving all dili∣gence to make our Calling and Election sure: If we sit loose from duties, or do them superficially and slightly, we open the mouthes of Heathens and ungodly men to speak evil of Religion: Uncircum∣spect, & carelesse walking of many Professors, causeth the enemies of
God to blaspheme: What will Turks say, they give Mahomet the best service they can, and shall Christians be carelesse in their service to Christ? shall Mahometans be more zealous to serve their false Prophet, than Christians to serve the great true Prophet Jesus Christ. Pliny tels us a story, that Alexander, when he had conquered Arabia, he presented his School-master with a ship laden full of Frankincense, bidding him to spare for no cost when he offered sacrifice unto the Gods. Let not Christians think much of any cost, any pains and service offered unto the great God of heaven and earth. As for instance, our prayers must be fervent, Jam. 5. 16. In giving Almes, we must give with simplicity: in Ruling, wee must rule with diligence, Rom. 12. 8. Love must be without dissimulati∣on, Rom. 12. 9. Faith must be a working faith, 1 Thess, 1. 3. In eve∣ry duty we must put our whole strength to it, remembring the coun∣sel of the Wise man, Eccles. 9. 10. to do with all our mght. It was a great wickednesse in Aigolandus, King of Africa, to scorn the Chri∣stian Religion, because he saw many Christians poor and ragged: But it is much more evil in Christians, especially Professors, by their loose and carelesse walking, to give advantage to prophane men to asperse the Christian Religion: Religion receiveth many a wound by licentious Professors. How nearly then doth it concern all Professors to look more narroly to their paths, to walk worthy of God, as becommeth the Gospel, that to their utmost they may keep up the reputation of Christian Religion. A fifth consderation shall be drawn from the greatnesse of the Consid. 5. From the sin in offering the vile and corrupt. 1 It is a great folly. sin in offering that which is vile and corrupt unto the Lord. This sin is compounded of four ingredients; Folly, Contempt, Presum∣ption, and Sacriledge. 1. It argueth great Folly to put off God with the worst; to pre∣sent unto an omniscient God a worthless sacrifice, is exceeding great folly, and such folly shall not escape unpunished. The heart is known to God; it's that which God principally looks after. He it is which searcheth the heart, and tryeth the reines: A sacrifice without a heart is rejected. In praying, if iniquity be regarded the Lord will not hear, Psal. 66. 18. Wherefore is Ephraim called a filly Dove? the Prophet reners the reason, because he was with∣out Mr. Totshel of Hypocrisie. a heart, Hos. 7. 11. Now the heart is the chiefest thing which God requires, and he requires the strength and bent of the heart, the integrity thereof: It must be one entire, and undivided heart.
Let's not dare to collude with God; though we may deceive our selves and the world, yet we cannot deceive God. It's exceeding great madness and folly to offer to the All-knowing, sin-revenging, heart-searching God, any thing vile and contemptible. 2. It argueth great contempt; v. 13. the words next proceeding: 2. It argues great con∣tempt. v. 7, 8. The lame and the blind are abhominable. God expects an intelligent, reasonable service. Blind devotion, ignorant services are abhominable: That Popish opinion deserves an Anathema, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. God requires the strength and vigour of the whole man: Therefore cold, languishing services, lame, halting services are abhominable. A governour on earth would not be put off with a refuse, sleight present: Jacob commands, Take of the best fruits in the Land, Gen. 43. 11. And shall we present to the great King of heaven and earth a contemptible, vile service? we read Zech. 11. 13. its called a goodly price, by way of scorn and disdain, that such a sordid price should be given: And what was that price? but thirty pieces of silver, about five Marks of our mo∣ny, which (as Josephus, and other Hstorians mention) was the price of a slave. And indeed, abhominable sinners do what in them lies, to put the great God to the condition of a slave, Isa. 34. 24. Consi∣der what a great affront and contempt it would be for a Beggar in his nasty ragge; to come and set himselfe down at the Table of a Prince? How much more is it for prophane persons to sit them∣selves down at the Table of the Lord? No uncircumcised person ought to eat the Passeover, and no uncircumised in heart ought to eat the Lords supper. The blind and the lame, ignorant and scan∣dalous have no right to this Ordinance, because they discern not the Lords body: It's childrens bread, holy food. In the Primitive times, when the Sacrament was to be administred, one cryed out a∣loud, holy things for holy persons. Though unwarrantable separati∣ons do much harm, as one extreme, so I am perswaded that pro∣miscuous Communion will doe as much harme on the other ex∣tream. 3. It argueth great presumption, to presume of acceptance of 3. It argueth great pre∣sumption. that service, which is cheap, sordid, and sleight: For any to think any torn beast would serve well enough for a sacrifice, this was the great presumptuous sin of the Jews: And for Christians to think a base out-side Profession will serve the turn, is a formall, lazy, cheap devotion. The bare sitting out of a Sermon, the mumbling
over in bed those few words between sleeping and waking, Lord have mercy upon me: For people to lick themselves whole, and think to be cured by such sleight Medicines, what's this but high presumption? This is for men to disparage Religion, as a cheap commodity: This is to undervalue the Medicine of Christs blood, by thinking it easie to be had: This is to presume of Mercy at last, though in the mean time men live as they list: But be not decei∣ved, God is not mocked. The work of salvation is not so easie to work out; it will cost sweat, and blood, watchings, fastings, humblings, repentings, and when thou hast done all, thou must de∣ny thy self, and acknowledge thy self an unprofitable servant. Take heed of presuming, and blessing thy selfe in carnall secu∣rity. There's one maine Scripture, which should bee as a Looking-glasse set before presumptuous sinners, Deut. 29. 19, 20. 4. To give God that which is vile, and reserve a better to them∣selves, 4. There is sacriledge in this sinne. to present God with any thing at a venture, when thou hast a better by thee, it plainly proves thee guilty of Sacriledge. The best thou shouldest consecrate to the Lord, the best in thy flock, the best of thy services, the best of the best of thy heart, memory, understanding, will, and affections. Now if thou dost keep back the best from God, thou art guilty of the highest kind of theft, even sacriledge, as we may read. Mal. 3. 8. upon this Scripture a good old Disciple layeth down this Doctrine: That it Mr. Stock on Mal. 3. 8. is a sacrilegious and impious thing for them to with-hold, and with∣draw the Ministers maintenance. Suum merito vocat ac censet, quod destinat in cultum sum (saith Calvin) And if it be a great sinne, as it is questionlesse, to defraud Gods Ministers, and rob them of their maintenance, how much greater is it to rob Christ of his Deity (as much as in Blasphemers lyes) and to rob God of his Day and Worship: The Papists would take away the second Commande∣ment, the Anabaptists the fifth, the Antisabbatarians the fourth, and some Antinomian and Familistical spirits would cut the whole Decalogue off at one blow; these are sacrilegious in a high man∣ner, Consid. 6. Notwithstan∣ding all fail∣ings all will be accepted through Je∣sus Christ. who rob God of his Law and Worship. ut I come to a 6. Consideration: When we have done the best, offered the Male in the flock, though there are many faylings, yet all will be accepted through Jesus Christ: Two things I must premise. 1. That there are faylings in our best services: There are ini∣quities
of the holy things. Exod. 28. 38. The Prophet confss eth himself a man of unclean lips. Is. 6. 5. The best of us all had need be humbled to the dust for those very sins that cleave to our duties, for our distractions, deadness, coldness in hearing, & praying; & when we have done our duty, we had need fall upon our knees, to pray for the forgivenes of our faylings, in the doing of that duty; We had need fast for our fastings, & be humbled for our humiliations, because we have performed spiritual services in a Carnal and Careles man∣ner. But 2. If we doe our utmost from a sincere heart, and offer all up in the name of Christ, through him, we shall be accepted of the Father. Christ is that high Priest that hath entred into the holy of holies, and there he bare the Iniquity of our holy things: He takes away our filthy garments, and cloaths us with the immaculate robes of his righteousness. Our prayers are raw and cold, but Christ mends them in the carriage: Our services are imperfect, Christ presents them perfect to the Father. Our duties have many staines and defilements by our formal slight performance of them: But the Lord Jesus washeth them, and so presents them to the Father. So then in all our services we must act in the strength of Christ: We must offer all our sacrifices upon this brazen Altar, Christ is the onely high Priest that can offer all for us: Nothing of our selves, as of our selves we can doe in an acceptable manner. All we must doe, must be in the strength of Christ, without him we can doe no∣thing, but we can doe all things through Christ that strengtheneth us. 7. And lastly. The last Consideration shall be drawne from the Consid. 7. From the dreadfull curse in the Text. dreadful curse in the Text: The hypocrite, the deceiver, that of∣fers a corrupt thing unto the Lord is under a dreadful curse. It was a heavy jdgement for Cain and Cham to be under a curse: And an Anathema, with a Maranatha at the end of it is the highest Gospel Curse: How dreadfull must the condition of Hypocrites be, who deal deceitfully with God, who (as it is in the Text) make vows and keep mental reservations; who vow under pretence of Zeal, and yet give God the worst. This dissembled Sanctity is double iniquity. But what did Cain meet withall, but a curse for his sleight sacrifice? what did Ananias and Saphira meet withall for their hypocritical juglings and defalcations from the price, but death in the place, a signal judgement? What shall carelesse Mi∣nisters meet withall, but a dreadfull woe? Zech. 11. 17. What shall
they all meet withall which doe the work of the Lord deceitful∣ly, but a dreadfull curse? Jer. 48. 10. Gods curses are terrible, and light heavy upon hypocrites: Though men oftimes cannot find them out, yet God will take them into his own hand; and it's a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. This De∣ceiver in the Text is an accursed person, his sinne will find him out; his juglings, pretences, hypocrisie are all naked unto God, and the vengeance of God will overtake him. Having dispatched this Use of Exhortation, I come now to a se∣cond Use, which shall be for Reproof of that grand Hypocrite and Deceiver in the Text, who hath in his flock, a Male, &c. Within the verge of this Reprehension come severall sorts of Ʋse 2. For Reproof persons, whom I shall single out, and cry aloud against them: As for instance, 1. The Hypocrite, who makes a shew, a shaddow, a pretence of 1. The Hypo∣crite. Religion, without the truth, eality, and substance thereof. The Hypocrite is odious to God and man: Men hate him because hee seems so good; God hates him, because he is not what he seems. He may goe a great way, and deceive men and his own heart for a time, yet he cannot escape the knowledge of a holy, omniscient Lord God. Its the observation of a Reverend Divine, that a Hy∣pocrite is usually discovered before he dye. But though he escape un∣discovered, and unpunished by man, yet the hand of God will reach him: The Psalmist sets him out, Psal. 36. 2. 3. Psal. 55. 21. No man gives smoother words than a Hypocrite; no man more full of complements, none will pretend more friendship, and none will doe lesse: Joab came after such a hypocritical manner to Abner and Amasa, and made his flattering speeches, but a Preface to his Mur∣ther: Ishmael came weeping as he went, before he lew them: Judas kist Christ, and then betrayed him. Multitudes there are that put on a Vizard of Religion to cover their oppressions, trea∣chearies, and Machivillian Pollicies: Such are set forth by the Poet in a lively character, —Pulchra Laverna Da mihi fallere, da mihi justum sanctumque videri: Noctem peccatis & fraudibus objice nubem. I will not English it, would mens contrary practises would make the confutation. But can a Hypocrite think to put off God with the worst (i. e.) shews, phansies, pretences, and airy complements.
Such empty sleight services as come from a rotten heart, are like the Prophets rotten girdle, good for nothing; like Cains sacrifice, like the cutting off a Dogs neck, like eating of Swines flesh, all which are an abhomination unto the Lord. Histories make menti∣on V. Fox Act. & Monum. Vol. 1. of William the Conquerour to have these Characters; He was wise, but crafty; rich, but covetous; faire spoken, but false hearted. If a Professor be guilty of these characters, he is a shame to his Profession. Ananias and Saphira played the notorious Hypocrites: They entred themselves into Church-fellowship, and would have been counted as good Disciples as the best; but they agreed toge∣ther to keep back part of the price; and their sin found them out, and left them as signal spectacles of Gods dreadfull judgement to Posterity. Thus Hypocrites keep back part of the price; they may present their bodies before the Lord in a publick Congregation, but they keep their hearts afarre off: They may doe many things out of custome, forme, desire of applause, reputation amongst men, for fear of the brawling of a naturall conscience, yet notwithstanding their hearts are not right before the Lord. 2. This Doctrine reproves negligent, lazy persons, who are so farre from giving God the best, as they think any thing will serve the turn; wherefore they will be at no pains in Gods service, loth to rise out of bed to hear a Sermon: Solomon describes such, Prov. 6. 9, 10. Men of lazy, supine spirits have alwayes excuses ready at hand, as wee may read Prov, 20. 4. Prov. 22. 13. This sloth∣fulnesse is a very great sinne, when men will not stirre up them∣selves, nor improve their parts and abilities to serve God with di∣ligence. Seneca calls Otium vivi hominis sepulturam: And a lear∣ned Professor calls it Christiani Barathrum. There is a dreadfull D. Arrowsmith Tact. Sacr. doome upon the slothfull servant, Mat. 25. 30. where God gives but one Talent, he expects improvement thereof: But what shall we say of such as have many Talents, great Gifts and Abilities, and yet hide them in a Napkin? It's a hard matter to get some into a Pulpit, though they have been solemnly set apart for that great work, and have dedicated themselves thereunto. Consider with your selves, where much is given, much is required; and for more Ta∣lents entrusted to you, the greater shall your accompt be at the last day. VVhat shall we think of such, who should have inspe∣ction over those that are entrusted to their government, but they faile that trust which Parents repose in them. Children are the
Parents dearest Jewels, and Governours and Tutors are Pro-pa∣rents, or should be so. Now to let youth have their liberty, and runne their course, to let them chuse whether they will come to Prayers or no, to Scholastical exercises or no; this liberty will be their bane; and how heavy an account have those to make to God, who have power to restrain them, yet are of Gallio's carelesse tem∣per. Brethren, let's take heed of sloath, and ease in our places; but let's be vigilant, industrious, and active for God: Let's look to all under us; let's Catechise them, keep them close to Religi∣ous and Scholastical Exercises: For Truants, idle, lazy persons, let's labour to reform them; and if they will not be conformable to Discipline, lets remove them from our Societies, lest their e∣vil example may be the ruin of the Community. Let not such Pleas be received; for they are vain and frivolous; That Gentle∣men come to learn fashions, and intend to stay but a short time, and must they be kept to exercises? It's an experimental observation, that such manner of Drones and slothfull persons, do the greatest mischiefe by their examples unto the place where they live: And upon fur∣ther experience it will be evident, that we had farre better bee without such idle company than have them. Let Joshuahs reso∣lution be our practise: We and our houses, we and all our charge will serve the Lord. Lets quicken our spirits, and shake off drowsiness; we serve a good Master, we cannot take too much pains, nor bestow too much sweat in his service. Thirdly, this Doctrine reproves all such who put off their e∣pentance to Old Age; what's this but to offer a corrupt thing, a lame, and a blind Sacrifice? Thy youth, marrow, vigour, strength should be given unto God. It's a Proverb fetcht from hell— Angelicus Juvenis senibus satanizat in annis. I am sure od beganne with Samuel, Timothy, Josiah in their youth, and in their fresh green yeares they gave up them∣selves to God. That rare King Edward the sixth was a mirrour of his Age for parts and piety in his tender yeares. Young Bullocks were offered up in Sacrifice, Numb. 28. 11. Fresh, green eares of corn were to be offered up to God, Lev. 2. 14. And the soul of God desires the first ripe fruits, Mich. 7. 1. Now what a great contempt is it to think, that old decrepite age, dry bones are
good enough for God (that I may speak with reverence) that is to offer God the Devils leavings. I doe not here set a barre a∣gainst the eldest, but invite them to repent, and bewaile their mis∣spent time: But this is to forewarne, and caution people not to delay repentance till old age; for 'tis doubtfull whether ever thou mayst live to be old. God may cut thee off in the midst of thy youthfull vanities; or if thou livest to be old, it is as doubtfull whether thou mayest have grace given thee to repent then. There's a peradventure whether thou mayest repent: And God gave Je∣zabel Rev. 2. 21. space to repent, but she repented not,. Wherefore it is great madnesse and presumption, and a most high affront unto God, to run a mad careere, and follow the swinge of youth, and to hope for repentance and mercy in old age. But I come to a third Use, which is for Examination. Three Ʋse 3. For Exami∣nation. Inquiries I shall onely make. 1. Whether we give God the best in the duties we perform un∣to him? 2. Whether wee give God the best in the exercises of graces? 3. Whether wee give God the best in our life and conversa∣tion? In all these things God requires a Male, and the best of that Male, in the best of the best duties, the best of the best graces, the best of the best conversation. Let's as in the presence of God, deale plainly and impartially in this Examination. 1. Then, do we give God the best in our duties? doe we give God our hearts, our affections, and wills? Do we doe all our du∣ties as in the presence of God, in obedience to God, with a sin∣gle eye, and respect unto Gods glory? Such questions as these put home, will search to the quick. Amongst others, I shall fix only upon these three instances, emi∣nenter non exclusive (For in all the best is to be given to God.) This Rule admits no exception. The question is, 1. Whether in hearing of Gods Word, we give God the best? Q. 1. Whether in hearing wee give God the best? This is a very weighty duty: And we are often enjoyned to hear, Jer. 22. 29. Faith cometh by hearing, Rom. 10. 17. It's a mark of Christs Sheep to hear his voice, Joh. 10. 27. But amongst hearers, three sorts in four miscarry, according to Christs own computati∣on:
for there are stony, high-way, thorny hearers; the Word of God is lost in all these: Onely the good hearer profits by the Word, and brings forth fruit with patience. Wherefore we are not only exhorted to the duty of Hearing, but to the right manner of performing this duty; Take heed therefore how ye hear, Luk. 8. 18. Now whether in our hearing we give God the best, we are to examine three particulars. 1. How we prepare our selves before hearing? 2. How we demean our selves in hearing? 3. How we behave our selves after hearing? First, before hearing there is required preparation, Eccles. 5. 1. Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God. Publius Scipio first went unto the Capitol to pray, before he went to consult amongst the Senators. Before we come to a Sermon, our duty is to sequester our selves from earthly entanglements. Abraham when he went up to the Mount to Sacrifice, he left his Asses at the foot of the hill: Before the Jews offered Sacrifice, they used many washings and purifyings, Exod. 19. 14. Mephibosheth dressed his feet, when hee went to David. O how should we wash our hearts before we come into Gods presence! Before we come into the place where the name of God is recorded, we should consider of that soveraignty, power, purity, and Majesty of God: We should get our hearts sequestred from the world; our pride, passion, and all inordinate affections should be mortified; we should have our spirits meek∣ned; we should approach with trembling, reverence, and awfull fear of the great and glorious presence of God. 2. In hearing there are two things required; Attetion of the ear, and Intention of the heart. 1. There must be a serious attention; we read Luke 4. 20. The eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastned on him. When we go to duty, we should consider of the presence of God and Angels, and should behave our selves with all reverence in the pub∣lick Assemblies. The Preacher should be serious, grave, reverend, and avoyd all affected phrases, uncouth, unscriptural speeches: He should hold fast the form of sound words. And hearers should de∣port themselves with all reverence: Laughing at one another, idle gazing, wanton glances, roving eys, O! how unfit and unsuitable are they, as at other times, so especially in places of Worship.
2. In hearing there is required intention of the heart: The heart must goe along with the eare; and what we hear, we must labour to let it sink into our hearts, and there make its residence: The heart must be affected in hearing; the heart must act vigo∣rously, and be fully bent upon God. His Word is precious, and none ought to fall to the ground: Wherefore we must rumi∣nate, ponder, meditate, apply, and labour for retentive memo∣ries. This caution is of great concernment, , Heb. 2. 1. VVe must remember that in hearing we deale for life and immortality; we negotiate for Eternity, and drive a trade for our immortall soules: so we must hear to day, as for ought we know, we may never live to have another opportunity: Wherefore the heart must be in good earnest, with all the affe∣ctions thereof set a worke; The Love, Joy, Hope, De∣sire, all must bee seriously fixt and intent upon what wee hear. Thirdly, how we must demeane our selves after hearing. To this purpose I shall mention onely two Duties, which if put in practise, it's without all question, that wee give God the Male. First, it's required that we meditate on what we have heard: 1. We must meditate in the Word. For Meditation is the spiritual digestion of a Sermon. This Mo∣ses, Isaac, and David much practised. It fareth with a good Sermon for the Soul, as with a good meales meat for the Body: By digesting what we receive, we thrive the better: Wherefore after we have heard a Sermon, we must call our selves to a strict accompt, rubbe up our memories, and labour to make what we have heard our owne, that this food may turne into our nourish∣ment, that we may eat and make a good meale, and digest the food of our souls even to eat the roll (as the Prophet did) Jer. 15. 16. Secondly, it's required, that wee yeeld ready obedience unto 2. Wee must yeeld obedi∣ence unto the Word. the VVord of God: For not the Hearers, but the Doers of the Word shall be justified. The life of a Preacher is the Applica∣tion, and the life of a Sermon in Preaching and hearing, consists in the particular Application: what wee heare, wee must ap∣ply, and practise in our lives. Thus we give God the Male in our hearing.
A Second Duty wherein we are to examine our selves in, is Q. 3. Whether we give God the Male in our prayers. whether we give God the Males in our prayers, and supplications? Prayer is a great part of our religion, a great part of worship, wherein God is gloryfied; wherefore I must take the best paines I can to examine this point; whether in our prayers, we give God the best? whether we offer a Male, and not a corrupt thing? For tryall whereof, Il'e lay down some distinguishing characters, to differrence the pretious from the vile. 1. Prayer must be humble, so did Abraham pray, Gen. 18. 27. so David prayed in a most humble manner, 2 Sam. 7. 19. so Jacob, 1 Prayer must be humble. Gen. 32. 9. There's required an humble reverentiall frame of spirit in our approaches and applications unto the throne of grace. Consideration of Gods transcendent majesty and greatnesse, and the apprehension of our own vilenesse should cause us in an humble manner to make our addresses, and preferre our supplications unto the great God of Heaven and Earth. Consider likewise thou art a Creature, dust and ashes, a worme, and no man, a sinner, a Re∣bell, an enemy to God, by nature a child of wrath, This Con∣sideration should humble thee in the presence of the Lord. 2. Prayer must be in faith, Mat. 21. 22. No prayer but that of faith can be accepted: No service but of a Beleever is any 2. Prayer must be in Faith. whit available in the sight of God: Its the prayer of a righteous man, which availeth much: And only beleevers are accounted righteous in the sight of God. 3. Prayer must bee fervent, James 5. 16. Qui timide rogat, docet negare. 4. All Prayer must be put up in the name of Christ Joh. 15. 6. 3. Prayer must be fervent. 4. All Prayer must be put up in the nāe of Christ. 5. Prayer must be with per∣severance. 6. Prayer must proceed from the spirit of Adoption. No petition can be excepted unlesse it be prefer'd in the name of Jesus Christ. 5. This Prayer must be with perseverance 1 Thess. 5. 17. Will the Hypocrite (saith Job) pray alwayes? will he alwayes call upon God? 6. Prayer must proceed from the Spirit of adoption Gal. 4. 6. Many have a gift and are strangers to the grace of prayer. Many use a form, and yet are unacquainted with the Spirit of prayer. Many use prayer as a duty, few as a meanes; Wherefore we must shaddow forth the spirit of prayer, by these propertyes.
1. There's a warming of the heart, the heart powreth out its selfe before the Lord: Hence comes grones, sighes, supplications. The heart is seriously affected. Prayer is rather heart labour, then lip labour, and the heart breakes, and pants after God in prayer: So was Hannah affected, in powring out her heart, before the Lord. 2. There is a Child-like language; There is Abba, Father. 2. Gal. 4. 6. There is much difference betweene the language of Children, and Slaves, Gods children learn his language, and they come as children unto a Father. 3. Their aime, ends, and designes are Gods honour and glory: 3. Self-ends and interests, doe not set men on work to pray; the spring that moves, is love to God, his honour and glory and the end and aime they drive at, is the glory of God. In the next place its inquired, How may we give God the Q. 2. How we may give God the Male in re∣ceiving of the Sacrament? Male in receiving of the Sacrament. For Answere hereunto we are to note, that if we rightly ex∣amine our selves, we may participate of the Sacrament; To which purpose I will set down. Self-examining-objects, Self-examining-propertyes, and Self-examining-graces. 1. For self-examining-objects, and they are either thoughts, Words, and Deeds; as 1 For our Thoughts, we must examine whether they are san∣ctifyed 1. Self-exami∣ning-objects. 2. Self-exa∣mining-Pro∣pertyes. 3. Self-exa∣mining-gra∣ces. Jer. 4. 14. 2. As for Words, they must be such as minister grace to the hearers, Col. 4. 29. and 3 As for our Actions, they must be such as become the Gos∣pell. Phil 1, 27. 2. For self-examining-propertyes, they must be, 1. Thorough and Impartiall, we must take notice, both of lesse and greater sinnes: No sinne must escape us, without due and serious examination. 2. Regular; The rule of the word must be that whereby we must try and examine our whole life, we must bring all to the Law and Testimonye: Then 3. For Graces, we are to examine in these especially.
1. Knowledge is required, whether we discern the Lords bo∣dy: An Ignorant, blind devotion is abominable, and rejected by God; we must know the nature of a Sacrament, the Institu∣tor, the end of it: we must know our happynesse by creation, our misery by sinne in Adams fall, our restored condition by Christs Redemption, the benefits of Christs purchases, viz. Justi∣fication, Sanctification and Glorification. 2. Faith is required, and this must not be Temporary, Histori∣call, Dogmaticall, but a Justifying faith, such a one as purifieth the heart, Act. 15. 9. as is unfained and worketh by lowe. 3. Repentance, this must be Evangelical: This Repentance must have these fruites 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. 4. Love, both love to God, and love to the Brethren: Joh. 13. 47. Love is the badge of a Disciple. 5. New obedience, newnesse of life is required, Isa. 55. 7. And thus we must give God the Male, in the celebration of his Ordinance. But the next Question hath some affinity unto this: Q. 2. Whether we give God the best in our graces? Q. 2. Whether we give God the best in our Graces? Not to instance in what I instanced before, Ile propound other instances, viz. In Humility, Meeknesse, Temperance, Wisdom. 1. Doe we give God the Male in the exercise of the grace of Humility? There may be a voluntary Humility, and a naturall humble carriage, but the question is, whether we have that Hu∣mility which is of the same stamp with spiritual Poverty? whether self be emptied, Christ advanced. 2. For Meeknesse; there's in some a more natural inclination to Meeknesse: But when we are provoked to wrath, do we then shew meek spirits to bear and forbear with others? to overcome e∣vil with good, to heap coales of fire upon enemies heads? 3. For Temperance; where is our sober, temperate carriage, in Abstinence and Moderation? Phil. 4. 5. 4. For Wisdome; doe wee labour for Wisdome, Divine Wis∣dome, and honour God with it? lay forth our parts, interests, and all to honour God withall? Q. 3. Whether we give God the Male in our whole life & conversation? Q. 3. Then the last Question is, whether we give God the Male in our whole Conversations? To which purpose by way of character we must decypher out such a Conversation.
1. It must be holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1. Holy. 2. Sincere. 3. Universall. 4. Wise. 2. It must be sincere, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 3. It must be universall, Ps. 119. 6, 101. 4. It must be wise and ordered with discretion; the wisdome of the Serpent is required as well as the innocencie of the Dove. 5. Fruitfull. 5. It must be fruitfull in the exercise of good works: A Christi∣an Conversation is not barren, it must bear twins. 6. Regular, 6. It must bee regulated according to the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. Ʋse 4. For Directi∣on. The fourth Use in order is for Direction: For the better set∣ting home this Use as may be most profitable for you, I shall en∣deavour to answer two Queries. The first whereof is; what impediments and obstacles we should remove that hinder us from giving God the best? Then secondly; What special duties are required to shew the Q. 1. What Impe∣diments are to bee remo∣ved. Imped. 1. Ignorance. sincerity of our hearts, that we offer God the Male, even the best of all our services? For answer unto the first Question; the Impediments are these especially. 1. An ignorant, blind mind; when people understand not the excellency of Jesus Christ, they will brayd of the Gaderenish humour, they preferre their swine before him. There's ignorance sufficient, when they askt, what is thy Beloved more than another beloved? Cant. 5. 9, 10. But the Spouse gives an experimental an∣swer, v. 10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thou∣sand. 2. A frothy and vaine spirit: How many entertain a low and Imped. 2. A frothy vain spirit. cheap opinion of Religion, and think any thing will serve, as if any thing were good enough for God? Such a slight service was done by Gehazi, he went on before, and layd his staffe upon the child, and there was no appearance of life in the child; but the Prophet Elisha layd his hand on the childs hand, his mouth on the childs mouth, &c. and in good earnest set upon the work, and the spirit of the child revived. It's the observation of a Reverend Mr. Jerem. Burroughs. and precious Divine, that of all spirits, hee desired to be delivered from a frothy spirit: it's therefore a matter of lamentation, and ought in good earnest to be bewailed, to consider with what irre∣verence,
formalities, and slightnesse of the spirit many set upon duty; some will pray partly between sleeping and waking, so drow∣sily, that they can scarce pronounce their words aright; Others will mumble over a few words of course in their beds. Neither of these think of that reverence that belongs to the great God of hea∣ven and earth, and that he requires the Male, the best we can offer unto him. A third Impediment is a worldly spirit: A heart swallowed up Imped. 3. A wordly spirit. with the love of the world will never give God the best; such spirits wil grudge any thing for God, because the world hath seized on their spirits, and took up their affections: Their breath, words, conversations, even all favours of the world. Now this love of the world is the root of all evill, and enmity against God: Demas for∣sook the Apostles society: The young man preferred earthly trea∣sures before heavenly; where the world sits close, and the heart is enamoured with the love of the world, there Christs riches and his excellencies are undervalued. A fourth Impediment is an unbeleeving heart. Christ is not a Imped. 4. An unbelee∣ving heart. whit regarded amongst unbeleevers; onely beleevers account him precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. He that knew the worth of the pearl of price, and beleeved there was such vertue in it, sold all to purchase it, Mat. 13. 46, 47. These Impediments being removed, some speciall duties ought to be practised. 1. Alwaies set before thine eyes the great God of heaven and Dut. 1. Set God be∣fore thine eyes. earth, as omnipresent, pure, and omnipotent, who seeth, knoweth, and searcheth all hearts. This consideration will make thee afraid to present any thing vile and refuse unto so great, so holy a Lord God. How thou prayest in thy closet, what thy secret, reserved thoughts are, what thy intentions are in any duty, all are naked unto that great and glorious Majesty with whom thou hast to deale. 2. Labour for sincerity of heart. That's it which will carry thee Dut. 2. Labour for sincerity of heart. through all brakes, bryars, difficulties, and perplexities whatsoever. It's said, Asa's heart was upright, there's a neverthelesse put in, 2 Chron: 15. 17. It's this which comforted Hezekiah when the sen∣tence of death was past against him, 2 King. 20. 3. It's that which God requires, even truth in the inward parts, Ps. 51. 6. It's that
which is the cause of rejoycing, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Nathaniels character, to be an Israelite indeed without guile: Joh. 1. 47. The upright are they which love Christ, Cant. 1. 4. And they are Gods delight, Prov. 11. 20. Their Tabernacle shall flourish, Prov. 14. 11. Their high way is to depart from evill, Prov. 16. 17. They walk surely, Prov. 10. 9. and no good thing will God withhold from them, Ps. 84. 11. Their end is peace, Psal. 37. 37. Upright walking with God will carry a man through all troubles whatsoever, and in life and death will yeeld matter of abundance of consolation. 3. Embrace the present season of Grace; Seek ye the Lord whilst Dut. 3. Embrace the present sea∣son. he may be found, call ye upon him whilst he is near, Isa. 55. 6. Now give God your strength and marrow, and lay aside all delayes, Apo∣logies, and Procrastinations. 4. Be much in Prayer and Supplication, that what ever thou Dut. 4. Be much in Prayer. dost, what duty, whatsoever service thou offerest unto God, that he would accept thee through Jesus Christ. As the Ancients held the Plough and prayed, so hear and meditate on Gods Word, keep the Lords Sabboth holy, and pray for a blessing upon all from heaven: Blesse Lord his substance, Deut. 33. 11. 5. Make Religion thy work, the grand design thou drivest: Let Dut. 5. Make Religi∣on thy work. thy generall calling as a Christian have the preheminence of thy particular calling in the world; Seek first the Kingdome of God, Mat. 6. 33. The last Use is for Consolation unto those who to the utmost in Ʋse 5. For Consola∣tion. sincerity of heart endeavour to walk before the Lord. Thus Enoch walked with God, Gen. 5. 24. Zachary and Elizabeth walked in Gods Commandments blameless, Luk. 1. 6. David was a man after Gods own heart: Yet the best of Gods children have their failings, Jacob confest himself not worthy of the least of Gods mercyes, &c. David confest himself as foolish as a bruit Beast, and wise Agur ac∣knowledged that he had not the understanding of a man. It's a great cause of greif, and a burthen to the spirits of Gods dearest children, to consider how much they faile in duties: Their dulnesse, dead∣nesse, disorder of spirit much afflicteth them. What I shall further adde shall be comprised in these ensuing considerations. Consid. 1. Infirmities are incident to the best. 1. Infirmities are incident unto the best of Christians; I sleep (saith the Spouse) Paul complains of a body of sin, and of flesh, and of an antipathy between flesh and spirit.
2. Gods children allow not themselves in sinne, but mourn Consid. 2. Gods childrē allow not themselves in sin. Consid. 3. Sincerity is accepted. Consid. 4. Where since∣rity is, there is an endea∣vour after more grace. Consid. 5. Others exam∣ples are not just standards Consid. 6: Perseverance shall obtaine the Crown. for sinne: Sinne is their exceeding great grief and burthen. 3. Where the heart is sincere, it is accepted; a willing mind is accepted, 2 Cor. 8. 12. 4. Where the heart is sincere, it is not contented with what it hath already attained, but labours for more grace, Phil. 3. 13, 14. 5. Consider, that others examples and attainments are not that standard, for every one to measure himself by: No examples but that of Jesus Christ is every way authentique. Some will say on one hand, Such and such goe no further, and will not this serve my turne? others say, such goe so farre, and if I cannot come near them, I may justly suspect my self to be an Hypocrite. Neither this nor that must determine us. 6. And lastly consider, that Perseverance shall obtain the Crown, Rev. 2. 15. Many beginne well, and fly back. Of all, Apostates are most hated by God: But as for such who persevere in Grace, and walk in sincerity before the Lord, these shall be happy unto all Eternity; these having been faithfull unto the death, shall receive a Crowne of Life. {inverted ⁂} The End of the Second Decad.
A THIRD DECAD OF SERMONS. PREACHED TO THE ƲNIVERSITY, AT St MARIES IN OXFORD. By HENRY WILKINSON, D. D. and Principall of Magdalen Hall in OXFORD. 2 Tim. 1. 13. Hold fast the forme of Sound Words, which thou hast heard of me, in Faith, and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. OXFORD, Printed, by W. H. for THOMAS ROBINSON Anno Domini M.DC.LX.
TO THE READER. I HERE present unto thee (Christian Reader) A third Decad of Sermons, of the same com∣plexion with the rest, answering those two imme∣diatly preceding, as face in water answers face. By them the Author may be knowne to be one and the same man, not varying a whit from his Prin∣ciples, by reason of vicissitude of times. The first of these Sermons was preacht at the Publick Act, and was formerly printed which (notwithstanding the derision of some) through the Incouragement and approbation of others (whose Judgment I preferre many degrees before my owne) is now againe presented to publick View in this se∣cond Edition. None of the other sermons of this Decad, and none of the two other Decads were ever yet printed before: neither had now, if some both Godly and Learned (who are better able to judge) had not thought farre better of them, then I ever durst of any thing of my own notwithstanding what paines soever it cost me. It's farre from my Intention to justify my selfe, but I shall alwaies with Jacob acknowledge my selfe, not worthy of the least of all the mercyes, and of all the Gen. 32. 10. truthc which the Lord through riches of mercy hath shewed unto me. It cannot be denyed, but ought to be acknowledged with renewed thank∣fulnesse, that now adaies we have more helps on all hands, if we had our eyes in our Heads, and greater advantages then our Predecessors ever enjoyed since Printing came up: And since the Gospell in it's Purity and Liberty was restored unto England (as Reverend Lati∣mer used to pray that God would restore the Gospell unto England once againe, once againe) We have variety of Prices both by prin∣ting and preaching, put into our hands to get divine wisdome with∣all. Oh! that we had this great mercy of mercyes vouchsafed to us, that the Lord would bestow upon us such good hearts as to Husband, and improove all those spirituall Talents for the best advantage of our immortall soules. That saying of a Learned Author hath often come into my deliberate thoughts—Ideo scribuntur omnes Libri, ut unus emendetur conscientiae. Now if by any thing that I have wrote, the
of Christians may thrive the better, and be built up in their faith, I have my desire accomplisht. Not unto me, not to the best of my paines and endeavours, but unto the name of Jesus Christ be all the praise and glory. It's not my purpose to detaine thee (Reader) in a lon∣ger Epistle. Only thus much I thought good to premise, to assure thee that this last Decad is of the same stamp, and breaths forth the same spirit, and pursues the same plaine stile with those two which accor∣ding to order went before; The designe I only drive at (as farre as I apprehend) is the eternall good of mine and thine immortall soule; so that our profitting may appeare unto all, that some addition may be made unto our spirituall stature. Be pleased therefore to read de∣liberately, and to joyne prayer and meditation with reading. Lay aside all prejudicate opinions, and through the meannesse of the Instru∣ment, look with the eye of faith unto Jesus Christ the great Counsel∣lour, and Prophet, who directs and instructs his people, and guides them unto all truth: And what ever good thou receivest, give Christ the praise of all, and set the Crowne upon his head alone. And in thy serious addressesse unto the throne of grace, remember him which in love to thy soule hath made these sermons publick. Do not despise the day of small things, undervalue not the Reare of the Christian Ar∣my. Do not entertaine a slight opinion of any of the meanest, (yet faith∣full) Labourers in Gods Vine-yard, who desires and endeavours to approove himselfe faithfull; such a one I desire to be, and remaine Thy servant and Brother in Christ Jesus, HENRY WILKINSON.
The Contents of the Third Decad. SERM. I. 2 COr. 5. 20. Now then we are Am∣bassadors for Chrit, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, be yee reconciled to God. The Context expounded. p. 2, 3, 4. The Text divided and expounded, p. 5, 6, 7. The Doctrine handled by prooving, and improoving all by particular Ap∣plication, p. 9. The Doctrine prooved first by Scrip∣ture, p. 10, 11. Then by three Rea∣sons, 1. From foure Properties of Am∣bassadors, p. 12, 13, 14, 15. 2. From the Benefit of a reconciled estate, p. 16. 3. From the misery of an unreconciled estate, p. 17. Ʋse for Exhortation, 1. To Mini∣sters, p. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 2. To people, p. 25. 3. Characters of a recon∣ciled estate, p. 27, 28, 29, 30. Five Mo∣tives, p. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. SERM. II. HEb. 1. 14. Are they not all Mi∣nistring spirits sent forth to Mi∣nister for these, who shall be heires of salvation? Text divided, p. 38. Doct. It pleaseth God to make use of the Ministery of Angels, for the good of his Children, p. 38. Q. 1. What Angels are, p. 39, 40, 41. Q. 2. How many sorts of Angel sthere? p. 42, 43. Q. 3. What are the offices of Angels? p. 43, 44, 45, 46. Q. 4. Whether every Saint hath a peculi∣ar Angell keeper? p. 46, 47. Q. 5. What is the knowledge of Angels? p. 47, 48. Ʋse 1. For Information in 2 parti∣culars, p. 49, 50. Ʋse 2. For Instructi∣on in 3 particulars, p. 50. Ʋse 3. For Consolation in 3 particulars, p. 51. SERM. III. 2. CHron. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and for through∣out the whole earth, to shew himselfe strong in the behalfe of those whose heart is perfect towards him, p. 52. Text divided, p. 53. Doct. 1. That there is a Providence of God, which extends it selfe to the or∣dering and governing of all the crea∣tures throughout the whole world, p. 55. The Doctrine prooved by Scripture, p. 55, 56. And by 6 Reasons, p. 57, 58, 59. Of the nature of Providence, p. 59, 60. Ʋse 1. For Confutation of Epi∣cures &c. p. 61. Ʋse 2. For Reproofe, ib. Ʋse 3. For Instruction in 6 Duties p. 61, 62. Doct. 2. As there is a generall pro∣vidence towards all: so there is a spe∣ciall distinguishing Providence to∣wards all Gods children, p. 62. Doctrine prooved by Scripture ex∣ample, p. 62, 63. By 6 Reasons p. 64, 65.
Ʋse 1. For Reproofe, p. 65. Ʋse 2. For Instruction, p. 66. Ʋse 3. For Consolation, six Duties prest▪ pag. 66. 67. SERM. IV. I Sai. 66. 6, 7. Yee that make men∣tion of the Lord keep not silence, and give him not rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a prayse in the earth. The Text divided and expounded, p. 69, 70, 71. Doct. That its the obliged duty of all the Children of God, to be earnest and assiduous suitors at the Throne of Grace in the behalfe of the Church of God, p. 72. Method of handling the Doctrine, 1. By propounding parallell Exam∣ples, p. 72, 73, 74. 2. By Scripture Precepts, p. 74. 3. By 3 Reasons, R. 1. In respect of God, p. 75. R. 2. In respect of prayer, p. 76, 77, 78, 79. R. 3. In respect of the Church, p. 79, 80. Ʋse for Reprehension, p. 80. 81. Ʋse 2. for Exhortation, p. 83. 4. Things especially to be prayed for, p. 83, 84, 85. 2. Motives, p. 86, 87. Ʋse 3. for Direction. 1. We must pray in faith, p. 87. 2. With fervency, ib. 3. With perseverance, p. 88. Ʋse 4. for Consolation, ib. SERM. V. GAl. 5. 24. And they that are Christs, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, p. 89. Doct. 1. That there are a peculi∣ar people that are Christs, and have speciall Interest in him, p. 89. Doctrine prooved from Scripture Testimony, p. 90. What it is to have Interest in Christ? ib. 4. Reasons drawne, 1. From the Promises 2. From the Fathers Dona∣tion. 3. Christs Redemption. And 4. From the sanctification of the spi∣rit, p. 91. What are the Benefits of those that are in Christ! Ans. In five particu∣lars, p. 91, 92. Ʋse 1. for Consolation, p. 92. Ʋse 2. for Exhortation, ib. Ʋse 3. of Ex∣amination: five Notes of Triall, ib. Doct. 2. Those that have Interest in Christ, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, p. 93. Method propounded. 1. What's meant by flesh? p. 93. 2. What's meant by affections and lusts? ib. 3. What's meant by crucifying the flesh? p. 94. 4. The Doctrine prooved by three Reasons, p. 95. Ʋse 1. for Information, p. 96. Ʋse 2. for Reproofe of three sorts, p. 96, 97. Ʋse 3. for Exhortation, pressed by three Motives, p. 97. Ʋse 4. for Exa∣mination, foure Properties of a Cruci∣fied person, p. 98, 99. Ʋse 5. for Di∣rection, 1. What we are to Crucify, p. 99. 2. What duties are to be put in practise, Ans. in 7 Duties, p. 100, 101. Ʋse 6. for Consolation, An Ob∣jection  answered in six particulars, p. 101, 102.
SERM. VI. ROm. 5. 8. But God commendeth his love towards us, in that whil'st we were yet sinners Christ died for us, p. 103. The Context opened, p. 103, 104. Doct. That the death o Christ for snners is an Evident Demonstration of the Love of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Chrit, p. 104. Method propounded. 1. By xplication. Q. 1. Where∣in consists the love of God the Fa∣ther? Ans. p. 105. Q. 2. Wherein consists this love of Chrit? ib. and p. 116. Q. 3. Did not Heathens dye, where lyeth the difference, Ans. p. 109. six Propsitions, p. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113. Three Objections answered, p. 113, 114, 115. Ʋse 1. for Infor∣mation in five Particulars, p. 115, 116. Ʋse 2. for Examination, six fignes given o those that have Interest in this distinguishing love, 116, 117, 118. Ʋse 3. for Exhortation, branch∣ed into six particular Duties, p. 118, 119. Ʋse 4. for Comfort, foure Be∣nefits of this speciall lve, p. 119, 120. SERM. VII. 2 TIm. 2. 19. And let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from Iniquity, p. 120. The Context opened, p. 121, 122. The Text divided and expounded, p. 123, 124. Doct. That wheresoever there is the Profession of Christianity, there ought to be a Godly life and Conver∣sation, every way sutable and corre∣spondent therewith, p. 124. The Doctrine handled. 1. By Scripture Testimony, p. 125. 2. Confirmed by foure Reasons, 125, 126. 3. Applied in foure Ʋses, 1. for Information, p. 127, 128. Ʋse 2. for Examination, foure Characters, p. 129, 130, 131. Ʋse 3. for Exhortati∣on in three Motives, p. 131, 132. Ʋse 4. for Direction, 1. How we must de∣part from Iniquity? Ans. foure waies, p. 132. 2. What meanes must be u∣sed? Ans. 6 Meanes directed, p. 133. 134. SERM. VIII. JOh. 8. 24. For if yee believe not that I am he, yee shall dye in your sinnes, p. 135. Context opened, p. 135, 136. Doct. That of all sinnes, Insidelity especially is a grand-damning sinne a∣gaint the Gospell. Method, propounded. 1. What Infidelity is? Ans. in five particulars, p. 137, 138, 139, 140 2. The Aggravations of unbeleefe in 6 particulars, p. 141, 142. 3. By 5. Ar∣guments the Doctrine is confirmed, p. 142, 143. 4. The Doctrine is applied in 6 Ʋses. 1. For Reproofe, p. 145. 2. For Caution in 4 particulars, p. 146, 147. 3. For Exhortation in 2
Motives. 1. Drawne from the Benefit of faith, p. 147. 2. From the mischiefe of unbeleefe, p. 147, 148. 4. For Exa∣mination 5 signes of faith, p. 148, 149. Three signes of unbeleefe, p. 149. 5. For Direction, 4 directions, p. 150. 6. For Consolation in 5 particulars, p. 150. Objections of unbelievers answered, p. 151, 152, 153. Objections of Misbe∣lievers answered, p. 153, 154. Obje∣ctions of Weak-believers answered, p. 154, 155, 156. SERM. IX. HAb. 3. 18. Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. The Context opened, p. 157, 158. The Text divided, p. 160. Doct. Amidst all sorrowes, lossesse, and crossesse, joyes, supplies and com∣forts are to be found in the Lord our God, p. 161. 4. Arguments in the Text explain∣ed, p. 163, 164, 165. 5. Demonstrations added for Con∣firmation, p. 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175. Three Ʋses, 1. For Consolation, p. 176, 177. 2. For Exhortation. 1. To make God our joy, p. 178. 2. To make God our Treasure, p. 179. 3. To make God our Refuge, p. 179, 180. Ʋse 3. For Direction. 4. Impediments to be remooved, p. 181, 182. 3. Duties to be practiced, p. 182, 183. SERM. X. ROm. 12. 2. But be yee transform∣ed by the renewing of the mind. Doct. Every Person who is really Converted, is transformed and chang∣ed in the renovation of his mind, p. 184 Method propounded. 1. Whats understood by transformati∣on: Ans. p. 185, 186. 2. Whats meant by the renewing of the mind, p. 187. 3. The Doctrine by Scripture prooved, p. 188, 189. 3. Cautions premised, p. 189, 190. 4. The Doctrine applied in 4 Ʋses, 1. For Information, p. 190. 2. For Examination wherein are 6 False glasses discovered, p. 191, 192, 193, 194, 195. Three signes of Reall Conversion, viz. Ʋniversality, Since∣rity, and Perpetuity, p. 196, 197. Ʋse 3. For Exhortation, 3 Motives pres∣sed, p. 197. Ʋse 4. For Consolation, 3 Priviledges of such as are really con∣verted, p. 198. ERRATA. Pag. 4. Marg. r Calvin: In the same margent r delect i. p. 124. Marg. r. nominet credens verum discedat. p. 125. l. 14. r. implied. p. 127. l. 20. r. Angell. p. 185. l. 7. r. then. p. 186. l. 10. r. soever. p. 186. l. 16. r. which is. Other Errataes the Rea∣der is entreated to amend.
DECAD III. OF SERMONS, PREACH'D AT St MARIES OXON. 2 Cor. 5. vers 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did Sermon. 1. at S. Maries Oxon July. 11th 1658. being Act Sab bath day morn∣ing. beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, be ye recon∣ciled to God. WIthout controversie, great is the mystery of Godliness. 1 Tim. 3. 16. The word Omnium con∣fessione mag∣num Ambros. Ad verbum declarat pari∣bus verbis lo∣qui, ut iis so∣lent qui peten∣tibus assenti∣untur. Beza. in Luc 22. 6. Ezek. 1. 16.  car∣ries an Emphasis with it in the determination of the Apostle. And what he asserts, he as strenuously proves by an induction of particu∣lar instances in the place forecited, viz. God was manifest in the flesh, justifyed in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world received up to Glory. Every one of these taken severally is a transcendent mystery, as we read in Ezekiel, There was a wheel in the middle of a wheel: So here is one mystery involved in another. Now forasmuch as we find the Well deep, and have not wherewith to draw, since we are not able to fathom the depths of such mysterious things, let's all as one man stand astonish'd with an holy admiration of the wonderfull counsels of God, lay aside all curious disputations and learn to believe. However so far forth as we can meet with a Scripture Clue, we may not be wanting in our best endeavoures to wind our selves
out of all the Labyrinths whatsoever. Now to the business that lyes before me, even the great mystery of Reconciliation (which I have selected for the Argument of my ensuing meditations) that I may the better cleer a passage to my Text, I'le review what the Apostle principally instanceth in, as one of the greatest mysteries 1 Tim. 3. 16. of Godliness, viz. . This is the stupendious, unparallel'd mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, and this leads the Van to all the rest, as having priority of dignity and order both. This is one of those mysteries which the Angels desi∣red to peep into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. They stoop down, and with all dili∣gence sift and enquire into these mysteries. And if a comparison Prono capite & propenso collo accurate introspiciunt Beza. Omnia summa diligentia ex∣plorant, ac con∣tuentur dili∣genter. Are. Zach. 13. 7. may be admitted with mysteries amongst themselves, questionless this mystery of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, is the mystery of mysteries. Eternity it selfe will be little enough for us, fully to comprehend it. That the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternall Son of God, equal with the Father, fellow, and fellow-like with God, as great, and as good as himself, should assume humane nature, and unite a clod of earth unto his Divine person, and become Immanuel God with us,  God and man in one person by an hypostaticall union; the tongue of men and Angels can never enough inhance the singularity of this mystery. That this may be shaddowed forth according to our capacity, Q. A. my endeavour shall be to solve one grand question, viz. What was the great designe and end of Christs incarnation? I answer with the Apostle Paul, Hinc non est cur miremur tam sero Chri∣stum venisse in carnem, venire enim debuit non cittus quam  coelestis Patris exacta esset. Pareus in Loc. Gal. 4. 4, 5. But when the fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son made of a woman made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Further the Apostle gives an attestation unto this truth, 1 Joh. 3. 8. For this purpose was the Son of God manife∣sted that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Wherefore to accomplish this great work of Redemption and destroy the works of Satan (through hearkning to whose temp∣tations man fell from God) Jesus Christ the middle person in the Trinity, the beloved Son came down from the bosome of the Father to make up the breach and reconcile man the party offen∣ding, to God the party offended. And this is that ministry of Reconciliation given, and intrusted to the Ministers of the Gos∣pell to declare, proclaim, and publish. v. 19. To wit that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. It's said .
This sets forth Emphasin habet quod dicit Deum fuisse in Chri∣sto. Neque enim Deus in Christo fuit, quemadmodum in omnibus ali∣is rebus est, sed in ipso De it as Corporaliter habitavit. Zuingl. in Loc. the Deity of Christ and further this plainly evinceth that this reconciliation was not of yesterday, but that there were transactions, and negotiaions between God the Father, and God the Son concerning this admirable contrivance even from all Eternity. Each syllalle breaths forth love, bowels and wisdom raised to the very highest  and highest pitch. Here is singular matter for meditation, That when the Angels were past by, and left without a Mediatour, yet notwithstanding there should be Treaties of Peace before the foundation of the World was laid, to reconcile so vile a thing as the World, sinfull man unto the most holy God, by Jesus Christ: Here's met alto∣gether in one a concurrence of Wisdom, Mercy, Goodnesse, Graciousness, and Loving kindness. Yet though they were all put together, they come infinitely short in the representation of that superabundant love of God in Jesus Christ which transcends all degrees of Comparison. But the next Question will be, How is this Reconciliation Q. A. wought? The answer is given in the subsequent words, Not impu∣ting their trespasses unto them. God doth not reckon, accompt (so the word Significat tum generatim aestimare, sive apud se statu∣ere, tum specia tim imputare sive reputare. Vorstius.  imports) nor lay the sins of his peo∣ple to their own charge, but charge them all upon Christ their Surety. And most just it is that an innocent person should pay the debt, when he becomes engaged as a Surety, notwithstanding those Rotten cavils of the blasphemous Socinians, against the truth in this particular. Luther hath a strange passage to this purpose, that Christ was peccatorum maximus. Such speeches (though I much honour Luther, and conceive him to be a man of an excellent spirit) I confesse as are not safe to use, and I would many now a dayes were more cautelous than to adventure their fancies too far, (as it's too apparent they commonly do through self admira∣tion) lest they outrun their judgement: But as there are some, that rather will lose their friend than their jest, so there are some that will rather lose their Religion than a wild new coyned opinion. Yet (with submission to better judgments) I conceive that Luther in the saying foremen∣tioned implyes no more than what Calvin, Musculus, Zuin∣glius, and other reformed Divines have exprest, viz. That Christ was peccatorum maximus imputatione tantum; and for this assertion we have a ground from the Apostle, vers. 21.
of this Chapter, Sicuti in victimam re∣jicebatur olim Maledictio hominis i a Christi dam∣natio nostra absolutio fuit. Calv. Q. A. He was made sin for us (i. e.) by assuming the Vers. 21. nature of offenders, and imputing the guilt of their sinnes to himself, and so making satisfaction unto the Father, and imputing his Righteousness unto them for Justification. But then another question will be propounded, Who are the Commissioners entrusted in the declaration of this Doctrine? The next words specifie, and hath committed unto vs the word of Recon∣ciliation. In the 18. verse it's said  having given to us; plainely evincing, that the declaration of these good tydings is the gift of GOD. But here in the 19. verse it's said ; having committed unto us, or put in us. The word  signifyeth putting, or placing, intimating that a Minister of the Gospel should have the Doctrine of Reconciliation first fixed and placed in his own heart, and so speak from his own heart to the hearts of others, and so com∣fort others with those comforts wherewith he himself hath been comforted in particular. The note which Peculiar is hujus formula emphasis qua significatur, & cor loquentis à Domino impel∣li, & linguam egi & autho∣ritate docendi praeditos esse, qui divinitus sunt ad hoc munus delcti. Beza. Beza gives on the place. I conceive very apposite to my purpose, This is (saith he) a pecu∣liar Emphasis of this forme of speaking, whereby is signifyed that the heart of the speaker and tongue likewise are ruled and moved by the Lord. And the said learned Criick and Judicious Expositor adds another very seasonable observation—And those who from above are appointed to this worke are endowed with authority to teach. Now my text is the Use and Application of this Doctrine of Reconciliation. This 20. Verse is an illative conclusion drawn from the premises delivered in the 19. verse. In the former there's set forth the Reconciliation on Gods part: He though pars laesa the party injured, contrives and designes this great work of Reconciliation. In the latter is set forth the Recon∣ciliation on our part. We who are the Offenders and Rebels against God, are invited and intreated by the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, we would not try conclu∣sions with God but forth with lay down our Rebellious weapons, & embrace the word of Reconciliation. Although the Reconcilia∣tion long since is perfectly made on Gods part, & Christ is a perfect Reconciler, & thorough-working Intercessor, yet there is required a spirit of Application on our part. This then is the grand
design we drive at in our Ministry, It is the summe and substance of our whole Gospel-Embassy, to pray and beseech people to be reconcled unto God. In which words two main Generals lye obvious to our view, viz. The Ministers Dignity, and Duty. The Text divided & opened. 1. For the Ministers Dignity. Before I raise Observations, I shall premise a brief Paraphrase upon the words. ; Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, or rather, as most agreeing with the Originall, Therefore we doe the 1. The Mini∣sters Dignity. office of Ambassadours we act in our office, we are now upon our work, and are even now adoing our duty, and negotiating in our Embassie for Christ: Legatione fungimur, so Calvin, Msculus, Junius, Zuinglius, and Beza render the word . And the Vulgar edition (though I am far from believing it to be Authen∣tique) herein concurs with those Orthodox Interpreters. And wherein the Vulgar Edition (though rarely) is Orthodox, we will not disown what is truth, though from an adversa∣ry. For we usually say—Virtus laudatr in hoste. In my apprehension it was a speech that savoured of malice and envy in a high measure in Maldonate who though he could not Maldenatus. but acknowledge Calvins Exposition to be good, yet concludes. Quia Calvini est interpretatio, nolo: like that cause lesse anger Non amo te Sabidi nec possum dicere quare Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te. Now for the Grammaticall construction of , we are not ignorant that  is the Radix or Theme whence it is de∣rived and signifyeth an ancient man, a person of respect, gravity, and veneration; and sometimes is applyed to Princes Ambassadors, who usually have those qualifications. , &c. Suidas. Suidas an accurate Master in that Language, tels us the originall of this name: There were (saith he) certain Philsophers who went Ambassadors with Areobindus into Persia viz. Damascius the Syrian, Simplicius the ilician, Eulalius the Phrygian, Priscianus the Lydian, Hermias and Diogenes Phenicians, Isidorus of Gaza; and these returned home with great profit and honour, and these enjoyed great pri∣viledges for their faithfull service, and were afterwards had in great estimation. So that hence it evidently appeares, that
Ambassadors were persons of high repute and estimation amongst the Heathens. If▪ Ambassadors of Heathen Princes were set at so high an estimate, and if so much respect was shewed unto those whom Kings on Earth did honour, what then shall be done unto all those whom the King of Heaven will honour? The Ambassa∣dors in the Text are better and greater than all others, as being Ambassadors of Jesus Christ—Bibl. Poly∣glott. Nos itaque vice Christi suppli∣camus: This agreeth with the Arabick version. We pray you in Christs room or stead. Ex praemissis authoritatem Apostolatus sui colligit. Musc. in Loc. Hence (as Musculus observes) the Apo∣stle proves the Authority of his Apostleship. For the Apostle did not receive his commission of men, nor by men, but from Jesus Christ. Whence It a vos o Co∣rinthit non se∣cus accipere debetis, ac si ipse coram a∣staret. Bul∣ling. in Loc. Bullinger infers, That those things which Gods Mini∣sters command in the name of Christ, people ought no otherwise to re∣ceive them, then as if Christ himselfe stood by and commanded them. The Ministers of the Gospell may not run upon their own Errand, but upon Christ's. His Messengers and Ambassadors they are, and therefore it concernes them in an especiall manner, to discharge with all fidelity, that weighty trust reposed in them. Now having heard of the Dignity of Gospel-Ambassadors, let's inquire into their Duty. God never advanceth any to great Dignities, where he expects no great Duty: The greater the Mi∣nisters Dignity, the greater Duty is incumbent upon them. More particularly. 1. Let's take notice of the substance or the contents of the Apo∣stles Embassie, and that is in his own name, and in all the names of the Ministers of Iesus Christ, to beseech and entreat people to be reconciled unto God. The Text expresseth it thus, . . Chrys. in loc. Chrysostome notes upon the place. It is not said (saith he) Reconcile God to your selves, for God doth not make the breach, but reconcile your selves to God. The word  properly signifieth commutare, alium facere, to change, so as to make a man another kind of person; of an enemy to make him a  est fa∣cere, ut quis ex alienato fiat gratiosus. Alsted. Friend: Re∣conciliation according to the nature of the word, presupposeth a breach: And indeed there was the greatest breach that ever was made by reason of the sin of man. Man was in favour whil'st he continued in the state of Innocency; he had rectitude of judge∣ment, a right order of affections, an exact memory, but by reason of Adams prevarication, all these were defaced, Gods anger pro∣cured, and man thrown out of Paradise; so that of a Favourite
before, he is now accounted an Enemy. Here then is the labour, here is the work and grand employment of the Ambassadors of the Gospel, to entreat Sinners, Enemies, Rebels to God, now to come in, submit, and make their peace with him, that so they may be restored into favour, all breaches made up, and a through Reconciliation made. And herein consists the great work of Re∣conciliation; when parties between whom hath been friendship, and afterwards breaches, then they are brought into favour a∣gain: God and man were at the greatest distance, and the breach was made up by Jesus Christ, and he hath Reconciled us to God. Eph. 2. 16. Our Duty then is to apply this Reconciliation purchased by Christ, and to labour to be reconciled to God. This is a Doctrine which concerns us all. Let none say as Sheba did, What portion have we in David, what inheritance in the Son of Jesse? Let none 2 Sam. 20. 1. refuse the Soveraign remedy tendred, even a plaister made up of the blood of Jesus Christ. By nature we are all Enemies, and this Reconciliation is of indispensible necessity. For whoever lives and dies unreconciled unto Christ, he shall undoubtedly miscarry unto all eternity. And in the Preaching of this Doctrine of Reconciliation, those that are true Believers, Reall Saints, dare not exempt themselves as if this did not concern them, (as if their high attainments might procure a Writ of Ease:) They fly, as from a Serpent, from all such rotten Antinomian Glosses which corrupt a good Text. Mr. Calvin tels us, that The Observan∣dum est hic Paulo negotiū esse cum fide∣libus. Testatur quotidie ad illo perferri hoc manda∣tum. Calv. in loc. Aquinas in loc. Apostles businesse is with Believers, and he daily testifieth that he brought that command unto them. Such as are actually reconciled are concern'd in this Exhortation. It's their duty to clear up their Evidences for Heaven, and daily renew their Repentance, and to pray for the manifestations of Gods reconciled countenance towards them. It's (as I am perswaded) a rotten gloss which Aquinas himself gives on the place—Deus reconcili∣avit nos sibi ut causa efficiens ex parte sua; sed ut nobis sit meritoria, oportet etiam quod fiat Reconciliatio ex parte nostrâ. He goeth a∣bout to prove his assertion by particular instances, but makes his matter much worse—Et hoc quidem (inquit) in Baptismo & poe∣nitentiâ, & tunc cessamus à peccatis. But if there be such gross apparent errors in that great Champion of the Schoolemen, who is commonly called Angelius Doctor, so much Idolized, we had need take heed of taking any Doctrine on trust only for the Do∣ctor's
sake: We had need have our eyes in our head, and pray for a spirit of discerning, that our senses may be exercised to dis∣cern things that differ. It is a fit comparison made by one Robertus Gallus: Such (saith he) as tudy the Schoolemen, and in the mean time neglect the study of the holy Scriptures, are just of their humour who have wholsome food set before them, and yet lay it aside, and gnaw hngerly upon flint stones. But to this great Idolized Schooleman I shall oppose that judicious and faithfull Interpreter of Scripture (Neque in hoc institutum E∣vangelium, ut quae ante Bap∣tismum admi∣serimus pecca∣ta, nobis re∣mittantur; sed quemadmodum quotidie pecca∣mus, ita etiam quotidiana re∣missione à Deo recipiamur in gratiam. Calv. in loc. 2. The man∣ner of the Apostles pleading. M. Calvin I mean) the Gleanings of whose judgement in Interpretation of Scripture, I preferre before the whole vintage of all the Popish Doctors. Thus he writes upon this Scripture—Baptism (saith he) was not instituted for that end and purpose, that whatsoever sins were committed before Baptism, should be forgiven unto us: But as we daily sin, so we should labour by daily pardon to be received into favour. Having taken notice of the substance of this Embassie, which is the Doctrine of Reconciliation. Let's in the next place consider the manner of the Apostles pleading: It's thus exprest. . We pray you in Christs room, and stead: And this doth not only denote Actum exercitum, but Actum signatum also (as Cajetan observes) Describit officia Legato∣rum novi Te∣stamenti qua∣tenus Legati sunt esse ut ob. secrent vice Christi Cajet. in Loc. 3. A Preva∣lent Motive is urged. Who thus interprets the Apostle—That he teacheth that the Duty of Ambassadors is in generall to use all sorts of intreaties, to draw men unto Jesus Christ. Wherefore Mini∣sters should study all the winning Rhetorique, and use all perswa∣sive Arguments, to prevaile with men to come in, and close with Jesus Christ. Lastly, here is a Motive urged of great validity and prevalency : As though God did beseech you by us. Neque quic∣quam dici po∣tuit . Beza Be∣za tells us that there could not be a greater Emphasis.  relates to a similitude, Quia reipsa non precatur nos Deus sed veuti precatur in ministrorum persona. Beza. because God intreats us not immediatly by himself, but mediately by the person of Ministers. Here then is an unparallel'd act of Grace and condescension, that God should intreat, woe, and beseech us by the Ministry of his Ambassadors, that we should doe good to our own soules, and Reconcile our selves to him, against whom we have so grievously offended.
The words thus divided and expounded afford these choice observations. First, That it is the great dignity and honour of the Ministers of Observ. 1. the Gospell, to be the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. Secondly, The greatnesse of Ministers dignity is a speciall ingage∣ment Observ. 2. unto them for the faithfull discharge of their duty. Thirdly, It is a wonderfull condescension, and an act of Singular Observ. 3. grace, and mercy in God to imploy messengers concerning treaties of peace and Reconciliation. Fourthly, Ministers of the Gospell should study and practice the Observ. 4. most winning way to gaine soules unto Jesus Christ. As for these 4. It shall suffice at present only to have mentio∣ned them, considering that I have not leisure to handle them se∣verally; neither am I willing to handle them overhastily, and breake of abruptly. The fifth and last Observation, whereon I purpose to fix, is Observ. 5. this— That it is a main Duty incumbent upon all the Ministers of the Gospell, with all earnestnesse to presse upon people the Doctrine of Reconciliation, and use all the Arguments they can to perswade men to be Reconciled unto God. This is that grand needfull fundamentall Doctrine which can never be preached enough, never heard enough, never learned enough. You see (my Reverend Brethren) what a large field lye's before me to expatiate in. Here's matter enough to be trea∣ted on, in a large volume. And how can a short hour's discourse suffice, when many daies are insufficient? Notwithstanding through Christ that strengthen's me, by whose grace I am what I am, I shall 1 Cor. 15. 10. The Doctrine unfolded. Meth. 2. head's of discourse. endeavour to Contract my selfe, and to speak as much as I can in a few words. For Method's sake I shall only confine my selfe to two heads of discourse. The former whereof only aimes at the proof of the point asserted: the latter shall be imployed by way of self-reflexi∣on, what may this concern us all as reducible unto point of pra∣ctice. That shall constitute the Doctrinall part of my Text, this, my darticular use and Application. To resume in order what I first propounded, I shall endeavour 1. Head.
to make good my assertion by a double proof: both by authori∣ty of Scripture, and evidence of reason. 1. For Scripture Testimony, that I may not multiply many 1. For Scrip∣ture Testimo∣ny. instances, the Ministers of the Gospell (that I may speak it with reverence) are as so many Feoffees in trust with the Ministery of reconciliation. They are instruments imployed by God in the dis∣pensation of this great Doctrine. vers. 18. The expressions are vers. 18. , &c. Prae∣clarus Evan∣gelii titulus quod legatio sit ad reconci∣liandos homi∣nes Deo; singu∣laris quoque Ministrorum dignitas quod cum hoc man∣dato mittan∣tur à Deo ad nos ut inter∣nuntii sint, & quasi sponsores. Calv. * . There you have one clear proof of my Doctrine, that unto the Ministers are commit∣ted the Doctrine of reconciliation. This is the depth of love as O humanita∣tis profundita∣tem! quoniam mortuo filio re∣conciliation is Ministerium nobis Apostolis iterum credi∣dit. Oecumen. in loc. O∣cumenius observes. The Angels were the first publishers of peace Luk. 2. 14. Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, and good will towards men. This office, which was first the Angels work, is now transferr'd upon men. As for instance, the Angel told Cornelius that his prayers were heard, but as for the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ he referr'd him to the Ministery of Peter. Hence . Chrysost. Chrysostom observes, that this sheweth the dignity of the A∣postles, and what work they undertook, and likewise the exceeding greatnesse of the love of God. So that hence it plainly appeareth that this work of preaching reconciliation is incumbent upon all the Ministers of the Gospell. One excellent observation I'le give you more of Calvin upon vers. 18. of this Chapter, whose authority is never a whit the lesse because lately so much unworthily Stumbling block removed by P. H. wherein that eminent Ser∣vant of Jesus Christ Mr. Calvin is aspersed and maliciously traduced. tra∣duced. The words of Quum ex Evan∣gelio pronuntiat Ministertè ordinatus propitiatum nobis esse Dominum, non aliter audiendus atque Dei Legatus & publicam personam sustinens, atque ad id asseverandum legitima autho∣ritato praeditus, Calv. Calvin are thus translated: when a Mi∣nister (saith he) rightly ordained pronounceth out of the Gospel, that God is reconciled, he is no otherwise to be heard than an Em∣bassadour of God, and as one that hath the place of a publicke person, and endued with lawfull authority to assert the same. Another proof we have vers. 11. of this Chapter: Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord we perswade men. We perswade men indefinitely, they have rationall souls, and are capable of perswasion: and what do we perswade them unto, but to be reconciled unto God? Wherefore it's a base calumny of the Arminians who charge the
Orthodox (as these ears have heard in this very place) as if they made man no more then a stock or a stone in his Conversion. As Jer. 10. 23. Propheta hic non disserit ex professo quid possint homi∣nes, sed conce∣dit illis hanc partem, ut con∣sultent, & de∣cernant &c. Calv. Phil. 4. 13. for our parts we acknowledge man passive in his Conversion, and according to the Prophet, the way of man is not in himselfe: Fur∣ther we acknowledge the Antecedent, concomitant, and subse∣quent Grace, all to come from God: yet we cannot deny but God hath endued man with a reasonable soul, and made him a subject capable of receiving the Grace of the Spirit infused in him: so that man actus agit, motus movet, and is sano sensu, said to be a Co-worker with God. He can do nothing without Christ, but he can do all things through Christ that strengthneth him (as the Apostle speaks.) But the objection will be thus framed. If men (as all men by  Eph. 2. 2. nature are) be dead in trespasses and sinnes it's in vain to preach unto them, we may as well preach amongst Tombes and Graves. For answer hereunto, we must know, that notwithstanding men  are dead in trespasses and sinnes, yet ther's a quickning vertue in the voyce of Jesus Christ, to make even the dead to live. When Christ called with a loud voyce, Lazarus come forth, then he that was Ezek. 37. 10. dead arose out of his grave. Those drye bones mentioned by Eze∣kiel, as soon as the spirit breathed on them, they had sinews and flesh, and stood on their feet, and became an exceeding great army. So when the Spirit of God works powerfully by the Ministery of the word, mirabiles effectus habet: The blind see, the lame walk, and the very dead are raised to life. To this purpose tend those Exhortations with those prevalent Obtestations, , Rom. 12. 1. That ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, &c. Another is, Eph. 4. 1. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called. A third exhortation is exceeding pathetical, 1 Thes. 2. 11, 12. As you know how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a Father doth his children) that ye Phil. 1. 27. Tit. 2. 12. would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his Kingdome and Glory. All these exhortations redound to this issue, that such persons as are already reconciled, should produce evidences of their Reconciliation by their holy conversation, and that is to walk , seemingly, meetly, as becometh the Gos∣pel. And according to those 3 Adverbs mentioned, Tit. 2. 12. Haec tria perpetuo medi∣tda adver∣bia Pauli Haec tria sunt vitae regula sancta tuae. : soberly, righteously, godly. Now the
Ministers of the Gospell are sonnes of Peace, Ambassadours of Peace, and the Gospell which they preach is the Gospell of Peace; and this is the fruit of the lips which the Lord creates; and the main Isa. 5. 10. Quasidicat per praedicationem Evangelii, & renovationem Spiritus pacem dabo, atque eo modo sanabo hominem pec∣catorem. Bul∣ling. in loc. Mat. 5. 25. design which they drive, and the scope they aime at, is to per∣swade men to make their peace with God, and to throw down all their rebellious weapons, and yeeld themselves unto his mer∣cy. Sinne hath made God their adversary, wherefore that counsell must abide upon them, Mat. 5. 21. Agree with thine ad∣versary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him. At this time God hath sent me with an Olive-branch in my mouth, with a Commission of Peace; which if it be neglected this day, for ought any of us know, it may be expir'd and out of date to mor∣row. But I need adde no further Scripture proof in so clear a point. In the next place I am to enquire after Arguments for confirma∣tion 2. Proof by evidence of Reason. of the Doctrine. Amongst many I shall reduce them to three heads of Reasons, which I promised for the farther proof of the Doctrine. The first Reason shall be drawn from the Office of the Mini∣sters Reason 1. Drawn from the office of the Ministers of the Gospel. of the Gospell. Their names point out their office; they are called Watchmen, Seers, Workmen, Stars, &c. But I shall go no fur∣ther than the Metaphor of my Text; they are called Ambassadors, a name of great Dignity and Duty; and the great Duty incum∣bent on them, is to perswade people to be reconciled, to be at one with God, as Mr. Tindal's Translation appositely renders it. Let's then view the name of Ambassadours, and therein we shall finde 4. speciall properties which may very appositely be applyed 1. Ambassa∣dours are gift∣ed and quali∣fied for so great an em∣ployment. unto the Ministers of the Gospell. The first whereof is this, that Ambassadours are select Persons, gifted and qualified for so great an employment. Princes never send ignorant, unfit Persons on their errand: So the Ministers which are of Christ's sending, are qualified and fitted by him for the manageing of so great and weighty employment. The Priest under the Law ought to be a man of knowledge: Mal. 2. 7. his lips should preserve knowledge. And the Prophet Isa. 50. 4. ought to have the tongue of the Learned to know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. He ought to be an Job. 33. 23. Interpreter one among a thousand: And such a one ought the Minister of the Gospell to be, 2 Tim. 2. 15. a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, 2 Tim. 3. 17. throughly furnished unto all good works. Ambassadours
are men of renown and estimation, they are highly honoured for their gifts and employment; they do not negotiate concerning sleight, trifling, impertinent matters, but they intermeddle about weighty affaires of State, and their transactions are about their Prince's matters of highest concernment. And the resemblance holds alike with the Ministers of the Gospell: They are persons of Honor iste & ista sublimit as nullis poter it comparationi∣bus adaequari. Si Regum ful∣gori compara∣veris, & Prin∣cipum Diade∣mati, longe e∣rit inferior comparatio. Ambr. in Pastorali. honour, of ability, and fitnesse (such I mean as are of Christs sending) and their business is to treat about matters of the great∣est consequence, even of Reconciliation between God and Man. Secular Ambassadors deal about weighty affaires of the world, but Spirituall Ambassadors deal about Soul-affaires, even the great things of Eternity. Isa. 52. 7. How beautifull then should their feet be, who bring such glad tydings? Such are 2 Tim. 2. 17. worthy of double honour who labour in the Word and Doctrine. 2. Ambassadours are Persons in Commission; for they have 2. Ambassa∣dors are per∣sons in Com∣mission. received a Commission from their Prince, by vertue whereof they act accordingly. They dare not negotiate with other Princes without the Authority of their Master. They are commissiona∣ted by the Prince that sends them: they are bound up by instru∣ctions from him, neither dare they go beyond their Commission. So the Ministers of the Gospell are Persons in Commission, they are ordained Ministers into the Universall Church for the benefit of the Church in generall, though they may exercise their functi∣on ad hic & nunc in a particular Congregation: yet their remo∣vall from one place to another (which ought not to be done with∣out a clear call) doth not in the least null or make invalid their Ministeriall function. They are Persons called, approved, and set apart for this great work 1 Tim. 4. 14. by the laying on of the hands of the 2 Tim. 1. 16. Presbytery which gift ought not to be neglected but Sensus est Timotheum quum Prophe∣tarum voce as∣citus fuit in Ministerium & deinde so∣lenni ritu or∣dinatus simul gratia spiri∣tus sancti in∣structum fuisse ad functionem suam exequen∣dam. Calv. 1 Tim. 4. 14. stirr'd up as the Apostle gives an especiall charge. These are those peculiar Per∣sons who have dedicated themselves to the service of God, they have put their hands to the plough with a resolution never to look back. They have given themselves up as Hannah gave Samuel for a loane unto the Lord all the dayes of his life. But as for such who have no other call but from their own high conceited fancies and others (such as themselves) flatteries (as a V. Mr. Bur∣roughs Ireni∣cum. Reverend Divine instanc∣eth) who through the pride of their own hearts (as Novatus con∣secrated himselfe a Bishop) runne before they are sent, and make hast (more hast then good speed) to invade the Ministers office, let
them consider (if ever they once come to themselves) that God who is the God of Order and not of confusion will never blesse their excentrick motions. Ʋzzah's meaning and intention was good; he put forth his hand to hold the Arke, because the Ox∣en shak't it, yet his good meaning, and intention could not ju∣stifie an irregular practice: wherefore a fearfull breach was made, and Ʋzzah struck dead in the place 2 Sam. 6. 7. for his errour. Like∣wise 2 Chr. 26. 20, 21. King Ʋzziah invaded the Priest's Office and was smote with Leprosy. The sudden rising of the Leprosy on his face shewes it was a judgement from the Lord as A Deo prae∣sentiam suam in altari te∣stante, & eo lepram aspe∣tabili signo ejaculante. Jun. in loc. 3. Ambassa∣dors ought to keep close to their Instru∣ctions. Junius well observes. It was a signall hand of God punishing him for his presumption. These are judgments upon record, which should serve as so many warn∣ing pieces to cause such as usurpe the Minister's function to fear, and tremble lest some dreadfull judgement be their portion. 3ly. Ambassadours ought to keep close to their instructions and punctually observe the very words of their Commission. They come not on their own, but their Master's errand, and may neither adde to, nor diminish from the same. So the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell have a rule to go by prescribed by Christ, and they ought Gal. 6. 16. to walk according to that rule; they have a just standard to go by, and that is Isa. 8. 20. the Law and Testimony; They have a 1 Pet. 1. 19. sure word of prophecie, a 2 Tim. 1. 13. form of sound words. They have counsels of God to deliver; and they must be as thorough paced as Paul was, who appeal'd to his hearers, and took them to▪ record Acts 20. 27. that he declared all the counsells of God. What then shall we say of such who withhold the truth in unrighteousnesse, who are afraid to be good, and are so pusillanimous as not to dare to speak out what in their judgements and consciences they are resolved against, even the herefies, blasphemies and abhomi∣nations of the time: I shall give my opinion in the language of Impius sim, avarus, adul∣ter, imo omni∣um viiorum reus modo im∣pii silentii non arguar, dum Dominus pati∣tur. Luth. Luther that valiant Champion of Jesus Christ. Let me be wick∣ed, covetous, an adulterer, even guilty of all vices, rather then of wicked silence when the Lord suffers. But rather let's look unto the determination of our Lord Christ, Mark. 8. 38. In coelis Advo∣catus est eorum Christus qui ipsum non erubescunt in saeculo isto. Carthus. Mark. 8. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinfull generation; of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he commeth in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.
And what further shall we say of those, who devise waies of their own head (as Jeroboam ordained a solemne 1 King. 12. 32. festivall) and pre∣tend new notions, new discoveries, new light, though it be no better then an Ignis fatuus to lead them into bogs and Quag∣mires: these are exceeding subtle and skill'd in the art of Leger∣demain, still they keep a reserve or posterne door to convey them∣selves cunningly away (as if they had Gyges his ring) that they may escape invisibly: yet it's too too apparent that they in the mean time revive sundry antiquated, exploded haeresies, condem∣ned by ancient Fathers and Councells for many Centuries past. Surely such as these do not act by vertue of a Commission from God: For his Commission runs in terminis: Ad Legem & Testi∣monia: Isai. 8. 20. But they act by their own Commission, just as that Pro∣phet did who believed the old Prophet of Samaria, and paid dear for his disobedience. He came and Prophesied against the Altar of Bethel, so far he was in the right, but after he hearkned to a new light, or false revelation of another Prophet, there he was in the wrong, and was 1 King. 13. 24. slain by a Lyon for his too much credu∣lity to the old Prophet, and disobedience to God. By this sad example, let's all take heed of delusions and pretended Revela∣tions, of such Scepticks as fancy a Platonick Christ, and of Fami∣lists, Quakers, and the rest of that leaven, whose opinions and Persons both we ought to avoid with as much care as we would avoid a plague sore, lest being once infected with them we do not only ruine our selves, but multitudes togeather with us. 4ly. Lastly, An Ambassadour ought to have audience, respect, 4. An Ambas∣sadour ought to have re∣spect and au∣dience where ever he comes. and honour where ever he comes. If an Ambassadour be wrong∣ed, according to the Law of Nations revenge ought to be taken in a signal manner, an ordinary satisfaction will not serve he turne. An Ambassadour represents the Prince's Person from whom he comes and receives his Commission, and whatever af∣front or injury is done unto an Ambassadour is put upon the Prince's account, who sends him: so the Ministers of the Gospell come in the name of the great King of Heaven and Earth, and are his Commission-officers, wherefore their message requires audience, and their Persons ought to be had in honour. But if any will be so abhominably wicked (as these times afford many sad instances) as to injure God's faithfull Ministers, Christ will vindicate their quarrell, and account the wrongs offered to them,
all one as done to himselfe. Our proof is very clear, Luk. 10. 16. Luk. 10. 16. He that despiseth you, despiseth me: and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. I proceed to another reason which shall be drawn from the great benefit and happinesse intended even unto all eternity, to∣ward Reason 2. Drawn from the great be∣nefit of a re∣conciled e∣state. all those, upon whom this Doctrine of reconciliation works effectually. It's that great nail which the Masters of the Assem∣blies labour to drive to the head, the great end and aime of all their preaching to perswade people to make God their friend, to acknowledge their transgressions with all their aggravations, and sue out a pardon through the bloud of Jesus Christ. Now where this Doctrine takes and proves successefull, there God lets all suits fall, cancells all bonds, quittes all scores, and receives the offen∣der into favour. This is Argumentum ab utili, and a most pre∣valent Oratour. The happinesse of those that are reconciled is thus set down, Rom. 5. 10. Quis non videt quàm neque∣ant deseri a∣mici & recon∣ciliati, qui cum inimici essent, tanto∣ere dilecti sunt, ut de∣seri nequive∣rint? Musc. in loc. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Likewise we have the whole series of the great Mystery of reconciliation, with all those rich benefits attending the same express'd at large by the Apostle, Eph. 2. 13. We who sometimes were a farre off, are made nigh by the bloud of Christ. But then this Question will be asked, who is the efficient cause of reconciliation? Consult the Apostle, vers. 14. For he is our peace. Christ is the Author and finisher of this peace. By what means then is all this accom∣plished? The vers. 16. In eum finem utrique sibi invicem uni∣endierant in unum corpus, & sublato om∣ni dissidio pax inter utrosque procuranda atque firmanda, ut possent ambo velut in unum corpus compacti atque constricti Deo per Christi crucem reconciliari. Bodius in loc. 16. verse declares, And that he might reconcile both unto God, having slain the Enmity thereby. Christ by his death de∣stroyed death, took away it's sting, left it like an adder without teeth, like Samson without his locks. Now the cause being taken away, the fewd ceaseth, and the hatred between God and Man endeth: All breaches are compromised by Christ our surety and Mediatour. Hence follow upon this reconciled estate two glori∣ous priviledges. One is vers. 18. accesse by one spirit unto the Father, vers. 18. The phrase carryeth an Emphasis with it—: we are as it were led by the hand of Christ unto the Father. Hereupon Ʋt intelligamus nos non sponte & ultro in gratiam hanc adiisse & accessisse; sed huc adductos esse. Piscator. Piscator observes, that we did not of our own accord bring our selves into favour, but we are brought by Christ
thereunto. The other priviledge is an enfranchifement or making of us free Denizons, Vers. 19. Vers. 19. Now therefore ye are no more stran∣gers and forreiners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints and of the houshold of God. Hence from these premises we conclude that there is singular happinesse, and unspeakable advantage, which is the por∣tion of all those who are reconciled unto Jesus Christ. But if these two former reasons obtaine not that effect which Reason 3. Drawn from the miserable condition of an unrecon∣ciled estate. is desired and hoped for, I'le adde a third and no more, which is causa à contrario to represent the sad, miserable and desperate con∣dition of an unreconciled estate. The Apostle calls them Ene∣mies, and more then that they are Rom. 8. 7.  enmity it selfe in the very abstract: and more then all this, they are branded Rom. 1. 30.  haters, and hated of God: That word hath both an Active and Passive signification. Who then of any understanding durst venture to sleep in an unreconciled condition? To have a potent man thy Enemy, this is matter of great fear and perplexity, but what is it to have the omnipotent God of Heaven and Earth thy Enemy? who protests, Isa. 1. 25. that he will ease himselfe of his adver∣saries, and avenge himselfe of his enemies. And Christ himself calls for speedy execution of slaughter to be inflicted on his enemies, Luk. 19. 27. Luk. 19. 27. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reigne over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. Such persons then whilst they remain in their state of enmity against God Eph. 2. 12. have no hope, and are without God in the world. And if they dye in this unreconciled estate, they shall miscarry unto all Eternity. As the Tree falls so it lyes, and as Death hath left them so Judgment will find them. As soon as ever they are launched into the boundlesse Ocean of Eternity, they are put into a utter impossibility of returning back into the land of the living, and into an utter incapacity of suing out a pardon and re∣conciliation afterward. Let these Reasons or Arguments mentioned suffice for the con∣firmation of the Doctrine delivered. What remaines now but that I should descend unto particular Application, which is the life of every Sermon? Amongst many Uses (which I intended) I shall at present only fix upon an Use of Exhortation; wherein I shall addresse my selfe, 1. To Ministers; and 2. To Peo∣ple. Use of Exhor∣tation. 1 Part to the Mini∣sters. The first part of this Use I direct principally to my dearly be∣loved
Brethren of the Ministry. Suffer I beseech you (my Bre∣thren) the word of Exhortation, to put forth your selves to the utmost, and with all your might endeavour to presse home the Doctrine of Reconciliation. Shew people their hurt and cure, their malady and remedy; discover unto them their lost and utterly undone condition by nature, how miserable is that state which is of nature and Enmity against God. Shew them, that there is a way and means of reconciliation purchased by the bloud of Jesus Christ. Study all the alluring Rhetorick and the art of perswa∣ding people to do good unto their own souls, and to make all ex∣pedition to come unto Jesus Christ. This is the substance of your Embassy (as if you were Christ's Vicegerents) to pray them in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God. My Brethren, let me be your remembrancer, as you preach unto your people the form of sound words (which is your duty) so to converse with them that are under your charge. Visit their houses and be willing to be ac∣quainted with them. Take heed of a stately, reserved, unsociable carriage in spirituall affairs. Such as pray much with their people, and conferre with them, being inquisitive how their souls thrive, these are they who, through the Grace of God, shall reap sweet and abundant fruit of their Ministery. It's a speciall exhortation of Solomon, Prov. 27. 23. Prov. 27. 23. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flock, and look well to thy heard. Which Scripture (though u∣sually is applied to Masters of families) judicious Carthwright ap∣plieth Quanto magis cavendum est iis, qui ovibus Christi pretio∣so ipsius san∣guine redemp∣tis praeficiun∣tur. Carthw. in loc. unto the Ministers of the Gospell. If (saith he) a Shepheard ought to take such care of bruit Creatures, how much more should spi∣rituall Pastors take care of the flock committed to their charge. Hence all those rotten distinctions of lazy Nonresidents are to be abho∣minated, such as were per se, vel per alium: semper, vel  sem∣per: Residentia loci, vel Officii: such sorry fig-leaves could never cover the nakednesse of those that used them: And my charity perswades me, that such kind of distinctions will never be taken up again, nor so much as once named amongst you, Let me then presse my exhortation a little more home, that you would put both your shoulders to this great work, and that you would make this the  the main and principall design which you drive, to set close upon the consciences of your Auditors this unum Ne∣cessarium, this grand necessary Doctrine of reconciliation, to be∣seech people to be reconciled unto God.
And having endeavour'd this great work principally, in the next place I conjure you and earnestly entreat you (as you are Ministers of the Gospell of peace) that you would conferre your best endeavours to cement, sodr, and unite dissnting Brethren: that they may (what in you lies) be prevail'd withall to agree together in Unity on Earth, who shall agree in Unity in the high∣est Heavens. I plead not in the least for any persons (how much soever admired by some) who are either unsound in the saith, or unholy in life: No reconciliation can be expected, nor ought to be attempted with Gal. 5. 20. 21. Idolatries, Drunkenesse, Heresies, and other such like deeds of the flesh. I plead only for such as truly fear God, who are not only nominall, but reall saints. Here lyeth the la∣bour, and here the work, to be reconcilers amongst them: and such peace-makers are blessed. That I may speak, my mind freely (for I love plain dealing) as for such Reconcilers as Cassander of old, and Sancta Clara of late, who would joyn together the Ark and Dagon, the Ephod and Teraphim, I mean Protestantisme and Popery, these are to be detested, and sent back again to Rome from whence they came. V. Bishop Hall's Trea∣tise, No peace with Rome. No peace with Rome, no quarter ought to be given to Benhadad: I may say of them as Jehu said to Ahaziah, 2 King. 9. 22. what peace so long as the whoredomes of thy Mother Jezabel and her witchcrafts are so many, daies without number. As for Ignatius Loyola, Father of the Jesuites, John of Leyden, Ring∣leader of the Anabaptists, and the rest of their Complices, of whose franctick practices we have ample Relations in Print, V. Sleyd. Comment. & Baylyes dis∣swasive. they are so farre from any reall endeavours after reconciliation with us, as rather, like Samsons Foxes, they run abroad with firebrands in their tails, and so set all the standing corn a fire. These are the grand Incendiaries & flabella seditionum. From Jesuitisme and Anabaptisme all heresies and damnable errors receive their ori∣ginall. At Rome and Munster this counterfeit coine receives it's stamp and impression. Hence as out of a Trojan Horse is let out an Ambuscado to destroy the Protestant Religion. Therefore ther's no ground of hopefull successe, if we should attempt any re∣conciliation with them. Let them come to us and make serious Confessions and retractations, but let not us go to them. Let them first abjure their principles, and practises, (though I know not why we should trust a Papist upon his oath) till then there can be no possibility of embraceing peace with such who either are of Babylon, or for Babylon.
But what is chiefly in mine eye, and aime amounts to this brief issue, to perswade all those to unite amongst themselves, who are sound in the faith and holy in life. Amongst them there are some who come so farre up to us (and we hope they may yet come farther, if selfe interests make no obstructions) as to acknowledge us true Ministers, the Church of England a true Church. Much is granted to this effect by some V. Apolog. of the five dissen∣ting Brethren. Reverend dis∣senting Brethren in Print. When carnall Interests, secular poli∣cies, and mentall reservations are laid aside, and men declare plainly what they would have, and when we know once where to finde them, and where they will fix, then Attempts of Ac∣commodation may attain a happy and comfortable successe. That which much concerns us all is, to lay to heart and be deeply affected with the divisions of Reuben, and to use our utmost endea∣vour to comprimise differences, and make up breaches and a∣nimosities, lest otherwise we gratify the Jesuit who is the com∣mon Enemy, who loves to fish in troubled waters; or is like an Adder which seeks for shelter in broken walls. Let's leave off contention prius quam sese immisceat; so Junius renders the words of Solomon, Prov. 17. 14. Prov. 17. 14. (i. e.) Let not contention mixe with our affairs. For once it being mixed and joyned, it's not easy to unmixe and separate afterwards. Wherefore let it be our care, and wisdome not to give advantage by our domestick breaches to the wild Boar of Babylon; or the subtle Foxes of Munster and Raco∣via, who when they see us a quarrelling one with another, they make a prey of us both. I well remember about this time 24. yeares ago in the Vespers of our publicke Act there was a Question discuss'd which the Dr. Wingham of St Johns. Respondent held Affirmative—An Cal∣viniani (quos vocant) & Lutherani possint in unam Ecclesiam co∣alescere? And in the like solemne Convention another Question 7. yeares ago was affirmed homogeneous to the former by a Dr. Wilkin∣son of Christ-Church. learned Professor of our University—An intersit pacis & salutis Ecclesiae vere Evangelicos pium colere syncretismum? But especially let's have recourse unto Scripture: What saith the Psalmist, Psal. 133. 1. Psal. 133. 1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity. I have often fetch't a ground of hope against many fears, from 2. Prophesies: The one is Zeph. 3. 9. Zeph. 3. 9. For then will I turn to the people a pure Language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. The o∣ther
is Zach. 14. 9. Zach. 14. 9. And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name be one. Non satis est si homines agnoscerent u∣num Deum, ni∣si consentiut in reta & simplici aliqu fide ita ut ce∣lebretur in ter∣râ nomen uni∣us Dei. Calv. in Zeph. 3. 9. Though there be but one Lord, yet his name is called on di∣versly; but here is Prophesied an unity of worshipping God. And as for unity amongst Brethren, this is accounted a fruit of our effectuall calling, * Eph. 4. 3. Endeavouring to keep the uni∣ty of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And for the better setting home of this exhortation, the Apostle mentions 7. Ones in the following verses, viz. One body, one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one faith, one Baptisme, one God and Father of all. How pathetically doth the Apostle presse unanimity? Phil. 2. 1, 2. If (saith he) there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowells of mercies, fulfill ye my joy that ye be like minded, having the fame love, being of one accord and one mind. Numerus binarius eo magis infa∣mis, quia pri∣mus ausus est discedere ab unitate. Py∣thag. Pythagoras used to put a brand of infamy upon the number of two, because it first departed from unity. But the Apostle pro∣pounds the Question in the negative, which hath the force of a strong affirmation, 1 Cor. 3. 3. For whereas there is among you envying and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnall and walk as men? Sects and factions have their source and originall from the flesh; so Notandum est etiam hoc loco unde sint factiones & sectae in Ecclesia. Primum quidem ex carne, ut qui sectarii sunt, licet videantur esse spiritualissimi, revera tamen carnales exi∣stant. Muscul. in 1 Cor. 3. 3. Muscu∣lus a judicious Expositor observes. Further let me be your remembrancer of that great duty that in an especiall manner concernes the Ministers of the Gospell, that is to unite amongst themselves, and endeavour to draw in one yoak, and as one man, Jude 3. contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. Let the Apostles exhortation be as a frontlet before our eyes, and as a Phylactery sewed on the hemmes of our garments, Rom. 14. 19. Rom. 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. The Phrase is , we must pursue and run after peace, though it may seem to flye from us: But we must not take any peace at a venture, but that which tends to edification, as Sectemur: studium vehe∣mens conser∣vandae pacis requirit. Pac adjngitaedifi∣cationem mu∣tuam, ut non pacem quam∣vis, sed eam tantum praeci∣pi intelligamus quae ad aedificationem pertinet. Non aedificat pax, in mendacio, superstitione, idololatria, impie∣tate, sed in veritate. Zech. 8. 19. Veritatem & pacem diligite. Pareus. His duobus, con∣cordia & aedificatione continentur fere ma charitatis offici. Calv. Pareus and Calvin observe. Of all others let the faithfull Mini∣sters
of Christ endeavour after a right understanding of each o∣ther, and a loving correspondence and onenesse of heart and judg∣ment amongst themselves. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the Popish party triumph when they heare that even the Lords Diamonds cut one another, and that there are great animosities, evill surmises, and bitternesse of speech one towards another, amongst some that are truely Godly. How sharpe was the contention between two rare men even Paul and Barnabas, insomuch as they Act. 15. 39. departed asunder one from the other. In severall Centuries we read of the great variances amongst Euseb: L. 5. c. 26. & L. 7. c. 3. those who were eminent Lights in the Church, as Iraenaeus was at great variance with Victor, Cyprian with Stephan, Jerome with Austin, Basill with Damasus, Chrysostome with Epiphanius, Cyrill with Theodoret. And their private inconsiderable differences a∣mongst themselves, gave great advantage to the common Enemy Satan, who (as a learned Author observes) Dolebat hoc Diabolus qui semper de fra∣trum pace tor∣quetur. Optat. L. 2. is vexed with the peace of the Brethren, but much pleased with their contentions. Though it cannot be expected but offences will come, and that in the Church militant there will be sounding in our ears the noi∣ses of Axes and Hammers, and oft times it falls out that Doctors both Godly and learned differ in some things from one another in their judgment. Yet every Minister of the Gospell should imi∣tate his Master Christ in being a Reconciler. It was storyed of Athanasius that he was in lesser matters dissidentibus Magnes, (though in weighty affairs he was Adamas, an Adamant not to be moved) even a Load stone to draw those unto him, who dif∣fered from him. Wherefore abundance of wisdome and candour is required towards such as dissent from us, if they keep those Fun∣damentall Principles of faith and a good conscience. Truth ought to be spoke but in Eph. 4. 15. , hoc est, persistentes sinceri in vera doctrina ac fide, & in charitate. Zanch. Love. And a lapsed Brother ought to be re∣stored or set in joynt, so the word  imports, but it must be done by such as are † spirituall, and in the Spirit of meeknesse. If matters be circumstantiall, abundance of gentlenesse, moderati∣on and mutuall forbearance ought to be exercised. A flint may sooner be broken on a Pillow then an anvile: Gal. 6. 1.  significat rem aliquam resarcire, & collapsam reparare. Tarnov. in medull. Ev. * Si virtutum finis ille sit maximus qui plurimorum spectat profectum moderatio omnium pulcherrima est Ambr. de Panor. l. 1. c. 1. And mildnesse in some cases may prevail, where roughnesse cannot. But if mat∣ters
be Fundamentall; If some cry down the morall Law as an Almanack out of date, as some Antimonian Spirits have endea∣voured, if others cry down Magistracy and Ministery, as some Anabaptisticall Spirits have done; if some cry down the Christian Sabbath (as some Tilham a pestilent Anti∣sabbataria, who seduceth multitudes at Colchester, and writes for the Jewish Sab∣bath: and D. Heylin who in a late book intitled Re∣spondet Pe∣trus, disco∣vers himselfe a profest Ad∣versary to the strict keep∣ing of the Lords day Sabbath and decries strict observers thereof, and most unwor∣thily asper∣seth that eminent Light of the Church, D. Ʋsser A. B. at Armagh who though Orthodox as in other things so in his judgment in the Lords day Sabbath: yet cannot escape the abuses of D. P. H. which said P. H. is neare a kin to Ismael, whose hand is against every man, and every mans hand was a∣gainst him. Antisabbatarians have done with much im∣pudence and profanenesse of spirit) in these and such like cases, let's not yeild an inch, let's keep our ground. Let Luther's heroi∣call resolution be our pattern for imitation—Hic gero titulum cedo nulli. It was the prudent Counsell of Athanasius to the Or∣thodox Brethren, that they should by no means receive any pa∣cificatory Letters from George the Arrian Persecutor, and  Basil. Epist. 235. Basil in an Epistle to Epiphanius, assigns a strong reason, why Athana∣sius gave such Counsell, If once (saith he) we shake off the simpli∣city of the faith, there will be no end of Disputations. However let us all confer our heads and hearts together that we may agree so farre as we can, still holding Heb. 10. 23. fast our profession without waver∣ing. Let it be our endeavour Heb. 12. 14. to follow peace with all men and holynesse. Let's preserve a happy union between truth and peace. All the truths of God are more pretious then the Gold of Ophir. We are commanded to Prov. 23. 23. buy the truth, but are prohibited from selling the least part of it. Wherefore we ought all in our seve∣rall places and capacities to be valiant for the truth, even all steel to the back: The truth of God is a good matter, and it's good to be Gal. 4. 18. zealously affected in a good matter. Praedicare verbum Dei nihil aliud est, quam derivare in se furorem totius inferni & satanae. Luth: loc: com. † In aliis mansuetus ero, in blasphemiis in Christum non ita. Zuing: in Epist: ad Servet. Luther used to say, That to preach the Word of God zealously, was a ready way to bring the rage of all the Devills in Hell about our ears. But in Gods cause let's go on couragiously, and though we may be vilified by the vilest of men, yet let's resolve with David to be more vile. A good God, a good cause, and a good conscience will carry us through the greatest dangers and difficulties. And let us still remember to shew most meeknesse in our own cause, and most zeal in the cause of God. So * Zuinglius answered Servetus, in other things I will be mild, but not in blasphemies against God.
Now I have not yet done with the pressing of this Doctrin of union amongst Brethren; I shall yet prosecute it farther, hear∣tily desiring that my words may leave deep impressions upon your Spirits, and obtain some comfortable successe. The brea∣ches amongst the Ministers were as an Arrow stuck in the sides of that good man Philip Melancthon: Whereupon on his death bed, V. Vitam Phil. Melancth. per Melct. Ada∣mum editam. he profest—I am very glad I am to leave this World, because I shall be with Christ, and then shall be freed from the contentions of some Divines, which were very great at that time. There's a sad story of two eminent Martyrs for the truth, viz. Epiphan. Haeres. 68. Meletius and Peter, Bishops of Alexandria, who when they were put into Pri∣son fell at variance amongst themselves about a petty difference, whether the Lapsi were to be received into communion? The Schisme was very great, insomuch as they drew a partition be∣tween each other in Prison, and would not hold communion with each other, and yet afterward they joyntly suffered Mar∣tyrdome. And it's not easily to be imagined, what a great Rent their dissention made in the Church of God, and gave advan∣tage to the common Enemy. And what a dust was raised be∣tween two choyce, and constant Martyrs, Ridley and Hooper? one prest conformity too strictly upon his Brother, and contend∣ed with too much eagernesse for such kind of vaine, uselesse Ce∣remonies (which Calvin calls tolerabiles ineptias.) Yet notwith∣standing these two Godly Bishops could not agree in Blacks and Whites, they could both agree in Red, for they resisted even un∣to bloud, and sealed the truth of their Religion with the effusion of their bloud. And now to speak my judgment more plainly as in the presence of God, without partiality, having no mans person in admirati∣on for advantage, I conceive it a word spoken in due season, and that there is necessity of speaking of it, even to exhort Ministers to study the things that make for peace, and especially to agree in a sweet Harmony one with another. And I am fully satisfied in my judgment, that to effect this much desired union, a speciall ex∣pedient will be in severall Counties (as London, Lancashire, Essex, Warwick, Worcester, Norfolke &c. some herein have given a good President already) to associate into Presbyteries, and ex∣ercise that Government (which by experience is known to be Flagellum Haeresium) and ordaine Ministers, and to put Church censures into execution. When Ministers meet together, and so∣solemnly
seek God by prayer and fasting, they strengthen one ano∣thers hands, and unite each others hearts. The keeping up of Discipline, is a speciall means to preserve union amongst Brethren, to extirpate Heresies, and sweep them away as dung, and pro∣mote the power of Godlinesse. It hath often lain sad upon my Spirit to consider the mischiefe that hath ensued upon want of execution of Church Discipline. Hinc illae lachrymae. Hence for want hereof, a sluce hath been opened to let in an inunda∣tion of heresies and blasphemies. But it's much to be hoped that the execution of Discipline will shut up the sluce, and stop the inundation. Faxit Deus. Now having spoken thus farre to Ministers, the other part of 2. Part of this use to people. my use I will direct to people. And the substance of my exhor∣tation is to perswade them with all alacrity of Spirit to em∣brace the Doctrine of Reconciliation tendred to them. It's the great Doctrine of concernement in an especiall manner to be Preacht, and practised. The Ambassadours of peace publish these good tidings, They come in the name of Jesus Christ of∣fering termes of Reconciliation. With what joy, with what ar∣dency of love should you embrace such gracious offers? O how sweet is the voyce of Christ unto his Church! His lips drop as an honey combe. If thou be the Spouse of Christ, thou wilt delight to heare the voyce of the Bridegroom: So the Evangelist tel's us Joh. 3. 29. Discimus eti∣am hic quod etsi amicus sponsi. (i. e.) Minister E∣vangelii non gaudeat gau∣dium sponsi, neque fructum eum percipiat ex Ecclesia qui sponsi pro∣prius est; non tamen caret gaudio quodam suo, vel ex eo quod stet & audiat vocem illam sponsi longe suavissimam quam rursus bona fide tanquam internuncius referet sponsae, Rollocus in locum.—That the Friend of the Bridegroome which stands and hears the Bridegrooms voyce rejoyceth greatly. Now consider Christ's mes∣sengers are his voyce unto people; They come on his errand, and deliver what he puts into their mouth. O how sweet then will Christs words be to a gracious heart! And this is that sweet, wel∣come word which Ministers deliver to pray men to be reconciled and make their peace with God. My brethren I beseech you in the bowells of Jesus Christ, to set the highest estimate upon this Doctrine of Reconciliation, preferre it before your appoint∣ed food, before thousands of Gold and Silver. And have them in honour, and account their feet beautifull, who do the office of Evangelists, and are dispensers of these truths, and Trumpet∣ters
of Gospell peace. Though they be men of like passions, yet they are Persons of honour, Commission officers, authorized by Jesus Christ to Preach the Gospell. Private Christians may dis∣course of these things Charitative (but let them keep within the compasse of their own calling) and exhort one another to em∣brace this Doctrine; but Ministers exhort Authoritative as Am∣bassadors and commissioners of Jesus Christ. Wherefore (Bre∣thren) let me be your remembrancer of the great duty incum∣bent on you all, to love and reverence the Persons of your Mini∣sters, and have them in honour for their works sake especially. I shall put you in mind of a Scripture or two, that so my exhor∣tation may leave deeper impression upon your hearts: one is 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Another Scripture is, 1 Tim. 5. 17 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word and Doctrine. Which place seems to me plainly to set forth two sorts of Elders, viz. Ruling and Preaching Elders. And being compared together that  the double honour is especially to be given to the Preaching Elder. There's an Emphasis in the scituation of the words, It's not  but . I am non sin∣gular in my Interpretation, but have the concurrence of judici∣ous learned Duplices i∣gitur Presby∣teri fuerunt, cum uni va∣carent guber∣nationi, alte∣ri sermoni & orationi, &c. V. Bez. in loc. Quod dupli∣cem interpre∣tatur Chryso∣stomus victum & reverenti∣am non im∣pugno. Calv. Et deinceps subjicit—Colligere autem hinc licet duo fuisse tunc Presbyterorum genera, quia non omnes ad docendum ordinabantur: Nam aperte verba sonant, quosdam bene & honeste prae∣fuisse, quibus tamen non erant commissae docendi partes. Calv. Expositors who go before me in this Interpreta∣tion. I shall put you in remembrance of the following verse: For the Scripture saith thou shalt not muzzle the Oxe that treadeth out the Corne: The labourer is worthy of his reward. This plainly expresseth the duty of people to maintain their Ministers: if it were a cruell thing to muzzle the mouth of Oxen who tread out the Corn, much more cruell to with-hold maintenance from those who labour in the word and Doctrine. I shall only com∣pare this with another Scripture, (and in speaking my consci∣ence I may the rather be more earnest in behalfe of my dear Bre∣thren, because I plead not for any Interest of my own considering that I take no tyths, Gal. 6. 6. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things. It's said
not  not to contribute but to communicate unto him as Hoc est, qui docetur Docto∣ri suo commu∣nicet alimen∣tum, benevo∣lentiam, hono∣rem. Nam hoc indicat quod apendit, in omnibus bonis, & non inepte communicet, impertiaturve dixit, & non retribuat vel rependat. Com∣munio siqui∣dem id est: Il∣le spiritualia confert, tu qui doceris carnalia. Oecum. in loc. Oecumenius observeth. So that hereby it's evident that the reliefe of Pastors is not Eleemosynary, and precarious, but a kind of commerce and exchange of spirituall for carnall things: For he that teacheth bestoweth on his flock spirituall treasures, and they that are taught should bestow on him part of their temporall goods: And for the Quota pars (whereupon such a dust hath been raised) I cannot conceive how all the men on earth can ever be able to find out so fit a maintenance as Gods own proportion, insomuch as thereby Ministers are affected with the condition of their people according to Gods blessing of their increase, whether in a lesse or a greater measure. I shall only name one Scripture more to put you in mind of your duty to Mi∣nisters, and that is Heb. 13. 17. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your▪ selves, for they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy and not with griefe. By rulers and leaders are understood the Pastors of the Church: I rather understand it so with . Duces Haud dubie intelligit Ecclesiae Pastores & Gubernatores ut supra v. 7. Neque e∣nim alios Duces vel Gubernatores tune habuit Christiana Ecclesia. Pareus. Primum est Re∣verentia, ut agnoscamus ordinem divinum, eosque ut Legatos Dei nobis missos reverenter ex∣cipiamus & audiamus. Alterum est Amor propter officium. Tertium, Obedientia, ut iis ob∣temperemus in iis quae ipsorum officii sunt propria, & quae Dei nomine ex verbo ejus credenda, vel facienda praescribunt. Quartum est gratitudo, ut officiis & beneficiis quibus possumus ipsis labores & curas compensare studeamus. Pareus. Pareus to be meant of Ministers, then of Magistrates as Zuinglius observes. But Pareus adds four main duties of people to their Pastors, viz. Reverence, love, obedi∣ence, and gratitude. All these things people owe unto the Mini∣sters of the Gospell. But I draw to a close, what further remains concernes us all, both Ministers and people. My businesse yet remaining is by way of Character to decypher those who are reconciled, and by way of motive to excite you all to get assurance of your reconciled e∣state. These are weighty arguments, which I shall dispatch with what clearnesse, and Brevity I may, and so put a period to this Charact. 1. Every recon∣ciled person relyes on Christs Righ∣teousnesse. discourse. 1. We are to put our selves upon the test and triall, whether we are in a reconciled estate. Amongst many distinguishing notes which may be assigned, I shall only mention three instar omnium.
The first whereof is this (and it is a Proposition of eternall truth) every reconciled person denyes his own Righteousnesse, and re∣lyes only upon the Righteousnesse of Jesus Christ. No way to obtain Reconciliation, no other way to preserve it, but by the im∣putation of Christs Righteousnesse. The Garment of Christ is ab∣solutely compleat, and needs not the patching up of our merits: For what are all our Righteousnesses but Isa. 64. 6. filthy rags? Christ is the High Priest, who Heb. 9. 28. was once offered to bear the sinne of ma∣ny. He it is Isa. 63. 3. who trod the Winepresse alone. He is the only me∣diator, for there is but one 1 Tim. 2. 5. Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: Christ is the 1 Cor. 6. 20. price of our Redemption, and we Eph. 1. 7. have redemption through his bloud. The name of Jesus is the only name, for Acts 4. 12. there is no other name under Heaven whereby we shall be saved. Non solum horribile est, sed etiam pe∣riculosum de Deo extra Chrìstum co∣gitare. Luth. Loc. Com. Qui cuiquam salutem pro∣mittit sine Christo, nes∣cio utrum ipse salutem habere potest in Chri∣sto. Aug. There is no thinking of God without Christ: Neither will Christ admit any competitors or Corrivalls in this great businesse. Christ is a totall saviour, and he will have the whole honour (as is most due) unto himselfe. The whole work of salvation is Gods peculiar Interest, Isa. 43. 11. Bellarm. L. 9: de Justif. Isa. 43. 11. I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no saviour. Insomuch that Bellarmine himselfe that Champion of Rome is ; For having pleaded at large for merits, he gives his last Resolution as a cor∣rection of the Premises, saying; It's the safest way to relye only on the mercies of God in Christ. Wherefore let Papists discard their own merits (however they distinguish de congruo & condigno to elude their consciences) and let Socinians abhorre their blas∣phemy, who conceit that their obedience without Christ merits can justify them. Yet notwithstanding let us wholly betake our selves to Christs righteousnesse. His robes are broad enough to cloath us, His merits are of Infinite dignity and estimation. The great Apostle desired not Phil. 3. 9. Deo homines examinante & probante inve∣niar insitus Christo ut pl∣mes viti qui non meos ex lege. Mosaica, sed ex virtute Christi me efficientis fructus proferam deo gratos. A∣rias Mont. in loc. to be found in his owne righteousnesse which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith. And Job that holy man propounds the Question, Job. 9. 2, 3. Quasi dicat; frustra se defendere apud ipsum & prae ipso co∣netur. Nulla comparatio Dei & hominis justitiae. Mercer. in loc. How should man be just with God? if he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. Should the holiest of men, such as were Enoch, Noah, Moses, A∣braham, David, &c. Stand upon their own righteousnesse and
joyn issue with Gods Justice, not one of them could be able to stand in judgment. Wherefore we lay this down for a founda∣tion and a certaine truth—That all reconciled Persons ac∣count Christ their only Peace-maker, their rock and refuge, their Counsellour, saviour, their only Intercessour, and 1 Cor. 1. 30 him who of God is made unto them, Wisdome, Righteousnesse, San∣ctification and Redemption. This then is the first note of tri∣all, whether we come off clear, whether we throw away our own reason, merits, righteousnesse, and venture all upon the righteousnesse of Jesus Christ. He is a Isa. 27. 16. stone, a tryed stone, a pretious corner stone, a sure foundation. Wherefore we must (as the Persians when the King was offended brought his Son in their Armes) offer Christ unto the Father in the Armes of faith, and venture all upon his meritorious satisfaction. There's no danger of miscarrying, if with a lively faith we cast our selves upon Jesus Christ. Secondly, This foundation being necessarily laid, a super∣structure Charact. 2. The heart is new framed and fashio∣ned. may the better be raised on it; Therefore another note of triall I shall assigne to be, the new framing, new mould∣ing, and fashioning of the heart. For the heart of an unrecon∣ciled Person is rebellious against God; As it's recorded of Ju∣lian the Apostate that he shot up arrowes into the skie with a malicious intention to hit Christ: So every naturall man that lives without God in the World, would dethrone God (if he could) he hates God, his wayes, his people. But as soon as the conquering power of the Spirit of God subdues the heart, there is a marvelous change and alteration for the better. There's a Rev. 3. 18.  to anoint the eyes: So that the understanding is inlightned, and those that are Gods Children are Eph. 4. 23. renewed in the Spirit of their minde. They are all men and women of a pretious anointing, which is that 1 Joh. 2. 20. unction from the holy one whereby they know all things. And as for the wills of these regene∣rate, reconciled Persons, they are now yielding, obedient, and pli∣able to the will of God. For instance, Saul before his conversion raved in a distemper'd zeal against the Disciples, & breathed threat∣nings & slaughter against the Church, and through his distemper'd zeal thought he did God good service by persecuting of the Church of God, but as soon as ever Christ met him in the way, and threw down Horse and Man, and told him that † I am Jesus whom thou Act. 9. 5.
persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the prickes; then his will was changed, and he wholly devolved himselfe upon Christs will, as appears by his humble answer Vers. 6. Lord what wilt Vers. 6. thou have me to do? Further, all the affections are changed. These a reverend, Mr. Dyke in his book called the De∣ceit fulnesse of mans heart. Divine in an excellent and Singularly usefull book calls the feet of the soul. By these the soul is carryed along. And indeed the affections are the wings of the soul, to help it to soar aloft in Divine raptures and contemplations. Now in a reconci∣led Person all his a fections are alterd for the better. His love was formerly upon sin, now it is placed upon God, and all the wayes of holynesse: So that now what God hates a true believer hates, and what God love's a true believer loves. It's that  the Psalmist gives Psal. 97. 10. Psal. 97. 10. Ye that fear the Lord hate evill. And the best of Orators tells us; That to will and nill Idem velle ac idem nolle est summa pars amicitiae. Cic. the same is the chiefest part of Friendship. And as for the joy, hope, desire, they are all changed in a regenerate man. Where∣as formerly they were placed upon worldly vanities, now they are placed upon God, and the great things of eternity. In a word, where a Person is reconciled unto Christ, there's a new heart, and clean water is sprinkled upon it, the proud heart is become humble, the hard become soft, so that a new vergency and bent of the heart evidenceth it selfe throughout the continu∣all practice of the life and conversation. And this put's me in mind of the third Character (which I Charact. 3. drawn from the fruits of a Reconciled estate. intended) drawn from the fruits of a reconciled estate, which put forth themselves in the whole carriage of the life. Now we must know that the selfe same fruits which belong to a justified e∣state (because none are justified but those who are reconciled) appertain to a reconciled estate. The Apostle set's them forth Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. His ostendit competere quae∣cunque plenis∣sime justifica∣tis & in gra∣tiam Dei re∣posit is tribui possunt, eo∣que probat hac fide Evangelii Domini nostri Jesu Christi justificationem haberi consummatissi∣me. Bucer. in loc. Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have accesse by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoyce in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in Tri∣bulation also, knowing that Tribulation worketh patience, and pa∣tience experience, and experience hope. Likewise the fruits of the Spirit belong to every reconciled Person, and by them as a touch∣stone he ought to examine himselfe. The Apostle names one
Catalogue, Eph. 5. 9. Eph. 5. 9. Viz. Goodnesse, and righteousnesse, and truth: and he mentions another much larger, Gal. 5. 22, 23. Gal. 5. 22, 23. Viz. Love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, meeknesse, temperance. Here then is the great triall, whether the life and conversation be ordered aright? Whether the conversa∣tion be in † all holy conversation and Godlinesse? Whether the new Creature exert it selfe through a mans whole life? Whether a holy profession be adorned by a holy conversation? Now if in truth and sincerity affirmative answers can be given to these Que∣stions, then without doubt such Persons have Interest in this Re∣conciliation by Jesus Christ. But I shall adde no more to these Characters; I conceive that whosoever can produce these tokens, hath a sure and undoubt∣ed title. What yet remains is (as I promised you) to excite you all by some moving considerations, to make it your grand work and businesse to get assurance of your reconciled estate, which is the businesse of the greatest concernment. Motive 1. Consider the riches of mer∣cy and bowells opened to∣wards fallen man, and de∣nyed to the fallen An∣gels. As for Motives, 1. Let us consider of the riches of mercy, and bowells opened towards fallen man, which were utterly denyed towards fallen Angells. And this consideration heightneth the great contrivance of this Reconciliation, in that it was from all eternity: Adde hereunto that God himselfe was first in the ten∣der and contrivance of this great work. Man neither could nor would make up so great a breach. It transcended the Sphere of his capacity. Had Adam and all his posterity joyned all their heads together, they could not understand what way and means to undertake to make up so great a breach. But God the Father out of the riches of his mercy found out a way, even a new and living way by Jesus Christ. The Angels were past by, they fell once and that irrecoverably, without any hope of reinvesting themselves in their first estate. For Christ shed not one drop of bloud for them, He Heb. 2. 16.  significat arripere, ap∣prehendere manum inji∣cere. B. An∣drews. Cura, sollicitudo, labor, festinatio pro salute generis humani ea una voce significatur, Hyperius in loc. took not upon him (saith the Apostle) the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. Yet notwithstanding the riches of Gods mercy are inhanced toward fallen man, be∣cause the promised seed, even that Gen. 3. 15. the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, was proclaim'd in Paradise, and appro∣priated unto mankind.
Secondly consider the great and inestimable price paid to pur∣chase Mot. 2. Con∣sider the great price paid to purchase peace and re∣conciliation. peace and Reconciliation. And what was that price, but the price of bloud? And this is called in Scripture, Act. 20. 28. the Bloud of God: Yet in such expressions we are to understand a communica∣tion of Idioms. This bloud was the bloud of sprinkling, which Heb. 12. 24. Speaketh better things then the bloud of Abel. This was the bloud of the immaculate Lamb slaine from the Foundation of the World. Because Rev. 13. 8. without shedding of bloud there was no remission, Christ therefore took upon him humane nature. There are two great significant words which evidently declare his humane nature: one word is  Joh. 1. 14. Joh. 1. 14. He pitcht his Tent or Taber∣nacle amongst us: The other word is  Phil. 2. 7. Vers. 8. Phil. 2. 7. He emptyed himselfe, or made himselfe of no reputation. And Vers. 8. we read of the highest degree of Christs humiliation, in that he became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse. Thus Christ hath made a compleat satisfaction, by doing and suffering all that the Father required. And now Christ Rom. 8. 34. sitteth at the right hand of God who also maketh intercession for us. And we have a ground of strong consolation further laid down Heb. 7. 25. Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come un∣to God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. There's a word of great importance , which (as a  omnimodam significat per∣fectionem. Ca∣mero in My∣roth. lear∣ned Authour observes) signifieth all manner of perfection. This sheweth such an absolute perfection, that nothing else can be de∣sir'd, nothing can be added. And wherein doth this all-suffici∣ent Saviour shew himselfe to be so? We have an answer, and strong proofe drawne from Christs intercession in the following words where it is said, That he ever liveth to make  non dicit ut offerat, hoc enim semel fe∣cit, sed superest altera sacerdotii pars nempe Interpellatio. Beza. Intercession for them. This Scripture is a fort Royall and impregnable not∣withstanding all the batteries that Socinian Hereticks make a∣gainst it. But I proceed to a third motive drawn from the willingnesse Motive 3. Drawn from the willing∣ness of God to be recon∣iled. of God to be reconciled. Wherefore he sends his messengers up∣on this errand to perswade people to embrace Articles of peace. The Lord entrusts his Ministers with the word of reconciliation, which is the Doctrine of the everlasting Gospell. And they spend their Spirits and lay forth their strength to the uttermost, wo∣ing,
intreating & exhorting people, to submit unto Christs Scepter, and through him to make their peace with God the Father. Now the Spirit of God strives in the Ministery of the word. It's a most terrible judgment when Gods Spirit refuseth to strive any longer with a people. And this is threatned, Gen. 6. 3. Gen. 6. 3. And the Lord said my Spirit shall not alwaies strive with man (i. e.) The Lord will not alwaies dispute, chide, and argue the case with a people, the Lord will not alwaies strive by the Ministery of his servants, such as were Enoch, Noah & Methusalah who lived the longest, and died but the year before the flood. God will not alwaies suffer his Spirit to be grieved, & the motions thereof slighted: Neither will God alwaies suffer the faithfull labours of his Ministers to be neglected. * Some † Pagninus, Grotius. render the word Lo-jiddon non vaginabit. He will not alwaies put his sword into the scabberd, but he will draw it out and fight against his Enemies. And oh that you would all consider in your most serious composed thoughts, that now you hear as it were a voice behind you saying; This is the way walk in it: This voyce is the Spirit speak∣ing in the written word (for the Spirit speaks according to the word.) Now by all the woings and whispers of the Spirit, and by the unwearied labours of the faithfull Ambassadours of the Gospell you are entreated to consult the eternall benefit of your immortall souls. Now the voice of the Turtle is heard in the Land: Manna falls round about your Tents: The spirituall Manna of the word is plentifully rained downe amongst you. You never had more fre∣quent, never more profitable preaching. Now the Spirit moves by the Ministery of the word. And the Lord expostulates the case, Ezek. 18. 31. Why will you die O house of Israel? The Lord delights not in your blood so he professeth. Vers. 32. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dyeth saith the Lord God: Wherefore turn your selves and live ye. Now the Lord Jesus knocks at the dores of your hearts,  and waits for admission. He waits to be gracious, and even waits till his locks be wet with dew. He invites himself to be thy guest, and he invites thee to come unto him, & he will entertain thee with a ban∣quet of love. Now herein appears the great and wonderfull conde∣scension of our gracious God, who to shew his willingnesse to be re∣conciled, is himself first in the motion. We sought not to him (though we were the offenders) but he sought unto us. Hence appears how abundant in loving-kindness & mercy the Lord is towards us even alwaies before hand with us in mercy, notwithstanding we unthank∣full
wretches are behind hand with him in duty. The Lord con∣vinceth all the World, and stops the mouths of Cavillers, that he is not so austere (as some men mis-understand him) but he seeks to us first, and is 2. Pet. 3. 9. not willing that any should perish but that all should come to repentance. A greater gift the Father could not give then his beloved Son, yet he sent him out of his bosome, the Son in whom he was well pleased: not to reign according to the state of earthly Kings, but to be as Mat. 3. 17. one that serveth, and not to save his life, but to lay downe his life as a ransome for all those that were given him of the Father. And to this very end and purpose Christ came, Mat. 18. 11. That he might seek and save that which was lost. We were all lost in the old Adam, and there was no way of recovering our selves, but by seeking after our Interest in the new Adam; yet we would not seek him, we ran away from him, and when he invited, we made excuses and would not come: when he knockt we bolted the dore, when he called we would not an∣swer. But Jesus Christ in the day of his power makes us a Ps. 110. 3. wil∣ling people, or a people of willingnesses (as the originall expres∣seth it.) Now Christ's great errand was to seek us when we were altogether lost, and when he found us he beseeched us by the Mi∣nistery of his Ambassadours that we would be reconciled unto God. Fourthly, consider Reconciliation once made for us by Jesus Motive. 4. Reconciliati∣on once made is made for ever. Christ with the Father is abiding and permanent. There will be no breakings out again. The Reconciliation once made is made for ever, and the Foundation of it is the Faithfulnesse of God. He is a God Psal. 89. 28. 34. keeping covenant, 2 Chr. 13. 5 faithfull that hath promised, his Heb. 10. 23. promises are yea and Amen. The covenant of God is 2 Sam. 23. 5 an everlasting covenant, it's a covenant of ‖ salt, and the love of God is Jer. 31. 3. everlasting: And Christs love is Joh. 13. 1. to the end: Christs pray∣ers and intercession are everlasting (as in the place forecited, Heb. 7. 25.) So that hence we may conclude that once justified and for ever justified, once reconciled and for ever reconciled. Let us on our part labour to get assurance of our reconciled estate, and get more evidences and manifestations thereof unto our own souls, and so we shall reap the greater comfort. As for Gods part there's no possibility of failing, he never was, nor will be worse then his word. He is truth it selfe, and he glories in that attri∣bute of truth, that he is faithfull in all his promises. Balaam
though a mercenary Prophet gives a true attestation Numb. 23. 19. Numb. 23. 19. God is not a man that he should lye, neither the Son of man that he should repent: hath he said and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken and shall he not make it good? Such then as hold the Saints Apostasie (as Petrus Bertius doth, the Frontispice of whose book viz. Apostasia sanctorum, seems to me to be contradictio in adje∣cto) and others both of the Popish and Arminian faction now a∣daies, do highly derogate from the faithfulnesse of God, and are the greatest adversaries unto the consolation of Gods Children, by making them sad whom God would not have made sad. A∣mong many there's one speciall Scripture, which overthrowes all the Arminian Cavils in this particular. Here let us fix and (through Gods grace) resolve never to start a jot from that truth delivered by our Saviour, Joh. 10. 28. Joh. 10. 28. And I give unto them eternall life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Here's our strong hold, that our per∣severance is not in our own but in Christs keeping: And the per∣petuity of a Saints condition depends not upon his free will (which is an Aegyptian reed and is deceitfull) but upon free grace, upon Christs Intercession: And there is Heb. 13. 5. . help laid upon him that is mighty, and Christ is the rock of Ages, here is secu∣rity enough, here we may safely venture all. He hath said it (and theres enough in that promise) He will never leave thee nor for∣sake thee. Fifthly and lastly (and with this particular I shall conclude) Motive 5. This may be the last time of tendring termes of Re∣conciliation. consider seriously, for ought either you, or I, or any other can discern, this may be the last offer and tender of Gospel-reconci∣liation that ever may be vouchsafed unto you. If you stop your ears, and refuse to give audience unto Christs Ambassadours this day, for ought any of us knows, their commission may be expi∣red, and quite out of date to morrow. In a short time the most holy, industrious, and faithfull Ambassadour may have his Quie∣tus est. Christ may say to him Mat. 25. 21. Well done good and faithfull ser∣vant, enter into the joy of thy Lord. As then you desire that the Ministers of Jesus Christ may give up their account Heb. 13. 17. with joy and not with griefe, let it be your wisdome and care in this very day (which may be a criticall day) to entertain those things which concern your everlasting peace. Now you enjoy Sabbaths, the desire of dayes, the Ordinances the Is. 25. 6. feast of fat things: yet your
eyes behold your teachers, the dore of the Sanctuary is yet open∣ed, and a Ezra. 9. 8. nail is yet left in the holy place; you have bread in the morning, and in the evening, and more plenty of spirituall food on the Sabbath day and week daies, then heretofore. Much is gi∣ven unto you, and much required from you. Where God hath sown so liberally, he expects as plentifull an harvest. Now you hear the joyfull sound, even the word of reconciliation and sub∣stance of our Embassie is to intreat you to consider the value and dignity of your Heavenly born being soules, and to seek after re∣conciliation, otherwise you are undone to all eternity. Now Christ holds out a white flag for a parley of peace, now the King of Hea∣ven holds out the golden Scepter, O come and touch the top there∣of and live: The Port-cullis is not yet let down: The Judge hath not yet vailed his face: The dore of hope is not yet shut up; the ho∣ly Ghost calls: Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord whilest he may be found, call upon him whilest he is neer, 2 Cor. 6 2. Nemo tam di∣vos habuit fa∣ventes crasti∣num ut possit sibi polliceri. Senec. Now is the day of salvation. None of us can pro∣mise to our selves a morrow, no not the least moment of time: and if we neglect this golden opportunity, and season of grace offered, we may never live to have another tendred unto us. All the World cannot call back the least minute of time, when once it is past, it's like a swift stream, or an arrow out of a bw not to be recalled. Wherefore as you consult the eternal good of your immortal souls be intreated to improve all the prizes and Talents that God puts into your hands to get Wisdome withall. When the Lord bids you seek his face, O that your hearts with all readinesse might return this answer, Psal. 27. 8. Thy face Lord will I seek. God hath put this word in∣to my mouth, and here fixt my thoughts, (after I had severall o∣ther subjects in my eye) and hath sent me on this very errand to treat on this great Theame, of reconciliation unto God. And now what message shall I return unto him that hath sent me? What ac∣count shall I give at the last day of the entertainment of this word? What shall I say more? You have life and death set before you this day viz. The happinesse of a reconciled estate, and the misery of an unreconciled estate; O that the Lord would engage you all to make the better choyce by hearking unto this word of reconciliation, and unfainedly embracing the same, and so your souls shall live. 2. Tim. 2. 7. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.
THE MINISTERY OF ANGELLS. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all Ministring spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be heires of salvation? TO draw down the context to the text, we are to Sermon 2. Preached at S. Marye's Oxon. Oct. 3. 1658. Vers. 3. . Solis radii sunt ejusdem naturae cum sole, ab eodem propagatione distinguuntur, avelluntur nunquam: hac Metaphorâ divinam filii naturam con∣venientissime expressit Apo∣stolus. Et cha∣racter icitur expressa imago Archetypi. Pa∣reus in loc. take speciall notice of the Excellency and digni∣ty of Christ represented unto us in this chapter especially Vers. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person and up∣holding all things by the Word of his Power, when he had by himselfe purged our sinnes, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on High. And by way of Comparison, the Apostle further inhanceth the honour and preheminence of Christ. For after he had compared Christ with the Angells, he sets the Crown on Christs head, his name is more excellent than theirs. Vers. 4. 5. Being made so much better then the Angells, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they. For unto which of the An∣gells said he at any time, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? And againe, I Will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son. Christ is a Son, the Angells his servants, they may not be worshipped themselves, but they must worship Christ, Vers. 6. 7. Let all the Angells of God worship him. Of his Angells he saith, who maketh his Angells spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire. And further honour is ascribed to the Son, which is not to An∣gells, Vers. 8. 9. Ʋnto the Son he saith, Thy throne O God, is for ever and ever, a scepter of righteousnesse, is the scepter of thy Kingdome. Thou hast loved righteousnesse and hated iniquity: therefore God even
thy God hath anointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse above thy fel∣lowes. And further Christ is a Lord and Creatour, the Angells servants and creatures: Christ is advanced to the Throne, He is the Soveraign Lord of all, Vers. 13. The Angells ministering spi∣rits subservient to Christ, and at his command: and when com∣missionated by him, helpfull and serviceable unto all the children of God. It is demanded by way of interrogation in the Text, Are they not all Ministring spirits &c. Which scripture sets forth clearly the Protection of Angells, their Ministery and serviceable∣nesse unto the children of God, A point seldome taught, yet very usefull, comfortable, and of singular concernment unto all the children of God! And being that its the duty of the Minister to declare unto people the whole councell of God, that which hath oft been in my intention, I shall now endeavour to handle with all the perspicuity that I can. The words contain a question, Are they not all Ministring spi∣rits? Divis. which being resolved, the answer is obvious that the An∣gells are all Ministring spirits: More particularly we are to observe a Description of Angells. 1. From their nature, Spirits. 1. . 2. . 3. . 4.  implied  exprest. 5. . 2. From their office, Ministring. 3. Their commission, Sent. 4. Whose Ministers they are, 1. Primarily, Christs. And se∣condarily, Christs children. 5. The universality, All: All the Angells. Here's the uni∣versality of the object, and it is , and universality of the subject all the Angells: All that are heires, none left out, none exempted from the benefit of the service of all the Angells of God. All that are heires of Salvation, all Christs children have interest in their protection. Many scruples may be made, and many things require explica∣tion, what requires opening shall be endeavoured in the enlarge∣ment of one intire doctrine whereon I purpose to fix. Thus I pro∣pound it to you. That it pleaseth God to make use of the Ministery of Angells for  the good of his Children. This is the point I aime at from this Scripture. For the Inlargement whereof, I shall propound se∣verall questions and give in Answers to them, that shall constitute the doctrinall part of the Text, which done, I shall draw infe∣rences
for our instruction and practice, and those shall constitute the use and application. For the resuming the first thing propounded. The first question is, what Angells are? I have read many cu∣rious Q. 1. What Angells are. observations of Fathers and School-men concerning An∣gells, which I conceive not fit to communicate, being altogether unwilling to stue a Sermon with Curiosities and conjectures which tend not to edification. For if Moses knowing the origi∣nall of the world had it not revealed what to write of Angels, if Col. 2. 18. Demissio illa animi vitiosa parit cultum superstitiosum Monentur hoc in loco Colos∣senfes ne de∣cepti ab Im∣postoribus tri∣buant Angelis cultum divi∣num. Daven.  à Nuntiando. Stephen, who had the heavens opened saw not those orders of Angells what they were; if Paul, who was taken up into the third heaven, saw yet so little of Angells that whosoever will teach so curiously of them, he saith, they be puft up of a fleshly mind to speak of things which they never saw: Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angells, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puft up by his fleshly mind. If John in all his revelations had no such know∣ledge revealed of Angells, then it's a duty to be modest and sober in inquisitions, to be wise unto Sobriety, and to avoyd curious speculations of Schoolmen, and confine our selves unto the Word of God; Now what they are, we shall shew from their names and Nature. First, from their names, they are Messengers, who carry a Their Name. message: they are Gods messengers. *This name Angell is at∣tributed unto Christ. Gen. 48. 16 The Angell that delivered me from all evill blesse the lads, &c. Ex. 23. 20. Behold I send an Angell before thee to keep thee in the way and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. † Nomen non naturae sed of∣ficii Aug. Isa. 63. 9. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angell of his presence saved them, in his love, and in his pitty he redeemed them, and he bare them and carried them all the daies of old. Christ is called  Nuntius Dei Steph. the Angell of his presence, and the Angell of the Covenant. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom yee seeke shall suddenly come unto his Temple, even the Mal. 3. 1. messenger of the Covenant, whom yee delight in. This name of Angell is ascribed there unto John Baptist, who came in the spirit of Elias, and unto Christ also, and likewise to our Ministers, pastours and teachrs, Rev. 2. 12. Rev. 3. 1. Angells are took for Spirits, Messengers of God imployed for the fulfilling of his will and commands in Heaven or in earth! And so in my Text.
For their Nature. Damascene giveth this definition of Angells. 2. The Na∣ture of An∣gells. . &c. Damasc. A most pure and perfect, intellectuall, immateriall and immortall creature., created and appointed to be Gods attendants and messen∣gers between God and man. Not that God hath any necessity of help or cooperation of his creatures; but that he is pleased in his will and pleasure to imploy those Instruments. So I will, and so I command; God only can say, and we may not question, what he doth. But to set down their Nature more fully, I'le take notice of these properties. 1. Angells are Spirits. He maketh his Angells spirits, and his Mi¦nisters a flaming fire. In that they are called spirits, that declares 1. Angells are spirits. Psal. 104. 4. Spiritus vox naturam de∣clarat, flam∣mae vero orū potentiam. Gomarus. Facit Deus instar vento∣rum velocissimos Ministros, eosdemque facit flammam ignis, hoc est, celerrime, instar fulg∣ris exequendi jussa paratissimos. Pareus in loc. their Nature, and flaming fire, that shewes their power. Windes and fire are swift in their motion, and so are Angells. God makes his Ministers swift like wind, and like a flame of fire, that is most ready, like lightning, speedily to execute his commands. They are not compounded of matter and forme, for Luk. 8. 30. Many Devills entred into one man, and the Devills themselves were once Angells of light. And though we read that they have appeared in bodily shapes: yet we must know that those bodies were assumtitious. They might assume a body for a time, for the discharge of that parti∣cular service they went about. And whereas we read of their wings, faces, hands, and tongues; all those are to be understood Metaphorically. The disciples were terrified, and afrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spi∣rit: And he said unto them, why are ye troubled! and why do thoughts Luk. 24. 37, 38, 39. arise in your hearts! Behold my hands and my feet that it is I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me have. Angells are incorporeall, and though we read of their eat∣ing and drinking, as the Angells with Abraham, Lot and others, we must know that when they assumed bodies, God might give them those faculties that belonged to bodies, or they might con∣sume the foode, and work miraculously above mans apprehension.
2. Angells are invisible. By him were all things created that are 2. Angells are invisible. Col. 1. 16. in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for him. And they acted invisibly, when they took upon them shapes, and assumed bodies, for a time indeed they appeared unto men, but as spirits they are as Invisible as a mans soule. Who hath seen a spirit at any time, or the soul of man, or an Angell? 3. They are Immortall. Good Angells are so, neither can the 3. They are immortall. Luk. 20. 36. dye any more, for they are equall unto the Angells, and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection. Bad An∣gells are so, Then shall we say to them on his left hand, depart from me Matt. 25 41. ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devill an his Angells. 4. They neither marry nor are given in marriage. Hence Chry∣sostome 4. They nei∣ther marry, nor are given in marriage. Luk. 10. 33. confutes their opinion, who from Gen. 6. 2. by the Sons of God, understand the Angells, this must needs be a very corrupt exposition, because they neither marry nor are given in marri∣age. 5. They are most numerous, a great multitude? Gen. 32. 1, 2. Jacob went 5. They are most numerous on his way, and the Angells of God met him, and when Jacob saw them, he said, this is Gods host, and he called the name of that place Mhanaim. Deut. 33. 2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them, and shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of Saints, from his right hand went a fiery law for them. Ps. 68. 17. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angells, the Lord is among them as in Sinai, the holy place. Dan. 7. 10. Thousand thou∣sands ministred unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the judgment was set, and the bookes were opened. Rev. 5. 11. I be∣held and heard the voice of many Angells round about the Throne, and the beasts, and the elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousands, and thousand of thousands. They have great celerity and agility. They moove with all ex∣pedition. And though they are not repletivè in loco, we cannot as∣cribe an Ubiquity of presence to them, because they are created substances, yet Philosophers say, they moove in a point and in an in∣stant. And this assertion is consonant to Scripture, otherwise I should not meddle with it: For we read in Daniel, Whilest I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriell, whom I had seen in a vision at the beginning being caused to flie swiftly
touched me about the evening oblation. Hence we read of Cheru∣bims in Scripture, that they have winges. Hereupon Picture∣drawers Exod. 37. 9. paint Angells with their winges displaid, which discovers both their ignorance and superstition. What are Images but tea∣chers of lies? And (as the book of Homilies observes) no more A Booke of Homilies prin¦ted in Q Eli∣zabeths time. adorne a Church then Brothel-houses a Common-wealth. They have winges ascribed unto them, for our apprehension and accor∣ding unto our capacity, not that they have really winges, but thereby to set forth their swiftnesse, celerity and agility, to do what God commands them. 7. They are of great strength and power. We read of the 7. Angells are of great strength. Psal. 103. 20. 2 Thes. 1. 7. . strength of good Angells. Blesse the Lord, ye his Angells, that excell in strength, that do his commandments, hearkning unto the voice of his Word. They are called the powers of Christ. To you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angells. And bad Angells are of great strength: The Devill is the strong man armed, compared to a roa∣ring Lion, a Dragon, a Leviathan. And bad Angells are called powers, and principalities, spirituall wickednsses in high places! Eph. 2. 2. Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the aire, the spirit that now Eph. 6. 12. worketh in the children of disobedience. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the ru∣lers of the darknesse of this world, against spirituall wickednesse in high places. The second question is, How many sorts of Angells there are? Q. 2. How many sorts of Angells are there. V. Salkeld of the Nature of Angells. I answer there are good and bad, Angells of light, and Angells of darknesse. For good Angells, School-men and others make nine distinct orders of them, and they ranke them into 3 Hierarchies. 1. Cherubims, Seraphims, and Thrones. 2. Dominations, Vertues, and Powers. In the 3. ranke, Principalities, Archangells, and Angells. I dare not follow the School-mens steps too close, but shall en∣deavour above all to keep close to Scripture. That there are dif∣ferent degrees of Angells, some higher in dignity then others seems probable, but that there are those nine distinct orders, and that some are sent and not others, the Angells of the lower rank and not others are imployed, is an ungrounded conjecture, besides the rule of Scripture, and we may not be wise abou what is writ∣ten.
We read of Seraphims and Cherubims to cover the mercy seat: Isa. 6. 6. Eph. 1. 21. We read of Principalities, Rules, Powers, Dominions, Thrones. The Apostle ventured not to reckon them all up: How dare the School∣men so peremptorily determine? Augustine giveth his judgment Esse sedes dominatio∣nes, &c. August. thus: I do (saith he) firmely believe that there be seats, powers, and principalities: yet I hold with undoubted faith, that they differ in sort, but how they differ, I know not: neither do I think that by such ignorance I incurre any danger. Questionlesse there's an An∣gell  above them all in degree and dignity, to whom all the Angells must pay homage and worship, and that is the Archangell, (for we read not of Archangells in Scripture) Michaell the Archangell, when contending with the Devill, he Jude 9. disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a rayling accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. The 1 Thes. 4. 16. Lord himselfe shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voyce of an Archangell, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. This is meant of the Lord Jesus Christ: All thrones, powers, dominions must yeild subjection unto him: He hath a name above every name. He is Soveraign Lord of all. Now for the bad Angells. We read of the Devill and his An∣gells, and Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devills, which implyes Order and degree according to a common acceptation: though some rather understand it spoken of their power, and this is more probable. To be over-curiously inquisitive in these things I dare not. The well is deep and we have not wherewith to draw. I descend to a third question which is more profitable to know. Q 3. What are the of∣fices of An∣gells? 1. To behold the face of God. Math. 18. 10. Isa. 6. 2. And that is, what are the offices of the Angells? I mean the good Angells, for my text only speaks of them. They are these. 1. To behold the face of God. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you that their Angells do al∣waies behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven. Though sometimes we read, they cover their faces. Above it stood the Sera∣phims, each one had six winges, with twaine he covered his face, with twaine he covered his feet, and with twaine he did flie. They are not able to behold the infinite lustre, and splendour of his Maje∣sty; but in Scripture account, to be as the Angells in heaven sets forth a state of blessednesse. In the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angells of God heaven: Mat. 22. 30. And blessednesse consists in the injoyment of the blessed vision.
2. To execute the commands of God. Blesse the Lord, ye his 2. To execute Gods will. Psal. 103. 20. Mat. 6. 10. Angells, that excell in strength, that do his commandments, hearken∣ing unto the voice of his Word. Blesse the Lord all ye his hosts, the Mi∣nisters of his that do his pleasure. And we pray thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. 3. To celebrate the praises of God. Isa. 6. 3. One cried unto another, and 3. To praise God. said, holy, holy, holy, Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. Luk. 2. 13, 14. And suddenly there was with the Angell a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, & saying glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace, good will towards men. Rev. 4. 8, 9. The foure beasts had each of them six winges about him, & they were full o eyes within, & they rest not day or night, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, & is & is to come. 4. To make it their work to preserve Gods glory. And I fell 4. To make it their worke to preserve Gods glory. Rev. 19. 10. at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus, worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophe∣cy. The Angell would not beare with Gods dishonour, and would not permit John to worship him. 5. To be servants unto Christ. When he bringeth in the first be∣gotten 5. to be Christs servants. Heo. 1. 6. Psal. 97. 7. Luk. 1. 19. into the world, (he saith) let all the Angells of God worship him. Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast them∣selves of Idolls; worship him all ye Gods. They brought the message of Christs incarnation. I am Gabriell that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak unto thee, and to tell thee these glad tidings. They ministred unto him. Mat. 4. 11. Then the Devill leaved him, and behold Angells came and ministred unto him. Luk. 22. 43. And there appeared an An∣gell from Heaven unto him and strengthening him. Christ is the head of them, and they are his servants: ye are compleat in him, who is Col. 2. 10. the head of all Principality and Power. 6. Angells are serviceable unto men, not one, but all▪ not any . (i. e.) Mini∣stratores quos vulgò solemus officiarias vo∣care. Beza. Numb. 20. 16 2 King. 6. 16. ae exempted, They are all ministring spirits in the text. And these singular services which they have done, and will do for Gods chil∣dren, are upon record. They deliver them from dangers, When we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an Angell, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt, and behold we are in Kadesh, a Cittie in the uttermost of thy border. Feare not (saith the Prophet) for they they that be with us are more then they that are with them, Who were they but Gods Angells for the Prophets safe-guard. 1. The Angell of the Lord incampeth about them that feare him, 1. The An∣gell of the Lord incamp∣eth about the righteous.
and delivereth them. Dan. 3. 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spake and said, bles∣sed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, who hath sent his Angell and delivered his servants that trusted in him, aad hath changed the Kings word and yeelded their bodies, that they might not serve or worship any God, except their own God. And Daniel makes this acknowledgment, My God hath sent his Angell, and hath shut ‖ Psal. 91. 11. the Lyons mouth, that they have not hurt me, for asmuch, as before him innocency was found in me, and also before thee; O King, I have done no hurt. Dan. 6. 22. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all his waies. Angels are Protectors & Guardians commissionated by God Dan. 10. 13. to protect Gods children. The Prince of the Kingdome of Persia, withstood me one and twenty daies, but lo Michael, one of the chiefe Princes came to help me, and I remained there with the King of Persia, Michael is generally interpreted to be Christ the only Archangell. 2. The Angells are of marvellous wisdome to direct, coun∣sell, 2. Angels are of marveilous wisdome. Gen. 24. 7. and advise the children of God. The Lord God of heaven which took me from my fathers house, and from the Land of my kin∣dred, and which spake unto me, and sware unto me, saying, unto thy seed will I give this Land, he shall send his Angell before thee, and thou shalt take a wife to my son from thence. The Lord before whom I walk will send his Angell with thee, and prosper thy way, and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my Fathers house. 3. They comfort Gods children. Gen. 32. 2. This is Gods host said 3. Angells comfort Gods children. 1 King. 19. 5, 6, 7. Jacob, as Elias lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold then an An∣gell touched him, and said unto him, arise and eate. And he looked, and behold there was a cake baken on the coales, and a cruse of water at his head, and he did eat and drinke, and laid him down again. And the Angell of the Lord came a second time and touched him, and said arise and eat, because the journey is to great for thee. 4. They punish their enemies. Gen. 19. 11 They smote the men that were at 4. Angells pu∣nish the saints enemies. the dore with blindnesse, both small and great, so that they wearied themselves to find the dore. 2 King 19. 35. And it came to passe that night, that the Angell of the Lord went out, and smote in the campe of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and when they arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead corpses. Herod was made a signall spectacle of pride, as is on record. Acts 12. 23 And immediatly an An∣gell of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory & he was Rev. 12. 7. eaten of wormes, and gave up the ghost. They stand for Christ and his Church, against Satan and his Angells. And there was war in heaven,
Michael and his Angells fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angells. 5. They resist the wicked, and their attemps. Balaam found 5. Angells re∣sist wicked men. Num. 22. 22. 6. Angels car∣ry the Saints souls into hea∣ven. Luk. 16. 22. 7. They gather the elect unto Christ. Mat. 24. 31. Mar. 13. 27. Q. 4. Whether every Saint hath a peculi∣ar Angell his keeper? Mat. 18. 10. it so, And Gods anger was kindled because he went, and an Angell of the Lord stood in the way for an Adversary against him. 6. They carry the soules of Gods children into heaven. And it came to passe that the begger died, and was carried by the Angells into Abrahams bosome: the rich man also died and was buried &c. 7. They gather the elect unto Christ at the last day. He shall send his Angells with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall ga∣ther together his elect from the foure windes, from one end of heaven to the other. The fourth question is, whether every Saint hath a peculiar An∣gell to be his keeper and Protectour? That every Saint hath a peculiar Angell to keep him is the o∣pinion of Fathers, School-men, and many Protestants: but al∣though I am farre from a hasty censure, yet I cannot assent unto their opinion, because here in the text, it's laid down universal∣ly, All. There are two Scriptures specially urged in behalfe of this opinion: The one is Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that yee despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you that their Angells do alwaies behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. The other is Act. 12. 15. They said unto her; thou art mad, but she constantly Act. 12. 15. affirmed that it was even so: then said they, it is his Angell. To the former place I answer; the meaning is, that men ought  not to contemne poore believers, seeing God hath so farre ho∣noured them, as to give them his own Angells, to be their Guar∣dians and Ministers. And though they are called their Angells, it followes not hence that each Saint hath a peculiar Angell ap∣propriated to himselfe: but their Angells are appointed over al Gods children, and are as serviceable unto them, as if every one Angell had charge over one particular Saint, & Indivi∣duum. So that one Angell may protect many: as, The Angell of Psal. 34. 7. the Lord encampeth round about them that feare him and delivereth them. One Angell may protect many, and many Angells may pro∣tect one. The meaning of this Scripture Calvin makes to be this That they are not to be contemned, whose Angells are neere and rea∣dy Non impu∣nè contemni eos, quorum Angeli propinqui sunt & familiares, ut vindictam exigant. Calv.
to take revenge. The Angells will take revenge upon those who afflict the children of God. But there is more matter of doubt from Act. 12. 15. Then said  they it is his Angell. For answr, 1. The word  is rendred a Messenger  and so some rather render it: It's his Messenger. 2. It's spoken according to a vulgar opinion. There is an an∣tient opinion that there is a good and a bad Genius. Empedocles the Philosopher taught that every man had two Angells, one good another bad, And Grecians used to say that every man hath his own Angell to be the  of all his life. And Plu∣tarch records, when Brutus was laine, the night before, one ap∣peared unto him and said, I am thine evill Angell, oh Brutus. But among the Jewes themselves there were frequent apparitions of dead persons and phantasmes (which questionlesse were diaboli∣call) and they were thought by the vulgar sort to be the spirits, of the persons, whom they represented, and they had a conjecture that there was some good, or some bad, according to the diver∣sitie of the persons, and their forepassed life. Now it should seem that these people amazed as it were, at an unlooked for chance, followed the popular opinion and would thereby inferre that Pe∣ters death was inevitable, seeing his spirit did already begin to appeare. 3. This may be understood, It is his Angell, that is some An∣gell that God had sent for his deliverance, which was fully effe∣cted, For the Angell of the Lord took away Peters chayne, and deli∣vered Acts. 12. 17. him out of Prison. The fifth question is, what is the knowledge of An∣gells? Q. 5. What is the knowledg of Angells. 1. We must premise that they are not omniscient. Of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angells of Heaven, but my Fa∣ther Mat. 24. 14. only. They increase in knowledge, saith the Apostle Paul, Mat. 13. 32. Eph. 3. 10. To the intent that now unto the Principalities, and Powers, in hea∣venly places might be knowne by the Church, the manifold wisdome of God. And likewise the Apostle Peter concurres, Ʋnto whom it was 1 Pet. 1. 12. revealed that not unto themselves: but unto us they did Minister the things which are now reported unto you, by them that have preached the Gospell unto you, with the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which things the Angells desire to look into.
2. The knowledge Angells have is by intuition, and not dis∣course as men have. 3. Their wisdome and knowledge is excellent. So said the wo∣man of Tekoah, My Lord is wise, according to the wisdome of an An∣gell 2 Sam. 14. 20. of God, to know all things that are in earth. 4. They are Creatures of great experience. Even bad Angells have great knowledge. They have had long experience, and have made many observations of the Actions of men. 5. God oftimes communicates unto good Angells the affaires of men. I cannot, neither will I say, that the Angells know mens thoughts for: That's Gods sole Prerogative. Neither can I say, that the Angells know all our actions. But they know very much, be∣cause God communicates them unto them, and they rejoyce in Luk. 15. 7, 10 the conversion of a sinner, and bad Angells know much of a mans waies. The Devill observes and takes notice of our failings, and though he knows not our thoughts: yet he'l guesse neer the mat∣ter, and by circumstances and carriages put together, he will ea∣sily find out which is the bosome and constitution sinne, and so forme his temptation accordingly. Q. 6. Whether Christ died for Angells? Ans. 1. Heb. 2. 16. The sixt and last question is, whether Christ died for An∣gells? I answer, Negatively. For first, he took not upon him their Na∣ture. Verily he took not upon him the Nature of Angells, but the seed of Abraham. 2. God left the Apostate Angells without recovery. What their sinne was, whether pride, or any other sinne, (though most are of opinion that pride was the chiefest sinne of them) we will not curiously inquire. But that they were Apostates from God, and so became eternally miserable, is evident from Scripture: And Jude. 6. the Angells which kept not their first estate, but left their own habita∣tion, he hath reserved in everlasting chaines under darknesse unto the judgment of the great day. They it seems fell from their primi∣tive condition once and irrecoverably. 3. We affirme that Christs death is of great benefit unto the elect Angells. For thereby they are confirmed in their happy e∣state. Christs death established the holy Angells in their state of blessednesse. The Apostle plainly proves our Assertion, That in the dispen∣sation Eph. 1. 10. of the fulnesse of times, he might gather together into one all
things in Christ, both which are in Heaven and which are on earth, even in him. Far above all Principality, Power, Might, and Domini∣on, vers. 21. and every name that is named, not only in this world, but that which is to come, And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be vers. 22. the head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fulnesse vers. 23. Eph. 3. 10. Col. 1. 20. of him that filleth all in all. To the intent that now, the Principalities, and Powers, in heavenly places, might be knowne by the Church, the manifold wisdome of God. And (having made peace through the blood of his crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himselfe: by him, I Col. 2. 10. say, whether they be things in heaven, or things on earth. And ye are compleat in him, who is the head of all Principality, and Power. I purposely wave many curious questions, wherein Popish writers abound. Wherefore in the last place, I shall make a practicall im∣provement of the whole, and apply only three inferences, for Infor∣mation, Instruction, and Consolation. For Information. 1. For Infor∣mation. 1. What excellent, knowing, glorious creatures the holy An∣gells are, and if they be so excellent, how much more is Jesus Christ their Lord? Great is the knowledge of these glorious crea∣tures, but what they have is derivative from their Creatour. 2. Be informed that it is unlawfull to worship them. See thou do Col. 2. 18. it not, saith the Angell to John, for I am thy fellow-servant. And in the place fore cited, Let no man beguile you of your reward, and in voluntary humility, and worshiping of Angells, intruding into those things he hath not seen, vainly puft up by his fleshly mind. 3. Be informed of the singular benefit of the Angells ministry. The Angell of the Lord encampeth about them that feare him, and de∣livereth Psal. 34. 11. Josh. 5. 14, 15 them. The Angell stood for Joshua: It came to passe when Joshua was by Jerico, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and be∣hold there stood a man over against him, with his sword drawn in his hands, and Joshua went unto him and said, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries? And he said, nay, but as a captaine of the hot of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth and did worship and said unto him, what saith my Lord unto his ser∣vant? And he said, loose thy shooe from off thy feet: for the place whereon thou standest is holy. This was the Lord Jesus, the Angell of the Covenant, for a Created Angell would have refused adoration. An Angell preserved the three Children from the flame and burning of the fiery furnace, and shut the Lyons mouth. An Angell praised
for the Church, in Zechary that Angell was Christ. Then the An∣gell Zech. 1. 12. of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou hast had Indignation these threescore and ten yeares? An Angell delivered Hezekiah, and smote Senacherib: An Angell delivered Peter: An Angell brought the good newes of Christs in∣carnation. The Angells of God preserve us in our beds, in our houses, in our journyes, in our undertakings. The Angells will carry our soules to Heaven. By way of Instruction. Ʋse 2. of In∣struction. Psal. 91. 11. 1. Labour to walk in Gods waies. For he shall give his Angells charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy waies: Whilest we are in our lawfull waies (not in our wanderings) we have a promise of Protection. 2. Pray to God for the Protection of Angells. We may not pray to Angells, we may not worship them: but we may pray to God to vouchsafe their ministry to us, to make our waies prospe∣rous, to send us an Angell (as Abraham believed,) and cause his Angells to pitcht their Tents about us, as Gods messengers to de∣fend, Gen. 24. 7. and rescue us out of dangers. 3. We should so live as remembring we are in the presence of God and Angells, that Gods eyes are over us, that the Angells observe or carriage, and what decorum we keep in the duties we performe. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, because of the Angells. Though men (as Diodati observes) 1 Cor. 11. 10. would give consent and connive at this disorder: yet the Angells, who are continuall Guardians in their Assemblies would be offended at it. For I think (saith the Apostle) that God hath set forth us the Apo∣stles 1 Cor. 4. 9. 16. last, as it were, men appointed to death. For we are made a spe∣ctacle unto the world, to Angells, and to men. Wherefore I beseech you be yee followers of me. For Consolation. Ʋse 3. for Consolation. This serves for comfort to Gods children, that the Angells are their Ministers. 1. In their lives, they have them under God their protectors, the Lord bids them protect, preserve, succour, comfort, relieve such a one, he is in distresse, he is my servant: The very Angells 1 King. 19. 7, 8. were purveyers unto Eliah. The Angells ministred unto Christ, they strengthened him, when he was in the garden, when he suf∣fered
in his humane Nature. So the children of God find it to their comfort that the Angells refresh, comfort, support and protect them in their greatest extremities. 2. When they die, the Angells carry their soules into Hea∣ven. 3. At the day of judgment, they gather the elect unto Christ. Mar. 13. 27. He will send his Angells to gather his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth, to the uttermost part of Heaven. By all that hath been said, we are to understand the happinesse of all the Saints, who are here in the text called heires of salvation. God gives them his Son, and that's the height of mercy: God gives them his Angells for their Guardians, so those two Scriptures are abundantly fulfilled. Psal. 34. 9. O feare the Lord, ye his Saints, Psal. 34. 9. Rom. 8. 32. for there is no want to them that feare him. And Rom. 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not but with him freely give us all things. And these Scriptures bring a full measure of comfort unto the children of God.—Ha∣ving Christ the Saints have all, he protects and defends them, he is Lord over all, and commands all creatures services for the good of his people. This Doctrine of the Ministry of Angells, is too much Idolized by some, which fall to the worshiping of them. This is flat Idolatry; , is abhominable: And this Doctrine is too much slighted by others, who are not thankfull to God for the Protection of Angells. Both these extreames are to be avoided, and our duty is to look upon Angells as fellow servants, and begge of God their Ministry: And for all deliverances we should returne unto God the praise and glory of all, in the lan∣guage of the Psalmist, Psal. 115. vers. 1. which shall be my con∣clusion, Not unto us, O Lord not unto us, but unto thy name give glo∣ry Psal. 115. 1. for thy mercy and truths sake.
GODS PROVIDENCE COMMON AND SPECIALL SET FORTH. From 2 Chron. 16. vers. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himselfe strong in the behalfe of those whose heart is perfect towards him. THE best of men in the Church Militant, have Sermon 3. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. Oct. 12. 1658. Deut. 32. 5. 2 Chr. 15. 12. vers. 16. their failings: There's no gold but hath some ore, and drosse in it, no wheate without some chaffe, none of Gods children but have some spots. We need go no further then the Instance of my Text. Asa King of Juda a zealous Reformer, one that entred into a solemne Covenant with the Lord, one so full of courage as to depose his Mother Maachah for her Idolatry, and cut down her Idoll: ad of this King the Holy Ghost gives vers. 17. this finall judgment—Neverthelesse the heart of Asa was perfect all his daies. Yet notwithstanding here are upon Record; severall 2 Chr. 16. 10. faults of King Asa, viz. putting the Seer into Prison unjustly for pronouncing a full and seasonable reproofe, from the mouth of the Lord, for oppressing some of the People, and in his disease not seeking the Lord, but the Physitians. Hence the Apostles as∣sertion Jam. 3. 2. is evidently proved, That in many things we offend all: The Apostles exhortation should be to every one of us, instead of a par∣ticular Application, Be not high minded but feare: Let him that Rom. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12. thinks he standeth, take heed least he fall. The sinnes of Saints should be our warning peece, and hence we should learne caution, vigi∣lancy,
and heart-Inquisition. We are men of the like passions, and therefore ought to commiserate our Brethren, and likewise enter∣tain a holy jealousy over our own hearts, considering that we also may be tempted. To come to the Text: These words were spoken by Hanani the Seer to Asa King of Judah. And although they met with no better entertainment then a Prison, yet are no whit lesse to be va∣lued. Plain faithfull dealing is highly to be prised, notwithstanding it meets with course usage almost every where. It was Asaes great fault to rely on the King of Syria, and not on God vers. 7. Likewise he sinnes against the experience of a signall deliverance from the Ethiopians and Lubims vers. 8. But what are the best of men if left to themselves? Hezekiah a rare King, fail'd in the businesse of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon: We read God left him to try 2 Chr. 32. 31. him, that he might know all that was in his heart. This plain-dealing Prophet having charged home, and thorough∣ly aggravated the Kings fauls, layes downe in my Text a strong Reason, or Ingagement for him to relye on the Lord For the eyes &c. Wherein are observeable a description of Providence, of Gods Divis. Omni-presence, and the speciall manifestation & exhibition thereof. 1. Here is a descrition of Providence, by the eyes of the Lord. 1. A descrip∣tion of Prov∣dence. The eye of the Lord is cleare, and ten thousand times brighter then the Sun: The eye of God searcheth, and penetrates the most secret things: It seeth any thing, observes, discovers, pierceth, converts, . Hom. revengeth. All things are naked, Diaphanous unto God: With him the very inside is outside, secret or open, dark or light, night or day are all one with the great All-seeing God. God at once perfily seeth & knowes all things, by one cleare act of Intuition, unico actu simplicis Intelligentiae, (as Schoolmen say) he universally, suddenly knowes every thing. Creatures know successively per prius & posterius: But the Creator knowes all at once. Yet we must interpose a Caution that whn we read of Gods eyes, hands, feet, &c. We must not un∣derstand them littrally and properly, but figuratively and impro∣perly, or rather , Herein God condescends to our ca∣paciy and apprehension, and speaks after the manner of men. And the Rule in Divinity is to be especially observed, Qae dicuntur  intelligenda sunt . The like passage we have in Zechary, They are the eyes of the Lord, (i. e.) his Providence, Zech. 4. 10. which observes all that is done every where.
2. Here is a description of Gods Omni-presence from these 2. A descrip∣tion of Gods Omni pre∣sence. Deus est sphae∣ra cujus cen∣trum est ubi∣que & cir∣cumferenti nusquam. words—Run to and fro throughout the whole earth. Angells are said to be definitive in loco: Bodies circumscriptivè, but God is in loco repletive: His Center is every where, and his Circumference no where. Chrysost. in Col. 2. Homil. 5. Deus totus in coelo est, totus in terra non alternis temporibus, sed utrumque simul: Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 29. Chrysostome observes that God is every where (i. e.) because he fills all places, and yet no where (i. e.) confind to no place. Augustine goeth further and saith, That God is wholly in Heaven, and wholly in earth, not by vicissitudes but all at once: This is most fully confest by David, Psal. 139. 7, 8, &c. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there &c. The scope of the Psalmist is to shew (as judicious Non est aliquis lo∣cus uspium, in quo possim à faciè tuâ abscondi. Musculus. Musculus observes) There is not any place, any where, in which I may be hidden from thy sight. 3. Heres a Manifestation of speciall Providence to the children 3. Gods spe∣ciall Provi∣dence is to∣ward the up∣right. of God, thus described—Whose heart is perfect toward him, (i. e.) sincere. A perfection of parts may and must be attained in this life. A perfection of degrees is reserved for another world. Now as the generall and common Providence of God, extends it selfe to∣wards all the creatures, so there is a speciall distinguishing Provi∣dence, which exerts it selfe, and acts vigorously for the Provision, Protection, and Consolation of those that feare God, and walke uprightly before him. God puts forth his power to help them, so Ʋt firmum se exhibeat (verto,) ut robustum se exhibeat erga illos ut robu∣stam potenti∣am suam exe∣rat in opitu∣lando ipsos: Piscat. in loc. Piscator translates the words. So then the sense of the words I conceive to amount to this effect, that all things come to passe by Providence, nothing by chance in respect of God: For he seeth all things, and knowes all things; All the affaires and transacti∣on in the Universe, are manifest to Gods all seeing eye, the hid∣den deeds of darknesse, the secretest reservations of the mind and thoughts of the heart are all known to him. Further there is no creature, whether vegetive, sensitive, or rationall, but is order∣ed and disposed by this Omnipotent, and overruling Providence. The Providence in generall, ad rerum usque minima perting it. E∣very creature how mean so ever, is under a Providence: But in a more especiall and peculiar manner, the sonnes and daughters of God by grace, and Adoption: the Family of the first born, which as in the Text are described to be those, Whose hearts are uprigh
before God: these I say are under a choice distinguishing Provi∣dence. From the word thus divided and expounded, I collect two points of Doctrine: the first whereof I propound thus. That there is a Providence of God, which extends it selfe to the  ordering, and governing of all the creatures throughout the whole world. The other Doctrine (which chiefly I shall insist on) is this. That there is a speciall distinguishing Providence, which in a  peculiar manner manifests it selfe for the benefit of the upright, even all the children of God. I resume the Inlargement of the first Doctrine, and will dispose of my method of handling it on this wise. Method of handling the Doctrine. 1. By proving the truth of the point. 2. By making inquiry into the Nature of Providence, what it is, and how it discovers it selfe in it's various operations. In the 3. place, I shall make some profitable improvement of the Doctrine of Providence, as reducible unto poynt of practice. Now first I am to prove that there is a Providence. I purpose∣ly 1. That there is a Provi∣dence. wave all Heathenish names of Fortune, Fatall necessity, Augurium, Lucky starres, Lucky Birds &c. Which are so far to be detested, as not once to be named amongst Christians, . Hom. Il. . Homer doubtlesse im∣plyed a Providence, by a golden chaine hanging down from heaven. Quicquid patimur mor∣ale geni, Quicquid fa∣mus venit ex alto. Sen. Trag. Odip. 1. Proved by Scripture. Seneca acknowledgeth more plainely a Providence, in that he saith What ever we do or suffer comes from above. But I know no Necessity of going to the Philistines to whet my sword or speare. I shall according to Naomies counsell to Ruth, (though in ano∣ther case) not be found gleaning in another field, but that of Scripture, and Reason: by help whereof I shall endeavour the proofe of what I have asserted from the Text. 1. I repaire unto Scripture Testimony, and that is instar om∣nium. And because the heape is so great, I shall gather sparingly, some only amongst many, which are the most pregnant, and ap∣posite Proofes, viz. From the testimony of Job, David, Solomon, Christ and the Apostle Paul: and in the mouth of two or three witnesses, the truth will be established. Lets consider the Testimony of Joh, His eyes (saith he (are Job. 24. 21. Job. 10. 12. upon the waies of man, and he seeth all his goings. Thy visitation (saith he) hath preserved my Spirit.
And to the Testimony of Job, wee'l adde David, who plainly sets forth Divine Providence, when he saith that the Lord Cover∣eth the heavens with clouds, who prepareth raine for the earth, which Psal. 147. 8, 9. maketh grasse to grow upon the mountaines. He giveth to the Beast his food, and to the young Ravens which cry. To the same purpose he speaks in another Psalme, wherein he extolls the righteousnesse of God: Thy righteousnesse (saith he) is like the great Moun∣taines: Psal. 36. 6. thy Judgments are a great depth, O Lord thou preservest Man and Beast. Which scripture compared with Discamus hoc exemplo recumbere in Dei providen∣tiam, &c. Cal. in Gen. 8. 1. Gen. 8. 1. it will appeare, how the mercy of God was extended to Man and Beast, and likewise Jonah 4. 11. The multitude of Cattle were objects of Gods compassion towards Niniveh. Further lets take notice what attestation Solomon gives to the truth delivered: The wise man assures us, that the waies of man are before the eyes Prov. 5. 21. of the Lord, and he ponereth all his goings. And more fully he speaks Prov. 15. 3. of Providence, both towards good and bad, that the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evill and the good. This plainly declares that nothing can escape Gods Providence, as an Excellent Summa est, nihil esse om∣nium quae in mundo fiant, quod Provi∣dentiae divinae ambitu non comprehenda∣tur. Carthw. in Locum. Commentator observes. Above all Testimonies Christ the truth and the life, fully declares the government of Divine Pro∣vidence. He instanceth in Lillies, the grasse of the field, Mat. 6. 28. vers. 30. In the Sparrowes, the heires of our head, Mat. 10. 29, 30. And Christ drawes an Argument à minore ad majus: wherefore if God so cloath the grasse of the field, which to daie is and to morrow is cast into the oven: shall he not much more cloath you, O yee of little faith? And the Apostles of Christ confirme the truth of him, their Master. For Paul preaching at Athens plainly prooves, that God gives Mat. 6. 30. to all lie and breath and all things. And he quotes Aratus the Poet, Act. 17. 22. For in him we live and moove and have our being? Follow the same Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, For of him and through him, vers. 8. . Aratus. Rom. 11. 36. Eph. 4. 11. Heb. 1. 3. 1. Cor. 12. 6, and to him are all things. Likewise in the Ephesians, we read, that God worketh all things after the counsell of his own will: and to the Hebrewes, he declares that all things were upheld by the word of hi power, (i. e.) the power of Christ. It is God that moeth all in all. Having thus by severall Scripture Testimonies given abundant proofe of the Doctrine, I now come to the Confirmation of the Doctrine, by evidence of Reason. Amongst many that might be alleadged, Il'e fix upon six Reasons, which are as so many Demon∣strative Arguments drawn à fortiori for the further clearing the truth of our assertion delivered.
2. Confirmed by evidence of Reason. 1. The first reason shall be drawn from the order and harmony R. 1. Drawn from the Or∣der and Har∣mony amongst creatures. amongst creatures. In the Nature of things there's an order, dispo∣sition, succession, conservation, and propagation of each species. Fire and water would consume each other, if they were not hin∣dred by Providence. God is a God of order, and preserves all things in order. He made all things in order, number and measure He sets bounds to the Sea: Hitherto shalt thou go and no further. Were it not for a supreame overruling Providence, the Sea would break out and drown the whole world. Now this order must pro∣ceed from an ordaining cause which ordereth and disposeth of all things, and this is God: He telleth the number of the starres, &c. Psal: 147. 4. 2. We proove a Providence from the Provision that God makes R. 2. Drawn from Gods Provision of each creature. Mat: 6. 26. Psal: 104. 11, 21. for all the creatures. God feeds the fowles of the aire: Behold (saith our Saviour) the fowles of the aire: for they sow not, neither do they reape, nor gather into barnes: yet your heavsnly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better then they? He cloathes the grasse of the field. He takes care for the beasts of the field: He sendeth the springs into the valleys, they give drink to every beast of the field, the wild Asses quench their thirst. The young Lyons roare after their prey, and seek their meat from God. God knows how many Ravens are in every nest, and sends them food. God feedes the wormes, and provides for all creatures. The Providence of God extends it self to the least of crea∣tures, and in a more plentifull manner to mankind. All sorts of men tast of Gods Providence: For his eyes are upon the waies of man, and he seeth all his goings. Hence Christ commands doing of good, That Job 34. 21. Mat: 5. 45. ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven: sor he ma∣keth his Sun to rise on the evill and on the good, and sendeth raine on the just and on the unjust. But especially Gods children have experi∣ence of Gods gracious Providence toward them. It's a choice Pro∣mise mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah, But now thus saith the Lord Is: 43. 1, 2, 3. that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee O Israel, fear not for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. R. 3. Drawn from the ver∣tue accompa∣nying the meanes for Gods childrens Preservation. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy Saviur: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. 3. We proove a Providence from that vertue that goeth along with those means which God hath ordained sor our preservation
meat, drink, and cloathing:  have neither heate, life, strength, nor comfort in themselves. They neither can give, nor continue heat, or help: were it not for a speciall providence which gives vertue unto them. It's God that makes the meate to nourish us: It's God that makes the cloathes we weare, to warme us. The whole vertue and benefit which we receive from them, comes from the Providence of God: This in Talis igitur mens mundi quum sit, ob eam; causam vel Prudentia, vel Providentia appellari recte possit. Cic. L. 2. de Nat. Deorum. Ciceroes language, is called Pru∣dence, or Providence: And in Nul∣lam terras despicere Providentiam testor. Quinctil. in Proem. L. 6. Qinctilians it's put for God himselfe. 4. We proove a Providence from various events, distinctions, R. 4. Drawn from various events. Prov. 8, 15. appointments of affaires here below. God sets up one, pulls down another: By me Kings raigne (saith Wisdome) and Princes de∣cree justice. And in Daniel we read of the Watcher, He cryed a∣loud, and said thus; hew down the tree and cut off his branches, shake Dan. 4. 14, 25 off his leaves and scatter his fruit, let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowles from his branches: They shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grasse as Oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dw of heaven, and seaven times shall passe over thee, til thou know that the most high ruleth in the Kingdome of men, and giveth it to whom∣soever he will. One is rich, another is poore: one honourable, another contemptible: one a King, another a subject. All these severall stations in the world, come to passe by an overruling Pro∣vidence: (for even Mundus di∣vina Provi∣dentiâ consti∣tutus Cic. Deorum Pro∣videntiâ mun∣dum admini∣strare Cic L. 1. de Divin. Cicero himselfe consesseth, that the world is govern'd by Providence) That there is any government in the world is a Providence: for the wicked are farre the greatest num∣ber, and they hate the righteous with a perfect hatred: were it in their power and they might have their will, there would be no rule, no government at all: their lost and humour would be all the Rule they would go by. But there is a Providence that curbes these men, to keep them in awe, and strikes in them a seare of God and of men, who are in Authority, who although they hate them, yet stand in awe and feare of them. 5. We proove a Providence from Gods prservation of his R. 5. Drawn from Gods Preservation of his Church. Church, from the rage of the Devill and his Instruments, in so∣much that the gates of Hell neither can nor shall prevaile againt it. Though there be Legions of Devills and wicked men, and they
unite their forces, and combinations, with all▪ their might and main, and the Church is but a little flock: yet God graciously pre∣serveth it. That one promise, Lo I am with you alway, nto the Mat: 28. 20. end of the world: makes more for the Church, then all the malice of men and Devills can make against them. The Serpents seed al∣waies persecutes the promised seed, and if Satan and his Instru∣ments could obtaine their will, they would (as that monster of Rome wisht of the Senatours necks) destroy the whole Church at one blow. But still the Church is preserved, notwithstanding all the inveterate malice, and opposition of men and Devills: Maugre all their violent oppositions, God will keep this vineyard of red wine (i. e.) his Church: so he promiseth I the Lord do keep it, Isa: 27. 2, 3. I will water it every moment least any hurt it &c. 6. From the horrors of Conscience, and dreadfull punishments R. 6. From the horrors o Conscience. Rom: 1. 18. that befall the wicked, for the wrath of God is revealed from hea∣ven against all ungodlinesse and unrighteousnesse of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousnesse. So that a man shall say, verily, there is a Psal: 58. 11 reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth. When such punihments befall men, many are apt to bewaile their hard fortune, (that's their heathenish language) whereas they ought to consider of a Providence disposing, ordering, and ap∣pointing all. We read concerning Christs sufferings on this wise, Him, being delivered by the determinate counsell and fore knowledge Acts: 2. 23. of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and sain. There was an Act of malice in the Jewes, and even the height of wickednesse but an Act of Providence in God, by whose prmissi∣on and free appointment this came to passe. 2. In the second place we will inquire into the Nature of this 2. Concerning the Nature of Providence. Providence. Waving impertinent questions amongst Inter Stoi∣cos & Epicuri sectam secutos pugna perpetua est regaturne Providentia mundus? Quinctil: L. 5. C. 7. Epicures and Stoicks, and likewise avoyding their Phrases, I shall accord with Orthodox Divines, who give this Definition of Providence, viz. It Definition of Providence. is a temporary action of God, whereby he moveth and directeth all things after the counsell of his own will to their proper ends. 1. I call it an Action, to distinguish it from the Attributes of 1. Its an Act. God. 2. I call it temporary to distinguish it from the eternall de∣cree. 2. A Tempo∣rary Act.
3. I say that by this Providence, God moveth and directeth 3. Its Opera∣tive. all things, to shew that God is not idle in heaven, as Epicures ig∣noranly and foolishly dreame: this Providence is operative, this Job. 38. 41. Providence goeth through the whole world. It feedeth the Ra∣vens in the nest, when the damme forsakes them. By this Provi∣dence Job. 39. 15, 16. the Otriches egges are hatcht when they are forsaken, and left to the wild beast, by the unnaturall damme. 4. By Providence God acts after the counsell of his own will. 4 God acts by Providence. This sheweth that God doth nothing unadvisedly and rashly, but useth his owne knowledge whereby he perfectly understands all things, and his wisdome whereby he doth dispose all things being known. And this God doth of his owne will. He is a most free a∣gent, and he is not in the least compell'd, and he needeth not the Mr Pemble of Magd: Hall Oxon. advice of any other: For (as a Judicious Divine observes) God directs both to the mediate ends, & to the last ends of all after a set and determinate manner, according to the most free decree and counsell of his own will, that himselfe in all things may be glorified. 5. God doth direct all things to their proper ends, to shew that 5. God doth direct all things to their proper ends.  God doth not only govern things generally, by ordering and dispo∣sing of all the creatures, but every thing particularly, taking care of every worme, every sparrow, even the meanest of all the creatures. Now then, by what I have said will evidently appear that there are these eminent▪ properties in divine Providence. 1. It's permissive of all sorts of Actions. God permits not only 1. There is a Permissive Providence. the Act; but the obliquity of it: He suffers and beares with the Ini∣quities of the Amorites: And yet God is not author sed ultor pec∣cati. God hardned Pharaohs heart: He may withdraw his grace being not bound to give it. 2. This Providence is only effective of and approoves what is 2. Gods Pro∣vidence ap∣prooves only what is good. good. The Providence of God allowes no mans wckednesse: God is good and doth good, and nothing can come from God, but good∣nesse: As for sin it's a saying no more common then true, malum non habet causam efficientem sed deficientem. 3, This Providence is Omniscient. All qualities, properties, mo∣tions 3. Gods Pro∣vdence is Omniscient. Act. 15. 18. and Designes, are all known to God with all their circum∣stances: so saith the Apostle, Known unto God are all his workes frm the beginning of the world. 4. This Providence is most wise. If we speak of wisdome, God 4. This is a wise Provi∣dence. is wise: With God is strength and wisdome. The Apostle admireth the depth of his wisdome.
5. This Providence is distinct & particular to every worme, to 5. This Pro∣vidence is di∣stinct. every sparrow, to all the creeping things, to every herbe, to every pile of grasse: They all grow by Providence. 6. This is alwaies a working, alwaies protecting, providing, care∣ing. 6. This Pro∣vidence is al∣waies work∣ing. Epicures deny a Providence: Stoicks acknowledge a fatall ne∣cessity. Peripateticks deny a government of the world: But chri∣stians fully believe the power and Providence of God, in the go∣vernment of the world. This then being so. 1. Here's matter of confutation of Epicures, who denied all Pro∣vidence, Ʋse 1. For Confutation. & Stoicks, who maintained a fatall necessity. And of Peripa∣teticks, who denied the ruling and governing power of God. These V. Dr. Hack∣wills Apollogy. opinions, the Scriptures fore recited confutes, and I may say the less because such excellent paines hath been taken on this Argument by a Learned Dr. of our University. 2. This yeelds matter of reproofe unto two sorts. Of Reproofe. 1. Such as observe no Providence, heedlesse, carelesse persons, of Gallioe's indifferent temper: so they fare well themselves, they care not how it is with others. 2. Such as abuse Providence, who run on in mad wicked waies and then father their Actions upon Providence. Solomon saith, The Prov. 19. 3. foolishnesse of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the Lord. 3. Here's matter of Instruction. Let us hence learne our duties. Ʋse 3. For Instruction. 1. Take especiall notice of Providences: study these wheeles of Providence. These are wheeles in the middle of wheeles, and these require our speciall inquiry and observation. 2. Be inquisitive and observe how Providences fulfill Promises, how God is in every particular as good as his word. 3. Be thankfull for all passages of Providence, for prosperity Job. 2. 10. and adversity, shall we not (saith Job) receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive all. 4. Learne by all Providences to be more holy, and more cir∣cumspect in thy life. He makes best use of Providences, who learnes more holynesse, humility, and conformity to the will of God. 5. Serve Gods Providence in the lawfull use of meanes. Men may not lye in a ditch and cry, Lord help us: God that appoints the end, appoints the meanes. We may not make a separation be∣tween them.
6. In all straits and dificulties, comfort thy selfe with the con∣sideration of Gods Providence. O do not distrust Providence, It's the Apostles exhortation: Cast thy care upon him, for he careth for 1 Pet. 5. 7. Mat. 6. 31. thee. And our Saviours exhortation is, take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drinke, or wherewithall shall we be cloathed? As there is a generall Providence towards all: So there is a speci∣all  ditinguishing Providence towrds all Gods Children. This is the second doctrine. That the speciall Providence of God is exten∣ded Method. towards the Protection of Gods Children, will flly appeare by Scripture examples, and Scripture Reasons, which when we have prooved, we shall reduce all unto point of practice, by some usefull Application. 1. For Scripture examples, amongst many these are most emi∣nent. 1. For Scrip∣ture examples. Gen. 22. 12. A Providence in an especiall manner delivered Isaac, be∣tween the Knife and the Altar. The Angell calls out of heaven saying, Lay not thine hand upon the Lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: We hould consider (as Nostrum est intent is men∣tibus conside∣rare quam mirabiliter in ipso Articulo Deus Isaac revocaver  à morte in vi∣tam, Calv. Gen 33. 4. Calvin observes) how God helpt in the very Article of time, and delivered him from death to life. What preservations and speciall Providences did Jacob mee withall, being delivered from Esau's rage, when bloody inten∣tions were turned into embraces. Jacob feared least he would lay the Mother and Children, yet by speciall Providence Esau ran to meet him and embraced him, and fell on his neck and kissed him and they wept. In Joseph there is a Series of Providences, a concaenation of preservations. His brethren hated him and threw him into a pit: And in that pit there was no water. He was bought and sold by the Ishmaelites and Poipher: cast in Prison, and in the same Pri∣son where were the Kings prisoners. The chiefe Buler and Baker, were in the same prison. They dreamed, Joseph gave the Inter∣pretation: But yet Gods time of deliverance was not come. Pha∣raoh dreames, Joseph interprets his dreame, and is advanced and made Ruler over all the Land of Egypt. A fmine fll out, Jo∣seph's brethren came to buy corne, Joseph supplies them. Ste∣phen recites the History, and acknowledgeth a speciall hand of Providence: The Patriarchs mooved with envy, sold Joseph into E∣gypt, Gen. 50. 20, 21. Acts 7. 9. but God was with him. The History of Eliah, is remarkable: sometimes a Brook, some∣times
a Widdow woman, sometimes the Angells themselves were his Prveyors: and the very Ravens, those greedy Birds of prey brought him meate. The History of the Jewes delivered from Haman is especially re∣markable. Haman utterly plotted their ruine: He had the roy∣all assent granted, the day set, Haman on purpose went to beg Mordecai for the Gallowes, but see what intervened by the speci∣all hand of Providence, On that night the King could not sleep, and Esth. 6. 1. he commanded to bring the book of records of the Chronicles, and they were read before the King: after reading whereof the King advan∣ced Mordecai, and made Haman his desperate Enemy to make the Proclamaion. And Esther being entertained Qeene in the roome of Vasthi, shee supplicated for her own life, and the life of her peo∣ple. And the mischievous devices of Haman were turned pon his own pate: and as he meated to others, the same measure he receiv∣ed, the Text expresly shewes: So they hanged Haman upon the Gal∣lowes Esth. 7. 10. that he had prepared for Mordecai: Then was the Kings wrath pacified. The three Children in the fiery furnace, Daniel in the Lions den, Peter out of Prison were all miraculously delivered by the Ministe∣ry of Angells. The Apostle Paul delivered, when above forty had bound themselves with an oath in a conspiracy against him. And Acts 21. 30, 31. especially Acts 21. 30, 31. We read of a wonderfull deliverance (as we say) between the cup and the lip, And all the Citie was moved, and the people ran together, and they took Paul, and drew him out of the Temple, and forthwith the dores were shut, and as they went a∣bout to kill him, tidings came unto the chiefe captaine of the Band, that all Jerusalem was in an proare. By this Diversion the Lord wrought a signall deliverance for his servant Paul. What delive∣rances had David at Keilah & En-gedi, even when Saul had hēm'd him in, and (as I may say) had him in a Pound, not likely to es∣cape, yet then by way of diversion he was delivered: and Saul went 1 Sam. 23. 26, 27. on this side of the mountaine, and David and his men on that side of the mountaine, and David made hast to get away for feare of Saul: for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them: But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, hast thee and come: for the Philistines have invaded the Land. In that need∣full Instant the Lord made a plain way for his servants escape. I might Instance in many remarkable passages of Providence re∣recorded
in humane Authors. The tide brought in shel-fish for the besieged Rochellers. There was one Merlin, who at the Parisian Massacre hid himselfe in a Hay Mow, and every day a Hen laid an egge there, by which he was kept alive. Another was hid in a close hole, and a spider weaved a web at the dore, so the Persecutors went away. But there is no necessity of lighting a candle to the Sun that went before. No example may be compared to those which are recorded in the Word of God. To Scripture examples, I'le adde Scripture reasons, why doth God extend such speciall Providen∣ces towards his own people. 1. Let us consider the high estimate and value God puts upon R. 1. The high Value God puts upon his Children. Mal. 3. 17. Is. 28. 5. Exod. 19. 5. Zech. 2. 8. them. They are his Jewells: They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day, when I make up my Jewells, and I will spare them as a man spareth his Son that serveth him. They are a crown of glo∣ry and a diadem of beauty. They are a peculiar treasure, they are as deare unto him as the Apple of his eye. 2. Consider the relations between God and the godly. R. 2. Drawn from the Re∣lation be∣tween God and the godly. They are his Children, he their Father. They are his adopted sons and daughters. Now it is the duty of a Father to take spe∣ciall care for the preservation of his children. They are his spouse, and he their Husband: For so the Lord professeth, Turne, O back∣sliding children (saith the Lord,) for I am married unto you, and Jer. 3. 14. I will take you, one of a Cittie and two of a family and will bring you to Zion. 3. All the promises of God are made unto the godly. For R. 3. All the Promises be∣long to the godly Isa: 43. 1, 2. (saith the Apostle) all the promises of God are in Christ yea and Amen unto the glory of God by us. Promises of Protection belong to Gods children: Thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel: feare not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine. When thou pas∣sest through the waters, I will be with thee: and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Promises of direction are made to Gods children, Thou shalt guide me with Psal: 73. 24. thy counsell and afterward receive me to glory. 4. All the Attributs of God put forth themselves for the good R. 4. All Gods Attributes be∣long to the godly. Isa: 51. 14. of Gods people, viz. His mercy to pardon them, his wisdome to counsell them, his power to defend them: (as the Prophet I∣saiah saith) Feare not thou worme Jacob and yee men of Israel: I
will help thee, saith the Lord and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Is∣rael. 5. The ministery of Angells is imployed for their defence. The R. 5. The Mi∣nistery of An∣gells is imploy∣ed for the de∣fence of the godly. Heb. 1. 14. Angell of the Lord encampeth round about them that feare him, and delivereth them. Are they not all Ministring Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be heires of Salvation? And for the offence of their enemies, as in the case of Senacherib and He∣rod, who fell by the Angell of the Lord. 6. The Saints experiences are abundant proofe hereof: Pal V. Ps. 18. ttle. R. 6. Drawn from Saints Experiences. speaks how God delivered him out of the hand of the Lion. He spake of Nero, that cruell Persecutor of the Church. What Pro∣tections, deliverances have Gods people met withall? What Pro∣vidences to supply their wants in the most needfull instant? What deliverances from Fire, Water, Robbers, Murtherers? Great things can many of Gods children speak in this particular: Time would faile me to produce those Instances, which Saints experi∣ences have abundantly afforded in this Particular. This then being so, this Doctrine may be serviceable for these uses. 1. To reprove the madnesse and folly of wicked men, who Ʋse 1. For Reproofe. Ps. 37. 32, 33. set themselves in opposition against Gods children. They labour to root out their memory, and plot their utter ruine and destru∣ction: but, though the wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to say him, the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemne him, when he is judged. Wicked men are limitted, and can go not a jot further then God will permit them. 2. Here's matter of Instruction to the children of God. Doth Ʋse 2. For Instruction. God take the care of them, Let them be sure to keep in Gods waies, and walke according to the rule of his Word. Let none neglect meanes appointed by God, under any presumptions of Providence, that would be a tempting of God. You know how the Devill tempted Christ to leap down the Pinacle, when as there was a paire of staires, an ordinary way to go up and down. Let none upon pretence of secret impulses of their owne spirits, act any irregular thing upon Pretence of Providence. Gods Providences do not contradict the rule of the word. Let none distrust Providence in their greatest straits and difficulties. God hath supplyed, and is able still to supply: He hath delivered and is able still to deliver. Read two experiences one of David a∣gainst
the Lion and Beare. Thy servant (saith David to Saul) slew both the Lion and the Beare, and this uncircumcised Philistine 1 Sam. 17. 36 shall be as one of them. Another deliverance we read, is of the chil∣dren of Israel against Pharaoh: Thou didst (saith the Psalmist) di∣vide the Sea by thy strength, thou breakest the heads of the Dragons in Psal. 74. 14. the waters: Thou breaket the heads of Leviathan in peices and gavest him to be meat for the people, inhabiting the wildernesse, This was spoken of Pharaoh and his host. These examples drawn from ex∣perience, and former mercyes should be as so many Ingagements to trust God for the time to come. Here's one Use more, and that is for consolation unto Gods Ʋse 3. For Consolation. children. They are in Covenant, and under the wings of speciall Providence: As an Eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, Deut. 32. 11. spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him. He promiseth to be their Rereward: Then shall thy light Isa. 58. 8. breake forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth spee∣dily, and thy righteousnesse shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy Rereward. This is an allusion to Gods carrying his children out of Egypt: And the Lord went before them by day, in a Exo. 13. 21. pillar of a cloude to lead them the way: and by night, in a pillar of fire to give them light, to go by day and night. Now against all despon∣dencies, feares, doubts, dangers, let Gods children comfort them∣selves, with the consideration of Gods speciall Providence: God takes care and makes speciall Provision for them, wherefore let them do their duty, and leave all issues to God. The duties are these, 1. To study the Word, and be well acquainted with it. The Scripture is the sure Word of Prophesy, certaine, infallible: we must trust and venture all upon it. 2. To live by faith: when sence failes, let not faith faile: Be∣lieve God is as good as his word. Believe, though sence and reason be non-plusd. So did Abraham in the case of Sarah, and so in the case of Isaac. No life to that mentioned by the Apostle to live by the faith of the Son of God. Gal. 2. 20. 3. To set the Spirit of prayer a working. Pray for thy daily bread, and for daily Protection: So that thou maiest feele all coming in as an Answer of Prayer. And a Samuel a child of prayer is the most welcome mercy.
4. Beware of murmuring and repining when thou art delay∣ed. Eligat oppor∣tunitatem, qui libere dat mi∣sericrdiam Aug. Learne to wait Gods time: His convenient time is the best. He helpes in the most needfull time. Let him (saith Augustine) chuse the opportunity who so freely gives the mercy. 5. What ever thou wantest, be sure to be more thankfull then Efficacissimū pro Candid a∣to regandi ge∣nus est gratias agere. Plin. Pan. Trajano dictus. ever, sor what thou hast received before. Thankfulnesse is a cun∣ning way of begging: Put thy selfe in other mens cases, and consi∣der how thou aboundest in comparison of them. Look into Pri∣sons, Poore mens cupboards, and how oughst thou to pitty them in their wants, and be thankfull for what thou enjoyest. 6. Sixtly and lastly, be still renewing thy title and clearing up thine evidences for heaven: for the more thou securest that, the more secure thou mayest be of this speciall distinguishing Pro∣vidence. For though I believe not (but abhorre that opinion) that Dominium temporale fundatur in gratiâ, and I am farre from the Anabaptisticall opinion of thinking wicked men usurpers, as having no right of Creatures to outward things: yet I am fully assured, that only the Godly have outward things sanctified through Christ. With Christ they have all things: And having Christ, is that which makes a mercy to be a mercy indeed: All Rom. 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3. 20, 21. things are Yours (saith the Apostle.) The wicked of the world have outward things ex largitate, by common Povidence and bounty, the godly have all ex promisso by Promise and Covenant. Wherefore here lyes the great duty to get assurance, that what ever we have, we injoy as a Covenant mercy, streaming to us through the blood of Jesus Christ: for it is Christ alone that swee∣tens what ever we injoy, without him all is bitter: with him eve∣ry thing is sweet.
JERUSALEMS REMEMBRANCERS UNFOLDED ON A SOLEMNE FAST DAY. Upon Isaiah 62. vers. 6, 7. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. UPON perusall of the 1. vers. We shall find that Sermon 4. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. Jan. 7. 1658. selfe same thing put into practice, which is ear∣nestly charged upon us, as our grand duty in the Text for Zions sake, &c. Which words some learned expositors understand to be spoken of the Prophet Isaiah, whose prayers were inces∣sant in the behalfe of Jerusalem: But I rather concurre with Scul∣tetus, Scultet. Muscul. Musculus, &c. Who understand them spoken of God pro∣mising, and not of the Prophet praying. For the words are a pro∣phecy of Israels deliverance out of Babylon, and of the glory and happinesse that shall be put upon the Church of God. And Zion and Jerusalem are a Type of the Christian Church: So that God will neither let the world nor the Potentates therein rest, untill there be a full, cleare, and conspicuous deliverance, offered for the Church of God. Hence the Gentiles shall take notice of such won∣derfull works of God. Vers. 2. The Gentiles shall see thy righteous∣nesse,  and all Kings thy glory, &c. The Church that was so much affli¦cted,  and distressed, shall be called by a new name, vers. 3. No more termed desolate; but Hephtzibah, and Beulah, vers. 4. And the mov∣ing cause of all this is Amor complacentiae, For the Lord delighteth in
them. Which delight is amplified by a similitude, Vers. 5. For as  a young man marryeth a Virgin: so shall thy Sonnes marry thee. And as the Bridegroome rejoyceth over the Bride: So shall thy God rejoyce over thee. For the accomplishment of this great work to make the Church a glorious Church, the Lord raiseth up eminent Instru∣ments, Vers. 6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,  Hieronym. which shall never hold their peace day nor night, &c. Jerome under∣stands Angells, Prophets, Princes, Teachers. And some conceive that faithfull Governours, and faithfull Ministers are here meant by the watchmen of the walls: even all such as are in publick place and authority, who are diligent in their watch and importunate solli∣citors, such as will have no nay, and will never cease begging, but are constant day and night, as well in bad as good times in pour∣ing out their hearts in prayer, in the behalfe of Jerusalem. These things premised, I resume the words of the Text, wherein there's offered to our consideration, a charge of greatest concern∣ment unto the watchmen: For the Lord having promised such e∣minently usefull Instruments, for the effecting these great things pro∣mised to Jerusalem, and the Lord having given a Character of their fidelity, that they shall never hold their peace: but shall be busied in praying for, or instructing of the people of God in their duty: Now the Lord by an Apostrophe directs his speech to those watchmen, and chargeth them with the maine duty of the Text, Ye that make mention &c. 1, Wherein are three things to be observed. 1. The perrsons described by a note of distinction, to whom Divis. the charge is given yee that &c. 2. The substance of their charge set down Negatively in two expressions. 1. Keep not silence. 2. Give him no rest. 3. The main end and designe intended, that Jerusalem should be made a praise in the earth. 4. The duration and continuance of this charge, or employ∣ment of these persons that make mention of the Lord: keep not si∣lence till Jerusalem be establisht, (i. e.) Their prayer must so long continue, and they may not cease till Jerusalem be establisht, and the gracious promises accomplisht, in behalfe of the glorious con∣dition of Jerusalem.
Before I give you the Doctrines, I shall for explication of the words, resolve a few Queries. 1. What is meant by those that make mention of the Lord? Calvin understands them of the Ministers that Preach the Word of God. The 70. renders the words . And the vulgar edition renders it verbatim Qui reminiscimini domini: Qui ad me∣moriam reva∣catis Domi∣num, Tigr. Tran. So Jerome, Vatablus, Osiander. And our Marginall note in our Eng∣lish translation is, Ye that are the Lords remembrancers: some con∣ceive this speech to be an Allusion to that standing office in Kings Courts of Remembrancers: Corn. A. Lapide upon the place tells us Corn: A. Lap: in Loc. that the Kings of Judah had Maskirim, Admonitores whose office was to put the King in mind of weighty affaires. Junius renders the words, Qui commemoratis Jehovam. Rememorantes Dominum, So Vatablus and he gives a marginall note Qui reminisci facitis Domini. I shall not peremptorily determine, which is the best of these translations. Neither shall I confine the duty of the Text only to Ministers. They in an eminent manner are the Peoples mouth unto God, and Gods mouth unto the people. And this duty of being the Lords Remembrancers belongs to them: not that God needs any putting in mind or remembrance, but that he would have us do our duty by assiduous supplications: Yet we may not exclude any of Gods children from practising the duty of the Text, in presenting prayers, making diligent addresses unto the Throne of grace. Though it belong unto all godly men, yet in a more speciall manner to Ministers. So Quamvis haec sententià ad pios omnes pertineat: ta∣men praecipue Sacerdotes attingit. Cal. Calvin on the place. 2. What's meant by not keeping silence, giving God no rest? These two come to one and the same effect, implying that they ought to speak, and continue importunate in speaking: They should speak aloud, and never give over speaking. The words are Metaphoricall took from those who are indefatigable sollici∣tors, and will take no deniall. Here's a Character of fervent prayer, which gives the Lord no rest. (i. e.) earnestly and incessantly ply∣eth the Throne of grace, and will take no repulse. Of this more anon. 3. What is meant by Jerusalem? For Answer, Jerusalem is either taken litterally for the place and Metropolis of Judea, or rather by a Metonmia continentis, as it signifies the whole body of the Inhabitants there: or else Mi∣stically
for that Jerusalem which cometh down from above. And this is either universall or particular. The universall Church is the whole body of believers, dispersed through the whole world. The particular Church is that wherein we live: And this accor∣ding to judicious Carthwrights division, is of one Nation, or of a narrrower compasse. And the same Learned Author gives distinct definitions of them both. A Church (saith he) of one Nation is that which is gathered under one politick civill government. A V. Carthw. Catech. Church of a more narrow compasse, is such a particular Church or Parrish, that dwelling in one place, may conveniently at one time, be taught by the mouth of one Minister. Now both for the Church in generall, and for the particular Church especially wherein we live we ought to pray, and make frequent supplications to the Throne of grace. For the whole body of Christ (i. e.) the universall Church we must pray: for the Nationall Church wherein we live, under the visible Ministry and dispensation of vi∣sible Ordinances, and where there are visible Professours. We may not straighten our prayers, nor confine the Church of Christ (as the Donatists did of old) only to a narrow compasse in Africa. Although in a true Church, where are true Ministers, true Sacra∣ments, and God hath blest the Ministry with converting of Soules, yet there may be many rotten professours, many formalists, many hypocrites: yet we must labour to reforme what we can, and pray▪ incessantly for amendment of what is amisse, but we may not seperate from a true Church: We must separate from Heathens, and from Antichrist. We are to come out from amongst them, but we may not gather Churches out of Churches, that were to make a schisme between the members, amongst themselves, and to subdivide the body of Christ, and make a separation, where we ought to endeavour an union. 4. What is meant by establishing Jerusalem a praise in the earth? To make the Church a praise is all one (as Calvin observes)  as to make it glorious, for that the Lords remembrancers must pray that Jerusalem may be the subject, and matter of praise, that Christ may rule and settle his Ordinances there, fill it with know∣ledge, make it eminent for graces, that as vers. 1. The righteous∣nesse thereof may go forth as brightnesse, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth. Then may Jerusalem be said to be a praise
in the earth. But of this more largely in the application. To summe up all. Though principally this charge is given to Ministers: yet in a larger sence, I shall take it according to the judgment of good Expositors, as taking in Ministers and people both, injoyning to both the duty of remembring the Church of God before the Throne of grace: And in an especiall manner (though the Universall Church must be remembred) the Par∣ticular Church or Nationall Church wherein we live must be re∣membred: And this remembrance must be a fervent, incessant, and diligent remembrance, till the Lord be pleased to settle it as a naile in a sure place, and bring forth the top stone of Jerusalem with acclamations crying, Grace, grace unto it. This concernes Zach. 3. 7. us all, both Ministers and people: We must all pray for the esta∣blishment of Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Which words thus opened, containe one Principall Doctrine, which in it's latitude, and compasse, takes in the whole sence of the words. That it is the obliged duty of all the Children of God, to he earnest  and assiduous suitors at the Throne of grace, in the behalfe of the Church of God. More briefly: We should all as one man continue praying to God, that he would establish Jerusalem a praise in the earth? 1. In unfolding of this point my method shall be, Method. 1. To illustrate the truth propounded by parallel examples. 2. To prove it by variety of precepts, inculcating so great a duty. 3. To confirme it by strength of Reasons. And 4. To conclude all with some usefull Application. 1. For the resuming of what I first propounded, time would 1. The Do∣ctrine illustra∣ted by Exam∣ples. faile me to enlarge my selfe in so great a cloud of witnesses. Some of the chiefe i'le mention, and leave the rest to be supplyed in your serious meditations. How earnest was Moses for Israel, the peo∣ple where God was named, above all the people of the earth. When Amaleck was fighting against Israel, Moses his hands were lifted up, and Israel returned Conquerours: when God threat∣ned the utter ruine of that people and offered to make Moses a greater Nation than they: O how zealous was Moses in their be∣halfe, Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord why doth thy Exod. 32. 11, 12. wrath waxe hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out
of the Land of Egypt with great power, and à mighty hand? Where∣fore should the Egyptians speak and say: For mischiefe did he bring them out, to slay them in the Mountaines, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turne from thy fierce wrath and repent of this evill against thy people, &c. So Numb. 14. 18, 19. The Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, &c. Pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according unto the great∣nesse of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people from Egypt even untill now. Psalm. 106. vers. 23. Therefore he said he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turne away his wrath, lest he should destroy them. To Moses, I'le adde Samuel, as he himselfe was a Son of prayer, so he was a praying man, 1 Sam. 7. vers. 9. He cryed unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him. 1 Sam. 12. 23. Moreo∣ver as for me, God forbid that I should sinne against the Lord in cea∣sing to pray for you, but I will teach you the good, and the right way. Moses and Samuel have Characters of honour put upon them, for praying persons, Jer. 15. 1. Moses, Aaron, nd Samuel, are al three joyn'd together. And Psal. 99. vers. 6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his Name. These were noted for choice Intercessours with God. So likewise Da∣vid was a man made up of affections towards the Church of God. Psal. 14. 7. O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion? when the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. Psal. 137. 5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my hand forget her cunning. Psal. 51. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the wals of Jerusalem Psal. 25. 26. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. How doth Daniel urge the most prevailing arguments, in the behalfe of Jerusalem. Dan. 9. 18, 19. O my God, incline thine eare, and heare: open thine eyes, and behold our desolations: and the City which is called by thy name &c. O Lord heare, O God forgive, O Lord hearken and do, deferre not for thine owne sake, O my God: for thy City and thy people are called by thy name. I might instance in I∣saiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Ezra and Nehemiah, who all were much upon their knees for the publick, and made the very burthen of their prayers (as it were versus intercalaris frequently repea∣ted) the establishment of Jerusalem, upon the sure basis of truth and peace.
If we passe from the old Testament unto the New, we shall find the whole Church earnest for one man, Act. 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept in Prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him, , In∣tentae, So Beza referring to the ardor of the mind. Sine intermissio∣ne, so Erasmus. And how speed these prayers, Vers. 7. The An∣gell of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the Prison, and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up: saying, Arise up quickly. And his chaines fell off from his hands. Upon this Scripture il'e give you that observation of an excellent Divine, lately gone Dr Harris Pet. Enlargement. from us to heaven, in that rare Sermon called Peters enlargement. The Enemies (saith he) shuts the Prison dore, the Church opens Heavens dores, so there's old tugging for the prisoner, but the Church will not let him go; saith God, if you will take no deniall, there he is. And as the whole Church prayed for the Apostle: so did one A∣postle Paul, pray much for the whole Church, Rom. 1. 9. For God is my witnesse, whom I serve with my spirit, in the Gospell of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you alwaies in my prayers. And Eph. 1. 16, 17. I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Fa∣ther of glory may give unto you the spirit of wisdome, and revelation in the knowledge of him. 2. To these examples il'e adde in the next place Scripture pre∣cepts for Proofe. Ministers are in a peculiar manner in joynd this 2. The Do∣ctrine proved by Scripture Precepts. duty, Joel. 2. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch, and the Altar, and let them say, spare thy people O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God? All are in joyn'd Psal. 122. 7. Pray for the peace of Je∣rusalem, they shall prosper that love thee: peace be within thy walls, and prosperity he within thy Palaces. And James 5. 16. Confesse your faults one unto another, and pray one for another, &c. In the third place il'e assign some grounds, and reasons for con∣firmation: and these I shall reduce unto three Heads. 3. The Do∣ctrine confir∣med by Rea∣sons. 1. In respect of God. 2. Of prayer. 3. Of Jerusalem. All these are strong Arguments to perswade. 1. In respect of God, who both expects and promiseth a bles∣sing R. 1. In re∣spect of God. upon the meanes. The Lord so expects prayer, as that he will
not grant great mercyes unto his Church, but in and by his peoples prayers: God hath ingaged himselfe in a Bond. His promise is his Bond, and he will have it put in suit before he pay it: See what God promiseth, Psal. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. And Jer. 33. 6. Behold I will cure them, and reveale unto them the abundance of peace and truth. And I will cause the captivity of Judah, and the captivity of Israel to returne, and will build them as at the first. So Zeph. 3. 20. In that time I will bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: For I will make you a name, and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turne back your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord. What a glorious Church is Prophecied, and what transcen∣dent beauty will the Lord put upon them. Isai. 54. 11, 12. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with faire colours, and lay thy foundation with Saphirs, and I will make thy windowes of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. By all these Hyperbolicall simili∣tudes is set forth the glorious condition of the Church in the daies of the Gospell. These are great Beauties and excellencies prophesied of the Church: yet as they are worth praying for, so in good earnest they must be sought of God: Jer. 33. 3. Call un∣to me and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not, c. 36. Ezek. 37. Thus saith the Lord, I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them, I will increase them with men like a flock. Now prayer is Gods Or∣dinance, the language of his Spirit: the musick which he loveth, no Melody in Gods account, like unto the prayers of his people. Wherefore though God promiseth great things unto his people, who will not faile one jot of his word: yet he will have his Chil∣dren plye the Throne of grace. He is the great Master of Requests and loves to see his Court full of Suitors. He is the great God that heareth prayers, and delighteth in prayers, and it is his pleasure that his people should be his remembrancers, even to spread be∣fore him the condition of his Church. For though it's best known to him already: yet he will have them call, cry, and seek with Importunity, for the accomplishment of those good and great things, which he intends for his own people. Though delive∣rance was promised out of the Babylonish captivity at the expia∣tion of 70 yeares: yet they must pray for it, Psal. 126. vers. 4.
Turne again our captivity, O Lord, as the streames in the South. A second Reason shall be taken from the great benefit of prayer. R. 2. From the great Be∣nefit of prayer It is an instrumentall meanes under God, to obtain a blessing. By some it is called Clavis viscerum Dei, virtus omnipotens. Their inten∣tions are good (I doubt not) who use these expressions: yet it is not safe to use them, without an explanation of their sence. With∣out question great help comes by prayer, yet the help depends not upon what we do, but upon God that gives to will and to do. It is our duty to pray, and the praise and glory of the successe and issue coming of prayer, we must ascribe wholly unto the Lord, that heareth prayers. Now what helpes prayer affords, may be represented in these following particular Instances. 1. Prayer is an Universall help. It's Solomons : 1. Prayer is an universall help. when raine is wanting, when enemies get the victory, when there is death, famine, and pestilence, then is a speciall time to pray, and God promiseth audience, 1 Chron. 7. 13, 14. If I shut up Heaven that there be no raine, or if I command the Locust to de∣vour the Land, and if I send Pestilence among my people: If my peo∣ple which are called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seeke my face, and turn from their wicked waies, then will I heare from Heaven, forgive their sinne, and heale their Land. This is a Soveraigne medicine of Gods owne appointment for all dis∣eases: This God prescribes as the meanes, and the blessing of God makes it effectuall. This is the poore mans medicine, the sick mans medicine, the oppressed mans medicine. Nay both rich and poore, sick and healthy, honourable and dishonourable, each must go to God and seeke his face in prayer. Every one in this case is a licensed Physitian. Every man cannot contribute mo∣ney, but every man must contribute prayers, and teares for the good of Jerusalem. Every one hath not strength of body, to op∣pose the Churches enemies, but every one must put up sighs, and supplications at the Throne of grace, in the behalfe of the Church. 2. Prayer is an invisible help: It passeth through Ambus∣cades, 2. Prayer is an Invisible help. Courts of guard, strong-holds, and fortifications. There was a strong guard set over Peter: Yet the prayer of the Church prevailed with God, to send an Angell for his deliverance. The Angell came invisibly, and took away Peters chaines, threw open
the Iron gate, and delivered the Prisoner. So Paul and Silas were cast into Prison, put into the inner Prison, their feet fast in the stocks. Here's imprisonment upon imprisonment: yet their hearts were inlarged, though their bodies were imprisoned, Acts 16. vers. 25. At midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sung praises un∣to God: and the Prisoners heard them. The Nightingale warbles out her most melodious notes when her breast is upon a Thorn. I am sure amidst sore afflictions Gods people in joy sweet conso∣lations. So that as outward comforts abound, divine comforts superabound. God settles the tranquillity of the inward man, a∣midst the sufferings of the outward man. It is reported that Archi∣medes made engines whereby he vexed his enemies at a great distance off. Prayer I am sure, millions of miles off can reach the Church as an Instrumentall meanes for its defence, and an offence unto its enemies. Upon Hezekiah's prayer Senacherib was discomfited, up∣on Jhoshaphats prayer Moab and Ammon were overthrown, up∣on Moses his prayer Pharaoh and Amaleck were destroyed. And yet all these enemies did not know who hurt them. The pray∣ers of the faithfull did rout the enemies sooner, then all their weapons of warre. Hereupon Mary Qeen of Scots, was afraid V. Hist. of Scotland. of John Knox his prayers. She profest she stood more in feare of that Ministers prayers, than an Army of men. This help of prayer is ready, when help from earth failes: when we see no visible way to succour us, this Invisible meanes from Heaven, under God, worketh great things for us. Of all people even enemies them∣selves are most afraid of a praying people: They meet with them at a distance and wound them, and strike invisibly and give them deadly blowes, not knowing who hurts them. Although Achi∣tophel falls a plotting, yet David falls a praying, and so counter∣plots all his plots. Hence it came to passe, that all the counsells of Achitophel were turned into foolishnesse. So when a huge Ar∣my came against Asa, he betook himselfe to prayer, and they were discomfited. Prayer will frustrate the secretest cabinet Counsells of Polititians, and disappoint them. What shall I adde more? The secretest hidden deeds of darknesse, through prayer are manifested and laid naked, and blasted even in the bud. 3. Prayer is a speedy help, Dan. 9. vers. 20, 21. Whiles I was speaking, praying and confessing my sinne, and the sinne of my people 3. Prayer is a speedy help. Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord my God for
the holy Mountain of my God, yea whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to flye swiftly touched me &c. Before we speak God knowes our thoughts, and what we would have: and while we are speaking he promiseth to answer us, Isai. 65. vers. 24. It shall come to passe that before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I will heare? Before Ammunitions, mony, counsells of men can come time enough, our prayers may come at the Throne of grace, and God may give a gratious Answer. But then a question will be moved. If prayer be such a present help, how comes it to passe that answers to prayers are not retur∣ned,  the chariot wheeles of deliverance are long a coming? For answer, we must know there's no delay, no tarrying in Gods decree: though according to the execution thereof we may ap∣prehend  delayes, Hab. 2. vers. 3. For the vision is yet for an appoin∣ted time, but at the end it shall speak and not lye, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. But God fobeares to answer, that we may cry the lowder: and opens not, that we may knock the harder. Wherefore our prayers should have more vigour and fervency: they should be rowsing prayers as we read, Psal. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God according to thy loving kindnesse, &c. Psal. 51. 1. Heare my cry O God, attend unto my prayer. Psal. 64. 1. Here my voyce, O God, in my prayer. Psal. 80. 1. Give eare O shepheard of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, and that dwellest between the Cherubims, shine forth. Not but that God alwaies heareth: For his eare is never weary that it cannot heare, but that God loveth the earnest and impor∣tunate supplications of his Children. 4. Prayer is a prevalent help, Ex. 33. 10. Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them, &c. And Moses besought the Lord 4. Prayer is a prevalent help. his God, and said why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people? &c. What saith the Apostle? Read James 5. 17. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not raine, and it rained not on the earth by the space of three yeares and six moneths, &c. We are to understand that there's no merit in our prayers, neither may we understand it: as if any humane strength, or ability were in the least to be preferred before the strength of God. But these words set forth the wonderfull condescention of God to his people, as if it were to suffer himselfe to be overcome
by the fervency and faithfulnesse of their spirits. Thus Jacob pre∣vailed by prayer. He wrestled with the Angell and prevailed, Gen. 32. 25, 28. He wrestled with God, and God said, thy name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for as a Prince hast thou power with God, and with men, and hast prevailed. Compare this with Hos: 12. vers. 4. Yea he had power over the Angell and prevailed: he wept and made supplication unto him, he found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us. So Hannah poured out her Heart with all ferven∣cy, and went away with comfort, and received Samuel a Son of prayers. Devout prayer never goes away with a repulse: As Saul (in his most sober thoughts) said of David. So say I of prayer, it shall do great things and also shall prevaile. 3. A third reason shall be drawn from Jerusalem, and that up∣on R. 3. Drawn from Jerusa∣lem. a double ground, because Jerusalem needs our prayers, and likewise deserves our prayers. 1. Jerusalem the type of the Church needs our prayers: It is 1. Jerusalem needs our prayers. militant on earth. It resembleth Noahs Ark on the surface of the waters tost up and down, it's like to that smoaking furnace shew∣ed to Abraham, Gen: 15. 17. The Church is like the bush that Moses saw burning, but not consumed. It standeth among the Mir∣tle Trees in the bottome, Zech: 1. 11. The Church may take up that selfe same complaint, Psal: 129. 1, 2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed against me. It is necessarily then an incumbent duty upon us all, to remember Zion, and pray for the prosperity of Jerusalem. However Papists lay down Prosperity to be a mark of the true Church: yet all the Saints and Martyrs from generation to generation by their suffer∣ings and persecutions have abundantly confuted the groundlesness of their opinion. The Church of God meets with various dis∣pensations sutable to that prophecy, Zech: 6. 6, 7. Where were white, black, grisled, and bay horses: And for the most part Gods dearest Children drink deepest of the cup of afflictions, and have a full cup of the waters of Marah wrung out to them. The ti∣tle of the 22. Psal: is Aijeleth Shahar, the hind of the morning, in∣timating the continuall hunting, and persecuting of the People of God. However it shall go well with the righteous, it shall go well with them that feare the Lord. God hath founded Zion, the gates of Hell shall not prevaile against it: Christ is ever present with
them, and though the Dragon cast out flouds against the woman yet she shall escape. And though there are Hornes to push the Church, yet God sends Carpenters to cut them off. In the mean Zech. 1. 21. time how should we unite and pray for Zion, that it may be deli∣vered and established in glory. This meanes of prayer God ex∣pects, God blesseth and maketh successefull. Gebal, Ammon, A∣maleck, and Philistines, all the enemies that Hell can raise, are con∣federate against Jerusalem. The seed of the Serpent is at continu∣all enmity, even deadly feud with the seed of the woman. We read of their consultation, Psal. 83. 3, 4. They have taken crafty counsell against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, come, let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. We read of their associa∣tions, Isaiah 8. 10. Associate your selves, O yee people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsell together and it shall come to naught: speak the word, and it shall not stand: For God is with us. Of what necessity then are assiduous prayers, and importunate Applications unto God in the behalfe of Zion. 2. The Church of God deserves our prayers. What high E∣pihites are ascribed unto it: It is called the Citie of God, Heb. 12. 2. Jerusalem deserves our prayers. 22. The house of God, 1 Tim. 3. 15. The delight of God, Isa. 62. 4. The love, the dove, the spouse, the undefiled, Cant. 5. 2. A crown of glory, and a royall Diadem in the hand of God, Isa. 62. 3. The body of Christ, Eph. 1. 23. And doth it not in all these respects deserve our prayers? Should not we honour where God honours. I shall adde no more for confirmation. I now proceed to Ap∣plication, Ʋse 1. For Reprehension. and shall insist only upon foure uses. 1. For Reprehension. 2. Exhortation. 3. Direction. And 4. Consolation. 1. For Reproofe. This Doctrine in the first place, breaths ter∣rour unto all the enemies of the Church of God. If God put such an high honour, and estimate upon his Church, as to ingage his people to pray with all earnestnesse for it, what shall we say of such as are so farre from praying for the Church as they oppose it, and set themselves in battle aray against it. They mourn when it goeth well, and rejoyce when it goeth ill with Jerusalem. And
thus they tread Antipodes to divine Providence. Multitudes there are of Samballats and Tobiah's temper, who have a spirit of con∣tradiction, against the waies of Reformation. Many hate the power of Godlinesse, and cannot abide circumspect walking but reproach it, like the spies that brought an evill report of the promised Land They calumniate & revile those who walk most closely with God. Now the Churches Enemies will appeare especially in times of Triall, when it comes to suffering, losses, disgrace, poverty &c. Then all the Enemies to religion will make that wicked choice to chuse sinne rather than affliction, as Job speaks. Job. 36. 21. But a second sort are to be reproved who are negligent, careless, Indifferents, of Gallioes temper, they care for none of these things, They are secure, setled upon their lee's, at ease in Zion, and are no whit affected with the afflictions of Joseph. How many are there that never in good earnest, put up a prayer for the Church of God in all their lives. They look upon these things as not concerning them. They plainly shew themselves to be a body without the spi∣rit to animate it: a carcase only, painted men, not living members of Jesus Christ: For in Christs body, when one member suffers the other doth Sympathize: They are , and conferre subsi∣diary forces for the mutuall succour of each other: but where there is no Sympathy, and no fellow-feeling of each others afflicted con∣dition, This is a signe that the members of that body are rotten, dead, like withered branches cut off from the Vine. 3. A third sort to be reproved, are all such who pray but faint∣ly and slightly, and do not put forth their utmost strength for Je∣rusalem. Some pray now and then, when the humor takes them, but they flagge and hold not out: they are not wrastlers with God as Jacob, they are not such Remembrancers as will give him no rest, that will never leave of praying. Now it's an usuallsaying Qitimi∣de rogat, docet negare. Cold prayer, dead prayer, and drousy prayer are no better than Gehazi'es touching of the Shunamites child. He went on in a carelesse negligent manner, and laid his staffe on the Child, but it was not awakened, whereas when Elisha in good earnest with all his might laid out himselfe, and put his mouth vpon the childs mouth, and his hands upon the childs hands, and his eyes up∣on the childs eyes, then the Child revived: so you may read the History, 2 King. 4. 34. We read 1 Chron. 10. 14. That Saul enquired not of the Lord: yet we read 1 Sam. 28. vers. 6. That
Saul enquired of the Lord. These places may thus be reconciled, Though Saul did after a manner enquire: yet not in truth and faith, his enquiring was after a slight manner, after an hypocriticall formall way, like that of Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like unto his: and like unto Israels howling, Hos. 7. 14. And they have not cryed to me with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds, they assembled them∣selves for corne and wine, &c. Wherefore then should we give God a slight service. He requireth the Male, the best of the flocks and theres a dreadfull Curse, Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the deceiver which hath in his flock a Male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing. But in the second place here is a word of exhortation that we Ʋse 2. For Exhortation. would all unite our forces for the Church in generall, even the whole body of Christ, however dispersed and distressed through∣out the world. How many of Christs body suffer hard things? Some are imprisoned we must pray for the prisoners enlargement. Some are under Antichristian Tyranny, and Christ hath a Church even where Satan dwells, we must pray that they may hold fast their profession without wavering. Great things God hath gran∣ted to a praying people, and he is the same God, still as good and as gracious as ever. The Army called , prayed and raine was poured down in abundance, to refresh the Pagan Army of the Emperour, Insomuch ex ore adversariorum, it was confest great was the God of the Christians. Constantine that excellent Eccl. Hist. Euseb. Prince and Patron of Christians, would not after the example of his Predecessours, suffer his picture to be drawn standing in a state∣ly posture but kneeling, for he ascribed his victories to the answer of prayers. Let us remember likewise all the distressed Churches beyond the Seas, such as are in misery, where their enemies are the chiefe, we should give them the Charity of our prayers, counsells, compassions, purses, & our Bowells should be opened wide towards their release. Polonia & other places cry out in the language of Job, to his friends, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God hath touched me. To such as are afflicted pitty Job. 19. 21. should be shewed: We should all imitate the Apostle being alike affected with our Brethren, rejoycing with them that rejoyce &c. We should make their cases our own, of this excellent temper was the Apostle. Who is weake and I am not weake? who is offended and I 2 Cor. 11. 29
burn not? as if all the burthens of the Saints, were laid upon his shoulders, he was willing to beare them all. Jerome writing a commentary upon Ezekiel, and hearing of the sacking of Rome, a place where he formerly lived, was so affected that a long time he could think of nothing else: He laid to heart so much the suffering of Gods people there, as he imagined himselfe to be in their stead. Furthermore in a more particular manner, let us remember in our prayers the Land of our Nativity, the Church of England, Scotland and Ireland. We expect shortly a Parliament, and we hope in the multitude of Councellours, there may be safety. Former∣ly we have been frustrated of our expectations: High-raised hopes have been disappointed. That of the Prophet may truely be ap∣plyed to this purpose: Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy Jer. 14. 19. soule loathed Zion, why hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? We looked for peace, and there is no good, and for the time of healing, and behold trouble. We have been justly crost in our hopes, because we have Idolized men, and relyed too much upon an arme of flesh. We are to call upon the great counsell as the man of Ma∣cedonia did, Come and help us, and they likewise call upon us, help us with your prayers. We may hope to speed the better, if we pray the more. Let us pray as one man, that the Lord would instruct the Counselllours after his own will, and teach the Senators wis∣dome. What farther I shall speak in this use, shall come under these two heads. 1. What speciall things we must pray for, that our Jerusalem, our Church of England may be established a praise in the earth. 2. What moving inducements may be assign'd, to incourage us in the duty of prayer. For the first, Above all we must pray for the advancement of Religion, for the establishing the power of Godlinesse. It is Re∣ligion that beautifies and adorns a Nation: the Kings daughter, Gods Church and People are glorious within, their decking is of pure gold. Grace ennobles and puts a glorious lustre upon a peo∣ple. To name a few particulars. 1. Let us in an especiall manner, pray for the encrease of God∣ly 1. Pray for Magistates. Magistrates, Reprovers in the gate, such as will do judgment and justice. There is a great promise made in those Gospell daies,
Isaiah 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Qeens thy nursing Mothers, they shall bow down to thee with their face to∣wards the earth, and lick the dust of thy feet, &c. Our duty is to pray for them, so runs the Apostles command, 1 Tim. 2. 1. I ex∣hort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made For all men, for Kings &c. Godly Rulers are a blessing to a Nation, Jer. 5. 1. Run ye to and fro thorough the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if yee can find a man if there be any that executeth judg∣ment, that seeketh the truth, and I will pardon it. So Amos 5. 15. Hate the evill and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the Lord God of hoasts will be gracious unto the rem∣nant of Joseph. Where such Magistrates are, we must pray for their continuance, and for a supply of their mortality, that the Lord would send continually such as may dispence justice impar∣tially, and may be a terror unto evill doers, and a praise to them that do well. 2. Pray for faithfull soul-saving Ministers. Many such in mercy 2. Pray for Ministers. the Lord hath given us. We must pray that the Lord would increase the number of them. But the Prophets live not for ever, where∣fore we must pray for a Godly succession of Ministers, that such may be incouraged, who are workmen that needeth not to be asham∣ed, and such may be removed as unsavory salt, who make the sacri∣fice of God to be abhorred. There are yet left a faithfull remnant, sound in the faith, and holy in life (who are as farre from Anti∣christianisme, as their false accusers are from Charity) who la∣bour in season, and out of season, and are willing to spend, and be spent for the salvation of soules. These in an especiall man∣ner must be incouraged by our prayers, that the Lord would give them The seale of their Apostleship, and make their Ministry instrumentall to convert and build up soules unto Jesus Christ. And we must likewise be  Advocates and Patrons of their maintenance. It was the saying of an eminent Gentleman in Sr. Benjamin Rudiard. the long Parliament, that a scandalous maintenance would cause a scandalous Ministry. It's to be observed that Dioclesian did not do so much mischiefe to the Ministry it selfe as Julian did. Dioclesian put many to death, which was an horrid wicked∣nesse. But the Devill put another designe into Julians head, to take away all the maintenance of Ministers, and put downe
Schooles of Learning, and Ecclesiasticall Histories will informe us, that by consequent, Julian did the greater mischiefe. For though some particular persons were took out of the way through Diocle∣sian's persecution, yet there arose up others in their stead. But the taking away of all their lands, and revenues, did hinder a succession of Ministers. And the robbing of Schooles of learning, discouraged many from the study of learned Arts and Sciences. 3. Let us all pray for the continuance of Gospell Ordinances 3. Pray for the Continu∣ance of the Gospell. in their Liberty and purity. This is that which made Israel praise∣worthy in the eyes of the Nations: Deut. 46. 7. Keep therefore and do them for this is your wisdome, and your understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall heare all these statutes and say, sure∣ly this great Nation is a wise, and understanding people. For what Nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon him for? he Go∣spell of Christ, the Word and Sacraments administred in their purity, the Sabbath kept strictly, all these will be the praise and glory of our Nation. 4. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, both for Civill and Ecclesi∣asticall peace. Pray for Civill peace: It's to me a great wonder that 4. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. amidst all the concussions, and revolutions of these times, we in joy peace, that we it under our own Vines, and Fig-trees, that meum & tuum are in some measure preserved, that publick Courts of Justice are opened, and that the sword is not put to the decision of all con∣troversies. We should pray that peace may be continued, that all our Officers may be peace and exactors righteousnesse I know none that hath his eyes in his head, or grace in his heart that is willing to im∣broyl Isai. 60. 17. the Nation in another civill war. We know by sad experine the Calamities of War, how thankfull ought we to be for the peace we yet in joy, and how ought we to pray for the continuance of it, that Peace may be extended as a river, and righteousnesse like a mighty streame. For Ecclesiasticall peace we must pray: there are two great Prophecies, Zeph. 3. 9. Then will I turn to the people, a pure language that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. And Zach. 13. 9. I will bring the third part through the fire, Isai. 66. 12. and will rfne them as Sylver is refined, and trye them as Gold is tryed, they shall call upon my name, and I will heare them, I will say it is my people, and they shall say the Lord is my God. There is an Unity of the spirit, which we must endeavour to keep, and there
are seaven Ones mentioned, Eph. 4. 4, 5, 6. One body, one spirit, one hope, one God, one faith, one baptisme, one God and Father of all, &c. I remember a patheticall speech, which Luther useth to the Pastors of the Church of Strusburg, Vobis oro perswadeatis &c. (i. e.) I pray you (sath he) be perswaded that I shall alwaies be as desirous to embrace unity, and concord, as I am desirous to have the Lord Je∣sus to be propitious to me: Martin Bucer writes to a Godly Mini∣ster Quis non vitâ etiam sua re∣dimat submo∣rum isthuc in∣finitum dissi∣dii scanda∣lum? Bucer. very high expressions. Who would not saith he purchase with his life, the removing of that infinite scandall that comes by dissention? Wherefore let us study the things that make for peace and edifi∣cation. Let dividing names be laid aside amongst sound Christian: Quirites once named, Cesars souldiers were pacified. O that Chri∣stian being named, union and reconciliation might be obtained! Let us all labour to approve our selves members of the Church of Jesus Christ, as living stones in that building. The Apostle blames the Corinthians for siding, and making partyes, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. It hath been declared to me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the House of Cloe, that there are contentions among you. Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. The name of Christian should swallow up names of division. Now for Motives, the second thing propounded, here I shall 1 Motive God will make Je∣rusalem a praise. adde two only. 1. That God will make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. For first, Believe it God will not faile one tittle of his word. All the promises made unto Jerusalem, shall every one be fulfilled 1. Because he promiseth. in their season: Psal. 48. 1, 2. Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the mountain of his Holynesse, beau∣tifull for situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion, on the sides of the North, the City of the great King. And Psal. 50. 2. Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined. For Instance: Greater shall be the light of knowledge of the Church in the Gos∣pell. Isai. 11. 9. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Isai. 60. 1, 19. Arise, shine for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Vers. 19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightnesse shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everla∣sting light, and thy God thy glory. These great Promises referre unto the Gospell.
2. The Church shall be enlarged: Isai. 51. 1, 2, 3. Hearken unto me ye that follow after righteousnesse, ye that seek the Lord, look to the rockes whence ye are hewen &c. Look unto Abraham your Fa∣ther, and Sarah that bare you, for I called him alone and blessed and increased him. For the Lord will comfort Zion, he will make her wil∣dernesse like Eden, and her desert like the garden of God, &c. 3. Holynesse shall be improved: Deut. 26. 18, 19. The Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, &c. To make thee high above all Nations, which he hath made in praise, in name and in honour, that thou mayest be an holy people unto the Lord thy God as he hath spoken. 2. Consider those that pray most for Jerusalem, shall reape 2. Mot. Those that pray for Jerusalem shall reap the greatest com∣fort. the greatest comfort in Jerusalem's establishment. They that have ventured most in the flock, shall receive most in the return. In Je∣rusalem's peace we shall have peace: Our fraught is imbark in this ship. As we have sowen, so shall we reape. We have had a wet seed time, and have wept and fasted for the Church, but we shall have a joyfull harvest. Wherefore confirme the weak knees, and strengthen the feeble hands. But I proceed to a third use for Direction. How must we give Ʋse 3. For Direction. God no rest? After what manner, Must we thus present our sup∣plications to the Throne of grace? Amongst many I shall fix only on three properties of such a prayer, as consists in giving God no rest according to the Text, and they are Faith, Fervency, and perseverance. 1. We must pray in faith. The promise is that what we ask be∣lieving 1. We must pray in faith. we shall receive. No prayer unlesse coming from a Princi∣ple of faith, can obtain acceptance, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God: And whatsoever is not of faith is sinne. All prayers must be put up in faith, believing in Christ and expe∣cting from him only help and comfort. In all our approaches to the Father let us come in the name of Christ, believing, and rely∣ing only on his merits. Christ is the Bridegroom, and the Church his spouse. Christ is the Head, the Church his body. Faith is an Instrument of Union to unite the members unto the Head. 2. We must pray with fervency as Jacob wrastled, Hannah 2. We should pray with fer∣vency. poured out her Heart. We must imitate the Importunate widdow, Luk. 18. 1. Christ spake a Parable to this end, that men ought al∣waies to pray and not to faint. The woman of Canaan, who would
have no nay: And so Luk. 11. 8. Though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend: yet because of his Importunity he will rise &c. . We must besiege Heaven, and offer an holy Violence to the Throne of grace. The violent take it by force, and the effectuall fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much, James 5. 16. , an inward working, or an in∣wrought prayer. Those that were , did great things. 3. We must pray with perseverance. We must pray and not faint 3. We must pray with per∣severance. , Luk. 18. 1. The Word (as Eustathius observes) is de∣rived , à cedendo, from shrinking back as some cow∣ardly Souldiers do in time of danger. Our duty is to pray with∣out ceasing, 1 Thes. 5. 19. Job makes it the mark of an Hypocrite that he will not pray alwaies, he will not alwaies call upon God. The fourth and last Use, is a word of Consolation to praying Ʋse 4. For Consolation. Christians. Such as are much in Prayer, who tugg hard at the Throne of grace, and in joy frequent Communion with God in this Ordinance: They use prayer not only as a duty commanded, but as a meanes to obtaine a blessing. Their Hearts are heated, their affections warmed, and prayer is their Priviledge, as well as service: For they have accesse unto the Throne of grace, they cry Abba Father, they pray from a spirit of Adoption, they come to God as Children to a Father, and such have strong hopes to speed. The Lords secret is with the Righteous, they are his jew∣ells, & his peculiar treasure. Now the Prayers of the righteous a∣vaile much for themselves, and for the publick: wherefore O Chri∣stians hold on praying, lift up your Hearts with your Hands to God in the Heavens, continue to be Jerusalems Advocates, and what ever things you see coming as the Answers of Prayers, those will be most highly valued. Go on then, pray for Jerusalem, fast and weep for Jerusalem, and in Gods good time you shall see Jerusa∣lem a praise in the earth.
THE CRUCIFIED CHRISTIAN, REPRESENTED. From Gal: 5. vers. 24. And they that are Christ's, have Crucified the flesh, with the af∣fections and lusts. UPON a review of the precedent verses, you will Sermon 5. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. Feb. 13. 1658. observe a double Catalogue, one of the deeds of the flesh, vers. 19, 20, 21. Another of the fruits of the spirit, vers. 22. Concerning these the Apo∣stle determines, that against such there is no law (i. e.) 1. There is no law to Condemne them. 2. There is no law to compell them. Because they as freely o∣bey God, as if there were no law. Their freedome obligeth more to obedience, not in the least to disobedience. Now the scope of my Text is to prove, what was immediatly delivered before, that there is no law against spirituall men: and the Text gives a double reason, one is because spirituall men are Christ's therefore there is no law against them: the other is because that is crucified in spirituall men, which the law condemneth: namely, the flesh with the affections and lusts: therefore there is no law to condemne the spirituall man. The words then in their dift and Latitude containe a descrip∣tion, or a Character of true believers, and the scope of the Words lyes obviously before us in these fundamentall Doctrines. 1. That there are a peculiar people that are Christ's, and have spe∣ciall  interest in him. 2. All those that are Christ's and have speciall interest in him, are
such as have crucified the flesh with it's affections and lusts; These two points contain the full scope and substance of the words, and what needs explication in the Text, shall be given in upon the prosecution of the Doctrines as I go a long. I resume the first, That there are a pculiar people &c. This I  Method propounded. shall endeavour to cleare from severall distinguishing names, the nature, grounds, and benefits of those that are Christs, and have interest in him: and after this manner I shall handle the Doctrinall part of my Text, which done, I shall inquire how all this may con∣cerne us, as reducible unto point of practise, this shall constitute the particular Use and Application of all. 1. To prove my Assertion. It's plain if we inquire into Scrip∣ture 1. The Do∣ctrine pro∣ved. Testimony, what speciall distinguishing names and Titles are appropriated unto those who are Christs, and have speciall inte∣rest in him. Sometimes Christ calls them his friends, Joh. 15. 14, 15. Sometimes he calls them disciples, Joh. 13. 35. Children, Matth. 17. 26. They are a chosen Generation, a royall Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1. 6. They are a peculiar treasure unto God, Exod. 19. 5. A Crowne of Glory, a Royall Diadem in the hand of God, Isai. 62. 3. The dearly beloved of Gods Soule, Isai. 12. 7. The Sons of God, Hos. 1. 10. They are called Gods Jewells, Mal. 3. 15. Christ calls them his sheepe, Joh. 10. 27. They are his Church, his Spouse, his adopted Children, Inheritors of the Kingdome of Heaven, the Family of the First borne. Accordingly the Holy Ghost gives names and titles unto those, and those only that have interest in Jesus Christ. 2. In the second place, lets make inquiry into the nature of this 2. What it is to have Interest in Christ. interest in Christ, what is it to be Christs? Ans. It consists in two things viz: having Union and Commu∣nion with him. 1. True believers are Christs by vertue of Union with him, 1. True be∣lievers have union with Christ. Christ is the Vine they are the branches, Christ is the head of his body the Church, Eph. 5. 23. True believers are in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Christ prayed for them that they may be one, Joh. 17. 21. Faith knits us to Christ as an Instrument, the spirit of God is the efficient cause of this Union. 2. True believers are Christs by vertue of Communion with 2. True be∣lievers have communion with Christ. him, He is the head and hath influence upon his members, they
participate of the sap and nourishment of the roote, a communi∣cation of water from the fountaine to the streame, 1 Joh. 1. 3. Truely our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. But 3ly, What grounds may be given why, and how it comes to 3. The Rea∣sons. passe, that there are such a people who are Christs, and have in∣terest in him? 1. The first ground shall be drawn from the promises, because R. 1. Drawn from the Premises. there are a peculiar people who only have right unto the Gospell promises, and they only who have interest in Christ, have right unto the promises: The promises of Eternall life belong only to true Believers, Joh. 3. 16, 36. These are they that come unto Christ, and he hath promised that he will not cast away, Joh. 6. 35, 37. 2. Another ground shall be drawne from the Donation of God R. 2. From the Fathers donation. the Father: They have a Kingdome, Luk. 12. 32. 3. From Christs Redemption, For ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Christ hath purchased his Church with his R. 3. From Christs Re∣demption. blood, Act. 20. 28. Zipporah said to Moses a bloody husband hast thou been to me, She spake concerning the circumcision: much more may Christ say to his Church, A bloody Spouse hast thou been unto me, for thou hast cost me my blood. 4. From the Sanctification of the spirit, the Saints are a peo∣ple R. 4. From the sanctifi∣cation of the Spirit. loved and washed, even washed with the lover of regeneration, and renewed by the Holy Ghost, Tit. 2. 5. And these have the image of Christ stampt on them, which after the image of God is created in righteousnesse and holynesse. Eph. 4. 24. In he 4th place. What are the benefits which those receive that have interest in Christ. The 1. Is Justification, and this is free, as free as the freest gift, Rom. 3. 24. 2. It consists in Remission of sinnes, Psal. 32. 1. 3. In the Imputation of Christs righteousnesse unto us, and im∣puting our sinnes unto Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. And Justification is the mother grace, from whence such a rare issue proceeds, as peace, joy, accesse unto the Throne of Grace, hope, patience, Rom. 5. 1, 2. &c. 2. Those that have interest in Christ, have the benefits of Christs intercession, at the right hand of God, he interceeds for all his Children, Heb. 7. 25. Rom. 8. 34. For them Christ prayeth, and
for them exclusively, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, Joh. 17. 9. 3. They have the benefit of speciall providence, the Guardian∣ship of Angells, Psal. 34. 7. Heb. 1. ult. 4. They have a Sanctified use of all the creatures of God, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. All are yours, and ye are Christs &c. They in joy Christ in the creature, and with the creature have Christs love tokens, Rom. 8. 32. With him they have all things. 5. They shall hereafter reap the benefit of glorification, so runs the Climax, Whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he called them he also justified, and whom he justified them he also glori∣fied, Rom. 8. 30. 5. Now in the last place, what doth all this concern us? Ans. Much every way, as will appeare by the particular Appli∣cation Applicat. of all. 1. Heres an Use of Consolation to those that are Christs. Art Ʋse 1. For Consolation. thou in a doubt, he is thy Counsellour, Isai. 9. 6. Art thou in di∣stresses, he is thy comforter: Art thou tempted? Christ was tem∣pted, and is able to succour those that are tempted. Art thou full of infirmities? Christ himselfe had infirmities, which were not sin∣full, and Christ is a compassionate high Priest, touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. Art thou reviled, censured, nay condemned? O go to Jesus Christ, get assurance of thy inte∣rest in him, and then claime for thy comfort, Rom. 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us. 2. For Exhortation. Art thou Christs, let thy life give a proofe Ʋse 2. For Exhorta∣tion. hereof, give up thy selfe unto Christ, let him be thy King and Lord to rule and governe thee, set up Christ Commander in chiefe in thy soule. As the Centurion profest of the ready obedience of his servants, so do thou, go when Christ bids thee go, come when Christ bids thee come, give thy selfe wholly to be disposed, coun∣selled, and governed by Jesus Christ, As then we have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so let us walk in him. 3. Heres an Use of Triall, whether we are Christs or no. Ʋse 3. For Triall. 1. One Character is the new creature as we have it, 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2. Another we have Joh. 15. 5. Bringing forth much fruit. 3. Another we have 2 Tim. 2. 19. To depart from iniquity. 4. Another we have 1 Joh. 3. 3. To be borne againe. 5. Another we have in my Text, viz: Crucifixion of the flesh,
which brings in the second Doctrine, wherein I purpose to stay lon∣ger: Thus it was propounded— 2. That those that have Interest in Christ have crucified the flesh,  with the affections and lusts. For the unfolding of this point of Doctrine, I shall inquire, Method. 1. What's meant by flesh? 2. What's meant by affections and lusts of the flesh? 3. What's meant by crucifying the flesh, with its affections and lusts? 4. I shall then give in the proofe of Doctrine? And 5. and lastly conclude with particular Application. 1. By flesh we are to understand the corruption of the whole Q. 1. Whats meant by flesh. Perkins in Loc. nature: for the right apprehending hereof, I shall distinguish with Judicious Mr. Perkins of three things. 1. The nature of Man. 2. The faculties of Nature. 3. And corruption of both. Now this distinction must be without seperation of nature from faculties, or of corruption from either, so as we may say truly, that the nature and powers of the soule are corrupted. Now this corruption consists. 1. In the depravation of Gods image, man was created after Gods image, but by reason of sin he hath defaced the same. 2. In a pronenesse to all wickednesse, so that the nature of man is evill continually, and the seeds of all rebellion are sowne in the corrupt nature of mankind, wherefore the Lord threatens That Gen. 6. 3. his spirit should no longer strive with man, for that he is but flesh, (i. e.) he is become corrupted, he hath fallen from his Creator, and become fleshly and sinfull: what this flesh is the Apostle tells, Rom. 7. 18. Gal. 6. 8. Eph. 2. 3. 2. In the next place we are to inquire, what's meant by affecti∣ons Q 2. Whats meant by Affections and lusts. and lust's. Ans. By affections we are to understand inordinate affections, which beare sway in carnall men, their affections are out of or∣der, irregular, immoderate, and they are set upon the wrong ob∣ject, they love where they should hate, and hate where they should love. Anger is sometimes an inordinate affection, and it bared sway in Cain against Abell. Envy is sometime an inordinate affection, and it prevailed in Saul against David. Sorrow is some∣times
immoderate and inordinate in Ahab, when he could not get Naboths Vineyard, he was heavy, and displeased, 1 King. 21. 4. Love was an inordinate affection in the men of the last times: Lo∣vers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, 2 Tim. 3. 4. 2. By Lusts we are to understand, inordinate and insatiable de∣sires after the things of the world, as Riches, Honours, Pleasures, of this sort of inordinate affections are coveteousnesse, pride, glut∣tony, &c. 3. In the third place, whats meant by crucifying the flesh, with Q. 3. Whats meant by crucifying the flesh &c. its affections and lusts? Ans. For answer hereunto, we are to distinguish of crucifying, either as the action of Christ; or as the action of a Christian. 1. Lets consider Crucifixion as the action of Christ, and this 1. Cruci∣fixion as the Action of Christ. consists in three particulars. 1. Upon the Crosse, Christ stood in our Roome, and bared the burthen of our sinnes, and made an expiation for them: in this respect we are said to be crucified with him, Gal. 2. 20. 2. The second is in us, when Christ conveyes the vertue of his death in us, to cause the death of sinne: when Christ gives us his spirit to mortify the deeds of the body, Rom. 8. 13. 3. The third is in Baptisme, whereby Christ sealed the two former to them that believe, Rom. 6. 3, 6. 2. Lets consider crucifixon as the Action of a Christian, and 2. Cruci∣fixion as the Action of a Christian. this consists in the imitation of Christ crucified, after this man∣ner, Christ was attached, apprehended, and brought into the presence of Pilate, so must we bring our selves into the presence of God, Christ was arraigned at the Tribunall of Pilate, so must we arraigne our selves at the barre of Christs judgment seate: Christ was indited and accused, so must we indite and accuse our selves: Christ was condemned, so must we condemne and judge our selves, after sentence past there followed execution, Christ was crucified: so must we proceed to the execution of our sinnes, and corruptions. We must labour to be the death of every sinne, to give every lust a mortifying blow: we must not spare any Ru∣ling sinne, that was Sauls sinne in sparing Agag: but we must de∣stroy all, both great and small: we must not only mourne for sin, but hate it: not only hate it, but endeavour the destruction of it. But the further Inlargement of these things, I shall leave to the use of Examination.
4. In the fourth place, it remaines that I prove the assertion, 4. The Do∣ctrine pro∣ved. that those that are Christs, are such crucified persons; St Paul thus professeth of himselfe, That he was crucified with Christ. But I will prove the point by reason. 1. Because the flesh is enmity against God, Rom. 8. 7. , R. 1. The fleshly mind is enmity a∣gainst God. and naturall men are , Rom. 5. 10. Now flesh and blood, corrupt nature, unregeneracy, the old man cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, To be carnally minded is death, Rom. 8. 6. and such cannt please God, Rom. 8. 8. now we may not spare Gods enemies: The Children of Babylon were to be dasht in peices: A∣maleck was to be utterly overthrowne, these were Gods enemies: Likewise the affections and lusts of the flesh, are Gods enemies: these must be slaine, these must be crucified. 2. Because Christians ought to be conformable unto Christs R. 2. Chri∣stians ought to be confor∣mable unto Christs death. death, Phil. 2. 10. Rom. 6. 5, 6. As Christ died for our sinnes, so we must be a mortifying of sinne, sinne must not be suffered to live: we are in this world in a dying condition, we must never give o∣ver fighting, till we returne away conquerors: though we sinne as long as we be in this world, and have flesh as well as spirit, yet we must never give over striving for mastery over the flesh. 3. God will have us exercised in a continuall warfare, and R. 3. God will have us exercised in continuall warfare. combat against the flesh: it's an inbred enemy, and it hath many lurking holes, many Apologies, many pretences, we must be con∣tinually resisting the flesh, even unto blood striving against sinne, Heb. 12. 4. Here only a deadly Feud is lawfull; This must be trans∣mitted from Generation, to Generation, sinne must be crucified, Rom. 6. 6. Sinne must be subdued, Mich. 7. 18, 19. And above all sinnes we had need fight most violently against fleshly lusts, they being grand enemies unto the soule, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 'Tis true the Canaanite will be in the Land, sinne will be in our mortall bodies, whilst we be in this world: but we must never let it reigne, never suffer it to have any peace, never give it quarter, but be continu∣ally resisting of and fighting against it. Now to apply what hath been said particularly to every ones Applicat. Conscience, here are six Uses to be made. 1. Information. 2. Reprehension. 3. Exhortation. 4. Examination.
5. Direction. And 6. Consolation. 1. For Information, and that in two particulars. Ʋse 1. For Informa∣tion. First, Hereby we are informed what a carnall man is: namely, one that is carried away with some inordinate affections; or some inordinate lust. Herod did many good things (as the Text saith) he heard John Baptist  sweetly, yet he was but a carnall man, Joh. 6. 20. for he was possest with an inordinate love of his Brother Philips wife. Saul slew many of the Amalekites, but he was but a car∣nall man, he obeyed the commandment of God too halves: He was partiall in his obedience. Judas was a disciple of Christ, yet but a carnall man, he was carried away with an inordinate lust of covetousnesse, he was a Theefe and carried the bagge. Joh. 12. 6. 2. Hereby we are informed what a spirituall man is, he is one that crucifieth his lusts, hee's a man crucified unto the world, and the world unto him: hee's a wrastler, and a warrior against flesh and blood, even against corruptions: he makes it his businesse to give a deadly blow to them all. 2. The second Use is for Reproofe of severall sorts of per∣sons. Ʋse 2. For Reproofe. 1. It Reproves those common sort of Protestants, who would be accounted Christians, and Protestants: but theres no change at all wrought in their hearts, nor in their lives: they professe them∣selves Christians, but they live without Christ: they know not what Regeneration, Adoption, the new Creature meanes: The old sent still remaines in them, they are covetous, worldly mind∣ed, Sabbath-breakers, swearers, &c. And yet these would go un∣der the name of Christians, but where's the crucifying of the flesh? where's the mortifying of their lusts: the want whereof evidently proves them to be only nominall, not reall Christians. 2. This Doctrine reproves such, in whom there is some be∣ginning of a change: but it's but partiall, it's not a thorough change: some sinnes they leave which are most crosse to their pro∣fit, and reputation: but others they hugge, and foster: some sweet sinne, some antient pleasant customary sin, they will not forgoe: a beloved bosome sinne, they will not crucify: they would have a dispensation in this, with Naaman, and would be faine pardoned in that: but these fosterings of a darling sinne, shew the heart to be rotten: David profest his uprightnesse, by keeping himselfe from
his own iniquity, Psal. 18. 23. Right eyes ought to be pluckt out and right hands cut off. 3. This reproves those that love not to heare their sinnes re∣proved, if a preacher touch them to the quick, and tell them of cosenage in the trade, double dealing, equivocation &c. and shew them the evill of their worldly mindednesse, pride, and vaine glo∣ry, &c. They cannot abide such plaine dealing, but account of such a plain dealing Preacher, as Ahab accounted of Michaiah a great enemy, and as the Apostle Paul himselfe was accounted an enemy because he told them the truth. 3. The third Use is for Exhortation, to presse home the du∣ties Ʋse 3. For Exhorta∣tion. of the Text, to set upon this great work of crucifying the flesh, let the proud man labour to crucify his pride, the voluptu∣ous man his pleasures, the worldly man his covetousnesse, the cho∣lerick man his anger: here's a great work indeed, it cannot be done easily: There's required sweat and blood, there's much di∣ligence; A Christian must be in fastings, and watchings often: of∣ten tugging hard at the oare, often in prayer, and wrastling with God. It's a greater victory for a man to conquer his pride, an∣ger, earthly mindednesse, &c, Then to take a City by storme, Prov. 16. 32. I will cast in further two or three Considerations, to move us to this duty impartially. 1. Consider execution of justice upon Gods enemies is accep∣table Consid. 1. Execution of justice is ac∣ceptable un∣to God. unto him, after Achan was stoned, the vally of Achor was a dore of hope, Hos. 2. 14. The workes of the flesh are enemies to God, and must be destroyed impartially. 2. If we be not the death of sinne, it will be the death of us, Consid. 2. If we kill not sin, it will kill us. it will bring eternall death: shall not we rather kill then be killed, rather slay sinne and destroy it, then let it slay and destroy us? E∣very sinne is destructive to the soule, theres a pit of destruction whereinto sinners fall, Psal. 55. 23. 3. Of all sinnes those that are most pleasing to flesh and blood, Consid. 3. &c. delightfull sinnes those are most pernicious and destructive to the soule: Immoderate mirth and jollity at Ammons Feast, were the harbingers of his ruine: when his heart was merry with wine, then was he slaine. Lets then every one beware of the Syren songs of the flesh, let us not hearken to them least we be inchanted there∣with to our utter destruction. But I proceed to a fourth Use for Examination. Here's the Ʋse 4. For Examinat.
grand Question to be put home unto us all, whether we are such persons, that have Crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts? Ans. For Answer hereunto, by way of Character, Ile set down the Properties of a crucified person. 1. A crucified person hath his affections crucified to the deeds 1. Cruci∣fixion of the affections. of the flesh, hee's none of those of whom the Apostle speaks, Rom. 8. 5. who mind the things of the flesh: The word is . Now a crucified person doth not rellish nor savour fleshly things, his love, desires, hopes, Joyes are not fixt upon carnall, sensuall plea∣sures: what a wonderfull change is here wrought? when as in the state of unregeneracy, carnall lusts, sensuall pleasures, took up a mans joy, desire, and delight, his discourses, heart, pleasure and all. These were carried downe with this stream, but after God had broke in upon the heart, and renewed the mind, and sancti∣fied the affections, the man becomes another manner of man, what he formerly lov'd now he hates: what he formerly most rejoyced in, are now his greatest burthens and causes of sorrow: and whats the reason! Because he is a mortified person, he hath mortified his members (as the Apostle speaks) Col. 3. 5. and not only parti∣cular members, but the whole body likewise, even the deeds of the body, Rom. 8. 13. 2. A crucified person hath a quickning vertue from Christ, 2. There's quickning vertue from Christ. to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, as love, joy, peace, long-suffer∣ing, gentlenesse, goodnesse, &c. Gal. 5. 22. A crucified person is dead, and alive, (i. e.) dead to the workes of the flesh, and alive to the fruits of the spirit. By vertue of Christs death sinne is mor∣tified, and by vertue of his resurrection, we are raised up to new∣nesse of life. 3. A crucified person is weary of the world. The world is a 3. A cruci∣fied man is weary of the world. burthen to him, and what's the Reason, but because the love of the world is enmity against God. A man upon the crosse, O what paines doth he endure! his heart hankers not after honours, plea∣sures, pompe and vanities: hereupon the Apostle glorieth upon the crosse of Christ: By whom (saith he) the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. But with a caution you must understand this. A man may not be so weary of the world, as to be impatient of life, and unwilling to live against the will of God, with Job, we must wait our appointed time till our change come, Job. 13. 14. Much lesse may any hasten their owne death, and be their
own executioner, this is selfe murther. It was said of Cleombrotus that when he had read over Plato's book of the Immortality of the Soule, he threw himselfe down a steep Rock to be made par∣taker of immortality, this was a desperate act of wickednesse. But my meaning is this, we being crucified unto the world, dare not set up our rest, our hearts, our affections upon the world: we cannot be satisfied with worldly accommodations, and pleasures: the soule can take no acquiescency in earthly things, O how ma∣ny are there that are acquainted with God, of the Apostles mind, Phil. 1. 23. Who have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ. 4. All crucified person live another life, then the men of the Charact. 4. A crucified person lives another life then the men of the world doe. world do, they live a life that the world is not acquainted with all, and that is a life of faith, Gal. 2. 20. This life gives them a sacred acquaintance with God, a sight of him that is invisible, (as was said of the Patriarchs) Heb. 11. 21. Hereupon it comes to passe that they mind heavenly things, have their conversation in heaven, and set their affections on things above, and not on things below. This life of faith is a heavenly life, it causeth a Christian to find a heaven upon earth, it's the sweetest of all lives, none like there∣unto. 5. I proceed to a fifth Use for Direction, and this use I shall cast Ʋse 5. For Direction. into two heads. 1. What we are to crucify. 2. What duties are especially requisite for the crucifixion of them. Q. 1. What we are to crucify? 1. All inor∣dinate affe∣ctions. 1. What we are to crucify? For Answer, its said in the Text affections, and lusts, more particularly. 1. All inordinate affections ought to be crucified as immo∣derate love of any earthly thing, Rachel was so importunate for children, as she said in a great passion, Give me children or else I dye, and so for joy, the Rich man in the Gospell did sing a Requi∣em unto himselfe, and said to his soule eate, drinke, and be merry. Thus voluptuous men desire pleasures, and Ambitious men desire honours, and rich men hope in their riches, and say to the wedge of Gold thou art our confidence. 2. All Ruling lusts are to be crucified, Pride, Passion, Envy, 2. Ruling corrptions must be cru∣cified. these are to be crucified, those three are to be crucified especially, viz. the Lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life.
And theres great reason why Ruling lusts should be crucified. 1. Because Ruling lusts are the fountaine of all mischiefe, Jam. 4. 1. 2. They are the soules enemies, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 3. They allure and entice the soule to evill, 2 Pet. 2. 18. Now these impediments being thus removed, the duties that are to be put in practice are these. 1. To inquire after, and get a knowledge of the evill and great Dut. 1. In∣quire into the evill of sinne. mischiefe, which the waies of sinne, and the pursuits of carnall Lusts bring unto the soule, they are deceitfull, Eph. 4. 22. We expect this and the other satisfaction from them, and they beguile and deceive our expectations, they are called foolish and hurtfull lusts, 1 Tim. 6. 9. Destructive, worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 12. Dut. 2. Be acquainted with the pleasures of Godliness. Dut. 3. Stu∣dy the beau∣ty & riches of Christ. 2. Be well acquainted with the pleasure, and profit in the waies of Godlinesse: for pleasure, Prov. 3. 17. for profit, 1 Tim. 4. 8. 3. Study the Beauty, Riches, and all the excellencies that are in Christ, Christ is beauty it selfe, he is the fairest of ten thousands, for riches he hath all treasures, for wisdome he is the wisdome of the Father. Had men their senses exercised, and their understan∣dings inlightend, they would not be such fooles as to pursue bru∣tish pleasures and vaine delights, and in the meane time neglect their pretious soules. Had men their eyes in their heads, they would not make merchandise of trifles, and neglect the pearle of price: but multitudes there are now a daies, who bestow more paines to satisfy a lust, then to get Jesus Christ, and with lesse paines they might get Christ, then get a lust satisfied. 4. Give not the least liberty to the flesh to sinne. Christians Dut. 4. Give not liberty to the flesh to sinne. have great liberty by Christ, but no liberty to sinne, no allow∣ance in any lust, not for a Cloake of Malitiousnesse, 1 Pet. 2. 16. Saints are not the Servants of Corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 19. 5. Labour to keep thy body undefiled, Know yee not that your Dut. 5. Keep thy body un∣defiled. body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Shall I prostitue my body to Mammon? &c. Shall a lust be entertained in Gods Temple, shall a base lust be where Gods Temple should be? Christ will not dwell in a polluted body, in a cage of uncleane birds. Dut. 6. Be a fighting against eve∣ry corrupti∣on. 6. Be a fighting, wrastling, and strugling against every corrup∣tion, never lay down thy armes, but hold up thy weapons fight∣ing against every corruption. Labour to destroy the flesh by the
sword of the spirit, take the whole armour of God as you are ex∣horted, Eph. 6. 13. 7. And lastly, apply Christ crucified home unto your owne Dut. 7. Ap∣ply Christ crucified unto the soule. soules, and believe that Christ is not only crucified for us, but that we are crucified with him. Where this faith is, sinne shall have no dominion over you. Believe that Christ is able to sub∣due thy lusts, and mortify thy corruptions, and therefore go to him for strength to conquer thy lusts, and begge that he would beate downe Satan under thy feet, believe that help is laid on Christ who is mighty, and that he is able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. Do thou thy duty in striving against sinne, and ap∣ply Christ by faith, and believe that theres vertue in his blood, to cure thee of all diseases: His blood is the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel: His blood is mor∣tifying blood, cleansing, healing, meritorious blood. Go then to Christ for victory against sinne, Christ is the great Phisitian only able to heale thee. He is a Counsellour for wisdome, a Rock for strength, a Treasure for riches, a Fountaine opened: Theres fulnesse in him, Col. 1. 19. compare this with Joh. 1. 16. And of his fulnesse, we have received grace for grace. 6. The sixth Use is for Consolation unto Gods Children, who Ʋse 6. For Consolation. have been thus imployed, in striving to crucify sinne, and in some good measure they have obtained victory: this is an excel∣lent imployment, to be wrastling against corruption, beating downe the body, bringing it into subjection. But it will be objected, That sinne is in the best of Gods chil∣dren,  and notwithstanding all their strivings, and struglings, they cannot get rid of sinne, whilest they are in this world. Ans. 1. You must know, that in this life there are imperfe∣ctions  in the best, and an absolute perfection cannot be attained till we come to heaven. 2. Sinne though it is, yet it Reignes not in the Regenerate, Rom. 6. 12. vers. 14. 3. The Regenerate make not a trade of sinne, 1 Joh. 3. 9. They are said  but not . 4. Sinne is the griefe, disease, burthen of Regenerate men, wherefore they grieve that they sinne, and would faine be in that condition where they may sinne no more, hereupon they crye out for a deliverer, Rom. 7. 24.
5. It's the endeavour of Regenerate persons to conquer every sinne, they allow not themselves in sinne, they strive to destroy bosome sinnes, Ps. 18. 23. 6. God accepts of Evangelicall Perfection. (i. e.) sincere In∣tentions, and endeavors, for action; the will for the deed. Where∣fore then though flesh remaines as well as spirit, yet the spirit at length will prevaile, and returne conqueror, and herein consists the great conquest of Christians, to conquer the flesh, to subdue all inordinate affections, and insatiable desires: and this is that which I have prest from my Text, To crucify the flesh with its af∣fections and lusts.
GODS LOVE IN CHRIST, DISCOVERED. From Rom: 5. vers. 8. But God commendeth his love towards us, in that whilest we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. THE Apostle having disputed at large, the Do∣ctrine Sermon 6. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. March 20. 1658. of Justification by faith; concludes by way of inference, that singular priviledges, graces and benefits are the peculiar portion of a justi∣fied person. Justification is the root, and the following graces are the fruit: Justification the mother grace, they the issue or Daughters: viz. Peace of consci∣ence, vers. 1. Accesse to the Throne of Grace, vers. 2. Joy in tribu∣lation, vers. 2. Patience, vers. 3. Experience, vers. 4. Hope, vers. 4. And the ground of this hope, is the love of God, vers. 5. Not that love whereby we love him, but whereby he loveth us: It's said . We have a sensible feeling of this love, and this is not a delusion of our owne fancy, but it is the ef∣fectuall working of the Holy Ghost. A singular Instance of this love appeares by the death of Christ; wherein we have, 1. The season,  according to the due time and fittest 1. The sea∣son. season, this is the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the ac∣cepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. The most conveni∣nient time, even now when the fulnesse of time was come, Gal. 4. 4. But when the fulnesse of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman, made under the law, &c. 2. The condition of the persons, for whom it's expressed by two 2. The Con∣dition of the Persons. words;  infirme impotent persons, unable altogeather to
help and deliver themselves: And  ungodly, such as left Gods true worship, and defil'd themselves with Idolatry: Now the love of Christ is further amplified by a comparison, vers. 7. let's compare Christ's love with the love of men, vers. 7. For scarce∣ly for a righteous man will one dye, yet per adventure for a good man some would even dare to dye: . By a righ∣teous man, we understand an innocent, godly, inoffensive, just dealing man: By a good man here we understand an usefull, ser∣viceable man: a publick spirited man, a Patriot for his countrey, one that hath shewed much goodnesse to us, Justus reddens cuique quod suum est; Bonus qui beneficus est, ac bene à multis meritus: (as some of the Learned observe.) But what's this in comparison of the love of Christ: All the love of creatures in comparison of Christ's love, is not so much as the drop to the Ocean. Note the incomparable unparrelled love of Christ to sinners in my Text. But God commendeth his love unto us, in that while we were yet sin∣ners, Christ died for us. Wherein observe these Remarkable Par∣ticulars. 1. The greatnesse of Gods love , Commendat, verbum Insignem & summe com∣mendabilem esse ostendit. Beza. Commendare significat, aut confirmare, (as Aretius observes:) It signifieth testatum facere, as Budaeus and Demosthenes use the word. 2. The Proofe or Evidence of this love, by Christ's death, . 3. The condition of the persons, sinners,  rebellious sinners, such in whom sinne raigned, who were wholy under the power of sinne, in their blood in a loathsome filthy condition. All are sinners, they have no truth in them that deny it, 1 Joh. 1. 8. But here by sinners (saith Qui toti vi∣tiosi sunt, ac peccato addi∣cti. Calv. in Loc. Calvin) are understood such: Who are wholly vitious and addicted unto sinne. We read that God hear∣eth not sinners, Joh. 9. 31. For these sinners Christ died, for ene∣mies, rebells, polluted, lyeing in their filth, these Christ loved and washed. No fore sight of their faith, & repentance moved him to pitty them, only his love. For these he died, and this is an unpar∣rellel'd demonstration of the love of God, and of Jesus Christ. I shall comprise the whole of my meditations, in one fundamentall Doctrine. That the death of Christ for sinners, is an evident demonstra∣tion  of the love of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
This I shall () unfold by Explication, Confirmation, and particular Application. 1. For Explication. I propound these Queries. Query 1. Wherein consists this love of God the Father? Ans. In sending of his Sonne, his beloved Son, his only Son, the Son of his bosome. God might have impowred an Angell and sent him, but the mission of his Son: sets forth love inexpressible. Theres , Joh. 3. 16. He so loved the world that he gave his only begotten sonne: that whosoever believ in him, shall not pe∣rish, but have everlasting life. And further we read, 1 Joh. 4. 9. In this was manifested the love of God towards us, because that God sent his only begotten sonne into the world, that we might live through him. God left the fallen Angells without a Saviour, but took pit∣ty on lost man, God would never be reconciled to the fallen An∣gells, but from eternity he contrived a way to reconcile man unto himselfe, 2 Cor. 5. 19. To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himselfe, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation. This is love be∣yond compare. The duty that belongs unto us is, 1. To admire at this great infinite love, to get our hearts rai∣sed up in the high contemplation of this love. 2. Lets be thankfull; we can never be thankfull enough. E∣ternity will be too little, to praise God, and blesse him for so great love. 3. Let love beget love, love must be reciprocall, 1 Joh. 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us. 4. Let this love of God cause us to love one another, 1 Joh. 4. 11. Beloved if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. 5. Let this ingage us to obedience, and holynesse in our conver∣sations, Joh. 14. 15. If yee love me keep my Commandments. Query 2. Wherein consists this love of Christ? Ans. In dyeing for us: The greatnesse of Christs love in dyeing for us may be inhanced in these singularities. 1. In that he died voluntarily. 2. If we consider the greatnesse of his sufferings. 3. If we consider the persons for whom. 1. Christ died voluntarily, I gave my back to the smiter, and 1. Christ di∣ed volunta∣rily. my cheeks to those that pluckt of the haire. I hid not my face from shame and spitting, Isai. 50. 6. And Joh. 10. 17, 18. Therefore
doth my Father love me, because I lay downe my life, that I may take it againe. No man taketh it from me, but I ay it down of my selfe: I have power to lay it downe, and power to take it againe: This com∣mandment have I received of my Father. Christ if he pleased, could have defended himselfe from his enemies, he could have had legions of Angells in his defence: but in obedience to his Fa∣ther to fulfill the scripture, in love to his owne, he freely, and voluntarily resigned himselfe to his Fathers pleasure, and drunk that cup which his Father gave him. And question lesse this was great love for Christ freely and willingly to lay down his life. 2. Consider the greatness of Christ's sufferings. 2. Consider the greatnesse of Christ's sufferings. He endured contempt, reproach, spitting, buffetting, reviling, they called him Samaritan, Impostor, Devill, they scourged him, crowned him with thornes, wagged their heads at him, Insulted over him, and at last they put him to suffer that most shamefull, painfull, cursed death of the Crosse. This Crucifixion was a Roman punishment. That's evident from Joh. 18. 31, 32. Then said Pilate unto them, take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jewes there∣fore said unto him, it is not lawfull for us to put any man to death, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should dye. And to set forth the humiliation of Christ, you may read, Phil. 2. 8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himselfe and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse. Implying this was the greatest of Punishments, Quid dicam in crucem tollere? (saith Cicero.) In this punishment of Cru∣cifixion, we are to consider these Aggravations. 1. Shame. 1. The Shame; they were crucified (usually) stark naked: Most writers say Christ was so crucified. Believe not your painters who put a cloath before him, they are teachers of lyes. The com∣mon custome was, that they who were cruciied, were stript na∣ked as they came into the world: and so they suffered ignominy. And a further shame and disgrace appeares in this: that Christ was crucified without the walls, as unworthy to be within the walls. Barabbas a theife and murtherer was released, and Christ was cru∣cified between two theives, as if he had been their Captaine: this Circumstance sets forth the ignominy and disgrace put upon Je∣sus Christ. 2. In this punishment of Crucifixion we are to consider a curse, 2. A Curse. Deut. 21. 23. His body shall not remaine all night upon the tree, but
thou shalt in any wise bury him that day: for he that is hanged is ac∣cursed of God: that thy land be not defiled which the Lord thy God gives thee for an inheritance. There was a legall curse, put upon this death, Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree. Now for the Son of God, the fountaine of all blessings, in whom all Nations of the earth should be blessed, to stand upon the Crosse like an accursed man, the Sun was a∣shamed, and withdrew his light, and the earth trembled. 3. In this punishment consider paine, extremity of paine, a lin∣gring 3. Paine. death: This was a terrible and dolorous paine. His body was extended, stretched out, like stretching out upon a Rack. Of the Passion of Christ we are to understand, Psal. 22. 14, 16. I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joynt: my heart is like wax, its melted in the midst of my bowells. For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me, they peir∣ced my hands and my feet. Where the sinewes met in the palmes of his hands, and in the feet, where the paine was most acute, there they peirced him. It was not with Christ, as with many, who are stupefied, and in whom extremity of paine blunteth the sense thereof, but Christ was in perfect sense all the while: And six houres in extremity of paine he hung upon the Crosse: and was sensible as much at the last as at the first. Never was any sor∣row, like unto his sorrow: He sweat drops of blood, was in an a∣gony, was despised, rejected, reproached, and at last was crucified: All these Considerations inhance the greatnesse of Christs suffer∣ings, and his love towards us. 3. Consider for whom Christ died, not for friends but enemies, 3. For whom Christ died. Vers. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: Not for righteous, and good men: but for sinners, and bad men: not for strong, but weak: not for faithfull subjects, but re∣bells Christ died. Now this love is beyond all compare: Now the consideration of Gods love and our unworthynesse, should ingage us to love and thankfulnesse, as Tantae dile∣ctionis Dei, & indignitatis nostrae consi∣deratione demittamus Cristas in Dei judicio, ac toto corde eum redamemus ut non totos in ivam gratitudinis hostiam vicissim consecremus, Pareus in Loc. Pareus observes on the place. To lay downe his life for his friends, had been great love, Joh. 15. 13. greater love hath no man then this, that a man lay downe his life for
his friend: But to lay downe his life, for enemies, for sinners, un∣worthy persons, this love is a none such. Christ died for the ungodly. He said live when they were in their blood, Ezek. 16. 6. And when I passed by, thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood: I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. He found none at all godly, lovely, holy, but made them so. How many of those that imbrued their hands in Christ's blood, were converted by one of Peters sermons; Christ prayed upon the Cross for his enemies; Luk. 23. 34. Then said Jesus Father, forgive them: for they know not, what they doe. The Duties we ought to learne from the consideration of this great love of Christ, in laying down his life for sinners; are First, That in Zach. 12. 10. And I will poure upon the house of Dut. 1. To mourne over Christ. David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me, whom they have peir∣ced, and thy shall mourne for him, as one mourneth for his only sonne, and shall be in bitnernesse for him, as one that is in bitternesse for his first borne. Seconly, To crucify sinne, which crucified Christ: Thus the Dut. 2. To crucify sin. Apostle professeth, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ: Never∣thelesse I live: yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himselfe for me. Thirdly, Set an inestimable price upon the meanes of our re∣demption: Dut. 3. Set a high va∣lue upon the price of our redemption. that price of blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. For asmuch as yee know that yee were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vaine conversation received by tradition from your Fathers: But with the pretious blood of Christ, as of a lambe without blemish and without spot. Fourthly, Look for no salvation else where, Act. 4. 12. Nei∣ther Dut. 4. Look for salvati∣on through Christ only. is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. 1 Tim. 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, that man Christ Jesus. Joh. 17. 3. And this is life eternall, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Fifthly, Let us live unto Christ, which died for us, 2 Cor. 5. Dut. 5. Live unto Christ. 15. And that he died for all, that they which live, should not hence
forth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. Sixtly, Let our hearts be warmed, with love to Christ. 2 Cor. Dut. 6. Be warm'd with love to Christ. 5. 14. For the love of Christ constraines us, because we thus judge: that if one died for all, then were all dead. The apprehension of Christs great love unto us, should ingage us to love him a∣gaine. Qry 3. Is this so great a matter for Christ to dye, and to lay downe his life for publick good? Did not many others lay down their lives for the publick, as Codrus for the Athenians, Meneceus for the Thebans: Curtius threw himselfe into a gulfe, to preserve Rome from pestilence. Nisus would have died for Eurylus, Pila∣des for Orestes &c. Where then lieth the difference. Ans. 1. Heathens that laid downe their lives, were not inno∣cent persons, they were sinners: Christ was innocent, no sinner: a Lamb without blemish, no gile was found in his mouth. 2. Heathens laid downe their lives, out of principles of praise, and vaine glory: Christ laid his life in love to his Father, love to the elect. 3. Heathens gave their lives, at the instigation of Satan, having no thought to please God: but Christ gave himselfe in obedience to his Father, to do his will. 4. Heathens died, that their deaths might be esteemed glorious, and honourable: but Christ offered himselfe to the ignominious death of the Crosse. 5. They died for to obtaine some temporall deliverance, but by Christ we obtaine eternall deliverance. 6. They died for their Countrey and friends, but Christ died for his enemies. These things being premised by way of Explica∣tion. I come now to the Confirmation of the point: To which purpose I shall lay downe these Propositions, and they are Aeter∣nae veritais. 1. God the Father from all Eternity, contrived this admirable Proposit. 1. God from all eternity contrived the way of Redempti∣on by Jesus Christ. way of redemption by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19. To wi, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himselfe, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and hath committed unto us, the word of recon∣ciliation. Rev. 13. 8. And all that dwell upon the face of the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the booke of life of the Lamb, slaine from the foundation of the world. This transaction
was not of yesterday, but decreed, and contrived, and intended from all eternity. God reprobated the fallen Angells, and left them without a Saviour, for Christ shed not a drop of blood for them. They before the foundation of the world, were decreed to eternall punishments: But for lost man, a Saviour was decreed; and this was God's intendment before all time. Questionlesse this is exceeding great love, and an evident Character of the love of God the Father. 2. Christ was an innocent holy person, without the least sinne: Proposit. 2. Christ was an innocent Person. There was no deceit in his mouth. Isai. 53. 9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death: Because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. He was most holy, harmlesse, undefiled. 1 Pet. 1. 19. We were redeemed with the pretious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and with∣out spot. Christ was the beloved Son of God, in whom the Fa∣ther was well pleased. Matth. 3. 17. And e, a voice from heaven, saying, this is my beloved sonne, in whom I am well pleased. Christ was the only Son, and beloved Son: now for God the Father to send his Son, his only Son, his beloved Son, not to raigne, but to serve: not to live a life of honour, and glory in the world, but to be despised, rejected, wounded, and endure the shamefull, painfull, and cursed death of the Crosse, Never was any love like unto this: Of this we read, Joh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believeth on him should not pe∣rish, but have everlasting life. And likewise, 1 Joh. 4. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sinnes. 3. Christ who was sent, was God: God-man in one person? Proposit. 3. Christ is God-man in one Per∣son. The divine person assumed an humane nature. Christ was the Word, and the Word was God, and Christ that substantiall Word was made flesh, Joh. 1. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. And this is the great myste∣ry of Godlinesse mentioned: 1 Tim. 3. 16. And without controver∣sy, great is the mistery of godlinesse: God was manifest in the flesh, ju∣stified in the spirit, seen of Angells, preached unto the Gentiles, belie∣ved on in the world, received up into glory. Christ was God from all Eternity: Joh. 8. 58. Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. There he speaks of his Godhead:
A further proofe we have, Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the forme of God, thought it not robbery to be equall with God. Compare this with Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword, against my shepheard, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts: smite the shepheard, and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turne mine hand upon the little ones. This is love unparrelleld, unexpressible. 4. Christ himselfe, voluntarily undertook this great work of Proposit. 4. Christ vo∣luntarily undertook the worke of our Re∣demption. our redemption, he laid down his own life freely: And because the Godhead could not suffer death, he united our nature unto himselfe; and took flesh upon him. There are two words setting forth his humiliation, Phil. 2. 7. ; he made himselfe of no reputation &c. Joh. 1. 14. , and he dwelt among us, &c. He took the man hood, as if he should unite a clodde of dust unto himselfe, who was God from all Eternity. As if the An∣tient of daies should become the infant of daies, the Eternall God become a Child. As if he, that the heaven of heavens could not containe, should be inclosed nine months in the wombe of a Vir∣gin. Thus it was in respect of his humane nature, he was born of Virgin, wrapt in swadling cloathes, laid in a manger. He who had heaven and earth at his command, was laid in a manger. Herein appeares the singular love of Christ, in condescending to take mans nature, to take a body, that he might accomplish the great work of our redemption, by suffering upon the crosse. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he saith: sa∣crifice, and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me: In burnt offerings and sacrifice for sinne, thou hast had no plea∣sure: Then said I, loe, I come (in the volumne of the book it is writ∣ten of me) to do thy will, O God. 5. Christ by his active and passive obedience made full, com∣pleate, Proposit. 5. Christ by his obedience hath made full satisfa∣ction. and absolute satisfaction to his Fathers Justice: for all those that were given him by the Father, Rom. 3. 25. Whom God hath set forth to be a Propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousnesse for the remission of sinnes, that are past through the for∣bearance of God. To the same effect the Apostle speaks, Eph. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, yee, who sometimes were farre off; are made nigh by the blood of Christ, Col. 1. 20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himselfe, by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or in hea∣ven. Christ gave himselfe a sacrifice, to expiate for sinne; He trod
the winepresse of his Fathers sury. By his stripes we are healed, who his owne selfe bare our sinnes in his owne body on the tree, that we 1 Pet. 2. 24. being dead to sinne, should live unto righteousnesse, by whose stripes we are healed. He is the reconciler, Col. 1. 20. The price of our redemption , 1 Cor. 6. 20. For yee are bought with a price, Matth. 20. 28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministred unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransome for ma∣ny. See Christ's great end of coming into the world, , to give his life a ransome for many; Christ is the high Priest, that entred into the holy of holiest, and offered up himselfe a sacrifice: Thereby as a surety, he paid our debt; satisfied his Fathers justice to the utmost, Isai. 53. 5, 11. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniqui∣ties, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. He shall see of the travell of his soule, and be satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall beare their iniquities. And this is a thorough satisfaction, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he hath made him to be sinne for us, who knew no sinne, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himselfe for us, that he might redeeme us from all iniquity; and purify unto himselfe a peculiar people, zealous of good workes. Here∣by we are justified, Rom. 5. 9. Much more being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, through him, Hereby we are sanctified, Rev. 1. 5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithfull witnesse, and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his owne blood. Feare not, we are now made nigh, Eph. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, yee, who were farre of, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. By him we are reconciled, Col. 1. 20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himselfe: by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or in heaven. By Christ we are blessed, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ hath redeemed us from the Curse of the law, being made a Curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree; that the blessing of Abraham might come upon us. And that Christ doth fully satisfy, is evident, because he continually inter∣ceds for his people, and pleads the vertue and benefit of his per∣fit satisfactionion, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the utmost, that come unto God through him, seeing he ever liveth,
make intercession for them. And what was the motive, that moved him to do all this for his people, to be incarnate, to live on earth amongst sinners, to suffer reproaches, contempts, and infamies? what moved him to drinke that bitter Cup, to poure his blood out of his side, and become obedient unto the death of the Crosse? Nothing moved him, but his love, his good will: his compassion moved him to heale bodily diseases; and his compassi∣on, love, and mercy, moved him to heale soule diseases. 6. This love of Christ is a distinguishing, speciall love, for a pe∣culiar Proposit. 6. The Love of Christ is a distinguish∣ing Love. sort of people. He sweat drops of blood in the garden, he was afflicted, smitten, wounded; but all this he endured for the transgression of his own people; Isai. 53. 8. He was taken from prison, and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off, out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he striken. He hath a peculiar seed, Isai. 53. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to griefe: when thou shalt make his soule, an offering for sinne, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his daies, and the pleasure of the Lord, shall prosper in his hands. He is the Saviour of his body, Eph. 5. 28. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church: and he is the Saviour of the body. He layeth downe his life, only for his sheepe, Joh. 10. 15. As the Father knoweth me, even so I know the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheepe. Now hence those false doctrines of Generall redemption are discarded altogether. Christ doth not pray for all, Joh. 17. 9, 10. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me, for they are thine: And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glori∣fied in them. And we read, Joh. 13. 11. He knew who should betray him, therefore said he, yee are not all cleane. He doth not call all, justify all, nor elect all, for only few are chosen: and therefore all are not partakers of this distinguishing love. Yet notwithstanding these fundamentall truths, there are many Objections, which I would Answer, before I make particular application of this do∣ctrine. Its objected, that it is unjust for the innocent to be punished  for the nocent, for Christ holy and just to be punished for man that was unjust, unholy. We are to distinguish of sinne and guilt inherent, and sinne and  guilt imputed. In Christ was no inherent sinne and guilt, but there
was sinne and guilt imputed; For Christ was made sinne for us, and took our nature upon him, and was our surety: And it is no injustice to make a surety pay the debt, whereunto he voluntari∣ly ingaged. Christ freely, & voluntarily undertook the great work of reconciliation for lost man, and he willingly laid downe his life for his sheepe. No man took away his life from him. But 2. Its Objected, how can Christs blood, which was shed a∣bove  1600 yeares agoe, be effectuall now. This we are to believe, that though Christ suffered once, yet  the vertue of the suffering remaines to all eternity: For it was the blood of God, (This being understood by communication of Idioms,) of him that was  God and man, his blood was precious blood, cleansing, mortifying, healing blood: The blood of sprinkling which speaks better things, then the blood of Abel. The Church is the purchase of his blood. Act. 20. 28. Take heed there∣fore unto your selves, and to all the flockes which the Holy Ghost hath made you Overseers: to feed the Church of God, which he hath pur∣chased with his owne blood. This is redeeming blood, Eph. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgivenesse of sins, according to the riches of his grace. It is peace-making blood, Col. 1. 20. And having made peace through the blood of his Crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himselfe: by him I say, whether they be things in earth or in heaven. We are made white in the blood of the Lambe, Rev. 7. 14. And I said unto him, Sir thou knowest: And he said to me, these are they which come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lambe. We are washed from our sinnes in his blood, Rev. 1. 5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithfull witnesse, and the first be∣gotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his blood. So then Christs blood is a fountaine, that can never be drained dry, it wit∣nesseth our regeneration. 1 Joh. 5. 8. And there are three that bear witnesse in earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one. But 3. It will be Objected, if Christ died for sinners, then all  shall be saved: otherwise the remedy would not be proportiona∣ble to the disease, the plaister would not be as broad as the sore? 1. Theres a sufficiency of Merit in Christ; the Medicine is of in∣finite  value.
2. But 2. this medicine is only applied effectually unto some pe∣culiar persons. Neither doth this derogate a whit from Christs merits, in that his redemption is not equally extended unto all. But the riches of his mercy are the more inhanced, in that they are ef∣fectuall to some. 3. It was not the intention of God the Father, nor of Christ, that all should be redeemed. Christs Redemption only is appro∣priated to believers. Joh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. 4. Only those have redemption by Christs blood, who are re∣deemed from their vaine conversation, and those are Gods chil∣dren, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch, as yee know that yee were not redeem∣ed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vaine con∣versations received by tradition of your Fathers. But these are not the whole world, for the whole world lyes in wickednesse. I shall now come unto Application, And I shall make foure Applicat. Uses of the Doctrine. 1. For Information. 2. For Examination. 3. For Exhortation. Ʋse 1. For Informa∣tion. 4. For Consolation. The first Use is for Information, and that in severall parti∣culars. 1. Be informed of the greatnesse of the love of God, Eph. 2. 4. 1. This is great love. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he hath loved us. 1 Joh. 3. 1. Behold what manner of love the Father hath be∣stowed upon us, that we should be called the sonnes of God. 2. Be informed that this love is unparrelleld, let there be made 2. This love is unparral∣leld. locus à comparatis. The love between Jonathan and David, is not to be compared to the love of Christ unto his Church, Eph. 5. 25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himselfe for it. The love of a tender Mother, is not to be compared to the love of God, Isai. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that shee should have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget yet will not I forget thee. 3. This love is free, undeserved by any Creature, Ezek. 16. 6. 3. This love is undeser∣ved. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: yea, I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood, live. There is no fides praevisa, to move God: The Apostle determines, Rom. 9. 11, 12, 13. For the Chil∣dren being not yet borne, neither having done any good, or evill, that the purpose of God according to election might stand; not of workes, but of him that calleth.) It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. 4. This love is incomprehensible, inexpressible, Eph. 3. 18, 19. 4. This love is incompre∣hensible. That yee may be able to comprehend, with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that yee might be filled with all the fulnesse of God. 5. It is an eternall love, Joh. 13. 1. Now before the feast of the 5. This love is eternall. passeover, when Jesus knew that his houre was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, (having loved his owne, which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.) Jer. 31. 3. The Lord hath appeared of old, unto me, saying: Yea I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindnesse have I drawne thee. The second Use is for Examination, whether we are of that Ʋse 4. For Examina∣tion. number, which hath interest in this love. We are to distinguish of severall sorts of love. There's Amor benevolentiae & Complacentiae. For that there is Amor benevolentiae, hence appeares munificentia & . God doth good to all, makes the Sun to shine on the just, and unjust. That which we are to inquire of, is that which is called Amor complacentiae, appropriated only unto Gods children, What evidences may be given, that we have interest in this di∣stinguishing love? The 1. Signe is Sanctification, it's God's order and we may Signe 1. Sanctifica∣tion. not break it, Rev. 1. 5. Ʋnto him that loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his blood. If thou canst prove that thy nature is chang∣ed by the sanctifying vertue of God's spirit, thou maiest con∣clude that thou art one, that hath interest in the speciall love of God. 2. Those that have interest in this speciall love of God, feele a Signe 2. Constrain∣ing love of Christ. constraining power in this love, to ingage them to obedience to Gods commands, 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of Christ constraines us, because we thus judge: that if one died for all, then we are all dead.
3. By the sincerity of our love to God, we may conclude his Signe 3. Sincerity of love to God. love towards us, 1 Joh. 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us. Gods love to us, is the ground of our Assurance: our love to him, is the ground of our Evidence. Let Gods children (as Bradford that pretious man of God used to advise) lay this down for a foundation; That God loves them, and where this love is, it will shed abroad love in their hearts, even love to God, love to the brethren, love to the Ordinances, love and longing for the ap∣pearance of Christ. 4. Christ manifests his love to his people, Joh. 14. 21. He that Signe 4. Christ ma∣nifests his Love to his people. hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my selfe to him. Though he may hide himselfe for a time, yet he will embrace them with everlasting kindnesse Isai. 54 8. In a little wrath I hid my face from them for a moment, but with ever∣lasting kindnesse will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Re∣deemer. 5. Those whom God loves, with a speciall, distinguishing love, Signe 5. Christ is Lord and King. have Christ their redeemer, their Lord, King and Ruler, their Prophet to instruct them, their Priest to make satisfaction, and in∣tercession for them. This is the greatest evidence of Gods love, in giving thee his son, as in the place forecited, Joh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Which is plainly applyed to believers, and takes not in all universal∣ly, but a peculiar select company, even such only as believe. And Rom. 8. 32. He that spareth not his own son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us all things. 6. Those who have interest in this great speciall love, have Signe 6. Gods spirit dwells in them. Gods spirit, and this dwells in them. Rom. 8. 9. But yee are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you: Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Christs spirit dwells as an Inhabitant, and Ruler, and this is a witnesse, Rom. 8. 16. The spirit it selfe, beareth witnesse with our spirits, that we are the children of God: And this sealeth, and giveth earnest, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who hath also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the spirit in our hearts: and where this dwells, it may be knowne by the fruits which it bringeth forth, Gal. 5. 22, 23. But the fruit of
the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, meeknesse, temperance. The third Use is for Exhortation, and your duty I shall branch Ʋse 2. For Exhortat. into these following particulars. 1. Stand admiring, & contemplating this great love of God the 1. Admire Gods love. Father to give thee Christ; and that Christ should becomeman, be made sin, a curse, whilst that greater and nobler, richer & learneder then thy selfe should be past by: and God should give Christ for thee, that he should love thee, and wash thee, and make thee a King, and a Priest unto God: thou can'st never admire enough this un∣parralleld love of God. Eternity would even be too little, to set forth this wonderfull love of God. As there is a depth of wis∣dome, so there is a depth of mercy in God, which cannot be fathom'd. 2. Let thy heart be filled with the praises of the Lord. Lift up, 2. Be fil∣led with the praises of God. advance what in thee lyeth, the honour of God, the love of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ. God gives his Son, Christ's merits are , a price meritorious, and the Holy Spirit maketh application. How then ought we for ever to abound in praises to the Lord? The Samaritan returned back, and gave God thanks for his cleansing. So should we blesse God, that he hath made a difference by his grace, between us, and the very vilest of men what ever. Thus did Paul, 1 Tim. 1. 12. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he coun∣ted me faithfull, putting me into the Ministery: Now unto the King E∣ternall, immortall, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever, and ever Amen. 3. Love should beget reciprocall love, even Love unto God the 3. Love should be∣get love to God. Father, and Christ. If there be any spark of love, it will inkindle into a flame of Serapicall affections, David professeth, Psal. 18. 1. I will love thee O Lord, my strength. 4. This should beget love to the Brethren, Joh. 13. 35. By 4. Gods love to us should cause us to love our bre∣thren. this shall all men know that yee are my disciples, if yee love one an∣other. 1 Joh. 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren, 1 Joh. 4. 21. And this command∣ment have we from him, that he who loveth God, loveth his bro∣ther also. 5. We should place our love, where God placeth his: and our 5. love where God loveth. hatred, where he placeth his hatred. God loveth holinesse, holy
people, holy Ordinances, so should we: God hateth every sinne, so should we: Psalm. 97. 10. Yee that love the Lord, hate e∣vill. 6. We should be often inquiring, whether we be of the num∣ber 6. Enquire whether thou hast interest in Christs speciall love. Ʋse 4. For Consolation. of those, that have Interest in Christs speciall love, for whom he died. This we should frequently and seriously examine our hearts about! as I gave some evidences before, unto which I re∣ferre you. The fourth and last Use is for comfort unto all those, who have interest in this speciall love. Their speciall Benefits are these. 1. They are admitted to the Throne of Grace through Christ, Benefit 1. They are admitted unto the throne of grace. Eph. 2. 18. For through him we have both an accesse by one spirit unto the Father, They are his favorites, friends, Jewells, a Crown and Diadem of Glory: and therefore they are exhorted to draw neare with full assurance of faith, Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtaine mercy, and find grace to help in time of need: It's said , with freedome, boldnesse, or confidence. 2. All things work together for their good, Rom. 8. 28. And Benefit 2. All things worke toge∣ther for their good. we know that all things worke together for good to them that love God, to them who are called according to his purpose. They love God, & God loveth them, and nothing shall be able to hinder God's love. Their crosses, hardships, reproaches, all, shall conduce unto their good. 3. They shall feele the benefit of this love, unto all Eternity. Heb. Benefit 3. They shall feele Christs love unto all Eternity. 7. 25. Christ ever liveth to make Intercession for them. Though Satan roare, and men condemne, yet the love of Christ will comfort thee against all, Rom. 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that Justifieth: Thy sinnes and corrupti∣on administer continuall matter of Humiliation, and these will cost thee deare, whilest thou art in the valley of Bacha: but the time will come when there will be no more sighing for sinne: Sorrow and sighing will flye away: For there shall be no sorrow in heaven. 4. This may Arme us with courage, against feare of death, Ben 4. Gods love armes us wth courage against fear of death. Christ hath died and tooke away the sting. Christ hath per∣fumed the grave, He hath conquered sinne, & Satan: lead capti∣vity captive. Therefore in doubts, feares, troubles, inward and
outward, have recourse to this love of God in Christ, and this will be a Cordiall, a Salve for every sore. The consideration of Gods love unto thy Soule, will make thee undergoe hard∣ships cheerefully: kisse the Rod that beates thee. Gods love manifested in Christ, will make thee willing to live, and willing to dye: so that God may be glorified in thee, and by thee: For thou that hast Interest in this distinguishing love of God, recon∣ciled in Christ: know to thy comfort, that whether thou livest, or whether thou dyest, Jesus Christ will be unto thee in life, and in death advantage.
THE REALL PROFESSOR OF CHRISTIANITY, DISTINGUISED FROM THE NOMINALL. 2 Tim: 2. vers. 19. And let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from Iniquity. THE Apostle in the precedent words, gives adver∣tisement Sermon 7. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. July 24. 1659. concerning some notorious Hereticks, such whose words eat as a canker or Gangren. Their names are upon record to their eternall in∣famy, V. 17. Their words will eat as doth a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus. And their Heresy likewise hath a brand upon it, V. 18. Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some. Allegoricam nescio quam resurrectio∣nem fingendo. Calv. in loc. Calvin understands, that they feigned an Allego∣ricall resurrection. Estius and Gorrn concurre in the same judg∣ment; and Non suo tempore defu∣isse, qu esur∣rectionem or∣tuorum mani∣feste annti∣atam in ima∣gariam re∣surrectionem distorquerent. Tertull. de Resurrectione carnis cap. 19. Tertullian is cited in his Book de resurrectione carnis, cap. 19. In whose time there were not wanting some, who did o∣penly say that the Resurrection of the dead was imaginary. The names of the men are Hymeneus and Philetus. Anuptiarum eo. Hymeneus from the God of marriage. No∣men quasi Optatum Desideratum. Hugo. Grot. Philetus, that is a name as it were de∣sirable: (as some of the Learned observe.) Their doctrine and their mischievous consequences follow. First, For their doctrine; an erroneous and hereticall tenet is there laid downe: viz. That the resurrection is past already, (i. e.)
as Gorran, and Estius produce the opinions of those times, that the resurrection was compleated by Regeneration. And Completam ex mente isto∣rum interpre∣tantur resur∣rectionem in quotidiana a∣nimarum re∣novatione. Aug Ep. 119 ad Januari∣um. Augu∣stine himselfe in Epist. 119. unto Januarius, fastens the same opi∣nion upon them. Or else they might incline to the opinion of Marcion, that Notorious Heretick: That there was no resurrection of the body, but of the soule only. 2. Secondly, Let's consider the great mischiefe of this opinion. The Apostle tll us that their words eate as doth a Gangren. The Gangren some assimilate to a Canker, or a wolfe, which spreadeth further, and further, to the consumption of the whole body. The Originall (as Hesichius observes) is  depascor. Gangraenam medici de car∣nosa parte in∣flammationis & emortuâ intelligunt. Scultet. Scultetus saith, that by Gangren, Phisitians understand a fleshy, and dead part of inflammation. What further I shall say is this, that as a Gan∣gren frets the flesh, runs thorough the blood, and creepeth further and further, till it infect the whole body: so Heresies infect the whole man speedily, mortally, and uncurably. Wherefore let not any make a slight matter of Error and Heresy, and plead that eve∣ry one should have liberty of judgment, and that a Toleration of all sorts of opinions is very convenient, and not hurtfull. Let us observe the Apostles censure: They are Gangrens, destructive to many pretious soules and therefore may not be tolerated, and con∣nived at. Observe how the Apostle brands them for erring from the truth. The Originall is more emphaticall . In Significat Apostolus eos à scopo Chri∣stianae verita∣tis ad quam collimare de∣bebant, aber∣rasse. Estius. Estius his commentaries on the place, I find he followeth both Ambrose and Austine, and renders his own sence accordingly. The Apostle doth signify that they erred from that mark of Christian truth, at which they ought to aime. And Qui à veri∣tatis scopo ab∣errarunt. Gerrh. Gerrhard concurres in his judgment, (i. e.) they have swerved, or missed the mark. It's Non quod∣vis Erratum significatur, sed quod est ejusmodi ut fundamentum non retinea∣tur. Reza. Beza's observation on the place, that the Apostle used this word , thrice in this Epistle, which is mentioned to shew, That not every errour in Religion is signified, but an errour of that Kind that destroyeth the foundation. 3. Thirdly, The Apostle declares the issue, and mischievous successe of these Seducers, that they gaine Proselites, and followers, in the verse preceding my Text: They overthrew the faith of some. Some hereby conceive that they destroyed not the grace, but the profession of their faith: For by this heresy in denying of the resurrection, making it imaginary or spirituall, they subvert the Orthodox faith.
However heres our strong hold, that Gods foundation is firme: Mens wickednesse cannot shake that firme foundation which God hath laid. Heres a neverthelesse to support us against the Aposta∣cies of men of corrupt minds. Although they relinquish their old Principles and turne Hereticks: yet we have a firme Ground of In∣couragement, for the foundation of God standeth sure, against all the underminings of Apostates, and Heretickes. The decree of Gods election stands sure, notwithstanding the malice of the vi∣lest men, who have a spirit of contradiction. In this Proposition of eternall truth, That Gods foundation stands sure. Here are five things remarkable, and they carry a great deale of weight in them, requiring our most deliberate consideration. 1. Here is a foundation. 2. A firme and sure foundation. 3. It is the foundation of the great God unchangeable. 4. It hath a seale put to it. Things sealed are more sure and authentique. 5. Here is the omniscience of God ingaged, He knowes who are his. All true believers have their names wrote in the book of life. They are all known unto God: But as in sealing there useth to be a Counterpart when both parties seale: so God sealeth, and man sealeth. Gods eternall decree is his seale, sure and unalterable. Man's seale is his holy life and conversation. Because God know∣eth who are his, and his foundation is sure and certaine: there∣fore a stronger ingagement lyeth upon us all, to look to our lives and conversations. From the doctrine of the unchangeable decree of God, my Text inferres this practicall Use, And (which hath a connexion with what went before) Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Wherein you have consi∣derable Divis. the Name, and the Thing, or the Profession and Practice of Christianity. 1. You have the name or Profession specified in these words, 1. The name , every one that nameth, (i. e.) whoever would be repu∣ted a Christian, who takes upon him the name of Christ, and calls Qui invocat Christi nmen in eo sese Chri∣stianum ppel∣lat. Beza. Isa. 4. 1. Gen. 48. 18. himself after the name of Christ, Christian. So we read In that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying we will eate our owne bread, and weare our own apparell, only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach. And Jacob gave in chargeth this name should be named upon Ephraim and Manasseth, (i. e.) that
they should be called the Children of Israel. Such then as take upon them the Profession of Christianity, are said to name the name of Christ. 2. Heres the thing it selfe, or practice required, for an evidence 2. Here is the thing it selfe. Jewells A∣pology. of the truth of the profession: , let him depart from iniquity. This is a well-grounded Apostacy, to be an Apo∣state from inne and Satan. Learned Jewell tells us in his Apolo∣gy, that Papists accuse the Protestants of Apotacy: and saith he, It's true, we are Apostates: but such Apostates, who are godly A∣postates even from Rome, from Errours, Heresies, and Idolatries. And this Apostacy and Secession from them, is our glory, and ho∣nour. And although this is mentioned Negatively only: yet the Positive acts are necessarily included. We must abhorre that which is evill, and cleave to that which is good. We must cast off the workes of darknesse, and put on the armour of light: So Non solum nomine crede∣ret quoque ab iniquitate, de clinat à malo & faciat bo∣num. Arias Montanus. Arias Montanus expounds the place. And judicious Quisquis er∣go Deum in∣vocat, hoc est, se ex populo Dei esse profi∣tetur, ac cen∣seri vult, ab omni impieta∣te procul ab∣sit. Calv. Doct. Mr Calvin thus interprets the place, Whosoever therefore calls upon God, (i. e.) professeth himselfe to be of the people of God, and would be so thought to be, let him depart from all Iniquity. The summe and substance of the Words amount to this issue: It is not sufficient to be Christians in name, unlesse we be so in deed, and in truth. Notwithstanding the foundation is firme; Gods eternall decree, like himselfe is un∣unchangeable: yet upon presumption of our interest in the Decree of God, we may not let loose the reynes to licentiousnesse: but we must walke in all holy Conversation and Godlinesse: we must (as we are exhorted) depart from iniquity. The Words thus explained containe this obvious and funda∣mentall Doctrine. That wheresoever there is the profession of Christianity, there ought to be a Godly life, and Conversation every way sutable and cor∣respondent therewith. Or, Whoever professeth thename of Christ, ought by a thorough practice to answer his profession, and prove the sincerity thereof by an answerable walking thereunto. For the unfolding of this needfull and great Point, I shall select Method propounded. some choice Testimonies of Scripture, and then confirme the As∣sertion by strength of reason, and hope so to conclude in a pra∣cticall Application, as (through the grace of God) I may leave such deepe impressions upon your hearts, as to ingage you to re∣duce the Doctrine of the Text into practice throughout your
whole lives and conversations. To resume the Inlargement of these 1 Scripture Testimonies. Phil. 1. 27. . Tit. 2. 11, 12. 1 Joh. 3. 3. Gal. 5. 24. Jam. 3. 13. Col. 2. 6. Heads of discourse according to the Method propounded. 1. For Scripture Testimony we have many parrellel places: Let your conversation be, aecometh the Gospell of Christ. The grace of God that bringeth Salvation, hath appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should be soberly, righ∣teously, and godly in this present world. There are three choyce Ad∣verbs, . He that hath this hope in him puri∣fieth himselfe as God is pure. They that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? Let him shew out of a good Conversation his workes with meekness of wisdome. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Two things saith learned Ambulare in Christo duo de notat. per∣severare & progredi in do¦ctrinâ & fide Christi, vitam agere, juta hanc fidem. Davenant. in Col. 2. R. 1. A ho∣ly Conversa∣tion is an E∣vidence of e∣lection. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Rom. 12. 9. Dave∣nant, are imployed in that Exhortation, viz: Perseverance in the doctrine of faith, and a life regulated accordingly. 2. In the second place, for confirmation: amongst many Reasons that might be mentioned, I shall insist only on foure. 1. A holy Conversation is an Evidence of election. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure. There's great care and diligence required in the work. We need not ascend into heaven, and curiously enquire after the Decree of God: but our duty is to descend and make strict Inquisition into our own hearts, whether we be sanctified, and renewed in the spirits of our minds; whether we depart from iniquity, whether as the A∣postle exhorts, We abhor that which is evill, and cleave to that which is good. We must be assured in this grand Truth, That God, who 2 Thes. 2. 13. hath ordained to the end, hath ordained unto the means. We are bound (saith the Apostle) to give thanks alwaies to God for you, because he hath from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctifica∣tion of the spirit and beliefe of the truth. 2. When the profession and practice of Christianity meet toge∣ther, R. 2. This sheweth the sincerity of our Profes∣sion: 2 Cor. 1. 12. here's an infallible evidence of the truth, and sincerity of our profession: For our rejoycing is this, the testimony for our Conscience that in simplicity and godly incerity, not with fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. Multi∣tudes plead an interest in Christs redemption: But here's the Cri∣ticall note, To be redeemed from their vaine conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. To be new creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17. To be renewed in the spirit of their minds, Eph. 4. 23. To be made partakers the of divine Nature, 2 Pe. 1. 4.
These are the , the Markes and Characters of those, that have interest in Christ. And whoever make a profession, and pra∣cticeth not what they profeffe, they are strangers from the life of Christ, and no otherwise to be accounted of, then such who by Mapps, and reading of Authors, discourse of farre countreys, where they have never beene themselves, but only they receive things by an implicite faith upon others reports, and not by an ex∣perimentall knowledge. But hereby we have evidence of the truth of our profession, when Words and Actions, Profession and Con∣versation concurre together in a sweet harmony and mutuall e∣quipage. R. 3. Here the Gospell is adorned. 3. When Profession and Conversation meet togeather, there the Gospell is adorned. The Gospell gives not a Writ to licenti∣ousnesse, it opens no gapp to carnall liberty. It ought to be our study, and endeavour to adorne a holy Profession, by a holy Con∣versation Tit. 2. 10. Exhort servants (saith the Apostle) to be obedient &c. not purloyning, but shewing all fidelity, that they may adorne the do∣ctrine of our Saviour in all things. The great designe of Christians ought to be, to keep up the reputation of the Gospel. It is adorned, when people walk according to the Apostles charge: See that yee Eph. 5. 15. , &c. walk circumspectly: not as fooles, but as wise. The Word  in the Originall: we should be likewise  without spot and blamelesse. Holinesse only adornes our profession; and they are most beautifull, who are adorned with the graces of Gods spirit. 2 Pet. 3. 14. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her cloathing is of wrought Psal. 45. 13. Gold. And we read of broidered workes, badgers, skins, braclets, chaines, jewells, gold, ear-rings, Ezek. 16. Hence it eminently ap∣peares, that only the graces of the spirit can adorne a soule. Now when what we professe in our mouths, we make good by our pra∣ctice, When we name the name of Christ, and depart from iniqui∣ty: When we professe holinesse and live accordingly, then we a∣dorne the Gospell. For the Gospell requires holinesse, righteous∣nesse, circumspect walking, and the more holy, righteous, and cir∣cumspect a man is, the more he adornes the Gospell. 4. And lastly, Hereby we bring the greater glory to God. For R. 4. Here we bring the greater glo∣ry to God. Joh. 15. 8. God is gorified by the fruitfulnesse of his servants: Herein is my Father glorified, that yee bring forth much fruit. What is this fruit, but such as is meet for Repentance? Mat. 3. 8. Fruit unto holinesse, Rom. 6. 22. Fruits of Righteousnesse, Jam. 3. 18. And this is the
fruit the Apostle prayeth might abound in the Philippians, chap. 4. 17. That fruit might abound to their account. Now put all these Reasons together, I conceive there is strength of Argument to persuade us to the duty of the Text, viz. To de∣part from iniquity, (i. e.) to make our Profession, and Practise meet in one as lines in their proper center: considering that here∣by we prove our election sure, and our profession to be sincere, and that we adorne our profession, and bring greater glory to God. To these foure Reasons, Il'e adde only foure Uses, which are to be handled in the particular application (as I promised) and so I shall put a Period to my discourse. 1. Heres matter of Information, that a name or forme of a Pro∣fession, Ʋse 1. For Informa∣tion. an outward title or claime to Christ are altogether insuf∣ficient to Salvation. What's the forme without the power of God∣linesse? what's the name without the thing? No better then the body without the spirit, or the carcasse without the soule to ani∣mate it. Concerning Formalists we have a Caution, Having a 2 Tim. 3, 5. forme of Godlinesse: but denying the power thereof; from such turne aside. I know thy workes, (saith Christ unto the Angells of the Rev. 3. 1. Church of Sardis) that thou hast a name that thou livest: yet art dead. How many are there that rest contented, with an externall profession; because they are baptized Christians, borne in the bo∣some of the Church, where Christ is knowne, descended of Chri∣stian Parnts: and yet notwithstanding are ignorant of the life of Christ, of the Laver of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost? Some crye up their Baptisme too much (though Infant-Baptisme in my judgment, without question is Gods Ordinance) as the Jewes did the Temple, Templum Domini, Templum Domi∣ni: And yet were altogether unacquainted with the God of the Temple. Let such remember, He is not a Jew, which is one out∣wardly; Rom. 2. 28, 29. neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, who is inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter. But there are others who go yet higher in their own conceits, and because they are admit∣ted into Church-fellowship and called Saints: and reputed Church Members, therefore they think alls well with them, and their con∣dition is very safe. But who knoweth not that there are many Nominall Saints, which are farre from being Reall Saints. Many
there are that think it religion enough to joyne in such or such a Society, under such or such a Teacher, who is a leading Popular man: and yet many of them are acted by no other Principle but selfe-interest, Compliance with men, for carnall advantages. Ma∣ny Matth. 7. 20. shall say (saith Christ) in that day, Lord, we have prophecied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devills, and in thy name done Luk. 13. 26. wonderfull workes. We have eate and drunke in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets: but he shall say, I tell you I know not whence you are. How many Protestants have we at large, who are contented with the bare name of Christians, yet in their lives are Antichristians? To bid such deny their Baptisme, renounce Christ, they will tell you, they would spit in your faces: and yet their lives declare them no better then Turkes, Jewes, Atheists, without God in the world. It's a sad thing to consider that the Profession of religion, hath amongst many Tiular Professors justled out the practice; and a bare forme, and an outside profession many think sufficient: just like one of Machivells principles, Take the profession, that will do no harme: but not the practice of Religion. Psal. 51. 6. But be not deceived God, is not, God will not be mocked. The Lord requireth truth in the inward parts, God will be worshipped in spi∣rit Joh. 4. 24. and in truth. All the painted glosses, faire outsides, formall pre∣tences will be accounted no better than chaffe, straw, or stubble, at the great day of account. I am fully perswaded that since A∣dams Creation, there were never so many false conversions as now a daies. Many think they are converted, when only they are of such or such an opinion. Some are turned from Brownists to Semi-Brownists, and from Brownists to Anabaptists, from them to Familists, and afterwards to Quakers, Ranters, &c. And all these boast themselves to be Saints, and to be of the Church of Christ; though many (I censure not all) are of the Synagogue of Satan. Some poore soules are seduced by false teachers, and run like Abso∣loms followers in their simplicity, knowing nothing. Such God may in mercy bring home by a thorough change, and reformation: and make them sensible of their evill waies, and back-slidings, and in due time deliver them out of Satans snare. But multitudes there are which call themselves Saints and Christians, and have no∣thing but the bare name, witnesse their lives, farre from Saint∣ship and Christianity. How greedy are some of filthy lucre, ambi∣tious, proud, boasters, idle drones, sleepy sluggards, eating the
bread of idlenesse: when they were in a poorer condition, they were industrious and laboured abundantly in their callings, now being advanced, they grow lazie. Some in their younger yeares preached often: but now they are elder, they are more lazie, nei∣ther preaching frequently themselves, nor hearing frequently o∣thers that doe: and yet none of these, but will take it ill, if you call them not Christians and Saints too. But where's any thing of the life of Christ? Christ watched, prayed, went about doing good. Can they count themselves Disciples, who are so unsutable to their Master? Is it lawfull to take a Writ of ease, and to rest from our labours before we be dead? But leaving them, hopeing better things of you, I proceed to a second Use viz. Examination. 2. For Examination. The question is, wherein consists that Ʋse 2. For Examina∣tion. conversaion which is answerable unto our profession? I shall give an Answer in these distinguishing Characters. 1. This Conversation must be a holy Conversation. As he that Char. 1. This Conversati∣on must be holy. 1 Pet. 1. 15. Mat. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. Char. 2. This Conversati∣on must be snere. 2 Cor. 1. 12. hath called you is holy: So be yee holy in all manner of Conversation. Gods people are an holy people: Heaven is an holy place. The Society there an holy Society, the imployment an holy imploy∣ment, and only holy persons shall see the blessed vision. Blessd are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Follow peace and olinesse without the which no man shall see God. 2. This Conversation must be sincere. This is our rejoycing, e∣ven the testimony of a good Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sin∣cerity we have had our Conversation in the world. It's called there . I shall not overcuriously stand upon Criticismes, whe∣ther sincerus, sine cerâ, or . But yet I cannot let passe the word  from  sol &  judicio, an Allusion to the custome of Eagles, who held their young ones before the Sun, if they could not look up unto the Sun, then were they accompted spurious. Surely if our actions cannot endure the test, and triall of the Sun of righteousnesse, they are to be accompted spurious and illegitimate altogether. Sincerity is the constitutive difference of a Child of God, and a divisive difference which distinguieth one that feareth God, from him that feareth him not. This is that which will comfort a man in life and in death. So it did E∣noch, whose commendation it was that he walked with God, and Gen. 5. 24. Gen. 6. 9. was not for God took him. It was Noahs comfort, that he was a just
man and perfect in his generation. And it will comfort us in death, if we can sincerely professe with Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, 2 King. 20. 3. how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. Wherefore it especially concernes us all to labour after sincerity, even truth in the inward parts, that so we may approve our hearts unto God: and make it our daily exercise to keep Consciences void of offence, both towards God and towards men. 3. This Conversation must be pruden: For every wise man Char. 3. this Conversati∣on must be prudent. must order his affaires with discretion. We usually say Ignis in foco is good: but not in tecto. Many have a good cause, but through indiscretion spoile it in the carriage. There is required as well the wisdome of the Serpent, as the innocency of the Dove. Every wise woman, (saith Solomon) buildeth her house; but the foolish pulleth Prov. 14. 1. it downe with her hands. Now by wisdome. I meane not the wis∣dome of the times, (we see too much of that) Machiavilian wis∣dome, which is a turning and returning, and complying with all times and humours be they never so bad, for personall interest. This wisdome hath no portion in this businesse: But I understand spirituall wisdome, that which cometh from above, such as the Apostle mentioneth with distinguishing qualifications, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good Jam. 3. 17. fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy. Neither would I be mistaken: I count not that wisdome which alwaies joynes with the winning side at a venture, nor that which suites with the fa∣shion of ancient Persians now adaies revived, to worship the ri∣sing sun. Too many we have of that temper in these times, whom we account wise, though indeed they be errand fooles: and their wisdome like Achitophels may in time be turned into foolishnesse. But that I account wisdome which hath a spirit of discerning, to understand the things that differ, to understand what is the right rule and to walk accordingly. And to adde no more il'e rest in the determination of Job, The feare of the Lord that is wisdome, and to Job 28. 28. depart from evill is understanding. 4. And lastly. This Conversation that consists in the departing Char 4 this Conversati∣on consits in departing from ini∣quity. from iniquity, and accords with a holy profession, is Universall, thorough-paced and every way compleat. There's a threefold U∣niversality: of Subject, Object, and Time. 1. For the Subject. The whole man is ingaged to Obedience, all the members of the body and faculties of the soule, With my
whole heart have I sought thee (saith David) O let me not wander Psal. 119. 10. from thy Commandments. 2. There must be Universality of the Object. Then shall I not Psal. 119. 6. be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. 3. Universality of Time. Being delivered out of the hands of Luk. 1. 74. our enemies We must serve him without feare, in holinesse und righ∣teousnesse before him all the daies of our lives. 3. I proceed to a third Use for Exhortation, to presse home Ʋse 2. For Exhorta∣tion. unto us all the duty of the Text: To depart from Iniquity. If we be Christians let's evidence it by our Conversations, let's walke as becometh Christians. What will Heathens, Turkes, and Jewes say when Christians walke loosely and carelesly? they will blesse themselves in their owne erroneous waies, and thus by our loose walking we give advantage unto the enemies of the Lord to blas∣pheme. Amongst others take two or three motives to perswade you to your duty. 1. Consider the eye of God, his omniscience and omnipresence. Mot. 1. Con∣sider Gods Omnisci∣ence. Job. 10. 14, 15. His eye-lids try the Children of men. The eyes of the Lord are eve∣ry where beholding the evill, and the good. This was a monitor to Joseph, to David, to Job: If I sinne, then thou markest me, &c. The Lord knoweth all hearts, seeth the inmost recesse and diverticles of thy spirit. All things are naked unto him with whom thou hast to deale. 2. Consider the eyes of men. Good men observe our carriages, Mot. 2. Con∣sider the eyes of men. professours are much observed how they walke. They are Bea∣cons set upon a hill top, multitudes behold them. Good men ob∣serve that they may gaine some spirituall advantage. They expect the performance of our duty , to stirre up and exusci∣tate graces, to quicken or inliven them; and  is expected, to edify and build them up in their holy faith. Now if we are not what we pretend, if we be no more but formall professours, if our practice accord not with our profession, we sadden the hearts of the righteous. And likewise bad mens eyes are upon us, they watch for our haltings as Benhadads servants, they lye at the catch. Now if we do not  walk with a straight foot, if we are loose in our lives, and carelesse in ordering our footsteps, not∣withstanding our profession be never▪ so strict, we strengthen the hands of the wicked. A bad life is a confutation of a good profession. Although the Profession it selfe is not the worse, because there are
some hypocriticall professours: yet ignorant and malicious men endeavour to wound the profession it selfe, and asperse it by reason of scandalous professours. 3. Integrity and uprightnesse of heart and life will comfort us, Mot. 3. Inte∣grity of life will comfort u, when pre∣tences can∣not help us. 2 Cor. 1. 12. when all pretences, formes, outside professions will no whit availe us. This was the ground of the Saints rejoycing, Or rejoycing is this, the Tetimony of a good Conscience. This was the Apostles ex∣ercise . Duties of both Tables must be regarded re∣spectively. To pretend to the duties of the first, and neglect righ∣teousnesse and equity to thy Brother, (as the second table in∣joynes,) this discovers thee to be an hypocrite. To pretend just dealing according to the second table, and neglect keeping the sab∣bath Act. 24. 12. and other duties of the first, this sheweth thee to be only a Formalist. But in the last place. The fourth Use is for direction in two Ʋse 4. For Direction. particulars. 1. How we ought to depart from iniquity. Q. 1. How we must de∣part from iniquity? 1. We must depart spee∣dily. Ezek. 47. 3, 4, 5. 2. What meanes may be of speciall Use conducing thereunto. 1. For the first particular, how we ought to depart from ini∣quity. 1. We must depart speedily. We must not excuse sinne and say, at such a time I hope to leave it. Give not quarter to Benhadad: sinne reprived resembles Ezekie'ls waters, first up to the ankles, then to the knees, then up to the loines, and afterward a River not to be passed over. If thou delayest to depart from sinne to day, it gaines ground; and gets more and more advantage against thee, to morrow. 2. Depart willingly. Do not leave a sinne as Phaltiel was forced 2. We must depart wil∣lingly. to leave Michal, and afterwards followed her weeping that he could not injoy her. Some are restrained against their wills, who for feare of the law dare not sweare, in some companies neither dare be drunk: and yet their hearts are as bad as ever. 3. We must depart from sinne tho∣roughly. Ps. 119. 110. 4. We must depart con∣stantly. 2 Pet. 2. 22. 3. We must depart from sin thoroughly, & impartially. I have (saith David) refrained my feet from every evill way: Do not chop and change. Some exchange their sins, having been young Prodi∣galls, they now are become old covetous muck-wormes. 4. Depart constantly. Do not returne unto thy old courses: That's a doggish and swinish quality. The Dog returneth to his own vomit, and the Sow that is washed to her wallowing in the mire.
Then secondly for meanes to be used. Q 2. What meanes must be used. 1. Pray much, that the Lord would subdue thy corruptions. Who is a God (saith the Prophet) like unto thee, who pardoneth ini∣quity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of thy heritage? 1. Pray. Mica. 7. 18, 19. He will turne againe, he will have compassion on us, he will subdue our iniquities. Pray not only for mercy to pardon, but for grace to purge and renew thee. This is a petition sutable to Gods will, to pray for a new heart. This God promiseth: I will sprinkle cleane Ezek. 36. 25, 26. water upon you, and yee shall be cleane: A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh. Vers. 37. But he expects our prayers: I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel. 2. Keep a strict watch over thine heart. Above all keeping we 2. Keep a strict watch over thine heart. had need keep our hearts. The Devill lyeth in ambush: where∣fore we ought to be sober and vigilant. The flesh inticeth, as De∣liah did Sampson, and afterwards betrayes us to destruction. The world is a Patterne of all wickednesse: It offers pleasures, honours, promotion and riches. We had need look to our hearts: That's the fort Royall in a Christian; If that be conquered, all's lost. 3. Resist the first motions and temptations to sinne. Be they 3. Resist the first motion to sinne. motus primo primi, (as the School-men speak:) yet they are polluted and ought to be resisted. Take heed of the least sinne: A little leake may sinke a ship; A little pen-knife may destroy thee. A little theife let in at a window, may open the dores to a multi∣tude of Robbers. I remember what Hanno in Livy said of Han∣nibal, * Parvus hic ignis incendi∣um ingens ex∣uscitat. Liv. Dec. 2. Jer. 4. 14. This little sparke may cause a great flame. The embers of an evill thought, may set the whole man in combustion. Wherefore let us look to our thoughts: O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickednsse, that thou maist be saved: how long shall vaine thoughts lodge within thee? 4. Frequently and seriously exercise thy selfe in the examinati∣on 4. Examine thy heart. Jer. 8. 6. of thy heart, and life. It's an excellent duty to commune with our own hearts. I hearkned and heard, (saith the Lord) but they spake not a right, no man repented of his wickednesse: saying, what have I done? Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hoasts, consider Hag. 1. 5. 5. Behold thy face in the glass of Gods Law. your wayes. 5. Behold thy face in the glasse of the Law of God, how odious and abominable sinne is in God's accompt, and how
the law of God denounceth vengeance upon ungodly per∣sons. 6. Sixtly and lastly: Make it thy businesse to mortify and cru∣cify 6. Mortify thy Corrup∣tions. thy corruptions. This is the grand employment here on earth to be fighting against sinne, resisting to blood. And in all we do we must act in the strength of Jesus Christ: Help is laid upon him, who is mighty. He is the Redeemer, who turneth away iniquity from Jacob. It's the voice of Christ that saith, Be of Good Com∣fort, thy sinnes are forgiven thee. Such a Word, if the Lord Christ should speak to any one of us this day, it would be the joyfullest word that ever we heard, and the happiest day that ever our eyes beheld.
THE GRAND SIN, AND MISCHIEFE OF INFIDELITY, SET FORTH FROM Joh: 8. vers. 24. For if yee believe not, that I am he, yee shall dye in your sinnes. THAT part of this Chapter which relates to my Sermon 8. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. Nov. 27. 1659. Text, consists of severall Dialogues betweene Christ and the Jewes: And they begin viz, and conclude with the Chapter. My Text is a good Reply to a bad Answer. Christ foretold, Vers. 21. Whither I go, yee cannot come. Upon these Words the Pharisees fram'd a most malitious construction, and suggested nothing lesse then selfe-murther: Vers. 22. Then said the Jewes, will he kill himselfe? because he saith, whither I go, yee cannot come. Christ now rejoynes an Answer, wherein he puts them in mind of that vast difference there was between them, and him: even as great as between earth and heaven, Vers. 23. And he said unto them, yee are from beneath, I am from above: yee are of this world, I am not of this world. Christ came from the Father, and was to go againe to the Father. This grand myste∣ry transcended the capacity of Scribes and Pharisees: Their wis∣dome was earthly, and their affections were earthly. But this wisdome of the Gospell is heavenly and mysterious: This only a spirituall man can understand. This wisdome can none learne
unlesse such in whom the spirit formeth it, as Nemo ido∣neus erit Chri∣sti Disciplus, nisi quem spi∣ritus forma∣verit. Hinc fit, ut tam ra∣rasit in mun∣do fides. Calv. in loc. Calvin observes: 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. and afterward, he draweth an Inference very pertinent: Hence (saith he) it comes to passe, that faith is so rare a thing, because na∣turally all man-kind is estranged and averse from Christ. They only believe, who are effectually wrought upon by the spirit of God. No marvaile then, that the Pharisees past such a false judg∣ment on Christ, considering that they were carnall: Christ was spirituall, they were from the earth, Christ from above. Christ was above the world, a conqueror of the world, they were swallowed up with the love of the world. Wherefore my Text ingeminates what was before delivered, viz. That they should dye in their sinnes. The difference lyes only in this, there it is said , in the Singular number: here, , in the Plurall number: So then the words containe a Grand sinne, and a grand judgment. 1. For the sinne: It's said , If yee believe not. 1. A grand sinne. This great sinne of unbeliefe, is the meritorious Cause of the grea∣test of Judgments. As if the Lord Christ should speak to this ef∣fect: You may lay the blame at your own dores, every one may cast the first stone upon himselfe, considering that I have been at so great paines with you: Although I have been a long time preaching the Deut. 18. 15. Gospell unto you, yet you will not believe that I am the Prophet pro∣mised, Gen. 49. 10. Shiloh, a starre coming out of Jacob, the Messiah, the Savi∣our of the world, the Redeemer, unto whom all the Prophets beare witnesse: because you believe not that I am he, but despise the Dan. 9. 25. great Salvation which I tender unto you: You shall dye in your sinnes, (i. e.) in your impenitency and Infidelity: This I said before and I will repeate now, I said therefore unto you that yee shall dye in your sinnes, for if ye believe not that I am he, yee shall dye in your sinnes. From the words thus divided and expounded, I shall lay down one only point of Doctrine, for the Foundation of my ensueing Meditations. That of all sinnes, Infidelity especially is a grand-damning sinne  against the Gospell. For the Inlargment of this Doctrine my method shall be, Method. 1. To shew what Infidelity is. 2. To produce Scripture Testimony for proofe of the Do∣ctrine.
3. To Confirme the same by Demonstrative Arguments. 4. To inferre some practicall uses and apply them particu∣larly. My first inquiry is, what Infidelity is, or wherein it chiefly con∣sists? 1. What In∣fidelity is. For Answer by way of Character I shall endeavour to re∣present the nature of Infidelity in these Particulars. 1. Infidelity consists in not knowing of, nor believing that there 1. Infideli∣ty is the not knowing of a Christ. is a Christ: This is a Negative ignorance, which is called Igno∣rantia purae negationis. By beholding of the Sun, Moon, and starres, even by this naturall light, or book of nature, they may be con∣vinced that there is one God, Creator and Governour of all things, that this God is the absolute Being, Firfi cause, Being of Beings: But without the Book of Scriptures, we cannot know, nor believe that there is a Christ. This mysterie of Christ incar∣nate, Christ crucified, Christs merits, Christs purchases is only revealed in the Gospell, which is hidden unto Infidells, a book sealed unto them, above the ken, apprehension, and faith of the most learned Heathens. Wherefore all such opinions that hold, that the Sun, Moon, and Starres are sufficient to teach them Christ, and faith in him are abhominable and cursed opinions. We must fetch our faith out of the Book of Scripture; Faith in Christ is a mysterie, it's of a spirituall cognizance, beyond the capacity of a naturall man, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And notwithstanding the negative ignorance, and unbeliefe of Heathens, they are not excusable. Tis true that those that sinne against knowledge, shall have a hotter Hell, but all ignorant persons are under a dreadfull curse, Jer. 10. 25. 2. Infidelity consists, (and this is the height of it) in not be∣lieving Jesus to be the Christ; the Turkes account Christ as a great 2. Infideli∣ty consists in not believ∣ing Jesus to be the Christ. Prophet, and will not suffer him to be reviled, and blasphemed, but they account him not a Jesus, a Christ: for they preferre Mahomet that grand Impostor before Christ: The Jewes believe that a Messias shall come; that then shall come that Prophet Moses prophesied of, that Shilo that Messias, that Jacob, and Daniel foretold, but as for Christ that they crucified at Jerusalem they reject him altogeather, and account him no better then a de∣ceiver and the veyle to this day is yet upon their hearts, and their eyes are blinded, and God hath given them the spirit of slumber: Some Atheisticall scepticks we have now adaies, that fancy to
themselves a Platonick Christ, a Chimra of their own addle braines, these are better skill'd in the books of Plato, then in the Bookes of holy Scripture, this is but what Christ long agoe fore∣told, that there should arise false Christs, Mat. 24. 24. Insomuch (that if it were possible they should deceive the very elect) But there is a comfortable Parenthesis. My soule trembles to think of the blas∣phemies, heresies, and all sorts of abominations that springs from this cursed fountaine of Platonick scepticisme. I shall remind you of these speciall Scriptures, which if the Lord set home upon your hearts, will abundantly throw downe the Devils great strong holds of new devised whinsicall opinions, hammerd upon the Anvill of an Atheisticall spirit, Read them deliberately, Act. 2. 39. Act. 4. 12. Joh. 17. 3. 1 Tim. 2. 5. And this is the very scope of this Text. Where it is said if yee believe not that I am he yee shall dye in your sinnes. Is videlicet quem esse me dico verus ille vobis pro∣missus Liberator. So Beza on the place (i. e.) the same I say I Beza. am the promised Redeemer. Quaecunque scriptura Messiae tribuit, & ab ipso sperare jubet, so Calvin. Regula fidei est ut non modo cre∣damus Calvin. esse Christum, sed eum quem scriptura docet verum sc: , Gualter. so Gualter. We must not only believe that there is a Christ, but that he is the true Christ God and man, which the scripture teacheth and expresseth to be the only Physitian, Savi∣our, Fountaine of living water, bread of life, our great high Priest, the Messiah, the annointed of God. Piscator gives one Piscator. short, but pithy note; Eum sc. quem dico me esse videlicet Chri∣stum. Now the not believing this Christ here teaching in my Text, (who was afterward crucified at Jerusalem) to be the only Christ, the only Mediator, the only price of our redemp∣tion is a grand damning sinne against the Gospell. 3. Infidelity consists in not believing of the Word of God, Joh. 3. Infideli∣ty consists in not belie∣ving Gods word. 5. 38. Psal. 106. 24. Neither believed they his wondrous works, Ps. 78. 22. A strange unbelieving people who neither for the Word, nor for the workes of God, would yet believe, Every threatning and commination in the Word must be believed, yet notwithstanding how many blesse themselves as Deut. 29. 19. That they shall have peace &c. Every promise must be believed, but what a great que∣stioning of, and what disputing against promises by unbelievers? Many professe that Jesus is the Christ, yet when it comes to par∣ticulars, they walke not answerably to their profession; For in∣stance
do they believe that they must be redeemed from their vaine conversation, that they must be in Christ, and be new crea∣tures, and be pertakers of the divine nature, they must be borne againe, if ever they expect to come to heaven? These things they believe not, these are hard sayings say they who can heare them, yet the Word of God is resolute and peremptory, and not the least tittle thereof shall fall unto the ground: Is this Scripture be∣lieved, Isa. 3. 10. Say yee to the righteous it shall be well with him, and Vers. 11. Woe unto the wicked, for it shall be ill with him. Did men believe the Word and cleave to it? Did men believe that the Judgments against the wicked, and the promises made to the god∣ly should be fulfilled, they would not lead such lives as they do, living without God in the world? As one said either this is not Gospell, (holding up the Bible in his hands) or you are not Christians: But this is Gospell, that if we believe not, we shall dye in our sinnes: therefore we that live in our unbeliefe are not Chri∣stians. 4. Infidelity consists in this, when we live by sense and not by 4. Infideli∣ty is a li∣ving by sense. faith, we believe no more then what we see: if our sense and our reason failes, our faith failes; as in the case of Thomas, Joh. 20. 27. But we ought to live by faith and not by sense. Many will be∣lieve nothing but what they can give a reason for, though the waies of God are most reasonable, and religion is a reasonable . Rom. 12. 1. profession; and a reasonable service is commanded: yet its above reason, and transcendeth the capacity of a naturall man. That person must have his senses exercised, and a spirituall eye that will discerne the misteries of God, see how the Apostle describes faith, Heb. 11. 1. To be the substance of things not seen. And the Patri∣arches saw the promises a farre off, Heb. 11. 13. What then though sense faile, and reason is nonplussed, yet the promises of God ne∣ver faile: This sometimes is the fault of Gods own children un∣der desertions, who conclude awry, and say they have no faith because they want feeling: whereas feeling is an after thing, Eph. 1. 13. And faith may be in the Root alive, though the fruit ap∣peare not presently to the sense; There is truth of faith, where there may be want of sense and apprehension: In so much as faith and doubting may goe togeather as appeares, Mark. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help my unbeliefe. This living by sense more then faith, is a great peice of Infidelity, hence it came to passe that Abraham,
and Isaac both denied their wifes, in them there was sense, and fear joyned togeather. Sarah laughed at the promise, there was sense, as appeares by her answer, Ge. 18. 12. Sense acted in David and not faith; when he said in his heart that he should one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Sam. 27. 1. Wherefore he betook himselfe immediat∣ly unto the Philistines, 1 Sam. 27. 1, 2. Heres the Triall, Sense saith no, Faith saith yea: Sense saith its impossible, Faith saith all things are possible to the believer; Sense saith its incredible, and unrea∣sonable: Faith saith I believe though incredible and unreasonable: Sense saith, and reason pleads we can dispute and argue no longer, Faith saith leave of disputing and learne to believe; Thus did Abraham, and he acted upon a principle of faith, Ro. 4. 19, 20. 5. Infidelity consists in the Non-application of promises upon 5. Infideli∣ty consits in the Non ap∣plication of promises. Gal. 2. 20. the termes of the Gospell: for to belive Christ is a Saviour, and not my Saviour, what comfort can I take in it? To believe Christ dyed for sinners▪ and to exclude my selfe from any benefit by his death; this is a dreadfull condition, Paul applied Christ to him∣selfe, Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me and gave himselfe for me. And so did Thomas my Lord and my God. Now heares a great difference between presumptuous sinners, and poore weak believers; Pre∣sumptuous sinners are too hasty to apply too much, and poore weak Christians are too backward, and apply too little; Every presumptuous sinner would be blessed, and happy, and will say Christ dyed for him, but he is a stranger, and grossely ignorant who they are to whom appertaines blessednesse: It's appropriated Matth. 5. to the poore in spirit, to the pure in heart, to those that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse: but poore weak believers are afraid to lay hold on promises, and question their interest in them; Now to speak to weak Christians, whose faith is true though but little, let them know that their little faith is  like pretious 2 Pet. 1. 1. faith, they would faine have more faith, they pray for more, and they strive for more, it's their griefe, and cause of heavinesse that they have no more: do you not then whatever you are stand in your own light, O therefore tast and see that God is good, stay upon his promises, and apply your selves unto Christ, the poorer you are in your own spirit, and the more sensible of your unworthi∣nesse, the more fit you are to receive Jesus Christ, and if you dare not apply Christs promises unto you, be sure that you apply your selves unto Christ, and his promises, relye, stay and leane upon
them let them not goe. Faith is both a hand, and an eye, you must lay hold on Christ, and look unto him, as they did on the brazen Serpent in the wildernesse: This faith acts. Q. O but I am afraid, I tremble, I dare not lay hold on Christ, I dare not make this application to my selfe. Ans. To answer hereunto, 1. Know a Paralitick trembling hand may receive a pretious pearle. 2. Christ invites thirsty, hungry, poore, naked, indigent, lost creatures, such as are undone in themselves to come unto him. Art thou sensible of thy poverty, nakednesse, undone conditi∣on? thou art invited: why then dost thou not make hast unto Je∣sus Christ? 3. Those that come are accepted, such I mean who come in faith so Christ declares, Joh. 6. 35, 37. And the not coming un∣to Christ damnes multitudes of soules, Joh. 5. 40. But I proceed to the second head propounded, the proofe of 2. Ʋnbeliefe hath seve∣rall Aggra∣vations. the doctrine from Scripture, that this sinne of unbeliefe is such a Grand-damning sinne, and this will evidently appeare from those severall Aggravations mentioned in the Word of God. 1. Unbeliefe maketh the Word of God unprofitable unto us, Heb. 4. 2. The word profited not, because not mixt with faith. We thrive not under Ordinances because of unbeliefe: If in our estates we find out, that theres some wastfull, licentious course of living, that hinders us from thriving, and causeth us to grow behinde hand, we should carefully avoide that; Infidelity hinders our souls from thriving; hence comes a leannesse in our soules, notwith∣standing a fatnesse of Ordinances, and great barrennesse, and un∣fruitfulnesse because we believe not the word. 2. This sinne causeth Apostacy, Heb. 3. 12. Psal. 78. 57. 3. It scapes not unpunished in Gods own Children, Luk. 1. 20. Zachary was struck with dumbnesse, for not believing the An∣gell. 4. Unbelievers are joyned with the most abominable sinners, Rev. 21. 8. 5. The Scripture pronounceth damnation to be the portion of unbelievers, in the future tense its said, Mark. 16. 16. and Joh. 3. 36. He that believeth not shall be damned: but in the present tense, Joh. 3. 18. They are as sure to be damned, as though the were already in hell: It's said , which hath the signifi∣cation
of the present tense, as if the unbeliever were actually dam∣ned, or in a damnable condition. 6. This sinne labours to cut of the whole Gospell by denying of Christ his Word, falsifying his promises, accounting him an unsufficient Saviour undervaluing the price of his blood, and contemning that great salvation tendred in the Gospell, but this particular will fall in amongst the Reasons of the Doctrine, which follow now in the next place to be handled, for the further con∣firmation of the point, we have strong reasons drawn from Scrip∣ture, contributing further evidence to the Doctrine, amongst ma∣ny, Ile reduce them unto these demonstrative Arguments. 1. Because unbeliefe refuseth Gods remedy offered to heale Arg. 1. Ʋn∣beliefe refu∣seth Gods remedy. and rejecteth a pardon tendred by despising Jesus Christ the on∣ly mediatour, the only Saviour, and price paid for our redemp∣tion. God offereth the pearle of price the Lord Jesus, an unbe∣liever cares not for it, and bids God take againe his commodity Exod. 5. 2. unto himselfe. Pharaoh said Who is the Lord that I should obey his voyce? so an unbeliever saith, who is Christ that we should believe in him, these are those Gadarenish Mammonists, who all petitio∣ned that Christ might depart out of their coasts, they preferred Mar. 5. 17. their swine before Christ: There were three predominant sinnes in those Gadarenes, viz: Ignorance, covetousnesse, and Infidelity, these are they that will not have Christ to raigne over them, see their doome, Luk. 19. 27. These are they that despise Christ, and in despising of Christ, they despise God the Father, Luk. 10. 16. God would heale them and they would not be healed, Jer. 15. 18. Christ invites them, they all with one consent make excuses, Luk. 14. 18. Christ would gather them as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings but they would not, Luk. 13. 34. Christ sendeth Embassadors to entreat them to be reconciled but they will not, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Christ tenders a great salvation to them but they neg∣lect it, Heb. 2. 3. And how shall such escape? their perdition is from themselves, Hos. 13. 9. Their condemnation is Just, they are their owne murtherers. The riches of Gods mercy is Jesus Christ, unbelievers despise the riches of Gods mercy, the blood of Christ is the only soveraigne plaister, and healing Remedy, un∣believers throw away this plaister, trample under feet this me∣dicine, and thus they judge themselves unworthy of eternall life.
2. Unbelievers accuse God and his Word of falshood, where∣fore Arg. 2. Ʋn∣believers accuse God and his word of falshood. the sinne of Infidelity must needs be a grand God-provoking sinne. To give a man the lye is accounted a great reproach and indignity; what is it then to put the lye upon the God of eternall truth? And so unbelievers endeavour to doe, 1 Joh. 5. 10. An unbeliever makes the Gospell a Fable (what in him lyes) and Christ an Impostor: The comminations, and Judgments against sinners are lookt on by unbelievers, but as so many scarre-crowes, they blesse themselves, and promise to themselves peace notwith∣standing all their rebellions, and as for the promises they look up∣on them but as flattering and deceitfull, they believe no further then sense guides them. As for a reward to come, a resurrection, a day of Judgment, they are in their hearts Sadduces either ab∣solutely denying the thing, or else wishing in their hearts, and hoping that there shall be no such thing. 3. Unbeliefe after a sort may be said to binde the hands of Arg. 3. Ʋn∣beliefe binds the hands of God. God: God will have his word believed, and he workes faith in those whom he makes objects of mercy, though the fore sight of faith doth not move him to set his heart on them, thats his  alone which moves him to set his heart on any: yet those whom he loveth, he washeth, and whom he elects unto happinesse, and eternall salvation, he elects unto faith and repentance, and per∣severance in them both. Now Infidelity damnes up the streame, barres and bolts the dore, and hinders mercyes and puts them in an incapacity of receiving any mercyes; Christ would do no mighty workes at Nazareth, because of their unbeliefe. Christ Mat. 13. 58. would not suffer Pearles to be trampled under feet, he would not loose the glory of a Miracle, and cast away great workes up∣on an unbelieving people. The unbelieving Jewes entred not into rest because of unbeliefe. Unbeliefe barr'd multitudes out of Heb. 4. 6. temporall Canaan, and it barres multitudes out of the eternall Canaan. 4. Unbeliefe makes the Ordinances unfruitfull, and ineffectuall: Arg. 4. Ʋn∣beliefe makes Ordinances unfruit∣full. Jam. 1. 6. Jam. 5. 15. For instance it makes the Word, Heb. 4. 2. Prayer unfruitfull, Mat. 21. 22. Jam. 1. 6. Jam. 5. 15. To pray formally in a rode, as a lip-labour only without faith and fervency, so farre an Unbe∣liever may goe and reape no fruit from such formall services. Un∣believers hinder the working of the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per; for indeed that is a distinguishing Ordinance, and appertaines
not to unbelievers, It is childrens bread; Its a holy Sacrament, and holy things belong to holy persons, (as in the Primitive time they were wont to speak with a loud voyce, before the receiving of the Sacrament,) But what do Unbelievers get by this Ordi∣nance, 2 Cor. 11. 29. . if they will thrust in, and participate thereof, it prooves but common bread, common wine to them: and further they eate and drink Judgment to themselves. 5. And lastly, Unbeliefe causeth dreadfull Judgments, Tempo∣rall, and Eternall, to the profane Prince, 2 Kings 7. 2. vers. ult. To the Israelites how many of their Carcasses perished in the wil∣dernesse, Moses himselfe was shut out of Canaan, Psal. 106. 33. Comp. with Numb. 20. 10. which words heare now yee rebells, be∣trayed some distrust of God, and eternall Judgments are the por∣tion of all unbelievers, Luk. 12. 40. More I shall not adde to the Doctrinall part, but through Christ that strengtheneth me, I intend to make six Uses of this Doctrine. 1. For Reproofe. 2. For Caution. 3. For Exhortation. 4. For Examination. 5. For Direction. And 6. For Consolation. 1. For Reproofe and Terror unto all unbelievers, how dread∣full Ʋse 1. For Reproofe. is their condition, and they are not sensible of it, nor a whit affected with it, their Doome is terrible in the Text; they shall dye in their sinnes; Their sinne of Infidelity is enough of it selfe to damne them, but this is never alone, it hath a fraternity of sinnes and abominations joyn'd with it, as Pride, unthankfulnesse, earth∣ly-mindednesse, Atheisme, and many such like fruits issu∣ing out of the womb of Infidelity. What sinne is there that hath not some spice, some tincture of Infidelity? As for instance, the sinne of lying in Abraham and Isaac, was mixt with Infidelity, A∣braham denied Sarah, and Isaac denied Rebeccah to be their wives, they were afraid of their lives, and that feare exposed their wives to sad temptations. Did not God tell Abraham that in him should all the families of the earth be blessed, and that in Isaac his seed should be called, and yet he forgetfull of the promise betook him∣selfe to a broken refuge of lying and equivocation. It was like∣wise another peice of Infidelity which caused Rebeccah and Jacob
to use such indirect meanes to get the blessing, God was faithfull that hath promised, and he needed not their lyes to bring his work to passe, yet Rebeccah gave Jacob Counsell, and he fain∣ed himselfe to be his brother Esau, but Jacob smarted full sore by his Exile, and through Labans rigorous dealing: It was Infidlity in David to say in his heart that he should one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Sam. 27. 1. Wherefore he betook himself to Achish King of Gath, and there he met with difficulties upon difficulties, as one wave of the Sea following another, and varieties of dan∣gers, verifying our common English proverb, leaping out of the frying pan into the fire. Infidelity was in Zechary, and therefore Luk. 1. 20. he was smitten with dumbnesse. Thomas he must see before he believe. This sinne is incident to the generation of the just, but for this sinne Gods dearest children scape not unpunished. But what shall we say of all speculative Atheists, such as in their Judg∣ments and opinions deny God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, providence and Gods government in the world? And what shall we say of those practicall Atheists; who live without God in the world, running into all sinnes, and all manner of wickednesse, these be∣lieve not the truth of the Word of God, against swearers, Zech. 5. 3. Nor do they believe that a flying Roll is against them to cut them off, nor against drunkards, Isa. 28. 1. Read what Judgments the Scriptures pronounceth against them that believe not, Joh. 3. 18. 2 Thes. 2. 12. Heb. 3. 18. Jud. 5. I proceed to a second Use which is for Caution; O beware of Ʋse. 2. For Caution. unbeliefe its a grievous grand-damning sin, other sinnes damne as well as this, yet this throwes away the remedy and bolts the dore, barres accesse, stops the current of mercy. Now multitudes flat∣ter themselves with a false faith, and so cheate themselves unto all eternity, therefore there is great need to lay downe some pre∣vious Cautions which are these following. 1. Beware of a fond vaine perswasion and presumptuous confi∣dence: Caution 1. Beware of a fond vaine perswasion. many say alls well with them, and they believe as their Ancestors did before them, and thus they flatter themselves into a fooles Paradise, these vaine confident men never want woe, to be confident upon Gospell promises is a sure bottome to stay up∣on: but multitudes are confiddent by reason of outward riches, honours, pleasures, prosperity, &c. because they have abundance of outward blessings, hence they conclude that all shall be well
with them unto eternity; But this is a false consequence, a plaine Non sequitur: I am happy in this world, therefore I shall be happy unto all eternity; For a man may be eternally miserable, though he enjoy abundance of outward things, and he may be eternally happy, though he may want them all: By outward things no man can passe a certaine Judgment, you read how the Idolatrous Jewes blest themselves in their condition, Jer. 44. 17. That they had plenty of victualls, when they burnt incense unto the Qeen of hea∣ven. But see their doome, Vers. 23. Thus many think alls well with them, (though they runne their owne courses, and follow the devises of their own heart) by reason of the affluence of out∣ward things, but they deceive themselves. 2. Beware of a Temporary faith, Temporary believers may be Caution 2. Beware of a Tomporary faith. Mr Bolton. compared to the seed sowne on stony ground, Matth. 13. 5, 6. Which for want of root withered, Its an instance of a Reverend Di∣vine, suppose (saith he) there be a Serving man following two Gentlemen, when they part it will be knowne to whom that Ser∣vant belongs, and whose Master he serves: So when it comes to parting and loosing, lossesse, afflictions, persecutions, it will soon be known whose servants we are, whether we serve God or Mam∣mon, whether we serve our selves or our lusts: A Temporary Believer will pretend much, in Halcyon times of peace and tran∣quility: but when it comes to triall of suffering, bearing slaunder, ignominies, or losse of riches for Christ, then he is scandalized he will relinquish his profession, and will not embrace Christ to his worldly disadvantages. 3. Beware of distrusting Gods Word, though it may seem long 3. Beware of ditrusting Gods Word. in fulfilling what it promiseth, Hab. 2. 3, 4. Though the vision tarry, wait for it. Believers must wait Gods leasure: And he that be∣lieveth maketh not hast. The Lord promised that in Abrahams seed all the earth should be blessed, this promise was long in ful∣filling, and Sarah according to the course of nature was unlikely to beare a child, yet God accomplished what he promised to a tittle. Gods workes seemes to runne crosse to his word, as you may see by comparing Gen. 17. 19. with Gen. 22. 1, 2. But our duty is to stay upon Gods Word, though his workes may seeme 4. Weake Chritians must beware of curious Questions. strange and unlikely to bring his word to passe. 4. Let weake Christians especially beware of too high or curi∣ous Questions, nice and doubtfull disputation; some loose them∣selves
and dispute themselves into Atheisme and infidelity; As for in∣stance concerning themisteries of the Trinity, Christs incarnation, the procession of the Holy Ghost, these are matters of our faith, and not of our reasoning and disputing, we must believe where sense and reason failes; and because God saith it, we must believe and obey, not dispute his words and his commands. These foure Cautions premised, now in the third place I shall Ʋse 3. For Exhorta∣tion. proceed to an Use of Exhortation: Is unbeliefe such a speciall damning sinne, O labour for faith, There is no pleasing God with∣out faith, O! do not sleepe in a state of unbeliefe. The best of Gods servants have unbeliefe in them, but they complaine against it. Bradford a rare mortified man complained much of his unbe∣liefe, so we must complaine of our Infidelity, we must search nar∣rowly, make hue and cry after our unbeliefe, and labour to finde it out, and having found it, arraigne, condemne, and crucify it. Two Motives I shall urge. First, I'le draw some from the benefit of Faith. Secondly, From the mischiefe of unbeliefe. 1. Lets consider the benefit of Faith. First, It gives title and in∣terest Motive 1. From the benefit of Faith. to the promises, all the promises are made unto believers, Joh. 3. 16, 36. Temporall promises are the portion of believers, their basket and store is blessed, Deut. 28. Lev. 26. Spirituall pro∣mises are the portion of believers, and those promises of giving a new heart, circumcising the heart &c. are their portion; Eternall promises are their portion, for eternall life is their inheritance, Joh. 10. 28. Secondly, Faith is a hand to lay hold on Christ: But not a working hand, as that hand of a labourer that earnes his living, upon his desert and for his work receives his wages: But faith is a receiving hand of a poore man that layes hold on a pearle and receives all of mercy and favour from God: Hence faith is exprest by receiving, Joh. 1. 12. Thirdly, Faith gives insight into heaven, and communion with God, Heb. 11. 27. Fourthly, From Justification by faith flowes all our comforts, and priviledges, Rom. 5. 1. 2. But if the Consideration of the benefit of Faith take no Motive 2. From the mischiefe of unbeliefe. place, on the contrary take notice of the mischiefe of Insidelity. You heard before the reasons of the Doctrine (after another sort)
how Infidelity bound Gods hands, refused the remedy, I will adde other great mischiefes, which spring from the fountaine of unbe∣liefe, viz. these following. 1. Unbeliefe makes all our prayers unavailable: To pray and not in faith is sinne, for whatever is not of faith is sinne. 2. Unbeliefe causeth diffidence of, and staggering at promises Rom. 4. 20. 3. It hinders and deprives men of Communion with believers, 2 Cor. 6. 15. 4. Every thing is uncleane, and desiled to unbelivers, Tit. 1. 15. Their spirituall uncleannesse makes every thing uncleane unto them. The distinction of cleane and uncleane meates is disa∣nulled by the Gospell, the use of them is pure to them who are cleansed by Christs blood, and sanctified by his spirit; but of un∣believers it is said Their mind and Conscience is defiled. 5. Unbelievers are given up to damnable delusions, 2 Thes. 2. 10, 11, 12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth. The fourth Use is for Examination, and Triall of Faith, and Ʋse 4. For Examina∣tion. Infidelity: Every one is ready to say he believes but the number of believers is very small. But where there is true faith it hath these singular Qualifications to inlighten the understanding, to purify the heart, to sanctify the life and Conversation, to trust God with all, to live by faith, (for that is the life of a Christian,) To inlarge a lit∣tle these Qualifications. First, True faith inlightens the understanding, Paul when of Qualific. 1. True faith inlightens the under∣standing. an unbeliever he became a believer, it's said And immediatly there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, Act. 9. 18. Where God worketh faith he illuminates the understanding, Act. 26. 18. Joh. 2. 20. Secondly faith purifieth the heart, it's a purifying grace, Act. Qualific. 2. Faith puri∣fieth the heart. 15. 9. The heart is purged and cleansed from malice, this God calleth for, Jam. 4. 8. Jer. 4. 14. Thirdly, Faith reformes the life, hence faith is called a holy faith Jude 20. An unfained faith, the Faith of Gods elect, a Pre∣tious Qualific. 3. Reformes the life. Faith. For a true believer is a man of another Conversation; As it was said of Caleb, Num. 14. 24. He had another spirit with in him: So true believers are of another spirit (i. e.) of a gracious spirit farre different from what they were in the
State of unregeneracy, and farre different from the men of the world. Qualific. 4. Faith trusts God with all. Qualific. 5. the jut lives by faith. Fourthly, Faith trusts God with all, David calls God his Rock, Fortresse, Bulwark, &c. Psal. 18. 2. Psal. 27. 1. A Believers heart is fixed and setled in unsetled times, Psal. 112. 7. Fiftly, Faith is that whereby the just lives, Hab. 2. 4. Gal. 2. 20. A believer in a storme gets himselfe upon a Rock, he hides himselfe in the clefts of a Rock, Christ is the Rock of Ages, A be∣liever climbes up thither, and there rests: In dangers he goeth to God, hee's his Refuge, strong Tower, and Bulwark of defence; In doubts God is his Counsellour, in distresse God is his com∣forter. Now lets inquire after some signes and symptomes of an un∣believer. The first (which is to be reckoned in the fore front) is par∣tiall Signe 1. Partiall o∣bedience. obedience, an unbeliever (whatever he pretends) is but o∣bedient to halves, so was Saul in sparing Agag &c. So was Ana∣nias and Saphira in keeping back part of the price. Agrippa would be a Christian , Act. 26. 28. We have many such al-most Christians, halfe baked cakes like Ephraim, a cake not turn'd, Hos. 7. 18. The second signe of Unbeliefe is murmuring, and impatience: Signe 2. Murmur∣ing. The Lord complaines often of the murmuring of the Children of Israell, Psal. 106. 25. vers. 29. And this is forbidden, 1 Cor. 10. 10. See their impatience, Num. 14. 44, 45. Murmuring and impa∣tience go togeather: when God answers not at our time, we be∣gin to murmur, and wax exceeding impatient, so did they Psal. 78. 19. Can God furnish a Table in the wildernesse? Thirdly, Unbeliefe appeares evidently by that refuge which Signe 3. Broken Re∣fuge. men betake themselves unto in streights, and difficulties. Saul went to a witch, Judas and Achitophel to a halter, Ahaziah sent to Baalzebub the god of Ekron: The Foole in the Gospell comforts himselfe, with his riches, voluptuous men betake themselves to their pleasures, Ambitious men to their titles of honour, but all these are broken and deceitfull refuges, and wil faile in the greatest difficulties, like cloath that shrinks in the wetting. The fifth Use is for Direction, And this I shall branch into a Ʋse 5. For Direction. few Duties.
First be sure to act faith upon the promises, have a word for Dir. 1. Act Faith upon promises. your warrant, I trust in this word (saith David) I hoped in this word. Study promises, and apply them, live upon them, we read Joh. 3. 36. He that believeth hath eternall life. But I am a belie∣ver &c. make good this Assumption, and thou maist conclude that thou shalt be saved. Secondly, Content not your selves with those attainments and Dir. 2. Con∣tent not thy selfe with former at∣tainments. measures of faith you have already got, but pray with the Apo∣stles, Lord increase our faith, we read of some thing lacking in the faith of the Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 3. 10. Labour to get thy faith strengthned, and thy heart established upon God, Its no easy mat∣ter to believe: when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith in the earth? Dir. 3. Be Conscienti∣ous in the use of Ordi∣nances. Dir. 4. Of∣ten search thy heart. Ʋse 6. For Consolation. Thirdly, Be diligent and conscientious in the Use of Ordinan∣ces, as hearing Gods Word, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Rom. 10. 17. And adde praying and receiving the Sacraments. Fourthly, Often search thy heart for feare least a Temporary Faith lurke there. Much unbeliefe lurketh in thy heart, therefore watch and pray against it; labour to get it rooted out. The last Use is for Consolation unto Gods Children, they are true believers, and must needs be such as to whom comfort ap∣pertaines; for they have great priviledges. As first, Accesse unto the Throne of Grace, Rom. 5. 2. By whom also we have accesse by saith. Secondly, They have Interest in all the promises, 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. Thirdly, They have Interest in speciall providences distinguish∣ing mercies, viz. 1. For their provision, Psal. 34. 9, 10. They shall want no good thing. 2. For their Protection, Heb. 1. ult. The Angells are their Guardians. 3. For their direction, Christ is a Counsellour, and he directs them. 4. For their Consolation he comforts them, Joh. 14. 18, 26, 27 5. They have all sanctified what ever they injoy: The Crea∣tures are sanctified unto them. Fourthly, Christ is theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 20, 21. Rom. 8. 32. And with Christ they have all things.
Fifthly, They shall injoy the presence of God and be made per∣takers of the blessed vision, Mat. 5. 8. 1 Joh. 3. 2. Here they in∣joy God in his Ordinances, they have Communion with him, and feele spirituall Illapses upon their soules, but this Ebbes, and flowes, they have many Interruptions and Intermissions but here∣after they shall injoy an uninterrupted Communion with God to all Eternity. Yet notwithstanding what hath been said, there are many doubts and scruples raised, for there are three sorts of persons who make objections viz. 1. Ʋnbelievers. 2. Misbelievers. 3. Weak-believers. 1. I begin with Unbelievers, and these are to be considered, under a double capacity, Either such as are Heathens, to whom the Gospell hath not been preached, in whose land the voice of the Turtle hath not been heard, (i. e.) no publick preaching of the Gospell: or else such as live under the sound of the Gospell, who have heard of Christ and his Gospell preached, and yet they remaine in a state of unbeliefe. Obj. Concerning the first sort of unbelievers it's objected that  the Heathens and Infidells have not had the meanes, how then shall they believe on him on whom they have not heard? can it agree with the Justice of God to damne them for their unbeliefe seeing they never had the meanes of grace afforded, and never heard the Gospell preached? Ans. I answer God is a most free agent, he is bound to none.  On whom he will he hath mercy, and whom he will he harden∣eth: Faith is Gods free gift, to some he gives it, to others he de∣nies it. And God may do what he pleaseth with his owne, God is said to conclude some under unbeliefe, Rom. 11. 32. The Phrase is , shut them up, hampered them, And the God of this world hath blinded their minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. See what their Con∣versation is, Eph. 4. 17, 18, 19. And see their doome, Jer. 10. 25. Ignorance excuseth not, nor exempeth from Judgment, though Ignorance may sometimes extenuate and make a sinne lesse com∣paratively, yet it is a damnable sinne: For a sinne of Ignorance there was an offering to be offered unto God, Lev. 4. 27. And a blind mind is both a sinne and a dreadfull judgment, Act. 28. 25,
26, 27. Let none therefore lavish charity upon Heathens: If ever they be saved they cease to be Heathens, and become Christians: For assuredly there's no salvation but by Christ, Act. 4. 12. And no coming to Christ but by faith, Joh. 5. 40. Let God be true and every man a lyer, God is Just in all his waies and proceed∣ings. Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Concerning the second sort of Believers who live under the meanes, it's commonly objected: It is not in our own power we  cannot believe, God commands things impossible for us to doe. For Answer hereunto, Those who thus argue do not say, they  would believe if they could, they lay not the fault upon their own will which is refractory and disobedient, but they lay the fault upon God. To give a full Answer Ile lay downe these Propositions. Prop. 1. Man cannot by his owne power turne himselfe to God. Prop. 2. Con∣version and all the fruits thereof are the Graces of Gods spi∣rit Prop. 3. Good incli∣nations come from God. Prop. 4. We may not neglect our duty. Prop. 5. There is no Injustice in God to com∣mand things impossible. 1. It is not in the power of man to turne himselfe unto God, O Lord, I know, that the way of man is not in himselfe &c. Jer. 10. 23. 2. Conversion and all the fruits thereof, even all the Graces of the Spirit are the gift of God, so is faith and love: Every good and perfect gift comes from above. 3. Our wills and inclinations to any good, all come from God, He giveth to will and to do Phil. 2. 13. 4. Yet we are called upon to do our duty, to thirst, come to the waters, buy and eate, Isa. 55. 1. We are called upon to believe and repent, Mat. 4. 17. We must use the meanes that God hath appoin∣ted, we must do all we can, and put forth our endeavours to the utmost and yet expect no salvation from what we can do, but when we have done all we can, we must confesse we are unprofit∣able servants; some complaine I cannot profit by a Sermon. Will this be a sufficient excuse, to say I can not profit? thou must go to God and pray him to reach thee to profit, dost thou pray and meditate, and call thy selfe to an account, and examination of what thou hearest, let me aske such as complaine that they have no power to believe, would you believe and do you study Scrip∣ture? Do you read the promises? Are you swift to heare? Do you use the meanes to get faith? If you neglect Gods meanes, and Gods waies, your destruction will be from your selves altogether, Hos. 13. 9. 5. It's no injustice in God to command things which are im∣possible
to flesh and blood to performe, and that I will evince by these Arguments. 1. God is not bound to give and keep a stock both, he gave us power and liberty of will in Adam, we lost it and therefore its our duty to be made sensible of that great losse, and to be tho∣roughly humbled for it. 2. God hereby sheweth us our duty what we ought to do. 3. Hereby we are put in mind to use the right remedy (i. e.) going to Jesus Christ for strength of assistance; For through his strength we can do our duties, and without him we can do no∣thing. Let none therefore plead that they are not able to believe, nor repent, but though they are not able of themselves, they ought to goe to Christ for strength, for God hath laid help on one that is mighty, Christ is mighty to save, he it is that gives grace and glory. Let men examine their wills, are they not un∣willing to come unto Christ, though life and salvation is tendred, yet they will not come unto Christ: they frame multitudes of ex∣cuses, which their carnall hearts plead and reason against God. Christ offered to gather them, they will not: Christs offers to be their King, they will not be his subjects, they will not have him to reigne over them, unbeliefe and disobedience are mens owne faults questionlesse. In the next place concerning Misbelievers, there are many ob∣jections made by Jewes and Mahumetans, they would be accoun∣ted Believers, because they believe one God Creator and Gover∣nour: but these reject Jesus Christ, they believe not in him. The Mahumetans preferre Mahomet before Christ. The Jewes believe him not to be come, now questionlesse there is no true faith but that which hath Christ for its object, as we read Joh. 17. 3. The Papists go further, they believe in God the Father, and they pro∣fesse they believe in Christ, but they joyne their owne workes with Christs Merits, for they joyne with Christ Mediation the Mediation of Saints, and Angells, and so they in a high degree de∣rogate from Christs intercession, For he is an Al-sufficient Saviour, and the only Mediator, Heb. 7. 25. 1 Tim. 2. 5. But whatever Jewes, Turkes, and Papists may object; they will one day find all their devised worships, and misbeliefe to be abominable in the sight of God. Likewise there are multitudes of loose Protestants, and formall professors, they aske what need all this adoe? what
need so much faith? We perswade our selves to be in a good con∣dition already, because we believe the Scriptures, thus many per∣swade themselves to be in a good condition, and think their con∣dtion to be happy, and yet follow those very waies that lead down unto the Chambers of death. If all those that have a good perswa∣sion of themselves had been true believers, then the foolish virgins Matt. 25. 10. had not been excluded. Many say Lord, Lord, and Christ will say he knowes them not. Many will glory, and say that they have heard Christ preach in their streets, that they have been in his presence when he was upon earth, and yet Christ will not owne them. Farther yet, multitudes rest contented with a tempo∣rary faith, an Historicall, and Dogmaticall faith, and yet all this while they arrive not beyond the faith of Devills, and Re∣probates. In the last place, there are weak believers and these make many objections, and because their Consciences are tender, they ought to be dealt more tenderly with all. First, They object that they have no faith at all, because it is  very weake and little. We must know. 1. That faith admits degrees: There are some  weaker, and some stronger believers: the strongest believer must labour for more faith: and though he have a stronger faith, he may not conclude that he hath too much: and he that hath a weake faith may not conclude that he hath none at all. There is faith as little as a graine of mustard seed: and yet it is accepted, Mat. 12. 20. A bruised reed shall he not breake, and smoaking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. There are Christians of the highest, of the middle, and of the lowest forme. The man in the Gospell had faith and doubting togeather, Mark. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help thou mine unbeliefe. The disciples had a little faith, and yet this was true and accepted. 2. A weake faith, if true, is like precious, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Simon Peter a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ to them that have ob∣tained like precious faith with us: grace and peace be multiplyed unto you. 3. It hath the like pretious object, Jesus Cdrist; and he hath lambes as well as sheep in his fold, Isai. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather his lambs with his arme, and carry them in his bosome, and shall gently leade those that are with young.
4. Weak believers have Interest in the like precious promises, Joh. 6. 37. Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out: And Joh. 6. 35. He that cometh to me shall never hunger, &c. 2. Weake believers object that they have no faith, because they want feeling. But we must know that faith may be where feeling may be  wanting, so the Apostle declares, Eph. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that yee heard the word, the Gospell of your Salvation; in whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. Who knowes how the bones of a child grow in the wombe? shall we conclude that they grow not, because they are not discerned? But for avoiding mistakes, it will be needfull to interpret a few Cautions. 1. We must not measure faith by our sense and apprehension, Caut. 1. We may not mea∣sure faith by sense. Psal. 88. 14. David complaines of God's hiding his face, and so he doth frequently complaine else where, and yet a believer; Lord why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? And Gods hiding his face was a trouble unto him, Psal. 30. 7. Thou didst hide thy face and I was troubled. Caut. 2. A weake Chri∣stian may not content him∣selfe with a weak faith. 2. A weake Christian may not content himselfe with a weake faith: but he must labour for a strong faith: There are many things lacking in their faith, 1 Thes. 3. 10. Night and day praying ex∣ceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith. 3. A weake believer must not neglect the Application of the Caut. 3. A weake Belie∣ver may not neglect the Application of Promises. promises, but search them and bring them home unto their own soules. Thou hast a weake faith: but the word is a strengthening, and establishing word. Wait believingly on God, and thou shalt have renewed strength, so runs the Tenor of that choice word of Promise, Isai. 40. 29, 30, 31. He giveth power unto the saint, and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly faile: but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walke and not faint. 4. Neglect not observation of experiences of former dealings Caut. 4. Neglect not experiences. of God towards thee; how he hath delivered thee out of six and seven troubles. He hath counselled and comforted thee, and he is as wise and able as ever to help and relieve his people.
Lastly, Some object against themselves and conclude their faith  to be none, because they come so short of others. For Answer hereunto and to conclude, This is not a safe way  to argue: I have not the saith of Abraham, therefore I have no faith at all. Should Zacheus because he was not so high as Saul, conclude that he was no man at all? Look chiefly to the Quality, that this faith may be of a right kind, a genuine faith; such as pu∣rifieth the Conscience, worketh by love, and labour for more ac∣cession of it, and God will accept the quality for the quantity, pence for pounds, the will for the deed. We read Heb. 11. 17. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac. The faithfull in∣tentions of Abraham was accepted in the accompt of God, as a reall performance: Let's all labour to be sincere, and upright hear∣ted, and this perfection of parts (i. e.) sincerity will be accep∣ted instead of perfection of degrees, which is an absolute perfecti∣on without spot or wrinkle, which cannot be attained on earth by Militant Saints who are Viatores, but only by such who are Comprehensores glorified Saints in Heaven.
JOY IN THE LORD, AS A STRONG GROUND OF COMFORT AGAINST ALL DISCOMFORTS. Unfolded from Hab. 3. 18. Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. MY Text is an apposite close of a devout Prophets Sermon 9. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. Jan: 8. 1659 60. Prayer, composed of two excellent ingredients, faith and fervency for in the time of Jacobs troubles, when sad tidings were renewed eve∣ry moment, and each relation like Jobs discon∣solate messengers aggravated the miseries, and made them exceeding miserable, then my Prophet Habakkuk could discerne a Sun of righteousnesse with healing wings, dissipating all Mal. 4. 2. the clouds of sorrowes and miseries, I say amidst all these diastrous occurrences, this spirituall man by the eye of faith, could see a Believer and apprehend his Jesus the God of his salvation; this is an evidence of the strength of faith, and where faith is, it sets the affections a working, it's never idle, but alwaies operative, as soone as faith gives thee an insight into the beauty and excellency of thy God, how sweet and amiable will he be unto thy soule, thy affections will be transported with my Prophet, I will rejoyce, I will joy: his expressions were too short, they cannot reach his heart, and therefore he iterates his resolution; hee's a true lover
indeed, who delights to discourse of his beloved odject, and make frequent repetitions of his love, this is an argument of his fer∣vency. So then you see, (as I before intimated) that faith and ferven∣cy are the essentiall parts of this accurate prayer. The words read are promissory, and by way of covenant, or you may call them a comfortable conclusion, drawne from sad and dolefull premissesse. Upon perusall of the precedent words, you will find matter of ter∣rour and astonishment enough to make you quake and tremble; Before him went the Pestilence, and burning coles went forth at his feet, vers. 5. The earth is measured, and the Nations are drove a sunder, and the everlasting mountaines were scattered, and the per∣petuall hills did bow, vers. 6. Unheard of miracles, earthquakes a∣gainst the course of nature, the mountaines tremble, there's a great inundation of waters, the Sun and the Moon cease from their mo∣tion, vers. 10. 11. And as before there went out pestilence and burning coles, or burning diseases, so now to adde a complement to the judgment here are arrowes by day, which wound as much as the other in the night: the speares glitters, and the Lord mar∣cheth on in his indignation, the heathen feele the sore brunt of it, vers. 12. Thou didst thresh the heathen in anger; Yet out of all these bitter hearbs Gods people can suck sweetnesse: For God is good to his Israel, Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy peo∣ple, vers. 13. It's worthy of your notice, that amidst greatest ex∣tremities God extends his speciall eye of care and providence un∣to his owne people, he never failes to be their Protector. It fol∣loweth, Thou woundest the head of the house of the wicked, by disco∣vering the foundation unto the neck, (i. e.) God will pluck these up by the roots, that they shall never grow againe. By this Me∣aphor of a foundation, (according to Intelligit quicquid erat stabilitatis in ipsis hostibus, hoc fuisse e∣vulsumus{que} ad collum Calv. in loc. Calvins interpretation) I understand, Whatsoever strength and stability they seem'd to have, was quite overthrowne from the top to the bottome. The weapons God useth are described, vers. 4. Thou didst strike through with his staves; (i. e.) God gives them over to themselves, and they proove their own executioners, and every mans hand was against his fellow; Their particular sinnes are mentioned, They came out as a whirlewind to scatter me, their rejoycing was to devoure he poore secretly: Behold their insolent rage, and precipitant fury; Their motions are too violent to hold, their rage was against God like
unto Senacherib, but their tumult came up unto his eares, and they fare alike, I will (saith the Lord) put a bridle in thy lipps, and a hook in thy nostrills, Isa. 37. 29. And thus God abaseth the sons of pride: but yet their malice ceaseth not, their doggish nature discovers it selfe, they rejoyce and devoure the poore, and that secretly, one way or other they are a working, if not by open ho∣stility, yet by secret plots, and underminings: so as they may con∣trive their ruine; But view further Gods power and method which he useth, for the preservation of his people, Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heapes of great waters: this is an Allusion to that wonderfull passage over the red sea; Hence learne that in the greatest dangers God makes away for his ser∣vants escape. And now lets see, how all these wonders affect the Prophet, you may guesse at his disease by these symptomes, trem∣bling in his belly, quivering in his lipps, rottennesse in his bones, heres a man of the right stamp, you may discerne of what currant met∣tall he is by his sympathy, and fellow feeling of the afflictions of others. It's the duty of a good man to be alike affected with o∣thers calamities, and miseries, as if they were his own. To draw downe the Context unto the Text, my Prophet is no idle Spectator, but he with Mary keepes all these things and pon∣ders them in his heart, he makes a soveraingne Compound of bit∣ter Ingredients, and with the Laborious Bee, he suckes sweetnesse out of the sowrest herbes, and with Sampson findes a honey comb in a Lions mouth: I meane he makes a dungeon a paradise, an a∣bounding misery, a superabundant comfort by a wise and spiri∣tuall application, for come what will come his resolution is in∣violably fixt upon a principle of faith, that although the figg tree shall not blossome, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labour of the Olive shall faile, and the fields shall yeeld no meate, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalles, yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Here is an enumeration of the choysest comforts, such as are of highest estimation amongst men; The Fig-tree hath much sweetnesse, and brings forth good fruit, the fruit of the Vine makes the heart of a man glad, and oyle makes him have a chearfull countenance, and the field is so pretious, as Solomon tells us, Eccles. 5. 9. The King himselfe is served by the field. Moreover flocks in the fold, and herds in the stalls are of continuall use and service unto man: weigh
them together, and they will proove too light, they will frustrate thy hope, and renew thy feares and griefes. Let me instruct thee in this truth, that Gods owne people may be brought unto such great streights and miseries, as all creature comforts may faile them. Now it's the time of their triall, for the time of miserie tries the truth and sincerity of their faith, when they are almost ready to sinke and to be overwhelmed with sorrowes, then most opportunely the Lord reacheth out a Cable to draw them out. In the most tempestuous weather, hope remaines the Anchor of their soules, be their hearts never so much over-clowded with sorrow, they are revived by the joy of Gods reconciled counte∣nance: It's God alone who is the supporter of the sinking soule, they feele sweetnesse in God, surpassing the sweetnesse of the fig∣tree, they feele refreshings in him incomparably more delightfull then those which the Vine and Olive affords, and they feed on food which the world knowes not of, even the bread of life, which yeilds more nutritive and reall sustenance then all the flocks, and herds in the universe. The Lord is the Godly mans food, com∣fort, rejoycing, his only joy; God is all in all, nay better then all, unto him, Hee's a Portion, Treasure, Rock, what not to his Chil∣dren. Whereupon out of the strength of faith, he breakes forth with my Prophet into this heroicall resolution yet I will re∣joyce &c. My Text is the Triumph of a Christian, or the sanctuary of an Divis. afflicted soule, in the very  or highest pitch of afflictions. The first word in my Text is a redditive particle; tamen, yet, this resembles a prop and a supporter to a house, which holds it up a∣gainst blustering winds and stormess. Secondly, Here's the person I (i. e.) the Prophet Habakkuk. Thirdly, His resolution expressing strength of affection, I will rejoyce, I will joy, the Septuagint renders them by two words, : The joy is more then ordinary, for heres an exaltation he leapes for joy, and takes much delight and comfort in it. Fourthly, The object which is described by his names topfull of power, comfort, and mercy, a Lord, a God, and a God of salva∣tion: Each Title is a severall forcible argument to excite and ele∣vate the affection. Fifthly, and lastly here's the Propriety, hee's mine: The pro∣noune
possessive mine, appropriates the divine goodnesse unto a mans selfe in particular, and this makes Application of this most comfortable doctrine. The version of the septuagint is most Em∣phaticall, : Each name hath an Article prefixt, to make the Emphasis greater. The summe and scope of all comes to this effect, the prophet was very sensible of the violls of Gods wrath powred down upon the Nations: the whole world was in a combustion, one misery fell upon the neck of another, as one billow in a tempestuous sea followed ano∣ther, how could he think himselfe secure? why might not instru∣ments of death be prepared against him, and he have his share in these common calamities? but this prudent man hath a remedy to apply to these sores: amidst these stormes, he can find a hiding place for shelter, though sorrowes come thick and threefold, yet heel'e have recourse unto his God, and fetch down joy and con∣solation from him in abundance. From hence observe this experimentall truth of Doctrine which shall constitute the subject of my ensuing meditations. That when all creature comforts faile us, and render our outward  condition disconsolate, then there appeares sure mercies and comforts superabundant matter of Consolation, of joy and rejoycing in the Lord our God: Or take the point more briefly thus: Amidst all sorrowes, losses and crosses, joyes, supplies, and comforts, are to be found in the Lord our God: Yet (saith my Prophet) I will re∣joyce in the Lord. The verse immediatly following, set's out the exuberance of joy, pressed by strength of Argument, The Lord God is my strength; Look for no strength else-where, in him it's most eminent, Admit thou art exceeding weake, yet God is strong, and his strength will be manifested in thy weaknesse. The consideration of the divine supportation that it is sufficient for thee, should animate thee, to trust thy God with all thy com∣forts: he goes on, and he will make thy feet like hinds feet, and he will make me, to walke upon mine high places (i. e.) he will give me strength and agility to break through all oppositions; and therefore the last breath he puts out is Eucharisticall, To the chiefe singer on my stringed instruments. You see it cleare in my Text, the Prophet David professed out of universall experience, that Gods rod and his staffe, did com∣fort him, and in the multitude of his sorrowes Gods comforts re∣fresht
his soule; He had fainted, but for the goodnesse of the Lord. This holy man, was a man of sorrowes, and yet a man of comforts, the wrath of Saul was inkindled against him, and The wrath of a King (saith Salomon) is like the roaring of a Lion; He pursued him like a Partridge on the mountaines, and when he was at the brinke of danger, then appeares a method of delive∣rances, when he was hemm'd in and compassed round about, then the divine providence contrived a way to escape, then there came a messenger unto Saul saying, Hast thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the land, wherefore Saul returned from pur∣suing after David and went against the Phylistines: In this streight an unexpected providence procures his preservation. Indeed if we had leisure to inquire into the passages of the divine disposing hand concerning this one man, we should conclude them to be as so many continued Acts of the Finger of God. When Ziglag was burnt, and the people wept till they could weepe no more, even then in that lamentable condition, David encouraged him∣selfe 1 Sam. 30. 6. in the Lord his God; His God refresht his drooping spirit, he was more pretious, more sweet unto his soule, then a goodly ha∣bitation, the wife of his bosome, a numerous posterity: The least glimpse of comfort from the blessed Trinity makes amends for all. Not to passe by poore Hagar: when her bottle was spent, and she cast under a shrub her child, expecting ever and anon his death, and in the bitternesse of her soule she lift up her voyce and wept, then God opened her eyes, and she saw a wll of water, and over and above God promiseth to make him a great nation, Gen. 21. 18, 19. Here's sorrow turn'd into joy, and God himselfe becomes the comforter. The three children had the presence of God for their preservation in the flames; Daniel had the Angell of the Lord to shut the Lions mouth, Job saw a redeemer comforting him in the dunghill, Peter had an Angell to deliver him: God will have the prisoner, the shackles fall off, the dores fly open, the Iron gate opens of it's owne accord. Herod (though he thought that he had made all sure worke,) must be disappointed. 'Tis true Peter was a sleepe, he might dream of no such thing: Gods people, who have peace with God and their Consciences can enjoy quiet rest and repose in a prison: Thus you see how God performes his promise to his people, in giving unto them the oyle of joy for mourning, beauty for ashes, the garment of praises for
the spirit of heavinesse; God is alwaies at hand to support his ser∣vants to bring them out of the greatest streights. O that thou wouldst in the greatest feares and dangers expostulate on this wise with the Kingly Prophet David, Psal. 42. 11. Why art cast downe O my Soule, and why art thou disquieted within me; hope thou in God for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God, and with the blessed Apostle thou may'st argue; What Rom. 3. 31. shall we say then to these things? if God be for us, who can be against us. Let the world, the flesh, and the Devill, the three grand ene∣mies of thy soule muster up all their forces against thee, yet raise up thy spirit, be of good courage, and feare not, if the Lord be on thy side, thou hast more with thee then against thee. For the further confirmation of this truth, I find foure Argu∣ments 4. Argum. drawn from the Text. to my hand in my Text, I say in the most piercing sorrows, there's still left matter of rejoycing in God. 1. Because he is stiled Lord. 2. He is stiled a God. 3. A God of Salvation. 4. A God of our Salvation. 1. He is the Lord: Jehovah and  are promiscuously used 1. Lord. in the Septuagint, this is a name of Dominion, Soveraignty, and Majesty: he is  of himselfe Lord of all. David pickt much comfort out of this name: the Lord was his shepheard, re∣fuge, buckler, rock of defence, and therefore the close of, Psal. 144. 15. is full of comfort, Happy is that people that is in such a case, yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord. O do not stand in thy own light, and inhance thy griefe, by refusing comfort with Rachell. Art thou in a tottering condition ready to sink under thy burthen? Consider the promise, Psal. 37. 17. The Lord upholdeth the righteous, and vers. 24. The Lord upholdeth him with his hand: Art thou as weak as water, and thy heart failes thee like water spilt upon the ground? Yet couldst thou believe with David, The Psal. 29. 11. Lord will give strength unto his people, and the Lord will blesse his people with peace, then thy life would be more comfortable, thou wouldst go on couragiously in the strength of the Lord, and be confident in the power of his might; Although no comfort ap∣peares in thy Horrizon, yet could'st thou but wait upon the Lord, and by patience possesse thy soule, so many thoughts of Infi∣delity would not arise in thy soule: didst thou but delight thy self
in the Lord, thou wouldst soone discerne all thy desires satisfied. This name of Lord, as it's a name of Power and Majesty, so of joy and Consolation, and hence we are instructed in a submissive deportment, fixing our resolutions upon this argument with old Elie, 1 Sa. 3. 18. It is the Lord let him do what seemeth him good; and with Hezekiah, when he received heavy tidings, Good is the word of the Lord, which thou hast spoken. The consideration hereof makes a dutifull child kisse the rod, because the Lord sends it, it holds up a mans heart, and makes a man cheerefull under the pressure of a smarting crosse, because the soule can discerne the hand of the Lord. Thus you see whats the fuell to inkindle thy joy, what matter of rejoycing this comfortable name of Lord administers unto thy soule, and therefore this should be a prevailing argu∣ment with thee, to rejoyce because it is in the Lord. 2. From the glorious name of God, abundant matter of joy 2 God. is derived upon thy soule, I stand not upon usuall Etymologies : For it is undoubtedly true that God fills all places, and knowes all things. Omnipresence and Omniscience are his peculiar Attributes. Men are circumscribed to a place, and when they are present with us are unable to afford the least help and succour unto us: but the Lord is every where, and hath a store house of comforts for the supplying of our ne∣cessities, David professeth, that God is our refuge and strength, a Psal. 46. 1. very present help in time of trouble. God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a cleane heart. Let God arise and let his enemies be scat∣tered, Psal. 73. 1. and let those that hate him fly before him. When God goeth Psal. 68. 1. forth with an Army, one shall be able to chase a thousand, and two to put ten thousand to fleight. When a man hath a lingring sicknesse, and hee's become a very Skeleton, let him know that unto God belongs the issues from death. When the church is under hatches, and a furious enemie makes havock of it, yet there's a God in heaven which judgeth the Nations, who will wound the hairy Scalpe of the wicked: his heire will not be his safe-guard: God can bring light out of darknesse, and now in the times of af∣flictions, hee brings out the most pretious Cordialls unto his peo∣ple: when friends, the dearest and nearest forsake thee, thou art no looser when thy God takes care for thee; when thy heart is overwhelmed with sorrow, if God let downe some spirituall re∣freshments, then thou canst hold up thy head with comfort; If
where ever thou goest, bonds, imprisonments and afflictions, and all the calumnies and Nick-names (which the malice of man or Devill can invent) continually attend thee, yet all these shall co∣operate for thy good, they shall do no more harme, then the Ar∣row did Christ, which Julian the Apostate threw into the ayre, or the doggs unto the Moon, notwithstanding their daily barking. It was the sweet saying of a devout Martyr, Who would have thought that in a prison, I should have found a Palace, in an infer∣nall dungeon a Paradise of pleasure? Where God is, sweetnesse may be extracted from the most bitter pill of affliction. This is a se∣cond Argument of Comfort drawne from the sacred name of God. But if these names are not effectuall to set thy affections a work∣ing, 3. God of Salvation. here's an unparalled expression in the third Argument, the sweet name of a Jesus, hee's a God of Salvation, and therefore (saith a Father) Exultabo in Deo, Jesu meo. Salvation belongs to the Lord, Psal. 3. 8. And from hence the Psalmist drawes a pra∣cticall inference, Psal. 9. 4. I will rejoyce in thy Salvation. Here∣upon the Kingly Prophet in a hard time, when God frowned up∣on him, (as they say skilfull Chymists can extract oyle out of a flint) found Serenity in this meditation, Behold God is my Sal∣vation, I will trust and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my Song, he also is become my Salvation. Therefore (saith the Prophet) With joy yee shall draw water out of the wells Isai. 12. 3, 4. of Salvation. In the Prophesy of Obadiah, where direfull menaces are threatned against the Edomites: and indeed the whole Pro∣phesy may resemble that Scrole of Ezekiel full fraught with mour∣ning, Lamentation, and woe, but the day cleares up, and the Catastrophe is most pleasant, vers. 21. And Saviours shall come up∣on mount Zion, to judge the mount of Esau, and the Kingdome shall be the Lords. You cannot imagine how welcome redemption is to a Turkish gally slave, and in a dangerous skirmish, a Rescuer is gratefull. Lets then pawse a while, and consider former gra∣tious passages of Gods dealings towards us, when we were at our wits end, our contrivances were nonplus'd, and we knew not which way to turne us, and we were ready to perish then the Lord breakes in and discovers wayes and meanes for our preser∣vation: Let your particular experiences suggest instances in this particular. When there were but a heyre's breadth between us
and death, then the same God that brought us to the grave raised us up. When men and Devills banded themselves in opposition a∣gainst us, when the Pope and his Cardinalls contrived the Spanish invasion, and when that miscarried there followed a conspiracy in the Vault, a deed of Romish darknesse, then appear'd a God of Sal∣vation, to blow and scatter their Shipps, and afterward to bring deliverance betweene the match and the powder, Maugre all the plots and projects of all Achitophells, and underminers of Zion, blessed be God we are here alive, as you see this day to Celebrate the Praises of the God of our Salvation. 4. And so I am fallen upon my fourth and last Argument in my 4. My. Text, drawne from that propriety (My) I speak not of a good by heare say, in which others have the sole interest, but it's our own, The God of my Salvation, the pronoune Possessive (My) reduceth the comfort unto my selfe, and intitles me unto it, by a particu∣lar application. The use and vertue of medicines is knowne when they are applied, and the most comfortable promises of God, and doctrines of Salvation, then proove effectuall unto my soule when I make use of them in my life, and Conversation; How frequently doth David call God the God of our Salvation? Moses having a large testimony hereof by the overthrow of Pharaoh and his host, breakes forth into this triumphant Song, Exod. 15. 2. The Lord is my strength and my song, he is become my Salvation, he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation, my Fathers God and I will ex∣alt him: Certainly, (my brethren) Christians would lead more comfortable lifes, ever find a heaven upon earth, if they could make a profitable Observation of Gods former dealings each one with himselfe in particular. Men are apt to sink under the sense of any present evill, that presseth them, because they reflect not up∣on Gods former waies of mercies towards them. It were an excel∣lent course todraw home such Experimentall Arguments as these, I have knowne a famine and felt a pinching season, when scarce I could get bread from hand to mouth, I out-liv'd that time, the divine providence cared for me, and carried me through that plunge, and distresse, I have felt a sore disease, and have been in the mouth of the grave, and yet I live to praise Gods power, I have drunke deepe of the cup of affliction, I have been even drencht in my owne sorrowes, and yet out of them all the Lord hath deli∣vered me, and let his countenance shine upon me, I have known
feares, and troubles, dangers and distractions both in Church and state, yet the Lord became the Reconciler and brought all to a blessed conclusion, and still theres the same God, as full of bowells of compassion to commiserate our calamities, as full of power to effect, of wisdome to contrive, as full of fidelity to per∣forme his owne promises as before, and therefore my resolution stands firme, and unmoveable, that I will wait upon God in the waies of his own mercy, and rest in the constancy immutability, & indeficiency of that God with whom there is no variablenesse nor shadow of change. Had men such spirituall prudence, as to uphold their hearts by their experiences, and review often Gods former proceedings, they might with more stablisht and quiet affections, expect the salvation of the Lord againe. I have resum'd these Arguments as you find them layd downe in my Text; A Lord and willing, A God and able, A Saviour and my Saviour, each word severally abounds in comfort, and now when they are all united, how much do they concurre to the complement, and perfection of our joy. I told you before to this effect, that no condition was ever so disconsolate, but still some matter of joy and rejoycing was to be found in God. Me thinks I could dwell upon this sweet Theme, and say as Peter said at Christs transfiguration, It's good being here. For the further discovery of this most excellent and necessary truth, be pleased to weigh and seriously consider with me these five cleare and evident demonstrations. 1. All joy and comforts are treasured up in God. 5. Demon∣strations. 2. Theres no reall solid joy to be found else-where. 3. Amidst the greatest crossesse, streights, and extremities, then is Gods opportunity to send comforts, causing them to ap∣peare and shew themselves. 4. The least of Gods comforts will make a super abundant re∣compense for all the discomforts in the world. 5. And lastly all the waies and proceedings of God are waies and proceedings of joy and comfort. For the further Inlargment of these particulars. 1. I say all 1. All com∣forts are treasured up in God. comforts are treasured up in God. There must needs be water at the well head, there must needs be drops in the Ocean. God is the Fountaine and Originall of all our Consolations, The earth (saith the Psalmist) is full of thy riches, so is this great and wide Psal. 104. 24, 25.
sea, where in are things creeping, innumerable both small and great beafis. What canst thou want; if thou hast made God thy porti∣on, thou maist say with Jacob, I have enough I have all, In Christ all fulnesse dwells, Col. 1. 19. In Christo est quicquid requiritur ad Davenant in Loc. contituendum perfectum Redemptorem. Theres in Christ fulnesse of wisdome to direct, fulnesse of power to defend, fulnesse of merit to satisfy, and effect mans salvation, fulnesse of righteousnesse to justify, fulnesse of holinesse to sanctify, fulnesse of mercy to par∣don. Hee's stil'd in Scripture, a Rock for his strength, to support us, a Counsellour for his wisdome to guide us, a fountaine opened Isa. 9. 6. Zech. 13. 1. Rom. 27. 2. for his readinesse, and preparednesse to wash away our unclean∣nesse, a Tree of life bearing twelve sorts of fruits every month, for the plenty and perpetuity of joy and gladnesse, and other fruits of the spirit which he ministers unto true believers. Hence is he compared in the Revelations, to a pure River of living water Rev. 22. 1. as cleare as Christall, for that inestimable purity, perfection, com∣fort, and satisfaction which Christ minister unto the soules of his children; Likewise to a pretious pearle, for his superlative worth, Matth. 13. 45, 46. and value, and to a storehouse for his fulnesse of all spirituall trea∣sures: Omnia habemus in Christo, & omnia in nobis Christus, saith Jerome. Jerome, and the same Father proposeth particular Instances; Si à vulnere curari desideras, medicus est &c. If thou desirest to be cu∣red of thy wounds, Chist is thy Physitian, if thou burne with fea∣vers, he is a fountaine, if thou art burtheed with iniquity: he is righteousnesse, if thou wantest help he is strength, if thou fearest death he is life, if thou flyest from darknesse he is light, if thou de∣sirest heaven, he is the way: Therefore make thy wants knowne to God, though he knowes them all already, yet he will have them knowne unto thy selfe better, and God loves to heare from his children the expressions of his own spirit. When out of a sense and apprehension of thy owne vilenesse thou unbarest thy sores, and confessest thy sinnes, then God in mercy may remit them. A poore soule complaines of its ignorance, and folly: so foolish was I and ignorant, (saith David) even as a beast before thee: O make hast unto Christ, In him are hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge. When the depth saith it is not in me, and the sea it is not in me, when all the lamps of Philosophers can give no light, when all their penetrating braines cannot sound these misteries: Job instructs thee where thou must go to schoole, Job. 28. 23.
God understands the way thereof, and he knowes the place thereof, from God cometh wisdome, and from the Lord cometh understanding: Another is of a sorrowfull spirit, and goes mourning all the day long: The remembrance of their sinnes is exceedingly afflictive unto their soules, still it presents unto them gall and wormewood, terrors and feares, which almost drives them unto desperation, these would prize one glimpse of Gods reconciled countenance, beyond the Empire of the world: but alas they can apprehend no comfort as appertaining unto them; mark then what seasonable counsell the Prophet gives in this kind, Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voyce of his servants, that walketh in darknesse and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. A child of light for a time may walke in darknesse, he may possesse his soule in bitternesse, he may be wonderfully tost and troubled in a tempestuous sea of sorrow, ever and anon ready to perish, yet when Christ comes and re∣bukes the winds, and the seas there will be a great calme. One of his love tokens, and spirituall illapses will wipe away their teares, and make them go away full of comfort with Hannah, and be no more sad. A poore doubting Christian must not be his owne Judge he can easilier discerne, what makes against him, then what makes for him: O then hearken what God saith unto thee, what comfort his messengers proclaime unto thee: wait upon God in his Ordinances, stand upon thy watch, act faith upon Promises, and in Gods due time comfort may come, like Noahs Dove with an Olive branch in her mouth, in token that the waters of Marah are abated. When God hath fitted thee for a mercy, then he will give unto it a quick dispatch, and send unto thy soule tidings of peace; thus I have made it good unto you, that all com∣forts are to be found in God. 2. Theres no reall comfort to be found else-where; If you will 2. Demonst. theres no re∣all comfort to be found else-where. not believe this truth, but hunt after the creature, as if that can comfort you, to your perill be it, you may goe further and speed worse: what said Saul to the Benjamites, will the son of Jesse give you fields and vine-yards, and make you all Captaines of Thou∣sands, and Captaines of Hundreds? So let me expostulate, can the Creature give you any reall satisfaction and contentment, in that you so hugge your selves in the fruition of it? If these be your hu∣mors, I know not better how to resemble you, then to the men
of Shechem, in Jothams parable, Judg. 9. vers. 9. Who leaving the Vine, Olive, and Figg-tree, addrest themselves unto the bram∣ble for shelter and security, and since they put their trust in it's shadow, (which can Minister no safety nor defence,) what can be expected, but that fire should come out of the bramble and de∣voure the Cedars of Lebanon. I meane since they expect so much from the Creature, by woefull experience they will find it to be the greatest scourge and plague unto them. Creature comforts carry a brave port, and come with Agag delicately, but they are not aware of their approaching ruines. Pleasures of the world make faire promises, presenting unto us, as Jaell did Sisera but∣ter and milke in a lordly dish, but theres a hammer and a nayle, instruments of death are prepared against us, (i. e.) sowre sauce for sweet meate. Whats all the mirth of the wicked but madnesse? For their hearts are full of gravell, and the terrors of God affright them, amidst their Carrowsing and jollity. Saul could not be merry without a Musitian; Whereas Plato told the musitians, that Philosophers knew how to dine and sup without them. Dost thou think to recreate thy selfe by learning a lascivious scurrilous Bal∣lads, by healthing it in Ale-Houses and Tavernes, and revelling it in Balls and such like Idolized vanities, will the remembrance of these sinfull jollities make thee hold up thy head with comfort, when God lets loose the ord of thy conscience against thee? Then thou wilt curse the day that ever thou cast in thy lot a∣mongst them, to be a companion of fooles, and by woefull ex∣perience thou wilt find, that thou hast all this while sought the living amongst the dead: Ahab could not be merry without Na∣boths Vineyard, and when he had unrighteously took possession of it, his sorrowes were renewed abundantly. Haman could not comfortably enjoy himselfe because he wanted Mordecais bended knee; suppose he had obtain'd it, yet his restlesse ambitious hu∣mour could not be satisfied: For it is not within the sphaere of any sublunary thing, any created power, to afford comfort and sa∣tisfaction unto the soule of man. As the King of Israel said to the woman, that cry'd out in an extreame famine help my Lord ô King, if the Lord (saith he) do not help thee, whence shall I help thee out of the barne flore, or out of the wine presse? So say I if the Lord be not thy comforter, in vaine mayest thou expect any com∣fort from the Creatures. What is the vintage of Abiezer to the
gleanings of Ephraim? What are the onions and garlick of Egypt to the grapes of Canaan? Abana and Pharphar rivers of Damas∣cus, to Jordan and the rest of the waters of Israel: The waters that flow from the Cisternes of the Creatures, are like the waters of Tema which soon vanish away: hence is it that the Lord com∣plaines of the peoples grand folly and backsliding, Jer. 2. 13. For my people have committed two evills, they have forsaken me the foun∣taine of living waters, and hewed them out Cisternes, broken Cisternes that can hold no water: A miserable choyce, worse then that of Glaucus. Diogenes taxed the folly of men of his time, quod res pre∣tiosas minimo emerent venderentque vilissimas plurimo, because they Diogenes. would buy pretious things at an under rate, and overvalue base things: so may I condemne the folly of those, who overvalue world∣ly comforts, and in the meane time have a cheape esteem of those things which are above; Perhaps God hath given thee a beautifull Child, and thou mak'st an Idoll of it, he straight way takes it from thee; God hath given thee riches, thou makest the wedge of Gold thy confidence, God therefore blowes upon them. Fire or wa∣ter or perfidious servants are made scourges unto thee: Thou art in prosperity, and thou hast the world at will, and gloriest in thy condition, God sends an affliction to make thee know thy selfe, and rowse thee from thy security; carry it then home with thee for a truth, write it with the poynt of a Diamond, that however thou may'st flatter thy selfe, yet casting the best with the worse, thou wilt find all things here below to be but vanity, and vexati∣of spirit, and that there is no sollid joy and contentment under the sun; For thats joy (as the Philosopher define it) in quo quiescit animus, wherein the heart takes up it's rest, and this can∣not be found but in God alone. 3. Amidst greatest crossesse, straights and extremities, then is 3. Demonst. God helps a∣midst grea∣test Crossss. Gods opportunity to open his store-house, and let downe com∣forts in abundance. In the midst of streights and difficulties, when humane policy gives up the bucklers, then it's Gods accustomed manner to manifest himselfe to his servants comfort. When Abra∣ham was injoyn'd the hardest service, to be his owne sons execu∣tioner, he went in obedience to Gods command; he came to the place, made the Altar ready, lifted up his hand to give the deaths blow; then an unexpected second message comes of deliverance, Gen. 22. 12. Abraham, Abraham hold thy hand. The execution
is hindred, and the intention of his obedience received a gratious entertainment. Now Abraham for this unexpected providence would willingly offer some sacrifice of thanksgiving, and speedy provision might be as improbable as was his sons preservation, yet then in such a great necessity, behold behind him a Ramme caught in a thicket by the hornes, a burnt offering of Gods own providing: So that the saying is no more common then true, Mans extremity is Gods opportunity. The example of St Paul is instar omnium very fit for my present purpose, the whole story is worthy of perusall, that which I shall make use of is described, Act. 21. 30, 31, 32. And all the Citty was moved, and the people ran togeather and they took Paul and drew him out of the temple, and forth-with the dores were shut, and as they went about to kill him, tydings came to the chiefe Captaine of the band that all Jerusalem was in an uprore, who immediatly took Souldiers and Centurions, and ran down unto them, and when they saw the chiefe Captaine and Souldiers, they left beat∣ing of Paul. Each passage is of speciall observation. 1. A generall insurrection, all the Citty. 2. Their violent opposition they drew him out. 3. Their bloody intention, it was to kill Paul. 4. The entrance upon execution, they were beating him to beat out his life! Now in this streight here's matter for God (and none else) to shew himselfe: Now the divine hand so disposeth that tydings of deliverance come, let him alone, he hath more work to do: Satan and his instruments are chained by God, and can go no further then hee'l permit them. In this extremity the divine power was clearely manifested. Out of the deep David made his supplication: Abyssus ahyssum vocat, a depth of misery, calls for a depth of mer∣cy; Daniel prayed in the Lions Den, Jeremiah in the Dungeon, Jonah in the Whales belly, the Apostles in prison. These are Gods times of audience. When we are involv'd in miseries, and know not how to wind our selves out, then God leads us by the hand. God hath severall waies to refresh his people, as he did Peter when he was a sinking, then Christ takes him by the hand. God carries his people through thick and thinne, amidst their greatest sufferings, God hath waies to deliver them. God hath a way in the sea, to preserve thee in a Shipwrack, God hath a way in per∣secution to stablish his people in the faith, and make them of an
undaunted courage; God hath away in any difference, to com∣pose it, and cause men to live at peace in one family, in one corpo∣ration, in one Church, in one Common-wealth. The reason ma∣ny times why, we see not quickly the appearance of a mercy is, because matters are not yet brought to such a straight and exigen∣cy, as all plea of glorying may be took from man, and the more praise and glory may redound unto the God of our salvation. God saved the Israelites by a few, and by improbable meanes as by rammes-hornes, empty pitchers &c: that so they might not vaunt, but attribute the victory unto the Lord. Now then in a pinch of need, when thou art driven upon pressing exigencies, look beyond Hills and Mountaines unto the Lord only, whence cometh thy help; Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he will su∣staine thee; God made the Ravens to be Eliahs purveyors in a great famine, theres still the same God as good, as able as ever: although , (as the Septuagint renders it) the labour of the Olive shall lye, yet consider God is a God of truth, he hath said it, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. When all creature comforts faile thee, yet thou hast abun∣dant matter in God to comfort thee, who will never faile them that seek him: In the mount, in thy greatest straights, God will be seen to make a provision of comforts for thee, and therefore let the Lord be the joy of thy soule. 4. The least of Gods comforts will make a superabundant re∣compense 4. Demonst. The least of Gods com∣forts will make a∣mends for all discom∣forts. compense for all the discomforts in the world. A cup of cold water shall not loose its reward, and you know theres a vast dis∣proportion, betweene a cup of cold water and the Kingdome of Heaven. God takes notice of every teare that the Saints shed, and and he exhales them into his bottle, and when the time of refresh∣ing shall come from his presence he will wipe away all teares from their eyes. Admit a man hath endured a scoffe, or a taunt, an approbrious nickname for Christ, or admit, that he hath resisted unto blood, fryed at a stake for the Gospell of Christ, could a man I say dye ten thousand kinds of death, yet all these sufferings are not worthy to be compared, with the joy that shall be re∣vealed, for one moment in heaven will make amends for all; With this meditation Christ cheared up his disciples, Matth. 19. 29. E∣very one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or Lands for my names sake shall re∣ceive
an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. When Peter told Christ that they had forsaken all, and what was that? A poore all, a few rotten poles, and fishers nets, or some such like thing, our Saviour acquaints them of their thriving bargaine, of their happy exchange which they had made, by the losse of earth to gaine heaven, O do not inhance thy griefe saying that no mans sorrow is like thine, there cannot be a more Emphaticall Antithe∣sis, then in 2 Cor. 4. 17. . Our Translation cannot reach these sublime expressions: Our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a farre more ex∣ceeding and eternall weight of glory. Suppose thou art afflicted with outward crossesse, and in the meane time God settles the tranqui∣lity of thy soule, in liev of outward, God vouchsafes unto thee inward comforts, how art thou a looser by this? Suppose thou hast run in a greedy pursuit of some desiderable object, thou hast pursued thy pleasure, with as much violence as Rachell did her children, Give me (saith shee) children or else I dye: Now God in wisdome crosseth thee, he knowes whats better for thee then thou dost for thy selfe, God opens thy eyes, and then thou dis∣cernest what a singular mercy it is, that God disappointed thee of thy desire. We must not carve out waies of comfort to our selves, if we be our owne chusers we shall dearely smart for it. When the children of Israel lusted for meate, God sent them Quailes, but they had better have been without them, for whilst the meate was in their mouths, the wrath of the Lord came upon them. The Israelites would have no nay, but must have a King; The Lord gave them a King in his anger, and took him away in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. It's farre better to have a crosse in mercy, and so sanctified, as we may discerne the opened bowells of God, then the greatest conflu∣ence of riches, and revenues when they are sent in judgment, and in Gods displeasure. John Ardley a blessed Martyr griev'd that he had but one life to lay downe for Christ, if I had (saith he) as many lifes as there are heyres of my head, they should all goe for Christ. It was the strength of faith that made Gordius another Godly Martyr believe, that all the threats of his enemies were but as seeds, from which he should reape immortality, and eternall joyes. Here's the comfort, that those which sow in teares shall reape in joy: Let not us shrink then at any difficult service, which Christ
puts us upon: For all the troubles and hard-ships, which befall us in this vale of misery, (provided we suffer for Christs sake) will augment our future joyes in the kingdome of heaven. When thou comest thither, it will never repent thee in the least, that thou ever sufferest any thing for the name of Christ. Thy suffer∣ings and sorrowes here are but finite, and limited, but the joyes of Gods kingdome are infinite and incomprehensible: wherefore the Apostle describes them by way of negation, neither eye hath seen, nor eare hath heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive the things that God hath prepared for them that love him. 5. And lastly, all the waies of God are comfortable, and a∣bouud 5. Demonst. All the ways of God, are waies of joy and com∣fort. in joy: The waies of wisdome are waies of pleasantnesse, and all her paths are peace, Prov. 3. 17. O what ravishing delight and pleasure is there in the law of God: O how I love thy law (saith David) the law of thy mouth is better unto me then thou∣sands of Gold and Silver, Psal. 119. 127. I love (saith he) thy commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold. They were swee∣ter unto him then honey and the honey combe; Oh! what a sweet thing is it to heare God speaking unto us in his word, and for us to speake unto him by our prayers, herein consists the life of a Christians life. Oh! what a sweet thing is it to be fed with spirituall viands, when we are admitted unto the Lords Table, Oh! what sweetnesse is to be extracted out of the Communion of Saints, There be many (saith the Psalmist) that say who will shew us any good, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, thou hast put gladnesse in our heart, more then in the time that their corne and wine increased, Psal. 4. 6, 7. One beame of Gods recon∣ciled countenance, more cheares up a Godly mans spirit, then barnes full of corne, and coffers cramm'd with Gold. Oh! that I could perswade you in the feare of God, to the beliefe of this truth, that all the paths of God are full of joy and comfort. It's an horrid aspersion cast upon the waies of Godlinesse, that religi∣on makes men of melancholy and dumpish spirits, the joy where∣of they are pertakers is inconceivable: Spe gaudent they rejoyce in hope saith St Paul: , They that hope, re∣joyce (saith Aristotle,) Seneca tells us what joy he would have, Seneca. Volo illam laetitiam tibi domi. I would have thy joy to be at home. The joy of the Godly is abundant in their owne breast and in
their own soule, and conscience; The spirit witnesseth to their spi∣rits that thy are reconeiled to God: The apprehension whereof fills their hearts with joy and peace which passeth all understan∣ding. They have here the first fruits, and earnest of those in ex∣pressible joyes of heaven, this makes them to be a calling for their Robes, and Crownes which Christ purchased for them by effu∣sion of his pretious blood. Therefore trust God with thy joyes and pleasures: without God the sweetest thing is bitter: As Ab∣ner said to Joab, so say I of all thy sinfull lusts and pleasures, will there not be bitternesse in the end? but where God is the most bit∣ter pill of affliction is sweet and pleasant. St Bernard hath a spe∣ciall Bernard O∣rat. de bonis deserendis. observation in a declamation, de bonis deserendis, non Isaac sed aries morietur &c. If you be willing to sacrifice your Isaac, which signifies laughter (i. e.) your pleasure, your Isaac, your pleasure shall not dye, it is the Ramme, the stubbornesse of spirit which shall dye, but your Isaac shall live, you shall have pleasure still. Wherefore cast downe all your joyes, comforts, and plea∣sures at Gods feet, in an humble submission saying, Lord here they are, do with me and them, what seemes good in thine eyes. When the heart is thus took of the world it's in a fit temper, and is best qua∣lified for the comforts of God, and over and above when thy spirit is in this frame of resignation of all unto God, he in mercy may vouchsafe unto thee the comfortable fruition of them. Thus you have heard what Demonstrations I have propoun∣ded, for the evincing of this pretious Doctrine, that all joy and comfort amidst the greatest discomforts is to be found in God. Now that I may presse what hath been said home unto your Applicat. practice. 1. I shall inferre something by way of comfort unto those that make the Lord the joy of their soules. 2. In the next place, I shall exhort you unto so excellent and necessary duty. 3. In the last place I shall lay downe some Directions, how this sacred duty of rejoycing in God ought to be ex∣exercised: within these limits I shall confine my en∣sueing Application. In the first place this discovers unto us the comfortable condi∣tion Ʋse 1. For Comfort. of the Children of God. O blessed men whose hope and com∣fort the Lord is! comfort yee, comfort yee, my people (saith the
Lord) to these comfort appertaines, as their peculiar right and interest, let them amidst greatest calamities, lift up their heads, for their redemption draweth nigh. All the sufferings of Christ, his sweating of drops of blood were for them, Christ wept that they might rejoyce, he drunk a cup of gall and vinegar, that they might drink a cup of new wine in the Kingdome of Heaven, and he wore a Crowne of Thornes, that they might weare a Crowne of Glory, Oh! be not dismayed at any evill tydings, and mourne not as men with out hope, notwithstanding the confusion and troubles of the Land of our Nativity: Let faith, hope, and patience be exercised. Hope is the propp of the righteous, that stayes the soule from falling, were it not for hope the heart would breake, in these conflicting daies of sin, where there are such sad thoughts of heart, for the afflictions of Joseph, and for the divisions of Reu∣ben. We know not what to do, we have no strength of our selves, but let me tell you as Nehemiah did the Jewes, Neh. 8. 10. The joy of the Lord is your strength; Hee's a fountaine inexhausted, though the Cisternes of the Creatures are drawne dry, he conti∣nues a God of strength, though all sublunary things are as weak as water when Parents forsake a man, then the Lord takes pitty upon him, when riches make themselves wings and flye away as an Eagle towards heaven, God becomes thy riches, and inrich∣eth thee with grace, and so thou gainest by thy lossesse. As Joseph told Pharaoh, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace, so say I, God shall answer thy doubts, and let in peace and tranquility in∣to thy soule. Melchior Adamus records this observeable passage in Melchior A∣damus In vita Oeco∣lampadii. the life of Oecolampadius when some of his friends askt him, whe∣ther the light did not offend him, Tangens pectus (inquit) a∣bunde lucis est, he clapt his hands upon his breast and said, heres light enough. When the light of God shines in thy bosome, and thou discernest Gods reconciled countenance in Christ thou hast enough. Strive therefore to exterminate all thoughts of doubt∣ting and diffidence, feare not, stand still, and behold the salvati∣on of the Lord. However things go with thee, though clouds hang over thee, and they resolve and melt thy heart into abun∣dance of teares, and sorrowes, yet let my Prophets resolution set thy affections a working, yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. 2. In the second place suffer I beseech you my brethren the Ʋse 2. For Exhortation
word of Exhortation, Oh! that I could perswade you to your duty, I shall branch it out into three particulars. 1. To make God your joy. 2. To account him your treasure. 3. To have recourse to him as your refuge. 1. Make God your joy. Theres no man but hath some prin∣ciple Dut. 1. Make God your joy. of joy, or inward working motion within his own bosome, and according to the variety of fansies and humours, the joyes and comforts are bottom'd upon a various and different ground. 1. One man fixeth his joy upon his riches. A 2. Upon his honour and reputation. A 3. Upon his delights and pleasures. But the Godly mans honours, riches, pleasures are wholly ter∣minated upon the Lord his God. When the man in the Gospell had bought the field, wherein he found the pearle of price, he was ravisht with joy, beyond expression and apprehension. The grace of God revealed to the soule of man, is this Gemme of superlative estimation; thou must part with all thy riches, pleasures, and comforts, nay with all the world for this, and thou hereby ma∣kest the wisest bargaine that ever was made: For by the losse of earth, thou gainest heaven: what joy possest the spirit of the Eu∣nuch, after Phillip had baptized him, and brought Christ home unto him? the Text saith he went away rejoycing. Such is the joy of a spiritualliz'd man, whose God is his joy and Consolation, though troubles and miseries come thick and threefold, yet his heart is fixed upon Mount Zion that it cannot be removed, nay upon the God of Zion: Theres some inward working principle, that will swallow up all discomforts whatsoever: This spirituall joy dasheth all carnall joyes; This is the only true sollid joy ari∣sing from Gods reconciled countenance in Christ, which makes a man rejoyce in the Holy Ghost with joy unspeakable and full of glory. It's said in Judges that the young Levites heart was glad, when the children of Dan proffer'd promotion to him; much more joy resides in the spirituall mans soule and conscience, when he thinks of his Crownes, and of the joyes of Heaven, and of the sweet uninterrupted Communion with Jesus Christ unto all eterni∣ty: Oh! then make God thy joy; The serenity of his countenance will dissipate all these clouds, the refreshings and those soule ra∣vishing comforts of Christ will infinitely exceed the greatest dis∣comforts
in the Universe; The joy of the world may be took from thee by the men of the world: There are many Anabapti∣sticall, Antiministeriall spirits who muster their forces to make our comforts Ichabod, but this joy (saith Christ) no man taketh from you, men cannot give it, nor bereave us of it. Therefore bid a∣due to all thy carnall joyes: but lay fast hold of, and let not goe the joyes of Gods spirit, this is the first duty I presse upon you, to make God your joy. 2. Make God your treasure. How sollicitous is a man to get Dut. 2. Make God your trea∣sure. pretious treasures, how doth he compasse sea and land to get them, and when he hath them in his possession, how carefull is he to keep them. A man of understanding leaves not his Jewells at randome, but locks them up safe in a Cabinet, now if God be our treasure, we will seek him in his Ordinances, God is the trea∣surer and the treasure both, this is the only treasure we must seek after, if we find not God in one Ordinance, lets go to another, if we find him not in the word, lets go to the Sacrament, and if we find him not in the Sacrament, lets repaire to our prayers, and fall upon our knees, if yet we find him not, lets with the spowse make inquiry after him, lets aske the Ministers of Christ, nay lets put all these together and never give of seeking till we have found him whom our soule loveth. Now when once we have got him, lets labour to keep him: Will a wise man cast dirt upon a pretious Jewell? every sinner indeavours to cast dirt upon God. Sin is of a besmearing, and fullying quality: If then thou wouldst preserve thy spirituall treasure, and keep the grace of God in thy soule, take heed of that which foules and staynes it, and that is sinne: Oh! Christian be instructed to set upon the work of purification, labour to cleanse thy selfe from all pollution of the flesh, and of the spirit, so that thy soule and body may become a glorious Temple, wherein the spirit of God will set up his habitation. God is our treasure: our faith hope and very life it selfe, are re∣posited in his custody, and therefore the Lord Christ should be more pretious unto our soules, then thousands of Gold and Silver. Oh! how pretious is Christ unto that soule, which hath seen and tasted how good the Lord is. 3. Make God your refuge. What would a man give in such Dut. 3. Make God your Re∣suge. times as these for an Asylum à , or sanctuary whereun∣to he may fly and be secure. Men promise themselves security,
some in one place, and some in another, and they set their hearts upon them: But alas the comforts wherein they trust prooves oft times a Jonahs gourd, which in one night had it's originall, and it's period, or an Egyptian reed, which will either pierce them, or give them the slipp in their greatest extremity. But ô blessed man who makes his God his refuge, and seeks a hiding place in a divine promise: so that hee's not afraid of evill tydings, hee's not discouraged by the direfull imprecations of blasphemous Rabshe∣kahs of John of Leydens faction: Let the extremity be never so bitter, yet a true Believer can draw down comfort from a pro∣mise, which preserves his soule from sinking, he knowes how to look beyond men, unto his God. In such times as these (which are sad and perillous times) when men are set upon mischiefe, and wounder that men run not with them into the same excesse of riot, a man that hath a spirituall eye can bring home the promise, that the Rod of the wicked, will not lye long upon the lot righteous, whn God hath done with the rod, he will cast it into the fire: but he will provide Scorpions for their enemies. David was perswaded, that it would be better for him notwithstanding Shimeis execrati∣ons: so I am perswaded that for bitter ad implacable spirits oppo∣site to Magistrates and Ministers now a daies, Gods people shall fare the better; Let God alone, and do not anticipate him in his own worke, for all the malice that men and Devills can invent, shall work togeather for the good of the people of God. David had fainted, had he not seen the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living; and Hezekiah had fainted by reason of the huge host of Senacherib, but that he believed that God would be their de∣liverer. We have the same God still as good and as gracious as ever, he will put a bridle into the lips, and a hook into the nostrills of unreasonable men, God can help with meanes or with∣out meanes, he can help us, and that right early. When a man out of the strength of Faith can make God his refuge and shelter, and hide himselfe under the covert of his wings, this man amidst multitude of sorrowes, is a man of singular comforts, beyond ex∣pression and apprehension. Now then amidst multitudes of feares and sufferings, labour to have recourse unto a divine promise, that though friends, meanes, hopes, and comforts may faile thee, yet the Lord will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. He never failes them that put their trust in him. The promise runs, unto you that
feare my name, will the son of righteousnesse arise with healing un∣der his wings, Mal. 4. 2. If you can thus apply the promise, and labour to live by Faith, you are fixt upon Mount Zion, and shall not be removed, Psal. 125. 1. 3. And lastly, I shall close up all with a word of Direction, that Ʋse 3. For Direction. amongst the greatest crossesse and miseries, you may still find mat∣ter of joy and comfort in God 1. I shall direct you to remoove some impediments. 2. To do some duties. 1. Remove these foure Impediments. The first, or which I set in the fore front is earthly minded∣nesse, 1. Imped. Earthly minded∣nesse. this is a choake Peare unto the grace of God, this, and spi∣rituall joy are  incompatible termes. A man that is glu∣ed unto the world cannot rejoyce in God, heel'e say of his riches, as Mica said of his Idolls, they have taken away my Gods and what have I more? Jacob spake of Benjamin, his soule was bound up in the life of the Lad; so may I say, the life of a worldly minded man is bound up in his riches, his riches and joy live and dye to∣geather. Now discourse unto such a man concerning the riches of Christ, you talke of Riddles, he askes what is thy beloved more then another beloved? he wants a spirituall in-sight into Christ. The earth is an opacous body interposed between the organ and the object, so that he cannot discerne the beauty and excellency that is in Christ, a worldly man cannot rejoyce in God. 2. Remoove Infidelity when men exercise their sense, more 2. Imped. Infidelity. than their faith, and will with Thomas not believe unlesse they see, Oh! what enemies are they unto their own comfort. Though the Lord should make windowes in heaven, could these things be, so said the unbelieving Prince: so we are apt to say, Things aregone so farre as a Recovery is desperate. To settle affaires in peace and tranquillity upon firme-covenant Foundations, is a work impossi∣ble: what? Is any thing impossible with God? and all things are possible to the believer. O let not go thy faith, it is thy life: what wilt thou distrust thy God? Infidelity is the giving of God the lye, remoove then this stumbling block out of the way, if thou re∣moovest not Infidelity, thou canst not rejoyce in God. 3. Remoove impatience, and murmuring; Fret not thy selfe be∣cause of the ungodly, neither be thou envious at the evill doers (as the Psalmist exhorts) Psal. 37. 1. Repining and grudging are the
cankers of the soule, they eate out all it's peace and tranquillity. An impatient man is the worst enemy to himselfe, he adds weight to his burthen, and makes it insupportable, take heed of impa∣tience and murmuring, when Gods hand lyes heavy on thee. Ma∣ny there are who with Mary cannot see Christ for teares in their eyes, and being overwhel'd with sorrowes, they can discerne no comforts approaching. 4. Remoove remisnesse, and negligence in duties: Their condi∣tion 4. Imped. Remisnesse and negli∣gence in duties. is Lamentable, who when things suite not with their humors say it is in vaine, to serve the Lord; Hence they give to themselves the Reynes, and slacken the pace of their duties: whereas on the contrary had men their eyes in their heads, they would see more need of Duties, that they ought to adde more oyle to the flame, when things go worst with them. Job makes it the character of a wicked man not to pray alwaies. Remisnesse and negligence in Du∣ty is an Argument of a rotten heart; Though there be no appea∣rance of comfort, yet we must not slacken our duties. Spirituall du∣ties are pabula animae the food and nutriment of the Soule. Prayer meditation and divine conference are vehicula animae, and elevate the soule, and revive thy drooping spirit, they adde a miraculous rigour and alacrity, amidst all the crossesse, and discomforts in the world: If then thou wouldst retaine thy joy, take heed of remis∣nesse, and negligence in duties. Now having remooved these im∣pediments, I shall exhort you to set upon some Duties: I shall set downe three only, which I shall but name them, and so conclude. 1. You must labour to live by faith. Had we more experience Dut. 1. Live by faith, of this sweet and pretious life of faith, our hearts would be esta∣blished, we should cast our selves upon the divine providence, and stay upon his covenant, and resolve with (holy Job) though the Lord should kill us, yet we would trust in him. What ever crossesse Job. 13. 15. came upon us, yet we should never let goe our faith. We should believe against beliefe, and hope against hope, and now when sense and reason failes us, we must leave of disputing, and learne to be∣lieve. Oh! then support thy spirit upon a promise: Believe that all things shall work together for the best, to them that love God. Faith Rom. 8. 28. made Stephen see Christ, even through a shower of stones, and faith made Job, see a redeemer upon the Dunghill: Faith makes any condition comfortable; It is the sweetest life in all the world, to live by the faith, of the Son of God.
2. Labour for a sacred communion, and intimacy with Jesus Dut. 2. Labour for a sacred communi∣on with Christ. Christ. One moment of communion with Christ, will transport thee with joy unspeakable, which a stranger intermeddles not with all. None can reveale these joyes, but those that feele them: These are the white stones, the hidden Mannah, the new Name; which no man can read but him that hath it. Oh! what ravishing love tokens are those, which Christ vouchsafes unto his children! one of these spirituall illapses into the soule is to be preferred be∣fore the Empire of the world. 3. And lastly be much exercised in meditation and prayer. By Dut. 3. Be much ex∣ercised in Meditation and Prayer. prayer, thou confer'st with him that is invisible: and meditation is the wing of the soule to carry up its services, as a sweet smelling sacrifice into the Almighties nostrills. If we would pray more, and spend our time as Isaac did in meditation, if we would wre∣stle with God by prayer and supplication, if we would imitate Hezekiah, and spread the letrer before the Lord, and daily poure out our spirits before him, Oh! what comfortable lives should we lead, even a heaven upon earth: And such a heavenly life would be as a Bulwarke of defence to ward of the Batteries of the worst of enemies. Could we get such a sacred acquaintance with God, and have our Conversation in heaven, we would not feare what men and Devills could do against us. We should not feare the Combinations of such who are profest Adversaries to the U∣niversities and Ministery: For God will say unto these most des∣perate Adversaries, destroy not those Clusters for there is a blessing in them.
REALL CONVERSION DISCOVERED, from Rom. 12. 2. But be yee transformed by the renewing of your mind. THE Apostle having dehorted the Romans from Sermon 10. Preached at St. Marye's Oxon. Feb: 5. 1659 60. all conformity to, and Compliance with the garbes, fashions, and evill practices of the men of the world, presseth home by way of exhor∣tation the maine fundamentall duty, To be trans∣formed in the renewing of their mind. Which words (though few) are a full Character, and an es∣sentiall definition of a truely Converted Person, viz: He is one that Divis. is transformed in the renovation of his mind. More particularly we may observe, 1. A duty Be ye transfor∣med. 2. The subject the mind. 3. The Qualification of that subject By the renewing. What's needfull for explication of these Particulars, I shall endeavour to make good by the Inlargement of this fundamentall Doctrine—That— Every Person who is really Converted, is transformed and changed in the renovation of his mind. Method pro∣pounded. For the Methodicall unfolding of this poynt of Doctrine, I shall thus proceed. 1. By inquiring whats to be understood by transformation. 2. What by renovation of the mind? which premised, then
3. I shall endeavour to make good the Proofe of the Asser∣tion. 4. And lastly, make particular improvement of all by some usefull Application. 1. We are to make Inquiry, What it is to be transformed? For 1. What it is to be trans∣formed. a Resolution thereunto, we are first to take notice of the Quid nominis, (i. e.) the name them the Quid rei (i. e.) the thing it selfe. First, Let's consider the Notation of the name: The word is ; Which in a proper sense is to lay aside one forme, and assume another. The Radix is , and according to the Judgment of the Suidas. Learned Masters of that language , are used as Synonimous Termes: yet in a strict ac∣ceptation Suidas makes some difference; And ‖ Chrysostome makes Forma de a∣nimat is, spe∣cies de Ina∣nimat is dici∣tur. Suidas. a greater difference between : I shall not be over∣curious in Criticall Punctilloes: For if the Rule amongst Lawyers hold good, Ʋbi lex non distinguit, distinguendum non est: Much more doth the Rule hold good amongst Divines, Ʋbi Scriptura  &c. Chrysost. in Loc. non distinguit, non est distinguendum: Now I find the words used in one, and the same sense: As for Instance, Matih. 17. 2. It's said : And was transfigured: And Phil. 3. 21. , Who shall change or transfigure &c. Secondly, From the Notation of the name, I should come to the thing it selfe, but that I must first prepare my way by a distin∣ction, (having in my eye the Rule observed amongst Logitians, Distinguendum est, priusquam definiendum) Now we are to consi∣der of a two fold Metamorphosis or Transformation, one is in substance, from one substance to another: so Lots wife was chang∣ed into a Pillar of salt. We read of many fabulous and ridiculous stories in Ovids Metamorphosis, not worth the nameing (in such a place as this especially) But of such a kind of transformation we are not to speak, as no way concerning our businesse in hand. But there is another Transformation, and that is of Faculties, and Qualities, as when men are changed from darknesse to light, from waies of sinne and wickednesse to waies of holinesse. When bad men proove good, and profane men become holy, when Forma∣lists become sincere, halfe-Nominall Professors become whole Reall Professors, when from a forme there followeth the power of Godlinesse, this kind of change is that Transformation mentio∣ned
and injoyned in the Text. Hence learned Homo est formatus per Creationem, deformatus per culpam, Reformatus per gratiam, Conformatus per assimila∣tionem, trans∣formatus per contemplatio∣nem, Refor∣matus per glo∣riam. Goran. in Loc. Gorran gives an ob∣servation: That a man was formed by Creation, deformed by sinne, reformed by grace, conformed by assimilation unto Christ, transfor∣med by Contemplation, and to be further reformed in the state of glo∣ry. So that in the Text, Regeneration and transformation (which are an effectuall change wrought by the spirit of God) are all one. And this (as Learned Est mutatio sui à veteri conditione in novam. Rol. Rolloc observes) is a change of a mans selfe from an old condition into a new. And this change is of absolute in∣dispensible necessity. Of this change notwithstanding (how farre our progresse is) we have need as Semper in hac vitâ qua∣tumcunque e∣tiam profece∣rimus hac transforma∣tione, de re∣formatione o∣pus est. Est. in Loc. Eius observes. It's suffici∣ently knowne that amongst Philosophers there are reckoned six species of Motion, and accordingly there are so many mutations. As for Instance there is a change in Generation and Corruption, and these are reduced to the Predicament of substance: Yet the same man whether alive or dead, hath the same integrall parts of leggs, armes, and thighs &c. The carcasse of a man (although the spi∣rit be gone was infinite) hath those integrall parts, they are yet remaining. Another change is in Augmentation and Diminuti∣on. Now to change from lesse sinnes to greater is most abomi∣nable, and to change from greater to lesser is but a partiall-halfe∣change, altogeather rejected by God. Another change is in place, when a person removes from one place to another, yet he is one and the same man notwithstanding; In case of bodily sicknesse, and diseases, we know by experience that change of ayre, remooving from Towne to Towne, from one bed to another, doth not a whit remoove the disease. Likewise in case of soule diseases, (which are most dangerous) change of place doth not produce amendment of life and conversation. As for such (although their pretences be specious) who betake themselves to Cells, Cloysters, Wildernesses, and relinquish humane society, yet let them go where they will, to the uttermost parts of the earth, still they carry with them a body of sinne, a corrupt nature, in which are sowne all the seeds of rebellion against God. Such as pretend out of conscience to seperate from the company of the wicked, yet they keep company with one wicked man (i. e.) every one with himselfe. Basil an Eminent Greek Father being much troubled with the incursions of daily corruptions which brake in upon him, resolved to remoove from all company, and to live holily and retiredly in the wildernesse: But upon second
thoughts he acknowledged, Alas (saith he) I carried with me my wildernesse sinnes, and there I was haunted with my own hearts corruptions. The last change I shall mention (which only is to my purpose) is in Quality and affections and dispositions. When sinne and wickednesse are abominated, and the way of holinesse is embraced; when there is a new frame upon the heart, and it's alter'd from bad to good, from sinne to grace: this is that Trans∣formation which alone concernes our present discourse. This distinction being previously explained, the Definition which results from the Premisses is this—Definition of Conver∣sion. That a true Converted man is one truely changed in Qualities, endowed with new dispositions and affections, and thoroughly renewed in his mind. 2. In the second place in order, I am to inquire what's meant 2. What's meant by the renewing of the mind? by the renovation of the mind? The Originall is . Chrysostome expresseth this renewing by a Similitude, drawne from an old house, where although the same roomes re∣maine still, yet they are adorned, beautifi'd and repaired: so al∣though the same man and the same faculties remaine, yet they are rectified, reformed, and altered for the better: when the old Adam is mortified, and the new Adam quickned day by day. The na∣ture of man is a Fountaine poysoned, but as soon as Christ comes with his grace, he heales that fountaine. Now by the mind we understand the will and understanding, both which are repaired, renewed, and altered for the better. This is properly an after wit, which is an Individuall companion of true conversion:  a fore-wit was wanting, wherefore  an after-wit is requi∣red . Proprie signi∣ficat post factum sape∣re, & de er∣rore admisso ita dolere ut corrigas. Bez. Matth. 3. 2. especially. The Understanding is as it were a Queen Regent in the soule, the Commander of an Army, as a Pilot to a ship: It's called by Philosophers, , for guiding, ordering, and directing all our affaires. But if this understanding be blinded, If (as our Saviour saith) the light that is in thee, be darknesse ; How great is that darknesse? The Apostle (al∣though he mentions the mind only) yet by a Synecdoche totius comprehends the whole man, so that the understanding, will, af∣fections, and heart, all must be renewed, changed, and regenera∣ted. The reason which judicious Mr Calvin gives, is very appo∣site Calv. in loc. to our purpose. Quandoquidem & mente & corde alieni sumus à Dei Justitiâ. Estius gives a good Note, Studeto quotidianae reno∣vationis Estius in loc.
mentis vestrae per mortificationem malorum affectum & cu∣piditatum. To him Il'e only adde the exposition of Oecumenius Oecumenius, in loc. on the place, Qia homo cum quispiam est, non potest non peccare ideo semper renova te ipsum (inquit) per poenitentiam. The result of all is this, that in transformation and renovation no new sub∣stance is added to the regenerate man, but only new spirituall Qua∣lities are infused into him: The Faculties, of heart and life are all put into a new frame. I acquiesce in the Apostles exposition, be∣ing instar omnium: 1 Thes. 5. 23. And the very God of peace, san∣ctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soule, and body be preserved blamelesse unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. I proceed in the third place to make good the proofe of the 3. The Do∣ctrine proo∣ved. Doctrine. That every really converted person is transformed and changed in the renovation of his mind. This I shall endeavour to proove by Scripture and Reason. 1. For Scripture proofe the Apostles Exhortation is, Eph. 4. 23. 1. Prooved by Scrip∣ture. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. The same Apostle pro∣fesseth, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Though our outward man perish, yet the in∣ward man is renewed day by day. This is the Laver of Regenera∣tion mentioned, Tit. 2. 5. It is the washing of the Ethiopian, and the cleansing of the Leopards spots; Of this the Apostle James speaks, Jam. 4. 8. Cleanse your hands yee sinners, and purify your hearts yee double minded. And what their happy change is, the A∣postle mentions, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you; But yee are washed, but yee are sanctified, but yee are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 2. Prooved & confirm∣ed by Scrip∣ture. Reas. 1. This change is wrought only by the Power of God. 2. For fuller Proofe and Confirmation by Evidence of Rea∣son; Amongst others, some Reasons may be these Especi∣ally. 1. Every Converted person is changed and renewed in his mind by vertue of the power and irresistable operation of the spirit of God, which bloweth where and when it listeth; and when it work∣eth, none can hinder. It was Gods spirit that breathed upon those dry bones mentioned by the Prophet Ezekiel chap. 37. That had sinewes, flesh and life given them: So in our Regeneration it's Gods spirit that breatheth life into us and quickeneth us, Who were dead in trespasses and sinnes: So saith the Apostle, You hath he quickned who were dead in trespasses and sinnes. And Rom. 8. 13. Eph. 1. 2.
If yee live after the flesh yee shall dye; but if yee through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, yee shall live: This the Apostle fur∣ther expresseth, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but yee are washed, but yee are sanctified, but yee are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 2. The Word of God is an Instrumentall meanes to work Reas. 2. The Word is an Instrumen∣tall means of Renovation. this Change. It's an immortall seed, 1 Pet. 1. 18. It's the arme of the Lord, Isai. 53. 1. The power of God unto Salvation, Rom. 1. 16. 3. Without this Renovation and change there can be no Sal∣vation. For whoever hath Interest in Christ is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Whoever comes to Heaven must be borne againe, R. 3. With∣out Renova∣tion there can be no Salvation. Joh. 3. 3.  &c. He must be borne from a∣bove: whoever is saved hath put off the old Adam and put on the new; he is cut off the old stock (i. e.) the old Adam, and implan∣ted in the new Adam. But before I come to Application Il'e lay down a few Cau∣tions. 1. We must know that every by Nature is blind and ignorant Caut. 1. We must know that every man is blind by nature. of God: Eph. 4. 8. Having the understanding darkened, being alie∣nated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindnesse of their heart. Even the mind, the noblest part is depraved with ignorance, vanity, unbeliefe, doubtings and errours: 1 Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishnesse unto him, neither can he know them: because they are spiritually discerned. Col. 1. 21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wick∣ed workes: yet now hath he reconciled. The state of unregeneracy Eph. 5. 8. is a state of darknesse, even darknesse in the abstract. Cau. 2. This work of Illu∣mination is not attained by mans In∣dustry. 2. That this great work of Illumination, the opening of the eyes is not attained by the studies and endeavours of mans indu∣stry. This is the work of the great God to bring a soule from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan unto God, Phil. 2. 13. For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Caut. 3. The best of belie∣vers are but sanctified, and renewed in part. 3. The best of Believers are but sanctified and renewed in part; still there is some blindnesse, some ignorance in the best. This im∣perfection Paul himselfe (although the chiefest of the Apostles) acknowledgeth Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect, but I follow after, if I may apprehend that for which I also am apprehended of Christ Jesus: 1 Cor. 13. 9. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part. These Cautions premised, I proceed to particular Application of all. For Application I shall fix on foure Uses. Applicat. 1. For Information. 2. For Examination. 3. For Exhortation. And 4. For Consolation. 1. For Information. Be informed of the miserable condition Ʋse 1. For Informa∣tion. of all unconverted Persons, and they are such as are not transform∣ed in the Renovation of their mind. Some there are that lye in darknesse, even are darknesse it selfe, as Eph. 5. 8. For yee were sometimes darknesse: but now are yee light in the Lord, walk as chil∣dren of light. These neither perceive nor receive the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishnesse unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Now let none think that Ignorance will excuse them. The wise man tells us, without knowledge the heart is not good. Others there are who are partially changed. Perhaps they now sweare not as formerly, bloody oaths; but they sweare petty oaths. Perhaps they will not as formerly be drunk in the streets, but they will sit along time tipling with vaine company, telling idle vaine stories. Others there are who in some few particulars may seeme to be better: They perhaps formerly would stay at home in time of publick Administration of Ordi∣nances, now they will stay out a Sermon, and (as their Phrase is) keep their Church diligently, but when they come home, they speak nothing of what they have heard; they neither call them∣selves, nor those under them to an account. All this while the heart of these men, the inward frame, disposition and vergency of their spirits and affections are not cast into a new mold. Many more there are of this branne, on whom no reall work of grace is wrought, no effectuall Change. But I shall adde no more to this Use. This comes to be inquired after more strictly in the second Use which is for Examination. 2. We must all as in the presence of God put our selves upon Ʋse 2. For Examina∣tion. this Apostolicall Character and note of triall, whether we are
transformed in the Renovation of our minds. To this purpose that I may endeavour to distinguish the Pretious from the vile, my businesse shall be to represent those many false glasses, wherein multitudes behold their faces, and deceive themselves with false representations, which done I shall discover the true glasse of the Word of God, which makes a true representation of our con∣dition and accordingly it concernes us to put our selves upon Examination. In the first place. The first glasse wherein many behold them∣selves 1. False glasse is Ci∣vill Hone∣sty. is civill Honesty and Morality, when men deale justly, pay every one their own, wrong not, nor oppresse their neighbours; they think all's well with them, and that their condition is very safe. I know that morality may be a good stock to graft grace upon: and many civill honest men, even just dealing Heathens as Aristides, Fabritius, &c. will rise up in judgment against many carelesse Professours: yet all the morall Principles of Philoso∣phers, all the splendid actions of civill Justitiaries cannot bring a∣ny to the third Heaven. To deale justly with men, to live honestly in the world and unblameably is very commendable; but Chri∣stians must arise higher than Principles of Nature and Morality. There's a new birth required, Joh. 3. 5. Ʋnlesse a man be borne a∣gaine of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. There's holinesse required, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as he which hath called you is holy: so be yee holy in all manner of Conver∣sation. Truth in the inward parts, Psal. 51. 6. Behold, thou de∣sirest truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdome. Holinesse and Righteousnesse are con∣joyn'd, Luk. 1. 74, 75. That he would grant unto us that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the daies of our lives. However others may differ from me in judgment, I con∣ceive that it's easier for an open profane man to be converted, then for a meere civill honest man, who prides himselfe and bles∣seth himselfe in his morality and there rests satisfied: I ground my assertion on Matth. 21. 31. Whether of them twaine did the will of his Father? they say unto him, the first. Jesus saith unto them verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdome of God before you. And what were those Pharisees but meere For∣malists and Jusitiaryes: This is that which civill men boast off,
they live peaceably and pay every one his due. I answer it's well to live peaceably with men; but dost not thou live at peace with thy corruptions? dost not thou let thy sinnes lye quietly and har∣bour them in thy bosome, unmortified, uncrucified? 2. Thou dost well in paying men their dues, I would all would do so, and such especially as make greatest profession of religion, would they were more exemplary in their practice even in this particular, and laying aside all delayes, evasions and collusions, I heartily wish these would deale justly with every one, knowing that no unrighteous man shall inherit the Kingdome of God. But let me aske thee, dost thou pay God his due, his due of prayer, hearing, reading, meditation, sanctifying his sabboths? Here is a shibboleth that a meere Civill Morall man knoweth not how to accent ariht. If he be a dishonest man who deales unjustly with his neighours in robbing and defrauding and going beyond him; much more may he b accompted dishonest, who defrauds and robs God of his worship, sabboths, services and duties to be per∣formed unto him. A second false glasse is that of great parts, gifts and endow∣ments, 2. False Glasse great parts and abilities. whether naturall or acquired. Many mistake parts for grace. Such as are of excellent gifts and expressions, men of volu∣ble tongues are cryed up for Godly men, who notwithstanding for all their gifts may be as meere strangers to Regeneration as Nico∣demus was. It's sad to consider how many now adaies have abused their parts, and have bent their wits to coyne new opinions, and have borrowed from Gypsies a canting kind of language, uncougth and unscripturall phrases more befitting Poets, Stages, Players, Juglers then Preachers. And these are cryed up amongst many for eminent Saints and converted persons, whereas they never were acquainted with the great work of Mortification, known and pra∣ctised by such as are Saints indeed. Let me tell you plainly, (for I affect plainnesse of speech) A man may be as great a Scholler as ever Aristotle and Plato were: and yet be a meere stranger from the life of God, a meere Ignoramus in the Schoole of Jesus Christ. Where ever parts are we may not envy the owners of them, nei∣ther may we Idolize them. It's hard to tast much honey and not surfet, and harder to have great parts and not to be proud of them. Indeed good parts are great advantages, and when san∣ctified do abundance of good, but the greatest learning, gifts, na∣naturall
abilities and accomplisht parts may be in them that pe∣rish. Wherefore gifts and abilities are no infallible Characters of saving Conversion. The more parts any have, the more lyeth up∣on their accompt, and the greater is their sinne, not to improove them to Gods glory; And the greatest blindnesse it is, to be in∣wardly blind. And when men pride themselves in the quicknesse of their understanding, volubility of speech, &c. When as in the meane time they favour not the things of God, the mysteries of their salvation, what will become of all their parts? Perhaps God may take them away, or continue them as aggravations of their greater sinne and judgment: because they have a price put into their hands to get wisdome, and are such fooles as want hearts to im∣proove them. 3. A third false glasse is, when men compare themselves with 3. False glasse when men com∣pare them∣selves with themselves. themselves. This some take to be Conversion, Gal. 6. 3. If a man think himselfe to be something when he is nothing he deceiveth himselfe. Oh! saith one; I was a neglecter of Sermons, but now I heare them. Thou dost well to heare Sermons; and it's thy duty to wait upon these Bethesdaes. But let me aske thee, doth not feare, forme, compliance with men and Interests moove thee? What's that spring, that primum mobile which mooves thee to these things? Doth not selfe set thee a work? doth not vaine glo∣ry, reputation &c: moove thee? Oh! saith another, I am now much amended, I do not drinke and swill and game as formerly. It's well, if this be so in truth and sincerity: But doth not the frame of thy spirit remaine one and the same? doth not old age, want of money, want of opportunities, &c: make thee leave these things? doth not thy sinne rather leave thee, then thou leave thy sinne? We are then to distinguish, there may be a change of many par∣ticular actions, where is no change of the Nature. There may be a mortification of some particular members, where is no mor∣tification of the whole body of sinne. Per mentem totum hominem Per mentem totum homi∣nem intelli∣git. Peter Martyr in Loc. intelligit, Peter Martyr saith, The whole man by the mind is com∣prehended. It's required (as learned Jerome observes) ut corpo∣ris actus novi fiant. So then I conclude that the acts, nature, whole man must be changed, or else there is not a change to pur∣pose. How will some old men complaine against their Prodiga∣lity in their youth? but let them catechise their owne hearts, are not they now growne more covetous in their old age? And
give the Divell his option, he would as live have a covetous man as a Prodigall, to drive his designes: Wherefore let no men com∣pare themselves with themselves upon halfe reformations, halfe turnes and partiall amendments. Men may be better then for∣merly and yet be stark naught still. Their reformation may be to halfes; their heart may be divided, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is di∣vided, now shall they be found faulty: He shall breake downe their Altars, he shall spoyle their Images: His turne may be but parti∣all as Ephraims was, Hos. 7. 8. Ephraim, he hath mixed himselfe among the people, Ephraim is a cake not turned. 4. Another false glasse is, when men compare themselves with 4. False glasse when men com∣pare them∣selves with others. other men. Oh! say they such a one is a froward, deceitfull, an ill-tongu'd clamorous man; he cousens, and cheats, and complies with all sorts for advantage; But I am not such a one. 1. I Answer, Though perhaps thou mayest not act some of those things whereof thou accusest others: yet it may be because thou art not put upon those temptations, as it was said of one Casta est quia nemo rogavit: Opportunity hath not offered ano∣ther choice. 2. Thou mayst be as bad in other kinds. Some mens sinnes go before, others follow after. Some mens Genius and constitution inclines more to one sinne then another; though every wicked man is dispositione & praeparatione animi inclined to any sinne. Perhaps another man may shew his anger more openly, and thou mayst entertaine heart burnings and inward anger. And it's an observation of Seneca, Ira, quae tegitur, nocet. Perhaps another may work at his secular Trade on the Sabboth day (which is a very great and abominable Prophanation) and thou in the mean time mayst be idle at home, hearing and speaking vaine idle discourses, and this is likewise abominable. Wherefore let no man think himselfe good because he apeares not so bad as another. Anothers badnesse is no Argument to conclude me good. For instance, was the Pharise the better for overvalu∣ing himselfe, and undervaluing the Publican? Luk. 18. 10, 11. The Parise stood and prayed thus with himselfe, God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor even as this Publican. And are any a whit the better, because they speak against others, and in the meane time amend not themselves?
5. A fifth false glasse is others reports and commendation. Oh! 5. False glasse others reports and commenda∣tions. how proud are many of some great persons acquaintance, who set them out to the skies and flatter them. They boast they liv'd un∣der such Preachers, and have been acquainted with such and such eminent persons, and these have an honourable esteem of them. What a false glasse is this, no better then that of the Papists, who believe by an implicite faith, and see through their Priests specta∣cles, and pin their religion on other folkes sleeves. It's observe∣able that seldome an Hipocrite dies undiscovered; but it'ts possi∣ble he may: Some may tell such faire plausible stories and narra∣tives of their Conversion, as they may deceive men: yet they cannot deceive God, who knoweth and searcheth the hearts and reines. This is all the religion some look after, to insinuate them∣selves into the favour of some persons of note, and be cryed up by them, and carried up on high by their wings. In the meane time they search not their own hearts, and descend not to selfe-Inquisition how they may approove themselves to God. They examine not what's the inward frame of their spirit, whether their hearts be washed from wickednesse, and whether they be renew∣ed in the spirit of their minds? It's not he that commendeth him∣selfe: 2 Cor. 10. 23. but whom the Lord commendeth is accepted, Neither is it he, whom others magnify and extoll in praises: but he, whose heart is right with God that obtaines acceptance with him. 6. The sixth and last false glasse I shall mention is a formall, 2. False Glasse is a formall out∣side profes∣sion. outside profession of Religion. This is become even a fashion now adaies to take up a profession. And many take it up ignorantly, not understanding what it is: and many take it up upon Politick Prin∣ciples, to make a good market of it: both these are abominable unto God. There's a forme without the power, theres . Multitudes mistake Conversion now adaies, and think if they be of such an opinion, whether it be of Familists, Quakers, Anabaptists, Brownists, Semibrownists, &c: then they are converted. If they be rebaptized, then they question not, but that they are really converted, when as many of these never knew what belongs to the pangs of the new birth, fightings against strong holds of Satan, and crucifying of lusts. Others make no question of their Conversion; because they are admitted into Church fel∣lowship. But was not Ananias and Sapphira admitted into Church fellowship? And was not Judas himself one of the Apostles, and yet
farre from true Conversion? In the purest and best reformed Churches there may be Hypocrites, tares will be among the best Wheat. There's no Church without spot or wrinkle, till we come to Heaven. Indeed to seperate from Heathens and from Idolaters we are commanded, and this is a warrantable sepera∣tion. But to seperate from a true Church must needs cause mul∣titudes See Dr Har∣ris his judg∣ment in his life, lately set forth by E. D. p. 100, 101, 102. of Scismes, and Divisions (as daiely experience witnesseth) and we have no warrant in the Word of God for such a sepera∣tion. Let all professours know that they are not therefore con∣verted, because they take upon them the bare name and forme: For some there are (as the Apostle mentions) 2 Tim. 3. 5. Having a forme, but denying the power: And such as are only No∣minall Christians, and content themselves with the bare name are really Atheists. It's the easiest matter in all the world to take upon one a bare profession. Machiavel himselfe would allow an outward profession: But to have the Profession adorned with a Holy life, and Conversation; to be a Christian in name and in truth, this is the great thing required: To name the name of Christ and depart from Iniquity, to purify ones selfe as God is pure, this is the great work indeed. Now having discovered these false glasses, Il'e set before you one true glasse, wherein we must behold our selves, and that is the Word of God. This discovers our Pollutions, this shewes us the way of cleansing, Psal. 119. 11. Wherewithall shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word. This discovers our Maladies and Remedies: Now where there is a reall Change, and a thorough transformation, it will be known by three Characters. 1. By Universality. 2. By Sincerity. And 3. By Perpetuity. First, For Universality, and that lookes at five Sub∣jects. Char. 1. Ʋ∣niversality. 1. At the understanding, Eph. 4. 23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. 2. At the will, Psal. 110. 3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power. 3. At the affections, Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things a∣bove, and not on things on the earth.
4. The heart, Ezek. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle cleane wa∣ter upon you and yee shall be cleane: from all your filthinesse, and from all your Idolls, will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart, and give you an heart of flesh. 5. The life, Newnesse of life is required: For so it's required, that we should walk in newnesse of life, Rom. 6. 4. Secondly, Sincerity. The aymes must be single and sincere; Char. 2. Sincerity. no change for selfe ends, Interests, Preferments, &c. The glory of God must be in thy eye, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Since∣rity, not with fleshly wisdome; but by the grace of God we had our Conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you wards. Thirdly, Perpetuity, Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithfull unto death, Char. 3. Perpetuity. and I will give thee a Crowne of life, he that endureth unto the end shall be saved. 3. The third Use is for Exhortation. Let's all labour to be Ʋse 3. For Exhortatiō. Mot. 1. From the equity of the duty. Mot. 2. from the necessity of the duty. thus transformed. By way of Motive. 1. It is but equity that there should be a thorough change. The whole man is defiled by sinne, and the whole man should be trans∣formed and changed. 2. Theres a necessity: necessitas precepti & medii. 1. How often are we cald upon to make us new hearts, to turne unto the Lord, to amend our waies? 2. This change is an instrumentall meanes to pacify Gods wrath, 2 Chron. 7. 1. If my people which are caled by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seeke my face, and turne from their wicked waies: then will I heare from Heaven, and will for∣give their sinnes, and heale their land. So Joel 2. 12. Therefore thus saith the Lord; turne unto m with all your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning; rent your hearts and not your garments, and turne unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merci∣full, slow to anger and of great kindnesse, and repenteth him of the evill. 3. Consider the Utility, God will however have his glory, and Mot. 3. from the Ʋtility. yet we are the gainers by this change: By having changed hearts, we can do more acceptable service unto God, and are more in abled toperforme the will of God, which is a good, acceptable, and perfect will.
4. Now Il'e in the last place conclude with a word of com∣fort, Ʋse 4. For Comfort. unto those upon whom God hath wrought this gracious change, (i. e.) Blessed are their eyes, for they see. They were a∣fore this change as bad as others: but now they are washed and cleansed. Great is their comfort, whose eyes are opened, and they are brought from darknesse unto light, from the power of Satan unto God. By being converted, and so becoming sons and daugh∣ters of God by grace and Adoption, they obtaine these singular Priviledges. 1. They have Union and Communion with Jesus Christ. They Privil. 1. Ʋnion and Communion with Jesus Christ. are one with him mystically. He is their Head, they his body: they injoy Communion with him in the exercise of graces, in their ap∣proaches unto him in worship, 1 Joh. 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard, that declare we unto you, that yee also may have fel∣lowship with us, and truely our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. 2. They have Interest in all the Promises, 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all Pri. 2. They have Interest in all the Promises. the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glo∣ry of God by us. 3. They have Interest in all Christs purchases of Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification. What can I adde more but the Pri. 3. They have Interest in all Christs Purchases. complement of all, from Rev. 1. 5, 6. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithfull witnesse, and first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his own blood. And hath made us Kings and Priests un∣to God, and his Father: to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. And such honour have all his Saints, even all such as are converted, and borne againe, upon whom this reall change and renovation is past. These are here militant saints on earth, and shall be triumphant Saints in the highest Heavens.
Dr VVilkinsons 3. DECADS of SERMONS.
