W3215A 45578522 172432
Witnesses produced AGAINST Mr. JOHN SHAW of Hull, Attesting the Publike Charge against him, and much more. AS, To be A notable Turncoat and Time-server; Most scandalous in his actions; An enemy to good men; And A disquieter of the peace of the place, &c. SERVING For the Undeceiving of some, Informing of others, and satisfying of all, as to the condition of the aforesaid M. SHAW. By one who hopes and waits, to see Corrupt men, and Unjust things, less countenanced, and more suppressed. PROV. 11. 10. When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoyceth: and when the wicked perish, there is shouting. Printed at London, 1653.
READER, THat thou mayst understand what necessity there was of pub∣lishing these Papers which by Providence came to my hands, thou art desired to take notice that Mr. John Canne, in a book intituled A voice from the Temple, hath in a mar∣ginal note affirmed Mr. Shaw to be a Turncoat and Time-server, a corrupt man, &c. Whereupon Mr. Shaw went to some in Authority, and made his complaint to them. What satisfaction Mr. Shaw hath had in private, it is not known; onely he reports that he is quitted of the Crimes, reputed a very honest man, and Mr. Canne cast and lost in his reputation with his friends at Court. This, and much more then this, hath Mr. Shaw and his adherents given out, in Town and City, with unmeasurable boasting and insulation. Now in regard (not in reference to Mr. Canne, but) that the truth may no longer suffer, honest and good men be abused, and those who are corrupt and naught, hardned in their evil ways; I take it my duty to publish these things, as knowing no other way (as the case now stands) to have truth and innocency cleared and justified, and the mouth of iniquity stopped. And howsoever particular persons are here mentioned, as M. Canne and M. Shaw; yet the truth is, the matter is of publike concernment, and takes in, as the interest of honest men, the Cause of Christ and his Churches in this Nation, (to which M. Shaw hath been an old professed enemy:) so it is to disco∣ver and break in pieces a self-interest, and corrupt designe, which hath been too long carried on by a late prevailing party, in oppressing the poor, and ob∣structing justice. As for M. Shaw, I pity him, and pray for him, and shall be glad if these things which he himself hath occasioned to be published, may do his soul good. But I shall not keep the Reader any longer from the particulars: onely let him observe them well, and then judge. A Letter written by Mr. Shaw, to his good Lord and Master the Arch∣bishop of York. The Original is in Hull to be seen, under his own hand and seal; the superscription thus: For the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of York his Grace, Primate of England, and Metropolitane, these present. The Letter word for word, followeth.
Most Reverend Father in God: MY own unfitness at present to travel, joyned with some pressing busi∣ness of my own, compel me to this boldness, and (except your Grace pardon it) unmannerly presumption, thus to importune your Grace by a Messenger with this my Petition. I had resolved ere now, according to my duty, to have waited on your Grace; but still hoped for more peaceable times to do it in. In the interim, I am informed that the city of York presented a Petition to the Lord Keeper on my behalf, for a pre∣sentation to the Rectory of Alhallows in York; and another to your Grace, for your consent to their humble desire, your approbation of me, and your Graces Certificate accordingly to the Lord Keeper. And that your Grace would be pleased to excuse my necessitated absence, to par∣don this my boldness in sending this Messenger, for the speedy satisfaction of the said honorable Lord Keeper; and to afford to me your Certificate to my Lord Keeper, is my Who but a Time-server would beg thus  a Benefice? e 1 Sam. 2. 36. humble suit at present. I know innocencie it self is not free from accusation; therefore may I be subject to slanders. Note how he suffers in his good name, and for what. I hear some have presented me to your Grace as no friend to the Kings Majestie or Episcopacie: BOTH WHICH ARE SO NOTORI∣OUSLY FALSE, that whoever reports them, either mistook me or their own conscience: which thing, if need were, THE WHOLE And so they will, as to be the greatest Turn coat in Yorkshire, inso∣much as it is be∣come a Proverb, John Shaw the Turn-coat. COUN∣TRY WILL EVIDENCE AND DECLARE. Thus in all humili∣ty and duty (though in haste) relying upon your Graces clemency and bounty, and encouraged by your many wonted favours to the Clergie and Learning it self; I humbly crave your approbation and certificate by this bearer, and assuredly No lye. am Rotheram, August 22. 1642. Your Graces most faithful servant, and daily Orator, John Shaw. I shall not comment on the Letter. M. Shaw was true to the Proverb, and hath learn'd it by heart. Dum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more: Si fueris alibi, vivito ficut ibi. But this was (So he told his Excellencie. he saith) in the days of his ignorance, and when he knew no better. And in this we may believe him: for had he known that Monarchie and Episcopacie would have been so soon laid aside, he would not have acted so basely and grosly for them as he did, specially the later, as appears by that which follows. Sir, I Cannot deny your desire of the discovery of my knowledge concerning M. John Shaw, though I had rather have reserved it till I was called thereto. I have known him about thirty yeers, before he was a Preacher; and I have seen some of his ways, and heard of many at that time along. He
was never to my knowledge lookt upon by any that were truely godly, as a man of any consideration, but rather an enemy to the Truth, and persecutor of it, and the sincere professors of it: Unless for a while he did deceive a few of well-minded people at York, with his fair (though deceitful) appearances. He is altogether lookt upon in the West parts of York shire, as a coverous and worldly man, cruel with his There is mention made in our Chronicles of one John Shaw Clerk, for all the world like him. It is worth the while to compare these two Time-servers together. See Speed, p. 705. Book of Martyrs. Tenants: an oppressor and hard dealer with those he hath had to do, either in debts of his own, or of such as his father had left him. He was always a conformable man in the days of the Bishops, and a pleader for the Innocent Ceremonies (as he uses to call them) and a sharp inveigher against tender-spirited men in those days, who did refuse conformity and subscription to them. I have not known him by any, either of them that were within, or of them that were without, lookt upon as a man of a good and Let those to whom he is re∣ported to be an honest man, con∣sider the per∣sons who they are that give on such a report of him. pure con∣science; but always a complyer to the ruling times, and to great men, of what condition soever; and with men of Religion, for his own world∣ly advantage, &c. This is what at present I can present unto you, and shall be ready to discover particulars as to the making good of these in due time, when I shall be called thereunto, and in the while am Your humble servant, R. A. We have his character here in brief, so clearly and fully related, as I shall adde nothing to it; onely there are hundreds which know the same to be true, and are ready to bear witness to it of their own knowledge. The Guises took the Romish part, not for any Religion which they cared for, but being the stronger side, by which they might get both credit, honour, preferment: so M. Shaw I have heard some who know him well to say, that if it were to read the Mass∣book, or Alco∣ran, he would do it for pro∣fit, such is the covetousness of his heart. all along hath run with the times, right or wrong: like a flying fish, if pre∣ferment be among the birds, he is ready to flee after it, with the birds; and if it be among the fishes, then among the fishes he will swim after it. But to proceed. There was published in print a scandalous pamphlet against M. John Canne, intituled, The humble Petition of divers well affected persons within the Town of Kingston upon Hull: the which being seen by the Officers of the Ga∣son there, they immediately drew up this Petition, and sent the same to his Ex∣cellencie, in the words following.
To his Excellencie the Lord General Cromwel: The humble Petition of the Officers of the Carison, and divers well-affected persons in the Town of Kingston upon Hull, SHEWETH, THat your Petitioners having lately seen in this place a Petition in print, intimating, in the names of divers pretended well affected per∣sons, a grateful acknowledgement of your Excellencies successful sor∣vices; further intimating provocations put on them, for the vindication of their Pastor M. Shaw, against the accusations of M. John Canne, whose pains, approved fidelity, and experienced piety, should we not endea∣vour to justifie, and witness with and to the world, we should not onely shew our selves slothful, in the silent suffering of Religion, honesty, and innocencie to be traduced; but also fail in the discharge of our duties to your Excellencie, to whom we owe an account of our experiences in the particulars of this place, so publikely importing. Therefore, that we may not trouble your Excellencie with recrimina∣tions in the like kinde, which we might in many respects multiply, we shall onely pray, That the Articles which are or will be shortly exhi∣bited against Mr. Shaw, may by persons in this place approved for piety and fidelity, be This he will never yeeld to. examined and certified, that so it may appear who have been the greatest sufferers, or who have lyen under the greatest and justest Taxations, who have been the most pure & pious dispensers of holy Ordinances, who the most powerful and Evange∣lical Preachers, who the freest from hypocrisie, griping, covetousness, self-seeking, time-serving, carnal Gospelling, worldly mindedness, or undermining; who the most impudent oppressor, and opposer of Gods people, or belyer of the Truth, in pretending a publike charge of the Parliament, for supporting the one or other partie; who have been herein the most innocent, pious, or impartial, that they may have protection, without the testimony of these three worthy persons (yet by your power supprest) to whom Mr. Shaw is so well known, and without whose contradiction, vote, verdict, or resolution, (bles∣sed be God) we now believe his mistaken innocencie may receive a sentence and EXPULSION FROM THIS PLACE, where his spirit or impiety hath heretofore (to the disturbance of the peace of this place) so powerfully prevailed. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. Robert Overton, Rich. Elton, James Greenlesd, William Fugil, Edward Brad∣shaw, Thomas Rakes, Robert Luddington, Robert Leppington, James Tho∣mas, W. Elward, Mr. Waterhouse, Edw. Rigge, Thomas Brown, John Laten,
Jo. Smith, Rich. Hogg, John Graves, John Maultby, Joseph Rakes, Robert Winter, Thomas Richerson, George Calter, Joseph Custis, Lancelet Gibson, Edward Andrews, William Fugil, John Fugil, William Newhouse, A. Nead, John Aacon, Abr. Stracie, John Daffurn. As I observe the close of this Petition, how they desire M. Shaws expul∣sion from the place, for the peace and safety of it; it makes me to remem∣ber a speech of a gallant Captain, when there was a hot debate between Cae∣far's and Pompey's souldiers, he cryes out often to them, Nil nisi Caesaris capite delato: Never speak of peace (saith he) if Caesars head be not taken away. So I understand to be the opinion of the Officers of that Garison, Mr. Shaw having there beaded a faction, the same must be broken, to settle a firm peace among the people. Concerning the Articles mentioned in the Petition, they are these. I. That M. John Shaw is reputed a very time-serving and self-seeking This was his constant course a little while before the Bi∣shops were put down, as 100 will testifie. man; witness his siding with the Bishops in one place, and his speaking against them in another, according to the disposition of the place and persons amongst whom he preacht. For howsoever in the Letter to his Lords Grace of York, he professeth himself to be for the King and Epis copacie; yet at the same time, where he saw the people would bear the contrary, he would speak against the same things. Hence it is, that the Bishop in his answer to the Letter (the original of which is likewise in Hull) tells him that there are some particulars spread abroad about him, and Note, the Bi∣shop would not believe him. desires to be resolved by him. I shall set down the very words. 1. Whether you did stir and act an endeavouring to get hands to alter Epis∣copacie, and the Government Ecclesiastical, contrary to your vow in your Ordination. 2. Whether you did preach out of your Pulpit unto your Auditory, particularly not to chuse Sir William Savil Knight of the Shire. Which surely was no Pulpit-matter, nor a theme any way tending to save souls. 3. Whether you are at present (whatsoever opinion you were of) conformable to his Majesties Laws Ecclesiastical, wherein you know your Ordinary must be satisfied, before you can be instituted. II. He hath frequently opposed the Garisons Chaplains He was an o∣pen and known enemy to Mr. Oxenbridge, for witnessing against his cor∣rupt ways. Mr. Oxenbridge found him a malicious ene∣my to him. M. Oxenbridge and M. Canne in the exercise of their Ministery, which he hath by his scandalous accusations endeavoured to asperse, and also to disappoint them of a place to teach in, urging others in Authority to do the like. III. He hath bitterly reproached the Army, as guilty of Herefie, Blasphemie, Schism; whereby divers have undoubtedly been alienated in their judgements and affections from the Army and their adherents. IIII. Upon the Scots Army coming into England, Mr. Shaw set up his Presbyterian Government, and prayed in these or the like words: Lord, there are two Armies now in the field, they both pretend thy Cause; its
not in man to judge, give thou a perfect let. Major John Bourn was pre∣sent when he prayed to this purpose. V. His underhand complaints against the Governour, during the * He is noted generally for a most perfidious person. time of his pretended friendship to him; his supplanting Mr. Stiles of the Vicarredge and Charterhouse; whilst with Crocodile tears he seemed to deplore his departure from this place: his insinuation with persons in place and power, with their mutual serving one anothers ends and aimes at London, and in the Country, are not unknown. VI. His oppression of the poor, and beating of the blind man; where∣in he behaved himself more like St. George, then like St. John. His pro∣fering to forswear what was found by the Jury, and evidenced upon Oath in open Court, are of notable, if not How he hath most wretched∣ly sorsworn himself, thou shalt finde in its due place hereafter. abominable memory. VII. His threatning a poor blind member of the Hospital, for com∣plaining to the Parliament against him; his thrusting him forth of the Hospital by the shoulders, bidding him go againe to the Parliament, discharging him of his pay and place; although he had no power by the Donors will so to do: with other unchristian practices and oppressi∣ons will evidence, and upon examination make appear, how Episcopal, how Prelatical, how Presbyteran, how Arbitrary, how Oppressive, how Proud and obstinate a spirit he is of. Neither did the Officers of the Garison, and other Godly and well-affected persons in Hull, think themselves bound to appear in the Vindication of Mr. Canne from that false and scandalous libel, & to lay open the impiety and base∣ness of Mr. Shaw; but the M. Shaw was so impudent as to affirm, before col. Lassels and M. S. Nicholas that he had a Letter from this same Church: the which he knew was a lye. Church of Christ inhabiting in the said Town, presently hereupon gave in likewise their testimony and witness, in these words following. To his Excellency the Lord General Cromwel. The hum∣ble Address of the Church of Christ of Hull: for and on the behalf of Mr. John Canne Chaplain to the Garison. May it please your Excellencie, THe manifold advantages which the good people of this Nation have through the blessing of God received by your means, is, and ever shall be thankfully acknowledged by us, and is matter of encouragement to this present application: And we count it a great mercy, that God hath given you a heart so ready at all times to comply with the desire of his people, having made you as an Angel of God, to discern between things and things. Upon which consideration, and the sence of our duty, we are constrain∣ed to present those ensuing lines to your Excellencie, in the behalf of our Christian friend Mr. Canne, whom we conceive to be extremely traduced, in a Paper which we have seen in print, intituled, A Petition of divers well-affected persons within the Town of Kingston upon Hull:
of which Petition, and the persons therein concerned, we shall say lit∣tle, it being not our purpose to defile our selves with raking into the puddle of other mens faults, (though too much might be said) but shall rather leave the examination of Mr. Shaw's business to such as shall be designed for that work. Neither shall we reflect any thing upon our Magistrates, which the subscribers so much applaud; hoping the Su∣preme Authority will settle such a Magistracie in the Nation, as shall not be opposers, but encouragers of the godly party, and such as will best suit with the Government of this Commonwealth. Nor shall we insert how much we judge that Petition doth It is said Dr. Wittie was Penman of that Pamphlet, a known treache∣rous enemy to the proceedings of the Army all along. This is be that kept a va∣pouring when our Army went first into Scot∣land, and would lay wa∣gers we should be all destroyed reflect upon your Excellencie and Councel of Officers late proceeding in the dissolution of the late Parliament, the expression being so obvious to every eye, and like an open Casement lets you see the sense thereof. It being our main in∣tendment to give in our testimony concerning Mr. John Canne, whom they have endeavoured to render odious, not onely to your Excellencie, but to the world; and so at once weaken his reputation with those that have been your Excellencies truest well-wishers. We could no longer sit still, lest by our silence we should be found be∣trayers of his integrity. We are bold to witness with him, and of him, that, to our knowledge, since his abode amongst us, (which hath been some yeers last past) he hath diligently, (and, so far forth as we can judge, faithfully) and laboriously preached the Gospel, and opened the mysteries of the Kingdom, to the profit and comfort of those that have heard him; and was at all times, and upon all occasions, a clear owner of the work of God in this age, as foreseeing it all along; and both pub∣likely and privately manifested his good affection thereto, and that upon the purest grounds, without any self-advantage thereby, as was suffici∣ently manifested by his constant pains in preaching, though he met with great discouragement, his pay being detained for many months to∣gether, which was all that he had for the livelyhood of himself and fa∣mily. It would be too large to call in his owning of persecuted Truths under Episcopacie, and his Which was al∣most 17 yeers, occasioned by such time-ser∣vers as was Shaw and the like. long banishment, by reason thereof, from his native Country, in which time he suffered great hardship, with much patience and constancie; which may be a sufficient restimony of his pie∣ty and integrity. All which we leave to your Excellencies most pious and serious consi∣deration, desiring he may be encouraged and looked upon accord∣ingly; being convinced in our judgements, that he M. Shaw was so impudent, as to affirm before the General, that the cause of Mr. Canne's opposing him, was to get away from him the Charter-house. An untruth for which he hath no colour or pretence. intends and seeks nothing, but that all injustice and oppression may be removed, and that righteousness may take place. This we took our selves bound to certifie on his behalf, as Christian du∣ty becoming us, and not out of any other relation which we have to him. We shall no further presume upon your Excellencie, but subscribe our selves Your Excellencies humble servants, Robert Luddington, Robert Overton, Edward Atkinson, Tim. Lumm, Robert
Leppington, John Pecket, Lawrence Scortreth, George Kitchin, John Ee∣thel, Edward Andrews senior, John Daffurn, Boaz Britain, Thomas Kent, Ralph Casse, Elckar Pots, George Hill, George Norwood, Michael Hogg, Joshua March, Anthony Dickon, Edward Andrews jun. Concerning that scandalous Pamphlet which the Officers of the Garison and the Church mention in their Petitions, it is necessary that something be added, to the end the matter may be the better understood. 1. As it was published, so it was no other then a scandalous Libel, there being no mans hand or name put to it; onely said subscribed by abundance of godly and honest men, &c. but it seems he that put forth the thing, was careful not to have their names known, for so their godliness and ho∣nesty would have been called into question. But 2. Though their names be concealed, yet (ex ungue leonem) it is easie to ghess the condition of the men, by their reflecting upon his Ex∣cellencie and Councel of Officers, as the Church doth very well observe. Their own words shew what they are: As for these three eminent and He that drew up that Petiti∣on, might rather be called Dr. Simple then otherwise: for who but a fool or worse would so basely have slattered first his Excel∣lencie, and then the Speaker, with one breath, their actions be∣ing so contrary, as light is to darkness. faith∣ful Pasriots (note Reader the men) the Speaker of the late Parliament, Ba∣ron Thorp, and Sir Henry Vane, whom be unworthily taxeth, &c. their un∣tainted Honours may justly require satisfaction, &c. And a little after, refer Mr. Shaw to the testimony of these men, being well known to their Honors. Do not these shew themselves to be well-affected to the present power? But I shall not wring this filthy sore too hard. 3. What little honesty, and less godliness, these men have, may easily appear by their own words. For thus they say: Whose inveterate wrath to the very calling of the Ministery in England, is known to be such, that even the consideration of that Ordinance of God, is enough at any time to put him into a A Doctor like expression, and worded brave∣ly. But suppose the Dr. seeing his ignorance and vanity thus discovered, should run him∣self into a fury, the quest. then would be, whe∣ther any other Doctor had skil to make him ci∣ther witty or so∣ber after. I leave this to Dr. Primrose his judgement. fury. If the Author of that Petition, and the subscribers to it, had not been stark blinde, and grosly ignorant of a Gospel-Ministery, and of the glorious light which shines now thorow the nation, they would never have made themselves so contemptible & & ridiculous to the world. For who but a company of blinde people, Popish and superstitious, will now durst appear in the behalf of the earthly and carnal Ministery of Eng∣land, as knowing that it is not Mr. Canne's opinion alone, but it is gene∣rally held and profest by the people of God everywhere, that the same, viz. their National Ministery (as derived from the Pope and Prelates) is unlawful and Antichristian, a wicked plant, and shortly to be pluckt up by the root? He that toucheth the week of a candle, betters and mends the light, but burns and blacks his own fingers: so these men, whereas they thought to have dishonoured Mr. Canne, they have added much to his reputation and credit, and rendered themselves to the world, as a company of ignorant, superstitious, and blinde people: For what man that is spiritual, reading their words, but must needs conclude thus, or to this purpose: The Doctor that drew this, was very simple, and may for his work sake be fitly stiled Dr. SIMPLE. And the subscribers to it, as ig∣norant
and blind as the Doctor. All of them still in Babylon, under the yoke of Antichrist and deep superstition. 4. Though we finde not their names to the printed Painphlet, yet we may easily ghess who the persons are, by this expression; Mr. Shaw hath been a pious and painful labourer in the Ministry among us. For his piety, I leave that to the Testimony and witness here asserted: But that he is a painful labourer, those that hear him, know the contrary, as his matter to be meerly formal, legal, liveless, not in the demonstration of the Spirit and power of God. Besides, it is not unknown, that the stories, and low things which he hath, is still one and the same; changes often his Text, but not the matter; Like a scare-crow in a Garden or field to fright Birds: because it moves not, the Birds are not afraid of it: so his mat∣ter being colworts often sod, nothing new but what they have heard him deliver Ask Robert Wilson how often he hath heard him to preach one and the same thing over and over, 10. 20. 100. times before; its rather a burthen to the people then any way profitable. If the subscribers had not been either some ig∣norant people as do not know what a painful labourer in the Ministry is, or some that are basely by assed by a corrupt faction in the Town, they would not have set their hands to a thing so known untrue. For he hath not to this day opened the great secrets and mysteries of the Gospel, but rather been an enemy thereunto, and to such as do believe and embrace the same. But to proceed to further testimony. In the sixth Article before, there is mention made of Mr. Shaw his beat∣ing a blind man, and proffering to forswear the same. As this is a remarka∣ble thing, and a business of high concernment; so it is necesiary that it be plainly and truly related. When Mr. Shaw was before his Exceilencie, in the presence of Major * He layed his hand on Major General Har∣risons shoulder, to show what he did, as one∣ly a bare touch∣ing of him, and professed be did no more to the blind man, then be did to him. General Harrison, and Colonel Tomlinson: so again afterward to Colonel Lassels and Mr. St. Nicholas, he made most dreadful imprecations; as taking God to witness, and wishing that he might not see the face of God, or go out of the room, if he did beat the man, push him, or throw him down, but onely laying his hand softly on his shoulders, desired, or bid him depart: this he protested and took God to witness was all that he did. Mr. Canne told him at the same time that he trembled to hear him, as know∣ing that he forswore himself, and what he said was against his own know∣ledge and conscience, a sinning presumptuously, and with a high hand. And that this is so, to wit, that Mr. Shaw in all his protestations, impre∣cations, execrations, hath spoken falsely, we shall make it evident by the testimonies and proofes following. The form of the Inditement which was found by the Note, howso∣ever those of the Jury were Mr. Shaws chiefest friends, yet could not but finde him guilty, the proof being so full and clear. Jury against Mr. Shaw is thus.
AT the General Sessions of the Publike peace holden at Kingston upon Kingston upon Hull. Hull, upon Thursday the one and twentieth day of April, in the yeer of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty three, in the Guild-hall of the said Town, before John Rogers Maior of the Town of Kingston upon Hull, William Lister Esquire, Recorder of the same Town, Thomas Raikes, Henry Barnard, Nicholas Denman, Joseph Blaids, William Pop∣ple, William Peck, William Dobson, Francis Dewick, John Raye, Richard Wood, and Lancelot Roper, Aldermen of the same Towne, Keepers of the publike peace, and also Justices by the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, to hear and determine divers Felonies, Trespasses, and other misdemeanours committed within the Town and County of Kingston upon Hull aforesaid: Amongst other things it was then presented Quere, How those men of the Jury upon Oath could finde this Inditement a∣gainst M. Shaw, and yet say in their Petition to his Excellencie, that they have not known him guilty of any scandalous a∣ctions which might deserve justice to pass against him. The General is too wise to be deceived by such men. upon the Oath of Robert Pease, Wil∣liam Ramsden, Richard Wilson, John Crowther, Robert Moor, Augustine Jen∣kinson, Marmaduke Pattison, Martial Ripley, Samuel Lightfoot, James Net∣tleton, Thomas Dewicke, John Harris, Richard Wood, Marmaduke Thompson, and Robert Winter, lawful and honest men of the said Town of Kingston upon Hull, That John Shaw of the Hospital called Gods-House-Hospi∣tal, neer Kingston upon Hull, in the County of Kingston upon Hull Clerk, upon the Seventh day of February, in the yeer of our Lord One thou∣sand six hundred fifty and two, at the Gods-house-Hospital in the Coun∣ty of Kingston upon Hull aforesaid, by force of Arms, to wit, with hands, clubs, stones, and knives, in and upon Ellerker Potts of Kingston upon Hull in the County of Kingston upon Hull aforesaid, Baker, did make an assault, and him beat, wound, and evil intreat, and other enormities of∣fered, against the publike peace, &c. Witnesses sworn: Ellerker Potts, Joshua March, Will: Wakeley, Reynold Starr, Examined by Char. Vaux, Clerk of the Peace. What these men swore, as to the fact, and the manner how it was in the par∣ticulars, is faithfully reported in a Letter sent to his Excellencie by an honest man, and one of the Jury. The Letter is thus, word for word. May it please your Excellencie, I Finde a great lothness upon my spirit to disturb your Excellencie in your more publike and weighty Transactions, by the interposure of any particular concernments; yet for the great love I bear to Righ∣teousness and Truth, I cannot be silent when at any time I behold (in my weak apprehension) any stain or blot thereupon. And moreover, that which emboldens me at this time to trouble your Excellencie with the ensuing discourse, is, That I understood by Mr. Canne that of late there
hath been some debates (before your Excellencie) betwixt Mr. Canne and Mr. Shaw, concerning the blinde men, and their Tryal in this Court; and that at that time Mr. Shaw did Many horrible lyes he then told and no marvel if some there present did (at least in part) be∣lieve them con∣sidering how often he call'd God to witness, and with what impudence and boldness he a∣verred those untruths which he spake. calumniate Mr. Canne thereabouts, (which is very probable) for it is generally reported here, that Mr. Canne did ask Mr. Shaw forgiveness before your Excellencie, for his defama∣tion of him; which is thought to come from Mr. Shaw, but doth much rejoyce and lift up Mr. Shaw's friends, and astonish Mr. Canne's, it comes forth with such confidence. Now Providence so ordered, that when Mr. Shaw and the blinde man had their Tryal in our Court, viz. the 21 of April last, that I was called to be of the Jury, and am thereupon desired to declare the truth of the carriage of the whole business that was in Court that day, to your Excellencie; which (by Gods assistance) I shall do, so far as I remember, or do call to minde, in every particular: viz. The day above-said, one Elleker Potts prefers an Inditement against Mr. John Shaw Clerk, for that he the 7 of February 1652. did assault and beat the said Ellerker Potts, &c. which to make good, the said Ellerker, with three more, were sworn, two whereof were blinde men, but gave in evidence what they heard severally; which was, That the day above∣said being at the Charter-house or Gods-house, and there discoursing with Mr. Shaw concerning their priviledges there, Mr. Shaw fell into a great passion and rage against Ellerker Potts, and, as they supposed, cast him violently often to the ground, thrice at the least; and they heard a womans voice say, Husband, what do you mean to kill the man? (which woman they believe was Mistress Shaw;) and likewiss that they heard Ellerker Potts son cry aloud, Oh wo is me (or to that purpose) Mr. Shaw will kill my father. These two being heard and withdrawn, we called in the seeing man, one There was another took his Oath before the Governour of Hull, that he saw Mr. Shaw to throw him down. William Wakely, who was that day em∣ployed by Mr. Shaw; whose testimony was the same with them before, viz. that at the time aforesaid he was present, and did This testimo∣ny will rise up in judgement against him. see Mr. Shaw take Ellerker Potts by the shoulders, and throw him violently on the ground; and as he got up, cast him down again three times: and that Mistress Shaw came and took Mr. Shaw by the arm, and said, Fie, husband, do you mean to kill the man? and also the boy, as before recited. Whereupon, the Indice∣ment was found. I shall not further trouble your Excellencie at pre∣sent, then humbly to crave leave to subscribe my self, Your Excellencies humble servant, and cordial well-wisher. Robert Winter. You shall have a Black-smith that is used to the frequent and dayly handling of Iron, hold a hot fire-coal in his hand and laugh, whilst ano∣ther would roar out: So tender are some men, that their hearts will smite them for a little: but this man hath so accustomed himself to lying, he is so hardened in it, that his protestations, imprecations, execrations,
though never so false, are not (as it seems by this) so much as felt or ap∣prehended by him. And here it may not be forgotten, as to demonstrate how Another noto∣rious lye of his (which he fa∣thered on Mr. Moor) was this viz. That the three blind men should come to Mr. Moor, and there confess that they had ex∣tremely wrong∣ed Mr. Shaw; and desired him that he would stand their friend to regain Mr. Shaws fa∣vour: for o∣therwise they thought he would take a∣way their pay, in that they had so highly offend∣ed him: this he affirmed to the General; and that Mr. Moor would justifie it. accustomed he is to lying: when he protested to Colonel Lassels and Mr. St. Nicholas, that he did not beat the blind-man, push him, nor thrust him downe; he affirmed withall, that he had a Letter from Mr. Luddingtons people, which was to clear him of the said fact, and blaming the blind-man, for his proceeding against him: and to make this good, he took a Letter out of his pocket, and shewed it. Mr. Canne asked whose hands were to it: he an∣swered, he would not tell him; but there was the Letter. Now how false∣ly he spake in this, let all men judge, by this which follows. Sir, Whereas we have seen in a Letter of yours to the Governour, dated the 7. of July these words, viz. That Mr. John Shaw affirmed that he had under the hands of Mr. Luddingtons people, that they did condemn the blind man and clear him; We do hereby certifie that he never had anything under the hands of the Church (which we suppose he calls Mr. Ludding∣tons people) nor from any particular member thereof. But we further affirm, that we did, and we do judge the blind men to be wronged, as ap∣peared in open Court. Robert Luddington, Robert Overton, John Pecket, Ed. Atkinson, T. Lumm, Lawrence Scortreth, George Kitchin, John Bethel, John Dafforn, Boaz Brittain, John Bess, Ant. Dikson, Richard Newton, Edw. Andrew sen. Ralf Cass, John Mudie, George Norwood, Michael Hogg. The thing here is not onely denyed, and Mr. Shaw proved a false speaker; but withal, the whole Church witnesseth against him: and for the blind men, whose testimony I am sure will be received and cre∣dited before Mr. Shaw and his party, who endeavour to countenance and bear him out in lying, oppression, and other sinful practises. One thing more I must here give a hint of, concerning a writing which Mr. Shaw reports that Colonel Lassels and Mr. St. Nicholas gave him under their hands, the which writing he hh He gave out copies of it at Stilton in his way home, and so hath done all the Country o∣ver. M. Canne not knowing of any writing he he had, till af∣terward. made a great improvement of, to the publick disgrace of Mr. Canne everywhere. Now I shall not meddle with the Gentlemen at all; they best know what they did, and why. This onely I testifie in the behalf of Mr. Canne, that in the presence of Mr. Dove, Mr. James Nelthrop, and Colonel Gill, Mr. Canne affirmed to Colonel Lassels, that when Mr. Shaw and he were with him, he offered to prove whatsoever he had written against Mr. Shaw, and did not deny or decline any thing that he had published, but stood firm to the justification of all, and every whit that was in the Book. This Mr. Canne affirmed at first, to Colonel Lassels and Mr. S. Nicholas, and to Colonel Lassels in the hearing of the three Gentlemen named be∣fore:
and howsoever he leaves the prosecution of the business against Mr. Shaw to others more concerned in it, yet he hath seen and known, since the publishing of that book, so much lying, for swearing, and other ungodly actions done by Mr. Shaw, as he thinkes him to be a man far worse and more corrupt then he did before, and is perswaded that his sins are now full and ripe, and that God will speedily lead him forth with the workers of Iniquity. And in this he is the more confirmed by that saying of Solomon, Though hand joyn in hands, the wicked shall not be un∣punished; but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered, Prov. 11. 21. Moreover, not onely is the thing thus past against him by witnesses sworn, and the Inditement found in Court; But his own conscience (though his mouth forsweares it) hath since openly declared him guil∣ty. And this appeares as clear as the Sun at noon-day: for why else hath he removed the business, from Hull to Westminster, but in hope that the men whom he hath wronged, being blind, and so not fit to travel, and poor, and so not in a capacitie to follow the suit so far against him, he shall by this device escape the lash of Justice? Without doubt, had he not been conscious to the evil of the fact, he would never have removed it from that town, where he hath so many friends to act for him, as would acquit him right or wrong if they could. But he and his partakers there see the fact to be so notorious, as that place is not for their turn, but somewhere else (a great way off) must be chosen, where the truth may not be so openly known and manifested against him. Howsoever I question not, but as the Lord hitherto all Thus the un∣truths which he spake to his Ex∣cellency, his publishing a scandalous, pa∣per against Mr. Can, his insul∣tations & boast∣ing in Town and Country, of a victory which he bad gotten, and cleared of all things laid to his charge, is by the just hand of God, matter of shame & in∣famie to him. along, hath turned all his crafty and evil designes upon his owne head, and brought him to shame by his owne doings, according to that in the Poet: —Non est lex justior ulla, Quam necis artifices arte perire sua. He will do the like in this. For I know Judge Rolls to be a man of so much justice, conscience, and experience, as Mr. Shaw will not finde him to be such a man as he hath formerly found some of his old Masters, viz. as corrupt and rotten as himself; but will send him back, and the busi∣ness likewise, to its proper place, where things may be fully examined, the truth known, and the offender receive his due and condign punish∣ment. There are several other complaints in my hand, as charges of high and great misdeanours against Mr. Shaw; which I might have pub∣lished, the witnesses being ready upon oath to make good the same, viz. His This Edward Andrews will testifie. oppression, M. Shepherd by woful expe∣rience knows this to be true and others too. extortion, Mr. Ramsdel can speak out to this, whom Mr. Shaw dis∣swaded from taking the En∣gagement. underhand tampering with men to alie∣nate and disaffect them from the present Government, and causing faction and divisions among the Magistrates, and disturbing the peace of the whole Town: but I shall forbear here to mention them, because it is expected, that those who are in authority, for the love which they
bear to truth and righteousness, and a holy zeal to suppress incendia∣ries and deceitful men, will grant a commission to some in that Coun∣try, men of known integrity and honesty, not ingaged to carry on his designe, to examine these particulars, that the truth may be known, and the man no longer suffered in his insolencies, and born out as he hath been, to abuse the best and truest friends of the State, of his Excellen∣cie, the Army, and people of God. And for this end, I understand there are some here, in the behalf of the Garison, the Church, and the honest and good people of the Town, as endeavouring to procure such a Commission, as knowing well, if the same shall be granted, the man will be proved worse then they have yet declared, either to his Excellency or any other against him. I shall conclude this discourse, with a story sutable to the subject. When King Richard had taken in a skirmish, Philip Bishop of Bevois, a deadly enemy of his, he caused him to be clapt up in prison, casting Iron bolts upon his heel. Being complained of to the Pope, he writ to the King not to detain his dear son, an ecclesiastical person, a shepherd of the Lords; but to send him back to his flock: Hereupon the King sent his Ambassadours to the Pope, wishing them to use the words of the Patriarch to their Father Jacob, when they had sold their brother Jo∣seph, and dyed his party coloured-coat in the blood of beasts, saying, Hanc invenemus vide utrum tunica filii tui sit an non? This we have found (and shewing the Armour with which he was taken) see whether it be the Coat of thy Son or no? No (replyed the Pope) its not the Coat of my Son; nor of my brother, but some Imp of Mars; let him procure his own freedome if he can. The application I leave to the Reader. FINIS.
