W370 E985_22 99866900 119188
A COLLECTION OF Several Passages concerning his late HIGHNESSE Oliver Cromwell, In the time of his Sickness; WHEREIN Is Related many of his Expressions up∣on his DEATH-BED. Together with his PRAYER within two or three dayes before his Death. Written by one that was then Groom of his BED-CHAMBER. Entered according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson, dwelling in Smithfield, neer Hosier-Lane end. 1659.
A Collection of several Passages concerning His late Highness Oliver Cromwell, in the time of his Sickness, wherein is related many of his Expressions upon his Death-bed. HIs Highness being at Hampton Court, sickned a little before the Lady Eliza∣beth died, whose decease was on Fri∣day the sixth day of August, 1658. shee having lain long under great ex∣tremity of bodily pain, which with frequent and violent Convulsion-fits brought her to her end. But as to His Highness, it was observed, that the sense of her outward misery in the pains shee endured, took deep impression upon him, who indeed ever was a most indulgent and tender Fa∣ther, his affections being regulated and bounded with such Christian wisdome and prudence, which did eminently shine forth in filling up, not onely that of a Father, but also all other Relations, wherein hee was a most rare and singular example. And no doubt but the sympathy of his spirit with his sorely afflicted and dying Daughter, con∣sidering also his great burdens, cares, and labours in Government; Hard censures, bitter reproaches, and unjust calumnies from friends; the plots, conspi∣racies, and ingratitude of enemies, of all whom hee
better deserved; Besides his deep sense of suffer∣ing Christians in other parts of the world, as far as the Protestant Interest extended; I say, considering all this, and much more, which such a large heart and comprehensive spirit as hee had, could and did take in, It was enough to have deprest and sunk the stoutest and most undaunted courage in the world; And I have often wondred hee was able to hold out so long, But that hee was born up by a supernatural power, at a more than ordinary rate, whereby (doubtless) hee had held out longer as a mercy to the truly Christian World, And to us in these Nations, had wee been worthy of him, and not sind him away; Upon which account the Nation, especially the godly, and his own Family, and personal Relations, have great cause of self-re∣flection and humbling before the Lord, in order to a Timely Return, lest a worse thing befall us, and the effect and consequence of this great blow of Gods hand, prove worse than what wee (at pre∣sent) feel or fear. But, I say, his time was come, and neither prayers nor tears could prevail with God to lengthen out his life, and lend him longer to us, although abundantly and uncessantly poured out on his behalf, both publickly and privately (as was observed) in a more than ordinary way. Besides many a secret sigh, yet like Moses Cry, more loud, and strongly laying hold on God, though neither perceived not heard by man, than many vocal sup∣plications. All which (the hearts of Gods people being thus mightily stirred up) did seem to beget confidence in some, and hopes in all, yea some
thoughts in himself that God would restore him. And yet wee could not bee more desirous hee should abide, than hee was content and willing to bee gone, as hee exprest near his end, knowing that there were better Mansions, a better Kingdome and Inheritance, a better Crown, and a better Throne, yea every way better things in Heaven provided for him, as might bee gathered from his own ex∣pressions, yea the whole course of his life, exem∣plary conversation, and close communion with God, ever since his effectual calling and acquain∣tance with Jesus Christ, observed many years by such as knew him, and in the Lord had intimate ac∣quaintance with him, some whereof are living wit∣nesses to this day. But truly, since God raised him to the Govern∣ment, the truth hereof hath so abundantly appear∣ed, that the mouth of envy its self must needs bee stopped. And which things (although hee be dead) yet speak in the hearts of some, his nearest and nar∣rowest observers, and may speak to the conviction of most professors of godliness, and bee an excel∣lent pattern to them, especially such in great place and power, as best acquainted with his tempta∣tions, which through grace hee was enabled to bear and overcome in a great measure. And truly wee may say, that the one half of his worth, as a great Christian and servant of God, was not known to others, and therefore little comparatively can bee said; yet that little may be of much spiritual advantage to bee remembred, and as a copy to be writ after, seeing the original
is taken from us, and now in Heaven. Therefore in order thereunto I shall onely set down a few Observations occasionally made of what past from himself at times, before, and in his sickness; the whole (as I said) being but one letter of his name, as an excellent Christian, or a few frag∣ments of what may bee said by others, and I hope will, for publick use, this being onely a private Remembrance. And first his great Knowledge in the Mysteries of godliness, the depth, soundness, and solidity of his judgement being such, that hee was enabled to discuss the greatest truths of God, with so much clearnesse and evidence, that few of any sort of men could match him, to the great advantage of such as were so happy (as the Queen of Sheba said to Solo∣mon) to stand before him; his speech alwaies mixt with that humility and zeal, and so peircing, that it could not but leave some impression upon those that heard him; And hath been to some of more than ordinary use to edification. And indeed, the excellency of his spirit lay prin∣cipally in the wonderful insight hee had attained unto, and clearness in the Covenant of Grace, which doubtless, as it was his greatest study, as that wherein his All, and the All of every Christian doth lye, so it was his greatest delight to bee often speaking thereof, that hearing him, sometimes, I have thought with my self, if these things bee so, that grace is so full, so free to sinners, to the great∣est sinners, what reason or room could there bee
for unbeleef? or what discouragement can there bee to any not to come and drink freely of this open-fountain? onely mans will stands in the way, until it bee over-powered by special grace, the unsealing of that great secret of Gods e∣lection. I say in these things hee was wonderfully instructed, and able to instruct. 2 But as was his Knowledge, so was his Faith, his head was not so full of the one, as his heart was of the other, that as Christ said to the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 28. O woman, great is thy Faith, &c. so it may bee said of him, great was his Faith. A taste of which I shall give, as it was taken from himself on his death-bed, speaking of the Cove∣nant. Two in respect of the different Ad∣ministration of the same Covenant of Grace, but one as to the substance in Christ the Head and Mediatour of the Church from the beginning. They were two, but put into one, before the foundation of the world. It is holy and true, it is holy and true, it is holy and true. Who made it holy and true? who kept it holy and true? the great Mediatour of the Covenant. The Covenant is but one, Faith in the Covenant is my onely support, yet if I be∣leeve not,Behold his rejoy∣cing. hee abides faith∣ful. Is there none that will come and praise God?Speaking to some by him.
He did not mean that it was safe to sin, no, the laying hold of the Cove∣nant implies Faith and Repentance, which the Gospel requires, with new Obedience. Whatsoever sins thou hast, doest, or shalt commit, if you lay hold upon free Grace, you are safe, but if you put your self under a Covenant of works, you bring your self un∣der the Law, and so under the Curse, then you are gone. Is there none that saies, who will deliver mee from the peril? man can do nothing, but God can do what hee will. Lord thou knowest, if I do desire to live, it is to shew forth thy praise, and declare thy works. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, Heb. 10. 31. This was spoke three times, his Repetitions usually being very weighty, and with great vehemency of spirit. All the Promises of God are in him Yea, and in him A men, to the glory of God by us, by us in Jesus Christ. The Lord hath filled mee with as much Assu∣rance of his Pardon, and his Love, as my soul can hold. I think I am the poorest wretch that lives, But I love God, or rather, am beloved of God. 1 John 4. 10, 19. Herein is love, not that wee loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propi∣tiation for our sins. We love him, because he first loved us. I am a Conquerour, and more than a Conque∣rour, through Christ that strengtheneth mee. Rom. 8. 37. Nay, in all these things wee are more than Conquerours, through him that loved us.
Children, live like Christians, and I leave you the Covenant to feed upon. 1 John 2. 1, 15, 28, 29. cap. 3. 7, 18. & 5. 21. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that yee sin not. And if any man sin, wee have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And now, little Children, abide in him, that when hee shall appear, wee may have confidence, and not bee a∣shamed before him at his coming. If yee know that hee is righteous, yee know that every one which doth righ∣teousness, is born of him. Little Children let no man deceive you: hee that doth righteousness is righteous, even as hee is righteous. My little Children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. Amen. Love not this world, I say unto you, it is not good that you should love the world. 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but hee that doth the will of God, abideth for ever. Thus wee see, not onely his clearness in the Co∣venant of Grace, but the strength of his Faith, even unto a high pitch of Assurance, and triumph, with exceeding spiritual joy and rejoycing; And yet with a deep and soul-debasing sense of his own sin∣fulness and unworthiness, thereby magnifying to
much the more the Riches of Gods Grace, with his deep apprehensions of the dreadful consequence of despising the same, or turning it into wanton∣ness, or by drawing back from our holy profession and obedience after Conviction, Illumination, and some taste of the heavenly Gift, so falling into the hands of the Living God, which is a fearful thing. But as to his Faith, had it not been great, consider∣ing the many trials and afflictions, terrours and temptations hee was under, before these times, up∣on and after his turn to God, And the difficulties and dangers hee encountred with, with continual haard of life in his military employments; Be∣sides much more than ever, since called to the Go∣vernment of these Nations, a burden of its self too heavy for any man or men to bear, without a mighty power of God: I say, considering all this, had hee not been strong in Faith, hee had sunk long ago. In the next place, let us consider the exercise of his Faith, in a few experiences of many (wherein hee was Rich) declared by himself, and which were not ordinary, But such as few (I think) of the choicest Saints have attained unto, one whereof was as followeth. Being at Edinborough in Scotland, it pleased the Lord to exercise him with sore sicknesse, a high and dangerous Feavor, whereby hee was brought so low, that his Physicians and others had little or no hopes in reason of his recovery; For one fit of his distemper having lasted about twelve hours, Immediately a second fit returned upon him with∣out any intermission, for as long a time, and likely
to have continued in that extremity, until there∣by hee had expired. But behold this was Gods opportunity to shew his Power, and to magnifie his Word, a Portion whereof by the hand of the Spirit of the Lord was then given in unto him, not onely to feed his Faith, and revive his heart, but also to rebuke his Disease, which immediately left him, to the astonishment of himself and others, it being little less than a miracle. For his Distemper returned no more upon him, but the Lord raised him up, intending further to use and honour him, as hee hath done. The Scripture is, Psal. 91. 14, 15, 16. Because hee hath set his love upon mee, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high; because hee hath known my Name. Vers. 15. Hee shall call upon mee, and I will answer him: I will bee with him in trouble, I will de∣liver him, and honour him. Vers. 16. With long life will I satisfie him, and shew him my salvation. Which Promises, as then his Relief, so all along in every condition, have been eminently made good unto him in his own experiences, and would bee of good use to others, had not his own back∣wardness in uttering any thing wherein hee might seem to glory, for the most part concealed them. But as in sickness, so also in the high places of the field, as at Dunbar, Worcester, and elsewhere, when hee carried his life in his hand, ready to of∣fer up the same, as a willing Sacrifice in the great Cause of God, and his People, Did not his Faith then work at a more than ordinary rate? inso∣much that successe and victory was in his eye, whilst fears and despondencies did oppresse the
hearts of others, and some good men too, when great discouragements, and that not groundless as to the strongest reason, did lye in the way; I say, was hee not like another David, not fearing the face of any Goliah, nor the over-matching numbers and strength of Enemies? Yea like those Worthies, Heb. 11. did hee not by Faith suddue Kingdomes, work Righteousness, obtain Promises, stop the mouths of Lions, quench the violence of flames, escape the edge of the sword, out of weakness made strong, wax valiant in fight, and turn to flight the Armies of Aliens? Although I will not say, that his Faith alone had a hand in these successes (yet not the least) but all the people of God by Faith and Prayer had a great share therein, which must vigorously bee kept up still, if wee desire to prosper. But this by the way, being of publick concernment, and bet∣ter known to many others than my self. And therefore to come nearer, a few daies after the death of the Lady Elizabeth, his Daughter, at Hampton Court, which toucht him nearly, being then himself under bodily distempers, forerunners to his sicknesse, which was to death, and in his Bed-chamber, hee called for his Bible, and desired a person honourable and godly, then (with others) present, to read unto him, Phil. 4. 11. 12. 13. Not that I speak in respect of want, but I have learnt in what∣soever state I am, therewith to bee content; I know both how to bee abased, and how to abound, every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to bee full, and to bee hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. v. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengtheneth mee.
Which read, said hee (to use his own words as near as I can remember them) This Scripture did once save my life, when my eldest Son— died, which went as a dagger to my heart, indeed it did. And then repeating the words of the Text him∣self, declared his then thoughts to this purpose, reading the 10th. and 11th. verses of Pauls Con∣tentation and Submission to the Will of God in all conditions (said hee) 'tis true, Paul, you have learnt this, and attained to this measure of grace, but what shall I do? Ah poor creature, it is a hard lesson for mee to take out, I finde it so! But read∣ing on to the 13th. verse, where Paul saith, I can do all things through Christ that strengtheneth mee, Then Faith began to work, and his heart to finde support and comfort, saying thus to himself, Hee that was Pauls Christ, is my Christ too; And so drew waters out of the well of salvation, Christ, in the Covenant of Grace. But a little nearer yet, after his return to White-Hall, his sicknesse increasing upon him, hee was ob∣served to bee in a very spiritual frame of heart, and full of holy expressions, catched up by one or other fearing God that were present, as a hungry man doth meat. A little whereof it was my comfort to meet with, the very night before the Lord took him to his everlasting rest, which were to this pur∣pose following, viz. Truly God is good, indeed hee is, hee will not—there his speech failed him, but as I apprehend it, it was, hee will not leave mee; this saying that God was good, hee frequently used all along, and would speak it
with much chearfulnesse and fervour of spirit in the midst of his pains. Again, hee said, I would bee willing to live to bee further serviceable to God and his People, but my work is done, yet God will bee with his People. Hee was very restlesse most part of the night, speaking often to himself. And there being some∣thing to drink offered him, hee was desired to take the same, and endeavour to sleep, unto which hee answered, It is not my design to drink or to sleep, but my design is to make what haste I can to bee gone. Afterwards towards morning, using divers holy expressions, implying much inward consolation and peace, among the rest hee spake some exceed∣ing self-debasing words, annihilating and judging himself. And truly it was observed, that a pub∣lick spirit to Gods cause did breath in him (as in his life-time) so now to the very last, which will further appear by that Prayer hee put up to God two or three daies before his end, which was as followeth. LORD, Although I am a mise∣rable and wretched Creature, I am in Covenant with thee, through Grace, And I may, I will come to thee for thy people, thou hast made mee (though very unworthy) a mean
Instrument to do them some good, and thee service; And many of them have set too high a value upon mee, though others wish, and would bee glad of my Death; But Lord, how∣ever thou dost dispose of mee, continue and go on to do good for them, Give them consistency of Judgement, one heart, and mutual love, and go on to deliver them, and with the work of Reformation, and make the Name of Christ glorious in the world; Teach those who look too much upon thy instruments, to depend more upon thy self; Pardon such as desire to trample upon the dust of a poor worm, for they are thy People too. And pardon the folly of this short Prayer, then for Jesus Christs sake, and give us a good night, if it be thy pleasure. Some variation there is of his Prayer, as to the account divers give of it, and something is here omitted; But this is certain, that these were his Requests, wherein his heart was so carried out for God and his People, yea for them who had ad∣ded no little sorrow to his grief and afflictions that at this time hee seems to forget even his own
Family, and nearest Relations. And thus wee see in part something of the clearnesse and strength of his Faith in the Cove∣nant of Grace; and some tasts of the exercise there∣of in a few of his experiences, with the excellency of his spirit in prayer; And that spiritual and pub∣lick frame of heart breathing forth in him, even to the last period of his life, whose name shall and will bee as ointment poured out, notwithstanding the mouth of envy. But further, that we may see his Faith was not alone, nor an idle Faith, let us consider him in his other Graces and Excellencies, in some ob∣servations of his Conversation in general, which was worthy Imitation of the most eminent Saints, And that since he arrived at that great∣ness unto which God raised him, which caused no abatement in him (considerable) as usually it doth in men: But rather as his power and oppor∣tunity was increased, so his talents were drawn into exercise and usefulness. 1 And first his Zeal for God, his Cause, his Truth, his People, and the good of men, which in a manner (as it was said of Christ) did even eat him up. Insomuch that he did not count his life dear to him, nor any thing else, so he might be usefull. What else engaged him in, and car∣ried him through, the great Work of God, as a prime and choice Instrument for so many years together, with so much stediness and constan∣cy, as to the true aim and scope thereof, viz. Gospel liberty, and Civil Right, &c. Notwith∣standing
many difficulties, and discouragements, such as Paul met with in some sort. 2 Cor. 11. 26. In Journeyings often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by mine own Country-men, in Perils by the Heathen (Irish) in Perils in the City, in Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Pe∣rils among false Brethren, in Weariness and painful∣ness, &c. Known unto all, much more than I can express it. 2 Again, His Zeal did highly appear in fur∣thering the preaching of the Gospel in its Power and Purity, by the great incouragement he gave to Godly Ministers, And laying such a Foundati∣on thereof, that the Generations to come may reap the Benefit of it, If we sin not away that greatest of mercies, as we have cause to fear. Be∣sides, what care did he take to remove hinderan∣ces out of the way, by discountenancing and lay∣ing aside Idoll Shepherds, such as were found igno∣rant and scandalous men, Dumb Dogs, such as were more ready to bark against Truth and Reforma∣tion, than able or willing to speak for, or pro∣mote the same. Considering also the pains he took in his own Person, in sifting and finding out mans worth, or worthlesness for so great a work, especially when his own Concernments did more immediately require the same, which is known to most, he being herein also a most rare example to succeeding Rulers, and indeed the first of this Kind in so high state and Eminency. 3 Again, His love to the Truth, unto which
he was a faithful Friend, Laborious in Contending for it, Powerful in Conviction of the contrary, and stopping the Mouth of Error; Having of∣ten to do by reason of his great place, with many men of erring Judgements (as well as others) the most obstinate of whom I have often heard him silence, discountenance their errors with greatest detestation, especially when of Fundamental Con∣sideration, as once dealing with some of the Qua∣kers, he rendred their opinions in the most dread∣ful and yet truest Character that ever I heard, Saying, they were such as took the Crown off the head of Christ, disrobed him of his Priestly Garments, and denied his Prophetical Office, by setting up a spirit of their own in the Room of his, by the whole utterly making voyd his Me∣diatorship, who is God blessed for ever, And that he had rather be buried alive under a heap of stones, than in the least to countenance the same, and much more, which I have now forgot. 'Tis true, his heart being tender to all men, especially such as were peaceable, he did not use that severity ordinarily towards them or others of that kind, as was by some expected. But what other consideration did therein sway him to so much Lenity, I cannot tell, neither is it for eve¦ry one to know, much less to judge; but this we know, that he was merciful to all. 4 Again, His Zeal appeared in laying much to heart the afflicted condition of Gods People under Persecution in other parts of the World, and laying out his Power & interest to the utmost he
could, for their succour and relief, both by Arms and Alms, whose sorrows and sufferings added not a little to the grief of his Soul, and whom he car∣ried much in his heart, as appeared by his publique spirit to his dying hour, and 'tis sufficiently known, 'twas the Protestant interest, so far as it had foot∣ing, was mainly in his design in all his forein un∣dertakings, and not Riches, Honour, and Domini∣on, which most Princes have in their eye; And from which he did not withdraw, notwithstanding discouragements; in which Principle if other Pro∣testant Princes and States were more firmly unite, the Gospel-Cause against its enemies would in pro∣bability better succeed. 5 His Zeal appeared in his love to Justice, as the Scripture speaks of Job, Chap. 29. 16. search∣ing out the cause of the Widow, the Fatherless and the Oppressed, and yet no respecter of persons in Judge∣ment, as commanded, Deut. 1. 17. Yee shall not re∣spect persons in judgement, but you shall hear the small as well as the great; you shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgement is Gods: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto mee, and I will hear it. And Levit. 19. 15. Yee shall do no unrighteousness in judgement: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteous∣ness thou shalt judge thy neighbour. 6 Again, His Zeal did shew forth its self in punishing of evil doers, especially in his own fami∣ly, where loosenesse or prophanenesse durst not ap∣pear, or if it did, and came to his knowledge, Da∣vids Resolution, Psal. 101. was also his, that such
should not dwell in his house, but were cast out. Besides his readinesse to countenance them that were good, and did well, according to that Rule Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3. Let every soul bee subject unto the higher powers: For there is no power but of God. The powers that bee, are ordained of God. Whosoever there∣fore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves domna∣tion. For Rulers are not a terrour to good works, but to the evill. Wilt thou then not bee afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. It were too hard a task for any to reckon up all those Graces which did shine forth in him, espe∣cially for mee; And therefore I shall touch onely upon two or three more, wherein hee was a most rare Example of Beleevers, and an excellent Pat∣tern for those in highest Power. 1 And first, His love to Saints, to all Saints, and that as such, although of different Judgements: Unto whom hee was a Father, to protect them, and care for their welfare, a friend, to favour them in all just waies, and a peace-maker, to recon∣cile them, at least to carry things with that wis∣dome, prudence and moderation towards them, that so guiding them (as it was said of Moses, Psal. 78. 72. So hee fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.) With the skilfulnesse of his hand, in these dividing and divided times, that their divisions, through Gods mercy and blessing on his endea∣vors, have not broken forth into a flame of all de∣vouring
contention, as was feared by us, and waited for by our enemies, thereby securing our Peace to this day continued to us. And truly, had not God furnished him with ex∣traordinary wisdome this way, our condition had been (in all likelikood) very sad ere now, bear∣ing with the weak, forbearing the froward, and injurious, and ready to forgive such as appeared in the posture of enemies against him, upon the least appearance of penitency, yea many times in hopes thereof, endeavouring after the Command and Example of Christ, to overcome evil with good, to the wonder of most men. 2 Again, As his Love was great, the like rare∣ly to bee found in the times was live in, so was his Charity to the Poor, the Widow, the Fa∣therlesse, and the Distressed. In which respect wee may say of him, as Job of himself, Chap. 31. 17. Or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the Father∣less hath not eaten thereof? Hee did never eat his Morsels alone, a great many living upon his allow∣ed Benevolence, who must otherwise have perish∣ed, besides occasional distributions at home and a∣broad, with his readinesse to promote by his au∣thority and influence good works of this kind, as well as by his own example; for which the souls of thousands have blessed him, even beyond the Seas. 3 And lastly, His closenesse of communion and converse with God, not onely publickly, keeping up, and waiting on Gods Ordinances, in the most
solemn and set times of his worship with great Re-Reverence, Attention, and Intention of spirit; But also on other extraordinary occasions, when Gods providence called for it (whereof hee was a strict observer) in seeking his face with fasting and prayer, and that with wonderful successe, the Lord giving in visible Returns; And this (as I said) not onely in a publick way, but also in his family, and especi∣ally in his secret retirements. And indeed Prayer (as one calls it) was his daily exercise, which hee never neglected, notwithstanding all his weighty affairs, yea the more weighty and urgent they were, the more hee buckled to it, and sometimes with such fervour of spirit, that hee could not con∣tain himself, but with great breakings of heart, send up strong cries with tears unto God, heard, when hee hath not known any to bee near him; so that it may bee truly said of him, that as hee was a man (Abraham-like) strong in Faith, so (like Jacob) mighty in Prayer, and as a Prince prevail∣ing with God; such as indeed in all respects this Nation was never before blest with, to sit in the Throne, however hee was judged, and censured, and lightly set by, by many who were not sensible of our and their mercy, and who yet in time may bee sensible (if God prevent not) of his Remove, where his Prayers are turned into everlasting praises. And thus godliness was the true rise of his great∣nesse, and the root out of which hee sprung into publick use and serviceableness; whence as David saith of such a one, Psal. 1. His leaf did not wither, And whatsoever hee did (in the main) prospered, even
to the wonder and terrour of the world, And the fruit he was eminently an Instrument to bring forth, and designed more to do, was, that the cause of God, and Reformation, might prosper in these Na∣tions, yea as far as his head, heart or hand could reach. And although by the fall of this great Branch, the whole at present is much clouded, yet if those Branches still (through Gods goodnesse) remain∣ing, spring out of the same Root hee did (as it is hoped) and go forth in the power of that Spirit, and principles in which hee was carried, They shall al∣so (without doubt) flourish, and the Lord will make them to grow; But if otherwise, Faith fail, the Spirit of prayer (yet stirring) cease, and the work of Reformation run retrograde; Or, that In∣struments fit, faithful, and fearing God, should e∣ver bee discountenanced and disused, whom God hath hitherto owned and honoured; And carnal men, enemies to Gods work, by fair pretences, like Tobia, and Sanballat, creep in, into their room, our leaf will quickly wither, yea, there will bee a withering every way upon these Nations; And we may fear our strength, our glory, and our God will leave us. But our hopes are, that God yet will do better for us, according to his promise, than at our beginning, for hee can do it, and continue his presence with us for our future good, and the peace, welfare, and prosperity of these Nations, if wee bee not wanting in our duty to God, to those hee hath set over us, and to one ano∣ther. And therefore, O that God would put it into
the hearts of all his People, yea of all the People of the Land, seriously, sincerely, and seasonably, as Lam. 3. 40. to search and try our waies, and turn again unto the Lord. And then hee that hath torn, will heal us, and hee that hath smitten, will binde us up, and revive us again, that wee may yet live in his sight, Hosea 6. 1, 2. And praise the Lord. FINIS.
