W691C E464_19 E464_19* 99863559 162242
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE Late dangerous Petition presen∣ted to the House of COMMONS, September 11. 1648. PROV. 22. 28. Remove not the ancient Land-markes or bounds, which thy fathers have set. PROV. 24. 21. My Son, feare thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare 1648.
Some Observations on the late dangerous Petition presented to House of Commons September 11. 1648. HOw specious soever this Petition may seeme to some, as whatever pretends removall of grievances is catching, yet upon a second view, you may ob∣serve a continued vein of dangerous sophistrie wrapt up in Equivocall tearmes from the beginning to the end: so that to undeceive well-mean∣ing people, it would require a more sad animadversion, then my present leisure, or indeed abilities can afford you. He that will hinder a Serpents entrance, must mainly take heed to the insinuations of the head, which once admitted, steales in the whole body; Wherefore I will begin at the title, and unravel the whole piece, and in so doing, I doubt not to evince all, that when these Petitioners tongues are smoothest, their mindes are roughest, when they give fairest language, their intentions are sowlest, sondly designing with Mercury in the fable to pipe out Argus his eyes, and imitate those theeves, who rob with musicke. But withdraw the Curtaine now. To the right Honourable and Supream authority of this Nation the Commons in Parliament assembled The humble Petition, &c. Sheweth That no Govern∣ment is more just in the Constitution then that of Parliaments. Joyn
these together and spell them, you that pretend so great ac∣quaintance with the constitution of an English Parliament: did you never heare of we the Lords and Commons, &c. If you thinke the constitution of Parliament just, doe you thinke the conjunction of both houses unjust? Who are you that take upon you to legitimate one of these twins, and bastardize the other? Are you ignorant how they have been born and bred together? This was the old plot, Divide & Impera. The court aime, to di∣vide the two Houses; they knew well enough the fall of the one, would be the evening of the others ruine, that the first could not be stifled, but the second would be strangled. Will you put a new cape upon an old cloake, and build upon a Malignant foundation? Sure some new light hath discovered unto these men, how to make a body subsist all of belly, for tryall whereof they are whetting apace to cut off our Parliament at the wast; This is the reason why the Ordinances are stiled Illegall in the Warning-piece, because the Lords have a hand therein: The Peers are the skreene which stands between Prerogative and Liberty, and keeps each from scorching other; That Commissu∣ra cervicis which marries the head to the body; The mean be∣tween the extreames, A Gallery between Royalty and Pro∣perty which makes them keep their due distance; They are le∣nitives, which allay Monarchy, and of Mercury sublimate make it a wholesome medicine: In sum by their means we are famed and envyed, for our happy mixed Government. And as the end of all Government is the safety and freedome of the Governed, &c. What doe you quote the end of Government to the Pariament? for did they ever abridge just freedome? but what ever you talke of freedome, you mean licentiousnesse as is evident as well by the whole tenour of this Ochlocraticall Petition, as by the report of that warning-piece (but charged with murdering shot) which is but the construing Booke of this, as ap∣peares by its complaint of the stop of this very Petition, and o∣ther seditious pamphlets, in the last page. Now what great dif∣ference is there between tyrannicall and licentious Govern∣ment? Are not both Arbitrary? The one pleaseth not good men, the other displeaseth wise men: The one can easily doe e∣vll,
the other can hardly doe good: in that the insolent have too much sway, in this the foolish, yet is there more hope in Tyranny, for be there one or two evill Princes like droughts of immoderate raines, and rivers overflowing their bankes, a good successour like a fit of seasonable weather may repaire the others breaches and render us our own with Interest: but in an Anarchy what can be expected, but a never dying succession of confusion? There is a lively analogy between the populacy and the Sea, Both uphold only light things, let the heavy sinke, wit∣nesse the horrible ingratitude to their bravest Captaines and best deserving Citizens of the Roman and Athenian people. However the Sea may sometimes deceive the eye, with the smoothnesse of its glassy surface, yet we know it alwaies lyable to storms & tempests & that as inconstant as the Planet whose influence moves it, it hath suddenly wrapped it self up in surd billowes and devoured whom even now it smiled upon: Thus the unbridled multitude when at the calmest want but their flat∣tering Oratours to blow up their waves till they tumble and gather, then foame by mutuall attrition then roare and rage till the mast crackes under the sayles, the rudder deceives the hand of the Pilot, and anon the whole Ship of the Common-wealth split against the rockes of their inconsideratenesse. Every head of this Hydra is another Eolus who makes use of the popular windes viz. their affections, to reach the haven of his private aimes, and then shift for your selves. Of this tribe seemes to me the primum mobile of this Petition, whom I vehemently sus∣pect to be some Licinius or Sextius that gapes for the first fruits of a Plebeian Consulate. And to make it the most absolute and free nation of the world. I am here extreamely puzled how to tye  the end of Goevrnment and absolute liberty into one knot nei∣ther with all my tugging can I make the ones end reach the o∣thers beginning for what need Government where every man according to their principles may be his own Governour, or do they mean their Governours should be like glasse eys in a blind∣mans head for fashion not use? Tell us in plain tearms what you mean by most absolute and free: If you mean an unrestraint in do∣ing good, tis every true, Patriots wish that piety and vertue may
be the onely wayes to honour in this nation and that hereafter good men may reap some other recompense besides the consci∣ence of their owne well doings: but if your sence of absolute freedome stretch to an unlimited freewill to doe what ever shall seeme right in your eyes, to act your owne dreames where ad when you please without feare of controule, in contempt of authority, all which you daily practise; If this be the, Butt you shoot at, give me leave to invert your maxime, and tell you, that the end of all Government is indeed the safety of the Governed, in curbing that licentious and absolute freedome here aimed at, ad in restraining that Liberum arbitrium, in conceipt whereof all flesh is so prone to swell. But this is the common sin of Prince and People who caught with the same fallacy, wherewith the Divell foyled our first Parents and not content with the safe freedome of knowing and doing good, are still fancying an additionall perfection till they are justly left miserably free to bewayle the losse of their originall power, and fall from their primitive estate of freedome. Next ollowes a Catalogue of their grievances; They begin with the house of Lords (though not vouchsafed that title viz. of a house) whose just convening of Delinquents before them, they compare to the former supercilious proceedings of the Conncell board: but how justly we shall see, by examining the argument. Some Court Lords who moved but by the wire of their masters passions did amisse; therefore no more Lords are to be trusted: Divers particular Noblemen usurped an illegall authority over their inferiours, some out of arrogance, others onely by imitation; therefore the house of Peeres now acting as a court of Judicature according to the known lawes, is repugnant and destructive to the Commons just liberty, how does this comparrison hold. 1. And therefore in the first place you will be exceeding carefull to preserve your just authority, from all prejudices of a negative voice in any person or persons whatsoever &c. and that you will not be induced to lay by your strength, till you have satisfyed your understandings, in the undoubted security of your selves, and those who have voluntarily and faithfully adhered to you, &c. Here you
tell the House of Commons in plaine termes, the Lords are but cy∣phers, which added indeed to their figure encreas the summ, but of themselves make no number, whence learnt you this Parliamenta∣ry Arithmetick? Since when came an Ordiance to bee of no more force then an Order? this is to tell the Supreme authority of this Nation, that they understand not themselves, nor their Privi∣ledges, when they desire, to any thing, the Lords concurrence: You'l alter your tone shortly, and tell the House of Commons too, they shall be Supreme no longer then they please you. Doth not the same spirit of wild-fire, which here breathes upon the Nobility drive e∣qually against Lords and Commons in the Warning-piece? Where their Councels are termed destructive, their Votes, votes for Norman bondage, their Ordinances Illegall, where the Whole body of the City is rayled against and no other terme bestowed, then Proud Malignant, Illegal Major of London, and his like brethren the Aldermen, and a few illegall Common-Councell men. Who sees not by your insolent carriage, that your venome is against all di∣stinction of Orders? while you may be permitted to spit your poy∣son in secret, and to hatch young Cockatrices in your mysteri∣ous seminaries, you pt on a vzard of zeale to the House, and are sure to hoyse up title enough; (enough to drowne them, if they set sayle therewith) but upon the least alarum against your party, they shall be no more the Supreame authority of this Nation. But the vile of the House and their Confederates, a company of Traytors to God and their Country, for thus are they already stiled in the Warning-piece; Nay, King, Parliament, Priest and People are there inveighed against. I wonder whence these are, who are comprehended under none of those. Shortly wee shall have some of these seditious Tribunes step up, and preferre Agraias leges: Is it not against the Common priviledges to suffer any enclosure? Why should any Patrician possesse more land then a Plebeian? hath not the one as much of Adams bloud in his veines as the other? The truth is, they feare the State of Licinius, condemnd by his owne Law De quingentis jugeris possidendis, and therefore aime at nothing lesse then an equality, or extension of the Com∣mons priviledges. How pregnant is histories of examples of such as alwayes pretended the ease of the Beast, till themselves got into
the saddle, and then who rode harder then they? who ever tyran∣nized more then these kind people, who now weare the pleas of Liberty and Conscience threedbare, where they have enjoyed but an inch of Government? Let all Histories ancient and moderne speake. Let none of my Country-men therefore bee kindled by these Jack-strawes, who will in conclusion burne themselves, and those who are set on fire by them. Learne to know, that in a well ordered Common-wealth, there is nothing more unequall then e∣quality; let not the hands straine to submit the head to the feets trampling, lest the necke of the body be thereby broken. You know what became of the divisions betweene Abimelech and the men of Sichem; if you opinionatly persecute the house of Abimelech, a fire may issue thence, when you little dreame thereof and con∣sume you. Pray what got Athens by the Fines, imprisonments, banishments of their Nobility? Even as much as Rome by their Agrarian lawes, and other encroachments of the Tribunes upon the Patrician priviledges, which fits of convulsion extinguisht that flourishing Common-wealth. During the War between the Flo∣rentines and Millanesi, an dom. 1427. The popular faction at Flo∣rence having abated the insolence of the Granders, by subjecting their moveables, and other goods to proportionable taxes, began now to swell, and not content with present redresse of grievances, fell to ripping up old sores, and demanded satisfaction of the No∣bility for all unequall levies past: Indignation whereat had occa∣sioned (saith my Author) the conjunction of the Nobility and Gentry with the common Enemy, (as upon the like occasion they had formerly called in the Duke of Athens) had not Iohn de Medi∣ci timeously stopt the flux of these peccant humours, remonstrating the folly of fretting at old wounds, when they ought rather to pre∣vent new; and if their usage had formerly been unjust, they ought to thanke God, who had shewed the way to make it just, and con∣tent themselves with a middle-sized victory: For he frequently un∣does who over-does. 'Twas an ancient arcanum, Non in omnia de∣licta, nec in singulos Authoresinquirere. Who ever desires a Map of our English chaos, let him turne to the Florentine History, where he shall find the mutuall obstinate persecutions of the fa∣ctions, ever barking at the present government, to have strangled
that Common-wealth, and introduced a Tyranny, under which they yet groane; His ego gratiora dictus alta esse scio: sed me vera progratis loqui etsi meum ingenium non moveret, necessitas cogit, Vel∣lom equidem vobis placere, Quirites, sed multo malo vos salvos esse, &c. This devolving so much upon the people causeth a double evill. 1. Honors are heaped upon such as having never tasted therof, relish them the lesse, and have lesse occasion (going without them) to com∣plain. 2 They are taken away from such, as having been accu∣stomed thereto, will never rest till they be restored; as the Sea af∣ter a storme never leaves tumbling and tossing till his waves are le∣velled. Thus the injury on the one part, out weighs the benefit on the other, and for few friends, you make many enemies, who will alwayes be more ready to hurt, then those to help you; Since men are naturally more prone to revenge of injuries, then recompensa∣tion of benefits, this seeming to import dammage and losse, the other profit and pleasure. In the other branch of this Article, you desire the Parliament not to disband, before they have well provided for their owne safety, and their adherents. All their Adherents, that I know, would be glad to see Armies disbanded places disgarrison'd and the poore wasted Countries in some measure eased; as soon as the Parlia∣ment shall judge it safe, whose very being induced thereunto is ar∣gument enough to their modest friends of its safety. But who in∣duces them to devest their strength? any thing save reason? what sawcinesse is this to charge Supreme Authority, with so supreme weaknesse, as that they are apt to be induced to things against their own understandings? They know their greatest stength lies in the peoples hearts, and out of meere returnes of love have intertained a ender care of their disburdning, as far as wisedom will dictate. But who told you they were voring downe the Army? Nay you knew the contrary, by their late Votes for a new establishment under Sir Thomas Fairfax, unlesse you interpret the voting of some Troopes for Ireland a disbanding; however it bee, the Votes were al∣ready passed long before this bastard Petition was borne, and which renders your impudence inexcusable, in your magisterial de∣mands of undoing what you knew was already done. But you love o walk in clouds, and may you at length embace a cloud in stead
of your ambition'd Juno, shall be my prayer: In plaine English you are loth to see this Army by sub-divisions enfeebled, upon whose strength you rely for support wherein you thinke are many props of your extravagancy: you fancie to your selves wings out of their feathers, and therefore unwillingly see any quill dropt; fondlings, you dreame! The bulk of the Army are otherwise pos∣sessed; The sounder part begin to smell your rottennesse; I know not by what misfortune, you have not so close girt your Lambkins of late, but that you, Fox linings have appeared. 2 That you will take off all Sentences, Fines and Imprisonments, imposed on Commons by any whomsoever, without due course of Law, or judgement of their equalls and to give due reparations to all those who have been so injurioush dalt withall, and for preventing the like for time to come that you will enact all such arbitrary proceedings to be capitall crimes. Here is a fine spun net to catch the simple: but what geater enemy to tuth then likehhood? If you understand by due, har ordinary course of law what Malignant could speake higher language, or find, fitter engine wherewith to batter down what ever the Parliament hath been rearing up these five yeares? The safety of the governed, the end of government (to speake in your own dialect) hath occasioned the doing of many things above the ordinary course of law: strange diseases, unknown to Gallen and Hippocrates, have forced our State Physitians to new wayes of cure. If shame forbids you now the owning this construction, all the sense I can squeeze of this expression, is a charge upon the Parliament for their commitment of some of your mutinous rabble, for which yet you would be loth to stand to the due course of law. Dare you talke of the due course of Law, which you la∣bour to overthrow in divers Articles of this very Petition? The complaint were juster, that the Lawes are no more duly executed upon such troublers of our Israel. So when you demand repara∣tions, you must unfold the riddle, for verily to us poore Ignorants you speake in parables. I thinke you intend not Delinquents com∣positions be restored, although its possible, to get some of their hands to your Petition you may have gratified them in this Arti∣cle. For whom else hath the Parliament fined, sentenced, or impri∣soned? O, its true, I had forgot Rabshakeh Lilbourne, whose suf∣ferings
merit at least Letters of recommendation, to his name-sake, John of Leyden K. of Munster, for the office of Grand Master of his Ordnance. 3 That you permit no authority, &c.) Agai ne, so fierce for lega∣lity? long may be in this good humour I But I am afraid you will shake hands with it at the next turning. In the meane time let's examine whence cometh this zeal against an Oath ex Offi∣cio; is it not because they abhorre the very name of duty? will you allow never a graine more to the Parliament then Star∣chamber? Must what this assumes for the present be unwarrant∣ablebecause the other used it? sundry emergenciesdaily happen which escape the foresight of the most provident Lawgivers, who therefore have in every State, betrusted some with a Pre∣rogative, whereby the supreame Magistracy is impowred to provide in cases extra legall for the Common wealths indemp∣nity. The rule indeed usually holds Nemo tenetur seipsum pro∣dere but if the State judge it expedient for the dicovery of a∣ny Jesuit, or Jesuiticall—shall not the Publick Obtain that fa∣vour which the Law allowes in case of Private interest? A cleare conscience fears not the touch stone, and whoever inno∣cent starts from the triall is therein nocent because contemptu∣ous. Onely such owles as you, dread discovery and fly the day, therefore, whatever you may boast of your new lights they are at best but candle lights. 4 That all statvtes, Oathes and Covenants may be repealed &c. What an ambush of Banditi is here broken out against the poor Statutes? Did not I tell you what would become of your pleas for legality? My Gentlemen are already skipt from the Law, to a false Gospel: but no wonder they snarle here at mens Sta∣tutes when they bark in the next at Gods Ordinances What a bitter pill is this same Covenant? These Ostriches who so easily swallow iron (they swoon at the noise of disbanding cannot di∣gest the Covenant: oh this lies hard at their heart for why? it is a Shibboleth whereby the mutionus Ephramites are discove∣red; I commend Vulcans ingenuity out of whose forge came the warning piece who although he halt villanously in other matters, yet tells you like an honest rogue the Covenant is Anti∣tichristian
because it distinguishes the vile of the house from the faithfull of the house what unparalleld malapertnesse is this to demand the abrogation of our lawes, the nullity of our solemne vowes as far forth as they may be construed to their molestation? By whom shall they be construed? by you? we are like then to have pretty endlesse worke: for you know you are not bound to believe to morrow, what you make us believe you doe to day, so that should we modell our lawes to your present liking, be∣fore we had done you may have sprung a new opinion, or ano∣ther tender-hooft Sect may arise and taske us anew; May not Priests turne Independents, and with equall reason Petition a∣gainst the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance? But you are peaceable and well-affected: I wish you may prove so, if you have helped us hitherto we see in this Petition by what hopes you were led, and that in the work you were wel affected only to your selves. For suppose a complyance with all your fanatick de∣sires, which yet is impossible, you draw so unevenly among your selves, would not your peaceable maximes suddenly set the King∣dome on fire with war, spirituall war, debates, heart-burnings, envies, strifes, contention? Read the histories of your fore∣fathers, and tremble at their examples: Who pleaded more peace then the German Anabaptists, till they got the reines of government into their hands, and then what divels incarnate ever acted such villanies? O shun their foot-steps who so desires to tread in the paths of life▪ Those Dutch Sectaries first, to make way for their innovations, that no regard of Conscience or fidelity sworne to the Magistrate might stop their proceed∣ings broached this doctrine, that all Oaths in the time of the new Testament were unlawfull, and that therefore taken, or to be taken, they were of no validity. Ours only slice them as yet, and desire their qualification: when they have obtained this, they will have something else ready to obtrude upon us; for he that thinks they will ever be content, is to learn the nature of a Sectary: In the tayle of this Article lies this venemous clause, That none may be disturbed for difference of opinion or practice in Religion: A worthy grievance! that every Enthusiast should not have his allowed Teraphim! nay, they are not content to be∣leive
as they list, nor to practise what they list, unlesse they have Letters of Mart to take up Proselytes. All they can catch must be lawfull prize, and therefore they aske. 5. That no man for preaching or publishing his opinion in Religion in a peaceable way may be punished or persecuted as hereticall by Judges that are not infallible, but may be mistaken as well as other men in their judgements, least upon pretence of suppressing errours Sects or Schismes, the most necessary truths and sincere professours therof may be suppressed, as upon the like pretence it hath been in all ages. Mark how the Serpet creeps, and every where leaves a filthy shine behind him; Hitherto they never pretended more then a tolleration, now they will have a patent under the broad Seale for publike vent of their false wayes, While they only used the buckler and weapons of defence, we pit∣yed and connived at their weakenes, supposing that nothing but a certaine habit of private assemblings forced upon conscientious people by Prelaticall tyranny without any other obstinacy, had con∣tinnued their withdrawings from publike worship: But now that they furbish the sword and whet their teeth like sharp arrowes, blow the trumpet with that man of Belial, Every man to his tents O Israel. It is high time to rub our eies and watch their progresse. Had they contained themselves within their desires and stuck to their Penates they might still have pleaded the ease of weake breth∣ren: But that al markets should be open to their putid errours plain∣ly shews they never intended them other then for sale and I appeale to all understanding Christians, and such as cherish the practise of piety and power of godlines, whether this be not a straine beyond the tedder of a tender conscience! Did not the Divell by these same instruments ostruct the growing reormation in Germany? They complaine the Parliament and Assembly have done so little: Thanks to these Remoras? They should doe lesse if they could hinder them. These vermine that ferrt into by corners grawing ut the bow∣ells of religion, and eating out the power thereof, first biting at Ministry, then at Magistracy these dungwagons make us stink in the nostrills of all neighbouring Nations. But for sooth their Judges are not infallible; Very true. If you aske seeing we may possibly erre, how can we be assured we doe not? I aske you againe seeig, your eye sight may deceive you how can you be sure you see the
Sunne when you doe see it. Perhaps you may be in a dreame, and perhaps you and all the men in the World have been so, when they thought they were awake, and then only a wake, when they thought they dreamt. Because we challenge not an impossibility of erring, can we not be sure that all ought to be subject to the higher powers, (which you labour to kicke off) and that all sowers of en∣vy and strife and contentious persons are in the wrong, not to say what Saint Paul sayes that such shall not enter into the Kingdome of God? Because the Bishops imposed the nicknames of Puritan and Sectary, cannot we be sure they are your true names, and pitty it is they should be Christian names? Doe you thinke there ever was any such thing as Schisme or faction? if so, give the Magistrate leave to find it out and punish it or else set up your standard and own it. What pitty tis these men are not allowed to ride on a while! What a fine Egyptian miscellany of religions would be introduced! We should shortly have Mahomet the second appeare with new revelations freshly coined in the mint of some Ulcerous braines the itch of whose wit dayly breakes out into some new botch or boyle, for which they deserve not little a clawing. Sure they have retrived St. Thomas his Gospell out of the Vatican and would expound it in their Synagogues. Profecto si essent in republica magistratus nullum futurum fuisse Romae, (vel Londinis) nisi publicum consilium: nunc in mille curias concionesque cum alia in esquiliis, alia in Aventino fi∣ant consilia dispersam & dissipatem esse rempublicam? Under the no∣tion of a new mistery crept in the Bachanalia to Rome a Seminary of the most horrid impieties, that ever were heard of yet veiled over with such a faire shew of pure devotion that it was spread all over Italy before the Senate tooke notice thereof and then hardly with the death of many thousands, and banishment of more, could stifle this Grecian Independency. Doe not many moderne Libertines tread the same path, rending man and wife, Father and Son a sunder, breaking the nearest ands, and captivating simple soules into their new misteries which hard∣ly three or foure of their whole tribe understand where for ought we know, they are innitiated into as arrant deeds of darkenesse as those of the Bacchanalia? I am sure these and the German Ana∣baptistick conventicles run but too paralell. Neither will thoughts
of charity here satisfie a Master of a family, who is knowingly to rende accunt of all ose committed to his care. But thus most necessary truths may be suppressed. Thus those errours which are necessary indeed for your building nd without the rooting whereof, your Babell will tot∣te, shall  uppressed together with their insinuating Brokers, as upon the like  it hath been in all ages. I will brand them in the fore∣head and leave them: They are Intruders into other mens labours, reaping where they have not sowne, worthlesse drones who can by no embleme be livelier represented, then of Ants, that rob others barnes to encrease their proper store stealers of corne for their owne provisions, industrious for themselves to all others unprofitable: The true Pastor is not so, but lke a Bee innoxious, in-offensive, without any's preju∣dice gathers his hony for others, eating as pleasant as profitable. Yet againe They are not satisfied that Controversies in Religion can be trusted to the compulsive regulation of any. No, that's agreed upon you are pretty well resolved against satisfaction. Must nothing then be done in a State, til  mutineer be pleased to be satisfied, no law passe till every Coblr be fist made to comprehend the reasons which urg'd the enacting? what if his braines be too swimming, and will not ad∣mit of impression? What if the Tinker tell us the Tavern is his meeting house, where he first drawes the barrell dry, then sets himselfe a broach, and inspired by the spirit of wine, spits out his froth (miscalled prea∣ching) in the same vessell? Truly sirs, you must come off your stilts, and have this principle beat into you; That not the Magistrate ought to render yo reason, much lesse Gospell, for all his Ordinances; but unlesse you can dismount them with demonstrative arguments, not simple cavillations, out of Gods word, Gods word commands you to submit. Note. Two sorts of people offend in point of Religion, some have a depraved notion of God, and his worship, but confined to themselves; and these deserve a teacher, rather then a torturer, and to be dealt with∣all in the spirit of meeknesse. Others are not only Errones, but Turbones, stirrers as well as errors, and have suckt the same malice from their errors, as is said to be concomitant of the plague, viz. an itch of spreading their Leprosie. Now if it be fellony to intrude into compa∣ny with a Plague sore, what punishment deserve these soule infecters? Since the Jewes for their malicious artifice in sowing the Pestilence,
were justly banished many Countries, what shall be done to these, who by their Emissaries scatter their poyson in all places? Either con∣fine them to the Pest-house, or let them not walke without a white wand some distinguishing marke whereby they may be knowne and shunned. 'Twas a  Heathens speech, Sen. de Ben. l. 3. cap. 6. Violatarum religionum alibi a{que} aliubi diversa poena est, sed ubi{que} aliqua; Better one perish then unity. Can an injury be done to God, and not us? Therefore Clemency is here cruelty: for certainly if the lawes are binding only to morall duties, and loose to Christian, the Magistrate to us beares the Sword in vaine. 6 The Remonstrative part winds up the sixth grievance in these termes: The oppressive Monopoly of Merchant-Adventurers, and o∣thers doe still remaine, to the great abridgement of the Liberty of the People, and to the extreme prejudice of all such industrious people, as doe depend on Clothing, or Woollen manufacture it being the staple Commodi∣ty of this Kingdome, and to the great discouragement of all Tradesmen, Seafaring-men, and hindrance of Shipping and Navigation. Grant all this to be true, yet you must give us leave to doubt of your honest meaning; for he that useth by-wayes, is justly mistrusted when hee keepes the roade. The ingenuous are to be construed by their natures, the crafty, by their ends: The plaine hearted seldome suppresse their inclinations: The cunning man lookes one way, rowes another, and while he holds up artificiall hands, with his naturall under his cloak, cuts your purse. Here 'tis call'd a Monopoly, in the sixth Article  Company, so that when they cry downe this Company and others, till they explaine, we may feare they strike obliquely at all the London Companies, at least of Merchants. And indeed this is but consonant to their doctrine, which urges an universall Community, and esteemes every enclosure a Monopoly. But that, part hereof is false, and all the rest mistimed in the motion; The Westerne Gentlemen will beare me witnesse, who in the House have no small sway, and will for their own Interest have a speciall eye to Clothing, the chiefe riches of their Coun∣trey, the West being the staple of this staple commodity. 7 In the Preface I find these motives to your seventh Article. Also the old, tedious, and chargeable way of deciding suits in Law is continued to the undoing of multitudes of Families. The more undone, the better for you, for the poorest are aptest to embrace your doctrine of Com∣unity
besides, whence comes this care of us, since all out of you Church are Heathens in your account? No wonder, if your new wor∣ships love not to walke in any old way: But wiser men then you, who ever you are, did not use in old wayes to stumble at every stone, nor to cast off old customes, till old customes were ready to cast off them, and if any law grew burdensome, they let it fall through disuse, and antiquated rather then innovated; Physitians will tell you it is unsafe to disturbe an evill setled humour, and when an infirmity hath kept possession twenty, thirty, forty yeares, 'twere madnesse to try experi∣ments upon an aged body. Many Mountebanks, indeed by boasting their new receipts, as you doe, often find some impatient foole or other. who had rather die quickly, then live in a little paine, and weighes not the hazard, in respect of the dispatch. But we poore mortalls are content to thinke the old way the safest, till your new lights discover a better, for a Tinker will tell you, 'tis easier to find holes then mend them. Againe, you shoot beyond the Moone, when you stile this the most palpable and greatest grievance in the world; For who so knowes any thing in Forraigne affaires, knowes there is never a Kingdome in the Christian world, where the course of law is more regular lesse edi∣ous, and consequently lesse chargeable, although indeed, their Fees be lesser, then in England; Nay therefore is the Forraigne way more te∣dious, because lesse chargeable, therefore in demanding a more speedy, plaine, unburdensome way of deciding controversies, and the publication of our Lawes in English, you doe like the sonnes of Zebedee, and aske you know not what. Sure I am in France and other parts, where the Fees are moderate, and the Lawes in their owne language, there are a hundred Families to our one, utterly ruined by suites which continue from Father to Sonne, even to the third and fourth generation, for where it costs but twelve pence a time, every one will run to the Phy∣sitian, and where every worm eaten canker'd fellow can have his Ad∣vocate for his halfe crowne, the least Punctilio must bee pleaded, and the smallest difference turne to a Processe. There is another reason of their mischiefe: For where the Law is not lockt up, as it were in a strange character, as with us, but the way easie, and the doore open for all commers; Every Peazants sonne leaps to the Bar, till Lawyers swarme like Locusts, as in France, whereas their principall study must be in each Village to sow and foment divisions, for feare of starving?
Do not we frequently see fellows otherwise quarrelsome enough, & mutually incensed commit their differences to the arbitrement of neighbours meerly for feare of charges? And if yet some pee∣vish people will never be well till they have paid for it, how out∣ragious would they be when they might disquiet others with esse detriment to themselves? for my part I cannot but esteeme it wisely done of our State to fix some difficulties upon the study of the Common Law, which were they all removed we should soon have all England full of brawles because full of leaders even as now the facility of going to Law tempts many neare to London and West∣minster to their utter undoing who had they lived in Wales or Lancashire would never have dreamt thereof. Well but is this all? are they content to accuse our Lawes of injustice: no they further reuire that they be reduced to the neerest agreement with christianity & that all processe and proceedings theri may be true that so this nation may be freed of an oppression more burdensome and trou∣blesome then all the oppressions hitherto by this Parliament remoued. How furiously thse Jeh's drive boasting their zeal for the Lord pray God it end not as Iehu's in the accomplishment of their own ends. In the interim we stand deeply charged: with Paganisme, what no lesse then unchristian? I confesse they are ancient yet can hardly believe K Alfred fetcht his Lawes from China or that our forefathers have sinceborrowed any of the Turkish Aleoran or Jewish Talmud althoughall these have many excellent constitu∣tions, As impertinent, is the other charge of untruth upon the proceedings which is an arrant falshood. But give the childe his bable before he cry I uppose now the Law's in English without any abbreviation, all fees limited and in print, will it therefore follow this nation shall be for ever free? you Platonicks may please your selves with your fine Idea's, but verily you seeme to underst and the world as ittle as you understand your selves, and those that know you say that's little enough, The regular usuall fee of a Physician's but tenne shillings yet whether to engrosse the Doctours care or out of oftentation. I know not by what meanes it's come about that between the Physician and Apothecary many are purged of su∣peruities and are hardly left so much gold in their purses, as there
is about their pilles, whose fault is this now? must each mans fault be laid upon the States shoulders? so were the Councellours high∣est legall fee, a piece, might not one all whose hopes lay at stake in one cause underhand quicken his diligence with ten The like a second and a third in a like necessity, til the wheeles run in the old track? Nay may he not with more equity demand of me ten pounds, in some cause then one in another? should the fees be prescribed according to the peaders pains, or the causes impor∣tance? for may not a businesse of mighty concernment be often dis∣patcht with lesse trouble then a petty but knotty case case can be opened? as you may sooner read two chapters in a fair legible character then one in a small impression. Again how can a Lawyers pains be esti∣mated? either in the well timing a motion (for every businesse hath its golden houre) or in the manner, or in the choice of the matter, or in the expedition, a hundred wayes order it how you can, an active faithfull mans pains are invaluable, and in many ca∣ses cannot be weighed in other ballances then those of discretion To conclude, you may as easily make a coat for the Moon as limit Lawyers sees. Something perhaps might be amended, and will in time convenient, but to make such a mountain of this mole hill, as in comparison thereof to make nothing of the Starchamber, High Commission, Court of Wards, and all other Court tyranny makes manifestro all who eye your practises that there lies a snake under this green grasse; once I will be your Edipus and unfold this riddle. I find in my story of Mtzer that Arch-Anabaptist, among other his tenents That Iustice and Iudgeent under the new Testament ought to be framed and administred only out of the word of God y which do∣ctrine he made the poore People of huringia believe their Laws and Governments were unlawfull, and challenging to himselfe by degrees the cognizance of all both Ecclesiasticall and Civill mat∣ters. Our Anabaptists are not yet grown big enough to speak plain and therefore whisper in their preachments that there are stronger truths to be revealed but we are not yet able to beare them. First our Lawes must be disgraced and accounted as remote from Christia∣nity, no doubt because they are not all drawn out of the Gospell. Next our Parliament must be bespattered because they will not al∣ter them to their minds: then will some contrary Iustinian com∣mend
himself to the people, by condemning our Statutes for tedi∣ous, and extracting a quite-essentiall Law out of his chimericall revelations, which his Sectaries shall cry up for Gospell. Whoso∣ever reads me, read but the lives of these Plebicolae, and after a moneth or two's observation you shall find them singing Absalons tune in every corner to the people; Your matters are good and right but there is no man deputed to heare you O that our Gospell might nco prevail in the land, that every man that every man that hath any suit or cause might come unto us and we would do them iustice. The whole bent of their wit all their turnings, and windings and fetches; tend but to this to possesse the people against the present Government for this they affirme as many divers shapes as Proteus, with the honest minded insinuating a certain misterious strictnesse of conversation with the ambitious, they deale by communications of honours, telling them what a sweet thing it is to be lookt upon as chief of a party, that its better being the head of a Cat then the taile of a Lion; But deale how you can with them they will amuse and hold you in suspence, but you shall never squeese out of them what they would have, nor indeed can they tell you being resolved to set up more or lesse sayle according as the wind shall blow. Marke this phrase in conclusion. To the nearest agreement with Christianity as if Politicall Lawes could not quite agree therewith, or we be o∣ther then mungrell Christians while we retained any. This is pure Liberty. 8. That the life of no person may be taken away under the testimonie of two witnesse to doe it upon the testimony of one you say is contrary to the law of God or common equity. This is a grievance you have learn't by revelation, for I find no such thing in our lawes: Indeed in some cases of main importance for the example, where many cir∣cumstances compose a chaine of strong probabilities concurring with the deposition of a disinteressed eye witnesse I say in some such rare case the law allowes punishment of a notorious offender; And what can you picke out of this bne now? But you must be ap∣plauded for the sole deliverers from all bondage? And that in an equitable way you will proportion punishment to offences so that no mans life be taken away his body punished nor his estate forfeited but upon such eighty and considerable causes as justly deserve such pu∣nishments.
What your Synagogues account just we neither know nor care, but there is no man punished by the lawes in any of these res∣pects without such cause as the whole Kingdome of England for many, many hundred yeares successively have deemed weighty And that all prisoners may have a speedy tryall? Amen so be it, and may yours lead the dance; that they be neither starved, nor their fa∣milies ruined by long and lingring imprisonment. And that imprison∣ment be only used for safe eustody not punishment. To a Gentleman complaining of the dearnes of Sacke, his companion merrily an∣swers, If it were at a crowne the quart we should have fewer drun∣kards: So say I, if persons were yet more troublesome persons would be more orderly; you see as bad as they are, there are still enough found, that by their folly or obstinacy will venter the going thither. But now what if there arise crimes of contumacie, obstinate opini∣nesse, sedition, pertinacity in speaking evill of dignities, &c. By the practise of all the Common-wealths that ever I read or heard of, Imprisonment hath been judged the most expedient punishment. 1. Because these crimes are of a diffussive nature and therefore con∣finement the most proper remedy. 2. That solitarinesse might breed in their minds, reflex thoughts and so occasion repentance. 3. The indulgence of the magistrate could pitch upon no milder way un∣lesse he should proclaime impunity for all crime not capitall; This being the ordinary gradation of such, that the first fault draws on Imprisonment, and sometimes fine, continuation in it Banish∣ment, surreptuious return from exile, or a third guilt of the same crime death, What interest you have in deprecating such penall proceedings, Let your own Consciences determine. Another fooles bolt is shot against tythes & al other inforced main∣tenance and that nothing in place therof be imposed but that all Mini∣sters may be payd only by those who voluntarily chuse them, and con∣trace with them for their Labours. That is being interpreted, that excepting London and the adjacent Counties, all Ministers should be expeld the Realme of England, and how many thinke you would be left in the Dominion of VVales? Truly considering the pretty ma age we live in; I wonder no such whimsycall Petition as this was ever tendred, Humbly shewiug &c. That whereas for divers yeares past there have beene sundry differences happened in and a∣bout Religion to the detriment of the publike peace, They would
be pleased to order a suspension of all the Ministry for 12. months, till all contentions about Gods worship cease. How thinke ou? would not hands enough be got thereto? I, and seales too: With∣in a while people would be so far from disputing of God. that they would never thinke of him, your Petition hath the sae sence. un∣der other tearmes. The old Proverbe was Lik Priest, like People and both were bad enough; But if it be inverted, Like People, Like Priest, we shall see famous contracts, and a worthy labours all performed in a blind alehouse. If tythes came so hardly. when ex∣acted from them by authority, is it to be imagined, their contri∣butions will flow in more liberlly? The naked truth is this; If these shockes were out of the way Iohn or Leydens Prophets might happily reap the better harvest; for its probable they would plant their Gospell, with equall zeale to the Spaniards in the Indies. We are told there is no ground for either under the Gospell. A sim∣ple cavill: The whole Orthodox Church of God for these foureteen or fifteene hundred yeares, that is ever since any Churches were e∣stablished, have acknowledged more then abundant ground for both; Now because these fanatick dreamers find it not couched in so many Letters and Sylables, they most simply yet most wickediy cry downe all legall maintenance and upon the same ground all our other lawes: For tythes or any other maintenance were never ur∣ged by us as a precept of the Gospell, but as the law of England, and therfore in the seventh Petition they in effect demand the abrogati∣on of al our laws because not expresly contained in the Gospel there tearmed Christianity: Yet I need not grant them thus much for all sound Christians acknowledging a perfect harmony in the word, that the old Testament is but Christ under the veile, and the new Moses unveiled its enough for us to practise what God thought fit to be injoyned in the one, till we find it positively, or by strong inference (for we will not tye them so strictly to it as they doe us) retracted in the other. But this is another dreame of these Pseudo-Evangelists to oppose Moses and Christ, contending that the do∣ctrine of faith delivered in the old and new Testament is divers in substance and that Christ in the new Testament proposed quite a new doctrine. Those that will be blind, Let them be blind still; But God forbid the whole Kingdom should therefore put out their eyes.
10. That you will take some speedy and effectuall course to relieve all such prisoners for debt as are altogether unable to pay, that they may not perish in prison, through the hard heartednesse of their Creditors, that the ption may go down the better, they annex this clause as a gobbet of sugar and that all such who have estates may be enforced to make payment and not shelter themselves in Prison to defraud their Creditors. This was wisely moved believe me; could you but set the dores open and proclaim Jubile to all prisoners you might happily gain no small store of Proselytes, your communion of goods would take fire here like Gunpowder; how quickly would such as have nothing left, cry halves with their neighbours, ? but by your leave, ti motion ad been juster that some stricter punishment besides prison may be inflicted upon all such desperate spendthrifts as will rather obstinately hazard the perishing in prison through their hard heartednesse to their Creditous then bate an ace of their vain expences wherewithall to discharge the debt. Sure while the worst of it is a re∣treat to prison' where many ive jollily and in riot they beare up as long as they may and then let posterity sink or swim. Now admit the worst what proportion is there between the ruine of one man who hath spent his dayes in vanity and folly and the whole families desolation? They erre who think punishments invented onely for the offenders; they are for example sake and to deter others. Are not many for crimes, which by reason of age or other impediments they are no more able to commit yet hang'd up for scarre-Growes? It's a most unjust custome of the Hollanders, when any man is at∣tacht for murder, the people usually help him to escape with this boorish argument one man is killed already, why should we lose another? most foolish pity, yea most wicked! I my self have known a dozen murthers in one yeare by this meanes escape unpunished, all which might possibly have been prevented, had the first mvrthe∣rer been hanged. Those who pity not themselves who can pity? and in case of suretiship the usuall weaknesse of soft natures, or whatsoever else may merit regulation, we leave it to those whom it concerns without imposing our sence upon the supreme Magi∣strate. [11 In the next place here is a great stir about Prison keepers, & their under Officers, I will joyne with you herein, and wish they may be of
approved honesty, but rather wish it, then hope it, for I know not by what fare, they have never been better then they are; The contagion of the place, I thinke, infects them. But that you should now foist this in, to make up your Bakers dozen of grievances, is most, most ridiculous! What a happy condition were we in, if we lay under no greater bur∣den then this of Knavish Prison-Keepers. It's a signe you have little to say, when you interrupt the State-proceedings with such petty mat∣ters: Is not this a worthy businesse, thinke you, for the Parliaments cognizance, in the midst of the greatest difficulties, that ever Parlia∣ment groaned under? This is with Rachel to say, Give me children or else I dye: Is the Parliament in stead of God? Sometime you re∣vile them, here you deifie them. Can they make men honest? they may indeed displace knaves, but to hinder others from becomming as bad, is not their worke but Gods; Must the State be troubled with the pla∣cing and displacing every under Officer? There is one misterious phrase lurkes here, That they may detaine no person or persons without lawfull warrant. Doe they otherwise? why doe not those detained exhibit their complaints? for this is absolutely illegall, and the Prison∣keeper would be soundly fined in any Court of England: So that 'tis frivolous here to trouble the supreme Court. Stay a little, for I pro∣fesse, I can't pick sence enough out of this to fill a nut-shell, except you meane a Parliament Warrant is unlawfull; for who else hath commit∣ted any? 'Tis even so, The House of Peers, or a Committee of Com∣mons, hath sent some of your Knipperdollings to prison for their rude∣nesse, and this makes you plead so hard for prisoners; All the rest of the Article was but a shooing-horne to draw on this clause. But I would wish you to be more modest, and not to harp too much upon this string. for vetily, if you scratch your Superiours too hard, you may chance draw the smart upon your selves. Qui nimis emangit, sanguinem elieit. 12 That you will provide some powerfull meanes to keep men, women and children from begging, and wickednesse, that this Nation may be no longer a shame to Christianity therein. I am confident no Nation under heaven hath better provided for the poore by lawes, then ours, nor any where, Holland excepted, are they better executed: name me any King∣dome in Christendome where are fewer poore? besides that, many who seeme poore among us are but counterfeit, and beg out of wan∣tonnesse,
out of a vagrant humour of Libertinisme, which me thinkes, you of all others should not gain-say. Neverthelesse I deny not but they might be better ordered, and would be in that Government which you so much withstand. It cannot be unknowne to you also, how the City for their parts, have been of late consulting hereabout; so that it ill becomes you Plebicola, to act the Publicola, and to commend your selves to the people for the first movers of that, which hath been above these twelve moneths, to my knowledge, in agtation, and that's a point beyond motion. But such is your arrogance, as that you would in∣ferre to the people, that no body sees their grievances, but you, all the rest of the world is blind, and hardly can you afford the Parliament one oye as the Chinesi doe the Europeans. And whence (I pray) this ren∣der regard of the poore? doe not we know that we are all Infidels in your esteeme? What care you for all the poore in the world, that are out of your congregations? Verily of all graces, you have least cause to brag of charity. Well, I say no more, but wish your heart may here have kept your tongue company; So shall I hope, you may in time come to be honest Elders, since you are already so stont Deacons. 13 The last is a Voluminous complaint, 1. That men call them by their names, of Sectaries, Schismaticks, factious, &c. 'Tis well they are ashamed of the name, 'twere better they were ashamed of the thing; they disavow the titles, but not the tenents. Their argument runnes thus; All honest people, and such as would not conforme to the super∣stitions under Episcopacy, the then present Government, were formerly most unjustly reproached as Puritans, Hereticks, Schismaticks, &c. ther∣fore neither are we truly so called for resisting the present Government, (Although all those stumbling blocks be now removed, and so the rea∣sons why you refuse to joyne with us yet invisible.) I will match their Argument, and then turne them both loose to stand or fall together. In the raigne of Queen Mary, divers Socinians suppressing their blas∣phemous tenents, and only preaching against adoration of Images, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, and other popish superstitions, are therefore taken for Protestants, and together with the true Pro∣testants persecuted as Hereticks for opposing Papisticall Govern∣ment. Afterward in the beginning of Q. Elizabeths raigne while the reformed discipline of the Church was yet unsetled, they begin to peep as from under the maske, and by degrees to appeare in their own like∣nesse,
seducing many simple people, who had admired them for their zeale gainst the Papists. Now if these men apprehended for their horrid blasphemies against the Trinity, and other fundamentall Articles of our Creed, should come and plead not guilty, because the best Christi∣as had beene branded with the name of Hereticks, as well as they, de∣ny that they were Scmsmaticks, although they rent the Church, and obstructed the reformation because the most godly had likwise refused to common cate with the Papists, I uppose you would thinke this infe∣rence more worthy of laughter then an answer. We doe not say some of you are Hereticks, and others of you are Schismaticks, because so called; but we call you so, because you are so: Neither doe we terme you factious and seditions; only because you refuse to conforme to the presen government, but for that you therefore refuse it, because injoy∣d by the Magistrate, out of a pure spirit of contradiction whereby you shke the foundations of all Authority. And therefore to your scd branch of this Article, That you will not exclude any of approved flity from bearing office of trust in the Common-wealth for nonconfor∣miy. I retorne this answer: If any remain unsatisfied in any point of the present government, and be ready modestly to render a reason of his non conformity, no doubt he shall be borne withall, and not ex∣cluded therefore from any office of trust; for such a one will be con∣tent to keep his opinions to himselfe. But we know that most of you value not that tolleration which allowes not the spreading of your Heresies, wherefore we have as little reason to trust you, as the Prote∣stants in the former case to have trusted the Socinians, who might have pleaded as much fervour against the Papists, as you can against the Royallists. What are we the better for your milke, if now you kicke downe the paile? If you are good, and doe good, shall you not be accepted? and if you doe not good, sin lies at the doore, and punish∣ment under the threshold. You say you are the Parliaments reall friends, but I am sure you shew little respect, and lesse friendship, when you tell them (to their face? Nay, to the face of the whole world) that their Promotion of Malignants is the chiefe cause of all our grievances. Lastly, that you may end like your selves, you tell the Parliament, they are going to leave this Nation in great thraldoms both of body, mind, and estate (is uot this to hunt counter to the title of right Honourable in the beginning?) the sole prevention whereof consists in the granting
your humble desire, without which this Nation cannot be safe and happy This is a very humble conclusion indeed! but something unlike a Pe∣tition to say you must have what you aske, and cannot bee without it. Bggars had not wont to be chusers till of late, can you tell bet what's proper for the Parliament to gra then they themselves? you pretend I conesse, the generall good of the Common-wealth, but it your lives and conversations you walke more like our Antipodes then our Country-men. But I am weary of raking in this dunghill. He that would know what we may justly feare from this Gallimaufrey of Ecour let him reade Spanhemins Historicall natration of the German Sectis, where in the beginning of the second Chapter, you shall meet with a discrip∣tion of our present calamities: Those that are unacquainted with Hi∣story are apt to thinke all Relations of such proceedings abulous, so ridiculous and santastick are many of their principles. But so much the more daugerous are the effects, because we are so prune to slight the causes. Marke but the progresse of Herefie in all ages, and you will easily discover whether we are going: for that which hath been, shall bee, and there is no new thing under the Sun. The pretences have al∣alwayes been the same, of sweet communion, and encrease of know∣ledge, the progresse the same, the casting of the Ordinances of Magi∣stracie, and Ministery, the event the same, the trouble of the Church for a while, but ever in the end their owne confusion. The storme of Persecution was no sooner blowne over in the Primitive times, then those civill warres of Religion began to divide the Church, and so from time to time interchangeably continued till all setled in a grosse fog of ignorance under Popery: Againe, God no sooner stirred up Lu∣ther and his fellowes to reforme, then the Divell transforming him∣selfe into an angell of light, stirted up the Anabaptists to retard and corrupe the reformation. And how? by exclaiming against it as im∣perfect, condemning Luther for a flatterer of Princes, as if he had left the people under tyranny, and had not preached the full liberty of the Gospell; by which doctrine and cruell indulgence of the Migistrate in a short space they drew after them whole armies of licentious people, and lead them against their Princes. Which example puts me in mind of Appius, saying in Livi, Non miserris, sed leentia tantum concitum
: t lascivre magis plbem quam savire. All the sury is deri∣ved from the heads of these factions, the rest are mad by contagion. To wind up all in a Character of our Petitioners: 1. The whole rab∣ble of them, is a beggars cloak made up of divers patches. A faire well built body to the eye but uncase it, and you find an ill shapen car∣kasse covered over with a thick crust of appearances. 2. Their voice is Iacobs, but their hands are Esan's. 3. Their defigne is to clog the Par∣liament with endlesse intricacy of worke, that they may scape in the crowd unseene, till the Monster be full growne, and then locke it in the face who dare. Every good Patriot weigh well, and consider their actions! Trace them afar off, but tread not in their footsteps: Harken rather to Salomon. Prov. 22. v, 8. Pro. 24. v. 21. Remove not the ancient land-markes which thy Fathers have set, and againe. My son feare thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. If God challenge the firstlings, give the Magistrate the se∣cond fruits of thine Obedience. FINIS.
