19071 99892156 182357
A meruaylous straunge deformed Swyne. HEre Good Reader shalt thou beholde a straunge and defor∣med Swyne, farowed and brought foorth in Denmarke, and there bought and brought ouer by an Englishman, which hath it at this present, & is to be seen a liue, the proportion wherof is won∣derous straunge to beholde and vew: the forepart therof from the Snoute beneath the fore shoul∣ders are in al pointes like vnto a Swine, except the Eares only, which resemble ye eares of a Lion, the hinder parte (contrarie to kinde) is proportioned in all pointes like vnto a Ram, hauing softe wooll both white and blacke mixed monge the hard Heare, and so groweth from the shoulders downe warde, all the body ouer, and it is a Boare Pyg, how beit, there doth nothing appeare outwarde, but onely the Pysell vnder his Belly, but if a man list to feele & gripe it in the Grindes, there ye may feele his Coddes within his belly: and the most straungest thinge of all, is the misshapen and deformed Feete, wheron grow certayne Tallents and very harde Clawes, doubling vn∣der his Feete, euery Claw so byg as a mans Fynger, and blacke of colour, and the length of euery of them are full. x. inches, very straunge and wonderfull to beholde, it feedeth and eateth diuers and sundrie thinges, aswell Haye and Grasse, as Breade and Apples, with such other thinges as sheepe and Swyne do feede on. ¶An exhortacion or warnynge to all men, for amendment of lyfe. COme néere good Christians all, beholde a Monster rare: Whose monstrous shape (no doubt) fortels Gods wrath we should beware. His wondrous works we ought not iudge, as toyes and trifles vaine: Whither it be Childe or brutish Beast, for warnings they are playne. As now, this mingled brutish Beast, Gods creature is we see: Although as straunge of shape and forme as possyblie may be. For if you do way well ech poynt, his nature and his shape I feare resembles some of those, as on the same do gape. For why most Swinish are our liues, and monstrous (that is sure:) Though we resemble simple Shéepe, or Lambes that be most pure. But euery Trée it selfe will try, at last by his owne Fruite: Though on our Backs we cary Woll, our conscience is pollute, Though smilingly with flattering face, we seeme Gods word to loue: Contrary wise som hate the same, as well their déedes did prooue. Who ment the ruine of our Realme, as Traytours to our Quéene: Som white faste Lābs haue sought to do (nay, monstrous Swine) I weene. I meane not here at large to showe offences as they bee: In whom they raigne, in hie or low, I name here no degrée. But generally, I say to all, repent amend your life: The gréedy rich, the néedy poore, yea, yongman, Maide, and Wife. The Protestant, the Papist eke, what secte so that ye be, Gripe your own conscience, learne to do as God commaundeth ye. For all are sinners Dauid saith, Yea, do the best we may, Vnprofitable seruaunts still we be, we can it not denay. Iudge ye therfore how far amisse, all those their liues do frame: That outwardly professe Gods truth, and inward hate the same. Iudge ye againe that hate your Prince, and séeke the Realme to spoyle: What monstrous Swine you proue at length, for all your couert coyle. Experience late by Felton false, and Nortons two I wéene: Their Treason known were wōdred at as they had Monsters béen. And surely I can iudge no lesse, but that they Monsters were: Quite changed from true subiects shape, their déedes did so appere. Then let their déedes example be, to vs that Subiects are: For treason ends by shamfull death, therfore by them beware. I speake not here of monstrous Pride, in Man, in Mayde, and Wife: Nor Whoordom which is daily vsde, in England ranke and rife. Of Couetousnesse, what should I say, or Vsery daily don: It booteth not to speake therof, so much therby is wonne. But if they well do count their Cardes, how God they do offend: I wis their swéete ill gotten gaines, hath sowre and bitter end, From the which end deliuer vs Lord, and graunt both hie and low, To become thy seruaunts iust and true and then our end we know. God grant our gracious souerain Quéen long ouer vs may raigne: And this life past, with Christ our Lord, Heauens ioyes she may attaine. I. P. FINIS Imprinted at London by VVilliam Hovv, for Richard Iohnes: and are to be solde at his Shop ioyning to the Southwest doore of Paules Churche.
