3140.5 99884187 182935
Blevv Cap for me. OR, A Scottish Lasse her resolute chusing Shee'l have bonny blew-cap, all other refusing. To a curious new Scottish tune called Blew-cap. COme hither the merri'st of all the nine, come fit thée down by me and let vs be iolly, And in a full cup of Apollo's wine, wée'll drowne our old enemy mad melancholy: Which when wee haue done, wee'll betweene vs denise A dainty new ditty, with Art to comprise, And of this new ditty, the matter shall be, Gif ever I have a man, Blew-cap for me. Thēre liues a blithe Lasse in Fakeland towne, and shee had some suitors I wot not how many, But her resolution she had set downe, that shée'd haue a Blew-cap gif e're she had any: An English man when our good King was there, Came often vnto her and loued her déere: But still she replide, Sir, I pray let me be, Gif ever I haue a man, Blew-cap for me. A Welch man that had a long sword by her e, red pritches, red Tublet red Coat, & red Peard, was make a creat shew with a creat deal of pride and tell her strange tale that the like was ere heard: Was reckon her pedigrée. long before Prute, No body was by her that can her confute: But still she replide, Sir, I pray let me be, Gif ever I have a man▪ Blew-cap for me. A French-man that largely was booted and spurd, Long lock't, with a Ribon, long points and bréeches, Hée's ready to kisse her at euery word, and for further exercise his fingers iches: You be pritty wench Mitris, par ma foy, Be gar me doe loue you, then be not you coy: But still she replide, Sir. I Pray let me be, Gif ever I have a man, Blew-cap for me. An Irish man with a long skeae in his hose, did inke to obtaine her it was no great matter, Vp stayres to her chamber so lightly he gòes, that she ne're heard him vntihe came at hée: Quoth he I, doe loue you, by fate and by trofe, And if you will haue me, experience shall shote: But still she replide, Sir, I pray let me be, Gif ever I have a man, Blew-can for me.
The second part. To the same tune. A Dainty spruce Spanyard with haireblack as sett, long cloak with round cape, a long Rapier & Ponyard Hee told her if that shée could Scotland forget, hée'd shew her the Vines as they grow in the Vineyard. If thou wilt abandon this Country so cold, le shew thée faire Spaine, and much Indian gold, But stil she replide, Sir, I pray let me be▪ Gif ever I have a man, Blew-cap for me. A haughty high German of Hamborough towne, a proper tall gallant with mighty mustachoes: He wéepes it the Lasse vpon him doe but frowne, yet hée's a great Fencer that comes to ore-match vs. But yet all his fine fencing could not get the Lasse, She deny'd him so oft, that he wearyed was: For still she replide, Sir, I pray let me be, Gif ever I have a man, Blew cap for me. A Netherland Mariner there came by chance, Whose chéekes did resemble two rosting Pomwaters: To this Cany Lasse he his sute did aduance, and as taught by nature he cunningly atters: Ask will make thée, said he, sole Lady o'th Sea, oth Spanrds and Englishmen shall thée obey, But still she replide, Sir, I pray let me be, Gif ever I have a man, Blew-cap for mee. These sundry Sufors of seuerall Lands, did daily solicite this Lasse for her fauour, And euery one of them alike vnderstands that to win the prize they in vine did endeauour. For the had resolued (as I before said) To haue bonny Blew-cap. or else dee a maid. Vnto au her suppliants still replyde she, Gif ever I have a man, Blew-cap for mee. At last came a Scottish man (with a blew-cap) and he was the party for whom she had tarry' To get this blithe bonny Lasse 'twas his gue hap, they gangd to the Kirk & were presently marry'd. A ken not weele whether it were Lord or Leard, They caude him some sike a like name as I heard, To chuse him from an, she did gladly agrée. And still she cride Blew-cap th'art welcome to mee. FINIS. Printed at London for Thomas Lambort.
