a407a 53981438 180085
AN ACCOUNT Of the TOWN and CASTLE of CHARLEMONT IN IRELAND, Besieg'd by a Detached Body of the Duke of Schomberg's Army, under the Com∣mand of Lieutenant General Douglas. Licensed, November 5th. 1689. J. Fraiser. SInce the Landing of their Majesties Forces, under the Command of his Grace the Duke of Schomberg in Ireland, almost the whole Province of Ʋlster, and part of Connought, have been effectually Subdu'd and brought to Submission, the only place remaining Obstinate and Unconquer'd, being the Castle and Garrison of Char∣lemont and because the said place hath been heretofore Famous for enduring a Siege of some Weeks against Oliver Cromwell; whose Fortune over-run in few Days many places of more seeming Importance, it may not be thought amiss here to give a small Description of the Natural and Artificial Strength and Scituation of both the Town and Castle, as also of the Garrison now in it, how Defended and Provided; as also an Account of the Forces Detach'd by our General, in order to Reduce it: The Town and Castle of Charlemont was part of the Inheritance of the Lord Cawfield, Baron of Charlemont, and lies scituate in the County of Ardmagh, within Five Miles of Ardmagh; from Dublin it lies Norwest, and is about Sixty Seven Miles distance from the same, and from Dundalk where the English lay Encamp'd, some what above 'Thirty Miles, the Castle is scituate on a steep Hill, and on one side, near the foot of the same, lies a Lough, call'd the Black Water, it had formerly some Advantages of Art which King Charles the Second thought worthy to be Improv'd, and having first bought off the Entail of the House and Land from the late Lord Charlemont, gave Commandment to Mr. Robinson his Surveyor General of that Kingdom, to raise some Additional Fortifications, who accordingly rais'd several Bastions, and a Demi∣lune, or Half-Moon, about it; and surrounded it with a double Trench, each of which is One and Twenty Foot broad, and Palisado'd, besides several Pieces of Cannon well mounted, so that it is look'd upon as one of the most Regular Works in Ireland: The Lord Tyrconnell upon the sense of his mistake in dismantling Derry. and several other Garrisons in the North, about the beginning of our late happy Revo∣lutions, took speedy Care to Plant a sufficient Guard therein, and presently sent 4 Com∣panies of Foot, and Two of Horse, under the Command of Major Teague O Regan, Storing it pretty well with Ammunition and Provision. His Grace the Duke of Schomberg upon his Advance to Dundalk, being inform'd how uneasie a Neighbour that Garrison might probably prove to the adjacent Country, as also being unwilling to leave the least appearance of an Enemy behind his Back, thought fit to Detach three Regiments, viz. under the Command of Lieutenant-General Dowglas's. Col∣lonel Hastings, and Collonel Hamilton's, who by Letters of October the 24th are said to have Actually Besiged it; and considering they are wholly destitute of the least hopes of Relief, and that we have the advantage of Bombs and Granado's, which Cromwell very much wanted, we may modestly hope in a short time to have a very good Account of the Place. The Town it self is of small Importance, having scarce Twenty Houses in it; the Castle is of the Old Fashon'd Buildings, with large wide Windows, and of little Strength; and but for the Old Fortification, which have since been well Improv'd, was Famous for little but the Noble and Antient Family to whom it appertain'd. Re-Printed at Edinburgh in the Year 1689.
