c6550 99887071 183271
The Country-mans Delight: Or, The Happy VVooing. Being the Successful Love of JOHN the SERVING-MAN, In his Courting of JOAN the DARY-MAID. John's humble suit Joan does long time withstand, Till his known Wealth her favour does command; Then mustering all her Smiles, to him she bends, And to the Bargain straight she condescends: Now no Objection can retard her Love, If not of him, she does his Wealth approve; So Women for base Gold their Beauty sell, To whom so e're bids most, that Cursed spell, Fix'd deep into their Souls, comands them still, And guides the Reins of their tempesteous will. To a New Play-House Tune: Or, Dolly and Molly. John. QUoth John to Joan wilt thou have me? I prethee now wilt thou, i'le Marry with thee My Cow, my Cow, my House and Rents, All my Lands and Tennements: Say my Joan, say my Ioan, what wilt thou do? I cannot, I cannot come every every day to wooe. I've Corn and Hay in a Barn hard by, And three fat Piggs penn'd up in a Stye; I have a Mare and she is Cole-black, I ride on her Belly to savè her Back, Say my Ioan, say my Ioan, what wilt thou doe? I cannot, I cannot come every every day to wooe. I have three Mark ty'd up in a Ragg, I keep them there instead of a Bagg; I have a Cheese upon the Shelf, I'le cannot eat it awe my self: Say my Ioan, say my Ioan, what wilt thou doe? I cannot, I cannot come every every day to wooe. Joan. Quoth Joan to John you must not come, For your Master and Mistris are both at home; You are a Servant, and must obey, Else they'l be angry and turn you away: Say my Iohn, say my Iohn, is this not true? You must not, you must not come every every day to wooe.
John. I love thee Joan with all my heart, Come quickly consent, and we never will part; My Shirt, my Shirt, and eke my Band, All I have is at thy Command: Believe me Ioan, believe me Ioan, I tell thee true, I cannot nown's, I cannot come every every day to wooe Joan. In troth my John, I cannot consent, To gain your Cow, your Shirt, and your Rent; Yet smiling I think of your Love, And wish oft I worthy cou'd prove: VVith a Serving-man, with a Serving-man i'le not doe, who cannot, who dare not come every every day to wooe. John. Nay my Joan, pray say not so, E're i'le loose thee, my Place i'le forgoe Come Kiss my Ioy, and I will be A Servant unto none but thee: My Master, my Master i'le bid adieu, I'le leave him, i'le leave him, every every day to wooe. Joan. Oh John, by no means, not for me, I wou'd not your Master and you disagree; For I shall never have you 'tis plain, You offer'd your Band, but all in vain: Cease you Clown, cease you Clown, it will not doe, tho' you come, tho' you come every every day to wooe. John. Then yet more my Joany I have, Oh think not pray, thy Johnny a Slave; I was Free born i'le make it appear, My Father left me five Marks a Year: Believe me Ioan, believe me Ioan, I tell you true, I will come, I will come every every day to wooe. Joan, Come, come, it is no time for delay, Hark Iohn, your Mistris calls you away; We must not so suddain agree, For what will the Maids think all of me: Say my Iohn, say my Iohn, in this not true? You cannot by'th Mass, you cannot come every every day to wooe. Iohn. Fear not my Ioan, for by this Kiss, They cannot think on it amiss; Each on 'um wo'd, and wisht the like, And conquer'd by Love, they would soon strike: Say my Ioan, say my Ioan, is this not true? I cannot, I cannot come every every day to wooe. Ioan. Well Iohn, you have Charm'd me I see, My Love thou hast won, I yield it to thee, Though with soft sighs it is express, Yet Iohnny is lodged in my Breast: Say my Iohn, say my Iohn, what must we doe? You must come, you must come every every day to wooe. Iohn. Oh speak it again my dear Ioan, Can it be so quickly that thou art my own; I'le Hug thee, i'le Buss thee, now for this, Thou art my Ioy and all my Bliss: Say my Joan, say my Joan, is this not true? Now I i'le come, now i'le come every every day to wooe. Ioan. Well, when is the time you Design, That'th Parson in Weblock may, both of us joyn? Iohn. Uds-foot Joan, to morrow let's meet, And then we'l do all things Compleat: Say my Ioan, say my Ioan, does it please you? then i'le come, then i'le come every every day to wooe.
