D1955C 53981643 180202
The double right of Scotish Kings to England Continued upward to the present Reign. Malcome. 3 Margaret Edward slaine in Anwick Duncan. Maud Queene of England Edgar David. 1 Henry. Maud Countese of Anguss David Earle of Hunting Iohn last Earle of Chester Ala Lady Has¦tings. Henry Lord Has¦tings Iohn Hastings Competit Maud died a vir¦gin. Isabell Lady Bruse Bernard Lorde of Coningto Robert Bruce. Edward slaine in Ireland Thomas put to death by K E 1 Alexander put to death Nigell. put to death by Ed. 1 Robert. 1 Dauid. 2 Margaret Countess of Sutherland Mariory Steward Iames slaine with his brother Robert. 2 Eufame Lady Dow¦glas David Earle of Stracho Walter Earle of Athole Robert Steward Robert Graham A daughter maried Iohn Dubeir E of Athole Robert. 3 David Duke of Rothsay Iames. 1 Margaret Queene of France Alexander borne with Iames 2 Iane Countes of Austria Eleanor Duches of Austria Iames 2 Alexander Duke of Albany Alexander Bishope of Murray Iohn Duke of Albany Iohn Earle of Mare Iames. 3 Alexander Duke of Rothsay Iames. 4 Iames L. of Mur∣ray a natu¦rall sone Alexāder Bishope of St. Andrē Iames died at on years age A daugh∣ter died pre¦sently after birth Iames. 5 Iames died ye same day  Ar¦thur Mary. IAMES ye SIXT. Robert died without issue. Henry Frederick died yong Charles afterward King. Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia Charles. 1 Charles Died young Charles afterward K¦ing by ye Name of Charles the 2d. Iames afterward King by ye Name of Iames the 2d Charles 2 Iames. 2 Charles Died with∣out Issue Iames Died with¦out Issue Isabel Died with¦out Issue Charles Died with¦out Issue Catharin Died with¦out Issue Henriet¦ta Died withot. Issue Anna Princese of Denmark Mary Princese of Orange Mary. 2. Edgar Died with¦out Issue Charles Died with¦out Issue Henry died with¦out Issue Anna died with¦out Issue Mary Wife to the Prince of Orange William. 2. Henritha Maried to the Duke of Orleance Elizabeth died with¦out Issue Margaret died with∣out Issue Mary died with¦out Issue Sophia died with¦out Issue Arthur died at 8 dayes old Arthur died an infant Alexāder died an infant Iohn Earle of Marr A daughter died before mariage Mary maried the Lord Boyd Gregan Countese of Cassels. Iames Earle of Arraine Mary Lady Cp¦ver Anabella Isabell Duchese of Britain Francis Lady Al¦bert Margaret Duchese of Britaine Mary maried Vi∣coūt Rob̄ A Daughter Elizabet maried. L. Iohn Liōis Alexāder Earle of Buchan Alexander a naturall sone Iames Kenedy Bish¦op of St. An¦drews Duncan Steward Iohn Earle of Buhqua Robert Duke of Albany Robert Steward Mordo Duke of Albany Alexander Iames died in Ire¦land Walter Steward Mardok slaine at Hallidon Iohn slaine at Hallidō Alan slaine in Battal Maud died in in¦fancy Iane Sutherland Iohn heir appa∣rant Margare Countese of Galloway Dorni¦dilla Bal¦lial. Iohn. 1 Edward 1 Malcome. 4 Margaret Duches of Britain Alice maried Pinkney Henry Pinkney Robert Pinkney Competit William. 1 Henry slaine by his Vncle Marion maried Eustace Ves¦sy William de Vessy William de Vesey Competitor Isabell Lady Rosse William Lorde Rosse Robert Lord Rosse William Lorde Rosse Competitor Adama maried Pa∣trick Dun∣bar Patrick Earle of Marche Patrick Patrick Competitor Eufana maried to Will Say William Say Martha maried to Mundevill Roger Mundevill Competit. Alexander. 2 Alexander 3 Alexander died at 20 years David died young Margaret Queene of Denmark Margaret heire of Scot and Norwa Adhama Countese of Holland Florence Earle of Holland William Earle of Holland Florence Competitor Patrik Geletry Competitor Mary Countese of Bollign ALexander. 1 Edmōd a Monk in England
