F293 47012438 174407
The Faithful Young Mans Answer, TO THE Kind Hearted Maidens Resolution▪ Likewise how he shows his full intent, his valourous mind; and his action unto her whom he loves above all the rich treasures in the world. To the Tune of, Jenny, Jenny. MY fairest my dearest i've heard what thou'st told I vallue thy words more thou Silver or Gold, Matter not for Riches for thou shalt have store, If thou wilt go with thy Love all the world o're. As thou dost forsake Father and Mother beside, I'le make as much on thee what ever betide, Thou shalt be my Comrade on Sea or on Shore, Then come and go with &c. Though we travel to Rome Love to France or to Spain, Yet do not you fear but we shall turn again, I'le secure thee from the Tyger the Wolf and the Bore, Then come, &c. As thou art so constant and stedfast in mind, As faithful a friend thou ever shalt find, Then assure thy self i'le wrong thee on no score, Then come, &c. ANd if thou goest with me i'le promise thee fair, Instead of one boy Love i'le get thée a pair, I'le hug thée and kiss thée thy joys to restore, Then come and go with thy Love all the world o're. Though Sir Guy and St. George did venture their lives, Ile do as much for thee as they did for their wives, Ile be thy Champion against thousands and more, Then come, &c. He that séeks for to wrong thee i'le venture my Life, And you'l say a man can do no more for a VVife, But fight for a Sweet-heart in battles so sore, Then, &c. Hang him from his dearest will once stir or flinch, Or hang him if he loves her won't fight for a VVench, Then give us more liquor though we run on the score, And come &c. I'le show thee what fashions Europe can devise, It may be by our travel we to fortune may rise, Thou know'st not what blessings the Lord hath in store, Then come &c. For to stay at home Love and sit by the fire, Theres no recreation unto thy desire. Then lets to the fair Love where musick is store, Then, &c. Love never be daunted nor yet do not fear, But I will be faithful unto thée my Dear, No tongue nor yet beauty shall thy fame adore, Then, &c. He that wou'd wrong thée is worse then a jew, And he is a Knave that will not prove true, Such doings I hate and shall love thee the more, Then; &c. Though I don't praise thy feature as thou hast done mine, Yet i'le stick as close to thée as the Bark to the Vine, Therefore do not tarry but bar up the door, Then, &c. And thus my own dearest i've told thee my mind, And nothing but truth thou by me shalt find, Then take this kiss for i'le now say no more But come and go with thy Love all the world o're. Printed for J. Clarke at the Harp and Bible in West-Smith-field.
