K697A 47012493 174460
The Knight and the Beggar-Wench. Which doth a wanton prank unfold, In as merry a story as ever was told. The Tune is, The Kings delight, or Turn-Coat. I Met with a jovial Beggar And into the Fields I led her, and I laid her upon the ground; Her face did not invite mée, Nor her smock did much delight mée but I think the young whore was sound; With Ladies both fresh and gay I often did sport and play, yet a Beggar I'le take for varieties sake, She'l please mee as well as they. I have a good Wife, as fair As ever drew English aire her pleasure is past compare, Her cherry lips, cheéks, and eyes, Her belly, her breast, and thighs, might any but I suffice, With her I so often play And weary my time away That a fouler to mée Would be fairer than shée, Variety wins the day, This Beggar I shall describe, Without any hope of bribe, was one of the maunding tribe Shee had a fine foot and leg, As nimble as Doe or Stag, and then she began to begg; So soon as my Horse shée sees She fell down upon her knées, The whore had a sack That hung at her back Well furnish'd with Bread and Chéese, She struck mée into a dump The jade was both young and plump, with a round, and a ranting Rump; Her feature had so much force, It raised in mée remorse and drew mée quite off my Horse, But when I began to wooe She told mée she would not doo, Quoth I pretty Mort, Let mée shew thée some sport Shee kist mée, and answered no, My Horse to a twig I ty'd, the begger-wench then reply'd good Master get up and ride, Yes so I will straight (thought I) With that I drew something nigh she strugled and cry'd fy, fy, I am but a Beggar by breed, Quoth I let mée do this déed, For he that will scorn A Beggar-wench born May want a good turn at néed. Then into her Arms I claps, Quoth she now I'm in your traps, what shall I do with scraps Throw them in the bush said I, No, no, she did streight reply there's Pig, and Pudding and Pie We begg for better or worse, My blessings I will not curse, Why then quoth I, Go run presently, And throw it a 'thwart my horse. She then (in a merry veyne) Did trip to mée back again, to put mée out of my pain, She dazelled so my sight, That neither by day or night, I ever had such delight, So close to mée now she clings And flutters abroad her wings, But my bashful jade Asham'd of the trade Brake loose and away he flings. I rise and away ran I, The Beggar-wench then did cry, my Pig and my Pudding and Pie I ran and I curs'd and swore, Untill I came to my door, but the Horse was get home before I bad the wench stay behind, And told her I would be kind, But when I came home I look'd like a Mome, I wish'd that I had béen blind. My Wife and my neighbours all Did laugh, ye might hear 'em bawl from Temple Bar to White-Hall, my sweet-hearts provant was found Which lay in the wallet bound, and scatter'd about the ground, The sight of my wife did daunt, and make my heart prick and pant Sir Thomas quoth she, (And spake merrily) Where get you this good provant? Thought I, it is best bear up, Although of this venemous Cup, I take but a sorrowful sup, In the twinckling of ones eyes, I thought of a thousand lyes, but nere a one would suffice; I many things had in doubt, Yet could not wel bring 'em about, As I went to begin The wench came in, And so came the story out. My Lady did laugh out-right, As if she had much delight But I found it not so at night; I gave the poor-wench a pee, But wisht she had been in Greece to tell such a tale as this, My Madam doth make it slight, But I have got nothing by't, for when she wants of her wish it is thrown in my dish, I'd better been hang'd out-right, FINIS. London, Printed for F. Coles, M. Weight, T. V & W. Gilberts
