M2042 99887109 183307
The Dub'd Knight Of the Forked Order. OR, The old wanton Lady as I will recite, And Son John the serving-Man her hearts delight, Their doings and actions, if you will attend, In Meeter, they are by a Poet Pen'd. The subtilty of women either old or young, And what cunning excuses they have with their tongue, That will play with their Husbands and laugh them to scorn, Stroke up there brows, and there place a horn. The Tune is, I am fallen away. TWas a Lady born of high degrée, In her aged days was youthful, yet she, So youthful was at thréescore years old, A young Man she estéemed more pretious then Gold: So old, so old, so wondrous old, Till threescore years and ten Old women are willing to play with young Men. This Lady one day in her Parlor did walk, Vnto her head-serving-man she began to talk, She told him his feature was comely and rare, Few men that she lookt on might with him compare, So old, &c. A Lilly-white hand fair face and a nose Hair crisping and curled his breath like a Rose Streight leg and a foot and his body tall, But that in the middle is the rarest of all, So old &c. Madam he said, as I am alive, Vnto an antient Lady 'tis a present revive: It will make them merry either at night or by day, And clear every Vain like the dew of May. So old, so old, so wondrous old, Till threescore years and ten, Old women are willing to play with young Men. THen note what I say and obey my command, For I'le make use of thée, now straight out of hand, The bargain was made unto their own Will, The Serving-man had and the Lady her fill: So old, &c. When the Iig was ended, the Lady threw down, Vnto her good Serving-man, sevenscore pound: She gave this Gold freely, his courage to maintain, That he will but Ride in the Saddle again: So old, &c. Then the wanton Lady to her Knight she did hye, And like to Ameretrix she did reply, That she was much alter'd, and she had caught harm, Why then quoth the Knight; Lady keep thy self warm; So old, &c. I'le send for a Doctor the grief for to find, For to ease thy body, and troubles mind; I will have no Doctor my grief for to ease, But only one Man swéet-heart if you please: So old, &c. Let me see this Artist, the Knight did reply, O quoth the Lady, loe here he stands by; That can give me cure with a Syrup that he, Brought front the Venetian and from Italy; So old, &c. How came you acquainted with your Mans rarity? Sir, in a sad passion, being ready to dye, I dream'd that his judgement was right I do find, And his physick was health∣ful to old Woman kind. So old, &c. And if by the vertue thou pleasure do find, I doubt then by Venus that I am made blind, I dream'd I was hunting and pleasure did see, But a vision mine eyes much troubleth me, So old, &c. The Déer did run swiftly, and Hounds after rang'd And I like Action most strangely was chang'd I though that my lower part séem'd like a Man. My head like a Buck, and Horns like a Ram, So old, &c. And riding on swiftly, sweet pleasure to find, An Oke burst my horns & his blood made me blind, The Huntsman did hollow, and great shouts did make, and forth of my dream, I strait did awake: So old, &c. I told my fair Lady of my dream so strange, Quoth she 'tis the better when thy Life doth change; For the Forked Order the evil doth expel, And being a dub'd Knight, thou nead'st not fear Hell. So old, &c. From the Poor to the Rich, even to the Ladies Gay, Young Women are wanton old Women will play: And mumble their Husbands and jéer them to scorn, And point them a Breaker and give them a Horn: So old, so old. so wonderous old, Till threescore years and ten, Old Women are willing to play with young Men. By Abraham Miles. Printed for W. Whitwood at the Golden Bell at Duck-Lane end in West-smith-field.
