N1153A 53299201 179942
THE Night-Bell-Man OF PICKADILLY TO THE Princess of Denmark. elcome great Princess to this lovely Place here injur'd Loyalty must hide its Face; ur praise each day by every Man is sung, d in the Night by me shall e'er be rung. God bless your Queen, and yet I may moreover Own you our Queen in Berkly-street and Dover. May your great Prince and you live numerous years, That's the subject of all our Loyal Prayers. My Lord Nottingham's Orders to Mr. Dieves late Clerk of the Council, upon notice of the aforesaid Verses. YOU are to take a Messenger with you, and find out the Dwelling-house of the Bell∣man of Pickadilly, and when you meet with him, search his Fur Pocket, his Night∣, and above all his Bell, exactly; and what-ever Verses or Copies of this, or any other ure you find, seal them up very safely, and bring them to me. You are strictly to examine him, Whether he be the true Author of them? Or, who was that that made, and gave them to him, and who ordered him to sing or say them,  what reward he got for so doing. You are also to enquire of him, Whether he hath ever heard of my Letter, by the een's Commands, to the Major and Aldermen of the Bath, upon another Subject, though h of the same Nature. You are to demand of him (if she confesseth it) how he durst presume do That so near  Court, which the Mayor and Aldermen of the Bath were forbid to do at so great a ance. You are privately to acquaint him (if he saith he never heard of it) with the true Rea∣ of her Majesties displeasure with the Princess. which I herewith give you in writing. You are to charge him, upon pain of her Majesty's high displeasure and the forfeiture is Employment, that he do not presume for the future to sing any Verses, or say any ds about those Streets of the same Nature, without our License first obtained. You are to charge him not to pay that Ceremony to the Princess, in his Night-walks, e usually does to the rest of her Majesties Subjects, that are not under her Majesties easure. You are to charge him to take care that Thieves and Robbers be apprehended; but  that part of his duty to the Princess; for since her Guards are taken off, she is neither  regarded by day, nor secured by Night. You are to acquaint him, that her Majesties displeasure is so great against the Princess the Government designs to stop her Revenue, and by that means to starve her (as well  any other Jacobites) into an humble submission to the Government. You are from him to go to Dr. Birch, and charge him, as he will answer it before race at Lambeth, not to introduce New Ceremonies of bowing in time of Divine Ser∣ (it being contrary to his own Education, the Example and Tradition of his Fathers; ally when his Superiours are so busie about abolishing the Old Ones; warning him ularly to keep close to his Text, and his Text close to himself, and that he permit no  else to handle the same. d, lastly, you are to acquaint both the Bellman and Parson, that her Majesty expects act compliance herein, as a publick mark of their Duty: But as for the Waytes, , Fidlers, and others, Orders shall be sent to Mr. Killigrew about them. FINIS.
