p3846 99887271 181980
Protestant Unity, The best Policy to defeat Popery, and all its Bloody Practices. OR, Englands Happiness under such a Blessing. A Pleasant, New SONG. Would England ever blest and happy be, It must be done by perfect Unity, Let Procestants in all things then agree. Then Rome shall fall like Lightning from the Sky, And all her plots shall soon Expire and Dye, Whilst we do prosper, and her Rage defie. To the Tune of, Now now the Fight's done, &c. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms portrait of King Charles London NOw Plots upon Plots makes the Iesuits smile Who do think our Nation at last to beguile; Whilst Divisions grow rife, and Crowding come in Whilst Schismaticks Clamour and rail at the sin Which themselves have contriv'd, for here it is plain They were wheeling the Kingdoms to Forty again. Whilst thus we'r divided, the Pope has his will, And thinks that at last he his Coffers shall fill; With Protestant Plunder to make him amends, For the infinite store that he yearly expends To raise War and Blood-shed, and to carry on His private designs, to the Devil best known. For he's his Grand Counsellour, who so oft try'd The way for to Conquer, is first to divide; For England United, not Rome, no nor Hell, Have the power for to shake, nor once for to quell; Our selves are the causers still of all our woe, Whilst Protestants Protestants, seek to o're-throw. Read but the Scriptures, and there you will find, A Kingdom divided could never yet stand; Then let all those whose Brains they did fume, With the heats of Sedition, or have dar'd to presume To think ill of their King, let them do so no more, But a pardon of mercy, and goodness implore. Which will grieve to the heart our Blood-seeking foe, Who for this hundred years has sought our Woe By Plots and devices, then let us agree, Let Presbyter yield unto just Monarchy; Beneath whose Protection they happy may Live, And stiff-neck'd Baptists their Errors retrive. When a King that's so gracious does over us reign, What good man has reason or cause to complain? No there's none, for all such may happily live, And enjoy peace and plenty which Heaven does give: By Vnion our Church so firm founded will stand, That in vain all her foes then against her may band. Let Religious Cavels that late have been bred, All cease that the feet they may joyn with the head; And cordially let each his Loyalty prove, By striving to conquer eath other in Love: And let kind Vnion Alleigeance create, That the King and his Kingdoms may ever be great. Then shall proud France no more dare to frown, Least our bold Armies should take her pride down; We conquering Ensigns to Rome might extend, If each man was faithful and true to his friend; There to unhive the old Pope and his Crew, And lead them in Triumph New London to view. The object of Envy at which they still aim, And wish that once more they cou'd see it in Flame; But in vain they might wish if once we agree, To support the great Throne of true Majesty: To Maugre all Christendom, as we have done, When by strict Vnion the Nation was one. The let each Sect their pretences lay down, And to him submit that does wear Englands Crown; And let us like Brethren in strict Amity, To root out the Pope and his Agents agree: That the Nations may happy remain and be blest, Whilst we are of plenty and pleasure possest. Then that proud Monarch past doubt we might awe, Who undertakes to give Christendom Law; And live in safety in spight of the Power Of that Scarlet Whore who does seek to devour Our Lives and our Fortunes, to which we make way, When our King and his Laws we dare disobey. On such weak pretences as are not worth name Then who but your selves have you reason to blame? If Popery thrives and the upper-hand get, Whilst murmuring against a good King you do sit: Vnder whose Reign you so happy might be, Then cease such Division, and let us agree. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke W. Thackeray, and T. Pssinger.
