R1098B 52614885 176037
REPRESENTATION BY The Sherriff Depute of Ross, Commis∣sioners of Justiciary and Supply, and of the Justices of Peace within the District of Ardmanach. TO THE Come of His MAJESTIES most Honourable Privy Council To whom the Consideration of the Petition anent the Watches in the Parish of Kilernan was Remitted. having ottered several Execrable xprsons, ba  Popery was the best of all Religions, And that the Devil did only Ordain Pro∣testant Ministers, &c. The Minister and Session of Kilernan, Ordained him to stand in Sackcloath, and pay a Mulct to the Poor. Whereupon he (in presence of Reid Castle, his Master, the Reader, and some of the Elders,) De∣clared, That some person shall smart for that dayes work. Mr. John Mackencie the Minister attested, all then present, That if he should suffer, there was reason to suspect John Glass for it: And within a short time there∣after, falls into Vehement Burnings, Entream Sweatings, and many other pretr∣natural Torments, whereof the Physicians could give no Tollerable account. But Donald Moir, a person under, the common repute of a Warlock, being challenged as the Author, did distinctly confess, and persist therein till his death, That John Glass imployed him to put the Minister out of the way. In order whereunto Donald assumes, his Confederates. And Agnes Dess (alwayes, bruited as a Witch,) has acknowledged, That She her self with Donald Moir, Agnes Urich, Agnes Chisholm and Others, made an Effigies, &c. And that the Devil in like∣ness of a Black Man, with cloven feet, and bigg hands, did assist them in the Ope∣ration! There was likewise found under the Ground, in Agnes Desses house, a Clew made of Mens hair, A, dish bored in the side, and lifted, in the bottom, &c. And Donald Moir confessed, that John Glass promised him a free house, gave him a peck of Meal in hand; And thereafter enquired. if the Turn was done? &c. And being interrogat, Where the Corps was at the time? Answered. That he knew not, unliss it were in the custodie of John Glass, or Donald Mackwilkie his Father in Law, a person alwayes suspected of Witchcraft. John Glass on notice of Donald Moirs Discovery, comes with his Son and Ser∣vant to a Friend of the Minister, And, besides several unbeseeming expressions, Threatned, that they would shoot him, if he should challeng them as Authors of his decease. And likewise when the Sherriff and Commissioners had committed Donald Moir to prison till a Commission from the Council should come up, he is found strangled; which could not have been done by himself, seeing both his hands and feet were tyed, and the Shekels were found knocked off, And
the rope was faste  op of the h  Witnesses in the pris with him at the time, heard his last word, Viz: Let me alone in the Dev∣ name, for ye have done me too much mischief already: And it can be proven th John Glass Sons were absent from the house that night, &c. All which are vi¦lent presumptions, that Donald Moir has been cut off by John Glass, for preve∣ting a Legal Testimony before an Assize, when the Commission for Tryal we arrived. There are many other Evidences which were adduced before us, and her¦upon we sent instructions for obtaining a Commission from his Majesties Pr¦vie Council, which the Vaccation did obstruct. But in the mean time John Glass foreseeing what might follow, at last presen a Bill of Advocation to the Lords of Justiciary, Craving, That his Cause m be Advocate, Not only from the Sherriff, and all other inferiour Judges; B likewise from any Commission of Council that might come to be obtained; But the A∣vocation is only granted from the Sherriff, and other inferiour Judges. It is now Humbly Represented, 1mo. That a Commission ought to be granted, Because, otherwayes, t Criminals cannot miss to escape: in respect of the Distance of the place, so tha multitudes of witnesses, (many of whom are Old,) and Assizers (who are mo fit to be of the Neighbourhead) cannot come up, Especially, considering that thi would amount to a great Expence: And many both of the Criminals and Wi¦nesses, can only speak the Highland Language, which will difficult the Tryal  this place. 2do: The Advocation can be no ground to hinder the Extension of this Com¦mission, even to John Glass, both in Respect, that its not doubted, But the Lords of Justiciary will concurr in the Remit: And because a Commission from the Council is not precluded by the Advocation, seeing it only discharges, and Advocates from inferiour Judges. Hence there needs no Answer to the Impertinency of the Reasons of Advoca∣tion, and many Calumnies laid against us therein, As if we had not taken the Oaths, &c. But it is known who is the Father of Lies; And we had nothing in our View in all the pains and Expenses that we have been at, But the Glory of GOD, the Safety of our Countrey, and the Exhonoration of our Conscien∣cies, by a well grounded Zeal against those Enemies of Heaven and Earth, who are numerous and distinctly known in these parts; And the Inhaints since this late Discovery, are in a great Con,  bringing these Miscreants to Judgemen. Besides, there was no process, and consequently, there could have been no Ad∣vocation quoad John Glass; And he is so  a great Criminal by the com∣mon belief of the Country, That if he should escape a Tryal, (which ct miss, if he be not in the Commission,) They will esteem  to his Revenge, and to all the Instruments which he can be permi to sr up by the Assistance of the Devil. In Respect whereof, &c.
