r901 99887870 183522
Religion made a Cloak for Villan OR The Loyal Subjects Delight, Who is neither VVHIGG nor TORY. Being a most Pleasant New Play SONG. Alas! what pitty is't, when thus we see Religious Masques oft cover Villany; Tory and Whigg contend for Loyalty, When both alike do Envy Monarchy: The Name of Jesuit, Fryar, and Monk's forgot, 'Tis Whigg and Tory mannage all the Plot, Under those Names, Rome and Geneva lurk, And daily carry on their Cursed Work, To the Tune of, Now, now the Fight's done. LEt Tories Curse and the Wiggs let them Rage, While both strive the Nation in Wars to ingage; Whilst Religion's the Cloak to cover their Sin, And Wrap up Rebellion and Sedition in: Both alike dangerous to Monarchy why? For they up do the Mass, and the Covenant cry: But those are good Subjects that from Clamour cease, And pray for the King and the Nations long peace. When Gun powder Plots to destroy us were laid, Then Tories and Whiggs did each Other upbraid; Tho' then these Vile Names they so well were not known, Yet Papist and Purican then they did own, And Religion, Religion was then all the cry, Though nothing but mischief they meant us there, But those are good Subjects that from Clamour cease, And pray for the King and the Nations long peace. Religion in Forty-One Routed the Laws, Or 'twas a thing call'd so, wrapt in the Old Cause; O did not Jack Presbyter under that Curse, Deceive all the Simple, and Cheat many Wise: The League and the Covenant what were they mo Then to make Knaves Rich, and all Honest men Po But those are good Subjects that from Clamour cease, And pray for the King and the Nations long peace. Was't not true Religion those Villains did plead, Who' gainst the King, in his Name, Armies did lead. And cry'd, we're the Righteous, to us Plunder's free, And this is the way for to gain Liberty; When as into Slavery they did us all bring, And call'd Religion to Murther their King: But those are good Subjects, &c. O they were to be Sainted that Thimbles and Bodkins Vpon Publique Faith were sent, with many odd things When as the Rump turn'd them to Sack and to Claret Though each old Wife did long after mourn for it: Religion was then the cry, when none was used, But in the Name they the thing much abused; For those are good Subjects, &c. Fift-monarchy Cullys, Religion did cry, When as to get Plunder they purpos'd thereby; Though 'tis plain, if the Doctor does tell us but right, The Jesuits back'd them and bid them to fight: And now all the nosse for Religion must be, When by such as make the stir, none's us'd we see: But those are good Subjects, &c. For Tories whose fortunes Ill Husbandry made Bare as their Conscience, are never afraid To lose what they have, but would fain be at strife, For why? 'tis Contention they love as their life; What care they for peace or for quiet, so they Can Murther and Plunder, and for it have pay: But those are good Subjects, &c. In drinking of Healths they do take a great pride, And swear they'l be Loyal it they were but try'd; And that for the King and Religion they'l fight, But this with their Actions can not agree right: For why they who Oaths against God do still fling, Can ne'r be Religions, and true to their King: But those are good Subjects, &c. Then were Whigg and Tory that make all this noise, And would at all henest mens downfalls rejoyce, But once Unmasqu'd, and you plainly should see, As to all Religion Impossors they be: For from Geneva and Rome they are sent, To trouble the Nation, and raise discontent: But those are good Subjects, &c. Religion 'tis Sacred when rightly 'tis us'd, But in no age it was ne'r more abus'd; For why, for the most part a Cloak it is made, To cover vile Treason, or else 'tis a Trade; But Heaven defend it from such wicked men, And make it to flourish and prosper agen: Whilst those are good Subjects that from Clamour cease, and pray for the King and the Nations long peace.
