s1358a 52615038 176147
I7 R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Appointing a Roup of the In-land Excise of this Kingdom, and of the Rents and Duties of Orknay and Zetland. FOrasmuch as William Duke of Queensberry, Lord High Treasurer of this Kingdom, and John Earl of Kintore, Lord Treasurer-Deput thereof, and Lords Commissioners of His Majesties Exchequer; Taking to Consideration, that it is expedient, for the good and advantage of His Majesties Service and Government, that the In-land Excise of this Kingdom, due and payable to his Majesty from all Malt, Aquavitae, and Strong-Waters, Brewed and Sold, from and after the last day of October, 19. As also, His Majesties Rents and Duties of the Earldome of Orknay and Lord∣ship of Zetland (the former Tak of the said  being now  Farm by Roup; and that Intimation thereof be given to such of His Majesties Leidges, who are willing to take a Lease and Farm of the same, to the end they may for that effect attend the said Lord High Treasurer and Treasurer-Deput, and Lords Commissioners of His Majesties Exchequer, in the usual place of their Meeting, and there make offer, for a Farm of the said Excise, of the whole Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom; And for the Rents and Duties of Orknay and Zetland, Separatly: And pay such Sums of Money therefore, of yearly Tack-duty, as shall be agreed upon. Have therefore Resolved, that a publick Roup be made thereof, at the respective Dyets following, viz. The saids Lords appoints Wednesday the 3. of March ensuing, betwixt 3. and 4. of the Clock in the Afternoon, for the first Dyet, for Rouping of the said Excise; And Wednesday the 10 of the said Moneth, betwixt the Hours aforesaid for the second Dyet. And for the 3. and last Dyet, they do appoint Wednesday the 17. day of the said Moneth, betwixt the Hours of 3. and 4. in the Afternoon. And for Rouping of the Rents and Duties of the Earldome of Orknay, and Lordship of Zetland, the saids Lords appoints Friday the 19. day of the said Moneth of March, in the Afternoon, betwixt the Hours aforesaid; And that Publication may be made of the Premisses, Ordains the Macers of Exchequer, and Messengers at Arms, to make open Proclamation hereof, at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-Crosses of the whole Royal Burghs, and Head Burghs of the respective Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful; And that these presents be Printed. Given at Edinburgh, the fourth day of February, 1686. And of His Majesties Reign the first Year. Extracted forth of the Books of Exchequer, by me Tho. Moncrieff, Cls. Scaccarii. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1686.
