s1546 52612284 179584
I7 royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the last Tuesday of October to the first Thursday of April next ensuing. IAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Whereas by the last Act of the Parlia∣ment of this Our Ancient Kingdom; The same was Declared by Us Current, and Ad∣journed to the last Tuesday of October, next to come; And whereas the State of Our Affairs doth not Require Their Meeting so soon; We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby continue the Adjournment of the Meeting of Our said Parliament, from the said last Tuesday of October, to the first Thursday of April, next ensuing the date of these Presents; Requiring hereby the Lord Spiritual and Temporal, the Commissioners from the several Shires, and those from the Royal Burrows of this Our Kingdom, to meet that day in the usual way, and upon the accustomed Certifications; And to the effect Our Pleasure in the Premisses may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mer∣cat-Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our Kingdom; and there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Adjournment of the said Meeting of Our Parliament, from the said last Tuesday of October▪ to the said first Thursday of April next ensu∣ing the date of these Presents, that all persons concerned may have notice thereof, that none pretend Ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty first day of September 1685. And of Our Reign the first Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, COL: McKENƷIE,  Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.
