S967 99887292 183538
The Scotch Wooing: Or. JOCKEY of the Lough, and JENNY of the Lee: Jockey Wooes Jenny, for to be his Dear, But Jenny long time is in mickle fear; Least Jockey should be false or prove unkind, But Jockey put that quite out of her mind, So that at length they fairly did agree, To strike a Bargain up, as you shall see. To the Tune of, Jockey's gone to the Wood. DEar jockey's gone to the VVood and Dame Jenny's gone twa, Dear jockey would Court a good, but Dame jenny says nay: Come jenny my dearest love, prihee jenny fancy me: Thou art the blithest bonniest Girl, And the featest Lass, that e're jockey's ey'n see. VVhen Jockey had VVoo'd her thus, she said prithee forbear, Thou Jockey art false I fear, and would Jenny insnare: Dear Jenny believe it not, that thy Jockey is untrue, For I do swear by all that's good, In this pleasent VVood, and by Bonnet that's Blew. O Jocky shame faw thy Luggs, for telling sike a Tale, It is not aw thy honey words, are like for to prevail: For Jenny is a harmless Lass, fearing for to be trappand, Although that Jockey is a Lad, But few like are to be had, in all fair Scotland. My Jenny ne'r make a Din, but let us gang play, Since that thou art so neat and trim upon this Holliday: I'le give thee ale and spiced cakes, I, and love the tenderly, There we have a merry bout, And keep a Revel Rout, under the Green wood Tree. Dear Jockey I like it weel, a little sport to make, Yet do I fear that after all, poor Ienny's heart sud ake: I wad not for a score of pounds, I should come unto disgrace, Then prithee Iockey get the gone, and leave thy Ienny all alone, in this uncouth place. O jenny ne'r tell me that, thy Iockey's sike a Loon, Thou need'st not for to be a fraid, by Iockey to lig down: For as I am a lively Lad, meaning to the honestly, I'le give the nothing that is had, But the best that can be had, as Ienny shall see. O Iockey sud I beleive, 'tis sure what you say, And that you sud yobr Jenny leave, and basely gang away: My Jenny i'le plight my Troth, ever to thee to be true, Then beleive me what I say, For I scorn to gang away, to make my Jenny rue. Why sud I not now beleive, when dear Jockey does swear, By Bonnet and aw that's good, that e're Jockey shall wear? Then let us gang heam my dear, and be merry there a while, I love the heartily my joy, Thou art the onely Boy, on whom Jenny shall smile. My Jenny thou chear'st my heart, to give thy consent, Thy Jockey will never start, but give Jenny content: A Trenchmore Galiard we will have all for joy this very night, And ith morn we'l gang toth' Kirk VVhere i'le see my Jenny smirk, as soon as day light. Thus Iockey and Ienny beath, agreed for to be wed; For Jockey he thought it long to have Ienny in Bed: Next morning to the Kirk they went finely wedded for to be, And at this time are man & wife, Living free and void of strife, in their own Country. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden∣ball, in West-smithfield.
