148 99887581 182305
isbury Assizes. ard of Witchcraft. Being a true Relation of one Mistris Bodnan living in Fisherton, next house but one to the Gallowes, who being a Witch seduced a Maid, called by name, Anne Stiles, to the same abominable and de∣tested action of VVitchcraft; which VVitch for that action was executed the 19 day of March 1653. To he tune of Bragandary, WHen men and Women leave the way of God, and goodnesse quite, They practice mischief every day and therein take delight The Divel then is nye at hand When these things he doth understand, You that will goe, High or low Resolve upon this doubt. As by the Story you shall heare if you will list a while The Divell lately did appeare; and a Woman did beguile But she did make the way before, And in her heart did him adore You that will goe, &c. In Fisherton this dame did dwell of conversation bad She did converse with the Divell of Hell, which made her friends all sad, Vnto the Divell she gave her soule Sealed in a bloudy serouls, You that will goe, &c. Mistris Rodnam was her name, who daily undertooks To helpe men to stolne goods againe, even with her cunjuring booke A looking glasse she had likewise, To shew the Théeves before their eyes You that will goe, &c. Amonge the rest a Maid then went, her name was Annis Stiles About stolne goods in discontent but the Divill her beguiles The Divill did the Witch perswade For to seduce this silly maid You that will goe, &c. She gave the Maid a Looking glasse on which she looked on But at the length it came to pas she was to soone undone, For want of wisdome and true grace, She was undone in little space, You that will goe, &c. Swéet heart quoth she if that you please, I will teach you my art, So you may live in wealth and ease according to your heart If you your Soule the Divell will give In health and wealth you then may live, You that will goe, &c. To soone alas she did consent and seald it with her blood, Which made her afterwards repent, when as she understood That she must loose the joyes of heaven For some Toyes unto her giuen You that will goe, High or low, Resolve upon this doubt. part to the same tune. AT length it came for to be known, how she had simply run Then to the Witch she made her mone. and said she was undone She said to London she would flye, For feare least both of them should dye, You that will goe High or low, Resolve upon this doubt. The Witch was willing there unto, and bid her fly with spéed She was at Stockbridge taken though, for that notorious déed, The Divill cast her to and froe As all the company did know You that will goe, &c, When in the chamber she came in, the Divell tost her about She askt the divell where héed bin to give her such a floute, Then all the standers by amaz'd, Vpon each other then they gaz'd, You that will goe, &c, A Gentleman great paines did take, with her the people say, And she to him her minde did breake and for her he did pray, She told him the old witch was cause That she had broke Gods holy lawes You that will goe, &c. Foure dayes together she was vext tormented rieviously And in her mind was sore perplex that some thought she would The Divell like a Snake apeard Which all the country people feard You that will goe, &c, But when the old Witch came in sight, then did she take her rest, And she did sléepe well all that night as plainly is exprest, She said when as she walkt againe, She praised God she felt no paine You that will goe, &c. She told the Gentleman that she would tell him all her art And that he should inriched be by what she should impart She told him that she knew full well, She should be a great Lady in hel, You that will goe, &c. The old Witch executed was, this moneth the 19. day, She ever had a face of Bras as all the people say, Instéed of pensiuenesse and prayer She did nought but curse and sware, You that will goe, &c, God nothing had to doe with her she said most desperately She swore and curst and kept a and desperately did dye Let all good people therefore say hearts with me and pray, goe
