131 99886978 181592
F.H. Van. Hove. Scu To the T of Lilli Bullero. The First Part (1.) COme all that wish well, to th' Land where we dwell, With Wool and Silk-workers, sing and rejoice; While those y be sad, who have ruin'd our Trade, With Thanks and great Praise let's lift up our Voice; Our Voices let's raise, to th' wonderful Praise Of William our King, for his Royal Consent. To this Happy Thing, for which we now sing Praise God and our King, and our good Parliament. (2.) Let Hatters and Drapers, so down to Shooe-makers, With all who sell Drink, or Provisions vend, With Plowmen and Sailors, and all (except Goalers, Or East-India Traders,) Their Thanks to Heaven send; For Passing this Bill, their Pockets will fill, And Tenants will better pay Landlords their Rent; Therefore let them sing, with us in this Ring, Great Praise to our King, &c. (3.) Ah, how many Years, have we been in Tears, Greatly lamenting our Sorrowful State, While th' East India-Trade, great Spoil on us made, And by our Undoing grew wond'rous Great: But now God be prais'd, we may see good Days; Our Ruine we hope this Bill will prevent: And therefore we sing, for this Happy Thing, Great Praise to our King, &c. (4.) This Nation now see, what great Misery Is coming on them by this India-Trade; That Two Millions's sent, in Two Years to be spent, Which make our wise Senators strangely affraid, Lest what they're doing, prove this Kingdom's Ruine, Which Mischief this Bill is design'd to prevent: For which we now sing, Hi ding a ding ding, Great Praise to our King, &c. (5.) For this Bill be'ng past, they'll not send so fast, Which Coin will increase, and encourage our Trade: In Gratitude bound, we'll always be found, To defend their just Rights 'gainst those that invade; And from our good Prince, let ne'er a Man flinch, Or utter or mutter the least Discontent; But in this round Ring, let's merrily sing, Drink a Health to our King, &c. (6.) We remember with Grief, when we sought Relief, Our Senators were well inclin'd to our Ease; But some ill advis'd, in Tumults did rise, Which certainly then did ruine our Case: But since they're grown wife, such Riots despise, For future such Meetings we'll strive to prevent; For we hate that ill Thing, which much Sorrow did bring, And displeas'd our King, &c. (7.) The Heavens now smile, on the Face of this Isle, And Trading will flourish as it did before. If our Ladies are kind, their own Intrest mind, They'll soon give Imployment to their own Poor, And by it they'll gain, as appear very plain, When those are imploy'd, will raise all their Rent; For Lands more Rent bring, while w'eat, drink, and sing, And praise our good King, and our good Parliament. (8.) Some Women, we're told, are angry and scold, Resolve to buy up and wear India Stuff, In 'spite of our Laws, and pitiful Cause; Talk of Restraining, they're angry, and huff: But we hope they'll grow wise, in Time and despise To use what destroy their Poor, Coin, and Rent, And with us will sing, for this Happy Thing, Great Praise to our King, &c. (9.) But when all is said, we're yet much affraid Their Fancies their Reasons will overpower; So that they'll still wear, what's far-fetch'd, tho' dear, And our Wealth and Trade thereby much devour: But if they're so vain, 'twill appear very plain, They are on their Country's Ruine still bent; And that 'tis a Thing, which great Loss will bring, And displease our King, &c. (10.) Our Princess, Heav'n prais'd, our Hopes has much rais'd, Since, for Preventing so ill a Design, She's graciously said, she'll encourage our Trade, In English Silks then our Court will soon shine: For which in Her Praise, while our Voices we raise, Her Fame for this thing, through the World will be sent: Her Glories we'll sing, drink her Health in this Ring, And praise our good King, &c. (11.) And since She's so kind, Her Example let's mind, And firmly ingage, by joining our Hands, To Promote and Wear, what plainly appear To be for the General Good of this Land. Thro' th' Land let it run, and th' work is soon done, And from such engagement let's never recant, But stand to this Thing, which much Gain will bring To this Kingdom and King, &c. (12.) In a Bumper of Beer, or such Drink as is here, To conclude, let's drink-one General Health; 'Tis a Health t' all those, who're clad in such Cloaths, As incourage our Trades, and Old England's Wealth; And they that refuse, deserve Wooden Shooes, Or else to go bare-foot until they Recant; While we merrily sing, and make the Skies ring, With Long live our King, and our good Parliament. The Second Part. (1.) HAv'ng in our First Part shew'd th' Joy of our Heart, For Passing this Bill, our Gratitude shown; Let's farther declare, to all that will hear, Such Matters of Fact as are fit to be known, That all Folk may see, the Necessity T' use their Endeavours, and join to prevent The wear of such Things, which great Mischief bring T' this Kingdom and King, and our good Parliament. (2.) Long since we were told, how Silver and Gold, And Bulliön was sent out to purchase our Ruine; How our Workmen went, and our Patterns were sent, The better to bring on our utter Undoing: To ease our great Grief, we oft sought Relief, And with Complaints to our Senators went; But now in this Ring, we merrily sing, Great Praise to our King, &c. (3.) For they've heard our Case, and giv'n us some Ease, Our Hopes have reviv'd, and mended our State; While our Indian Foes, in Numbers up-rose, With Noise and Clamour against us did prate, Our just Case prevail'd, and their Designs fail'd, At which their Passion and Folly they vent, Whilst we merrily sing, Hi ding a ding ding, And praise our good King, &c. (4.) The French, Edicts made, to discourage this Trade, So that they bring Home much Silver and Gold; While we send our Bullion, to spoil Silk and Woollen, They'll suffer no Printing, nor Printed Stuffs sold: The Dutch too grow wise, this Trading despise, Their Eight Ships brought less than One which we sent: Did we the same thing, much Gain it would bring To this Kingdom and King, &c. (5.) In King Charles's Reign, we then did complain, For our Trade in his Time was oft very dull; But what we design'd, they then undermin'd, All we gain'd was an Act to bury our Wool; Which small Relief yield, while the Nation they fill'd With Silks and Chints, which at Court they present: By Bribes or like thing, in Fashion they bring, Which might please the King, tho' not Parliament. (6.) It has been declar'd, as we have oft heard, These Traders once fear'd to bring in Wrought Wares, Or send out Bullion, to ruine our Woollen; But now they're grown Great, and got over such Fears: For they've sent Treasure, in wonderful measure To bring Home such Goods as Trading supplant: For stopping this Thing, we now merrily sing, Great Praise to our King, &c. (7.) To get a Law made; the New Dons then said, That th' Old drove a Trade to this Kingdom's Ruine; Since they've gain'd their Act, 'tis Matter of Fact, They're the like Method and Measures pursuing: For the Eagle declare, how they were sincere, What we must expect, if such Goods here be spent; For the Cargoe she bring, put forward the Thing, For which we praise our King, and our good Parliament. (8.) If a Million be sent, Yearly to be spent In Wares that supplant our Silk and Wool Trade, 'Twill hinder of Poor, half a Million, or more, Might be imploy'd here, supported and fed, Besides as great Train, these Workers maintain, B' all the Provisions which by them are spent, For stopping this Thing, which such Ruine bring, We praise our good King, &c. (9.) While we joy for Relief, 'tis matter of Grief, To think what great Numbers yet of our Poor, As Makers of Fans, Pots, Tables and Stands, Japanners and Limners, and Multitudes more, Who will be undone, and their Country run, If b' Law or Example, we do not prevent The use of such Things, which such Mischief bring To this Kingdom and King, &c. (10.) What troubles us more, is what is brought o'er, Tho' it doth not excel, or come near us in kind, How fond of their Ware, tho' never so dear, Are too great Numbers of our Women-kind, Which shews very plain, they're still very vain, Whose fanciful Humours are so much bent On East-India things, which such Mischief bring To this Kingdom and King, &c. (11.) But e're we do end, our Song we intend To remember all those, stood up for our Case, With Zeal and Good Will, did bring in the Bill, And th' rest of our Friends that gain'd us this Ease, And all those who wear, what plainly appear To th' advance of our Trade, and Lands in their Rent: Their Praises we'll sing, drink their Health in this Ring, And praise our good King, &c. (12.) And now we have done, t'our Works let us run, For fresh Supply let us work on our Trade; If we spend our Store, we can work for more To purchase good Drink, good Meat, and good Bread; And as for all those, that do us oppose, We wish them no ill, but hope they'll repent, And forbear to deal in, what such Ruine bring, While we work, and sing, and praise our good King, &c. Advertisement: England's Almanack: Shewing how the East-india Trade is prejudicial to this Kingdom, &c. in which is represented, by a Copper Print, the Weaver, Comber and Spinster at work on the one side, and the-East-India Ships on the other. And under the Copper-Print an account of 52 Ships sent to the East Indies in Two Years last past with above Two Millions of Bullion. A List of 26 Ships belonging to the Old East-India Company, with their Tuns, Guns, Men and Cargoes. A List of 52 Ships which were sent to East-India in 7 Years, from 90 to 97, of which but 37 return'd. An Account of all the Cloth sent to the East-Indies in 15 Years. An Account of all the Woollen Manu∣factures made in England in one Year, with the value thereof. An Account of all the Silver and Gold coin'd since January 95. Abstracts of Petitions, Decrees and Chronologies, extravagant Rise and Fall of Stocks. Dreadful Account of Burnings, occasion'd by the Use of Callicoes. With a Calendar for the Year 1700, shewing the New Moons, Sundays, Holidays, San-risings, &c. Calculated for Information of the Publick. by T. L. London: Printed by S. Bridge, in -Friers; and Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers-Hall. 1700.
