B1521 [ocm]17890760 200504
A CALL AND VISITATION FROM THE LORD GOD of HEAVEN and EARTH UNTO CHRISTENDOM, (SO CALLED) Who profess they Know God, but in Works Deny him. Being also an Examination of them, How they came by the NAME Christian. And its a Warning to them all, to Repent with Speed, before the Dreadful Judgments of Almighty God (which hangs over their Heads) be poured forth upon them. With an Exhortation and Direction, How they may come into the Way of Everlasting Peace with God, and Escape the Wrath to come. Through a Labourer in the Lord's Harvest, and a True Lover of all your Souls, William Bayly. Printed in the Year, 1673.
A Call and Visitation From the LORD GOD of HEAVEN and EARTH UNTO Christendom: (So called) Who Profess they know God, but in Works Deny him. HEarken and give Ear, all you People, who profess your selves Christians, and yet live (contrary to Christ and his Servants) in the Abominations of the Heathens; many of your excee∣ding Sodom and Aegypt in your Wickedness, Blindness and Darkness (which is felt by many that fear God) your Profession of Christianity is Loathsom before the Lord, and it is even a Shame and a Grief to true Chri∣stians that you should take his Name into your Mouthes, who are so full of Deceit, Uncleanness, Oaths, Cur∣sing and Bitterness) Who can number your Abomi∣nations? How doth Iniquity abound and multiply?
What is become of the Love and Fear of God? How is Sobriety and Truth wanting amongst you, and Mad∣ness and Folly exalted, as if the Kingdom of Darkness were to be established forever, and your only Happiness to bring forth the Works of the Devil? Have you yet never read, That every one that doth name the Name of Christ should depart from Iniquity; and That the Fear of God (which is to depart from Evil, is the Beginning of true Wisdom? Are you not yet come to this first Step of Christianity? Examine your selves a lit∣tle, you who have got the Sheep's Clothing, the Name [Christian] for your Covering: For in the Dreadful Name and Authority of the Everlasting God of Heaven and Earth am I moved to Examine you and Warn you in the Behalf of Truth and Righteousness (which he is now Exalting.) How came you by the Name [Christian?] Or who gave it you? And what is the Ground-cause or Reason that you are so called? How came you first by it? You that live like Wild and Savage Beasts; worse then the Sea-Monsters, Devouring and Destroying one another in your Pride, Envy and Ambition, which is as far from the Spirit and Way of Christ Josus (whom you profess) as the East is from the West, and differs from it as Dark∣ness doth from Light. Did not Christ Jesus teach his Di∣sciples (the true Christians) to be Merciful, and to Love one another, and to Forgive one another, and to do unto all Men as they would be done unto, and to be Meek and Lowly in Heart? who were called Christians first at Antioch, as you may read, Acts 11.26. But how got you the Name? Give Account if you can; for the Lord God is risen to Awaken you, and to call you to an Accompt, both Professor and Prophane,
and to make you manifest as you are, even to the Heathen afar off; and no Vizzard nor Covering of Profession shall be able to hide or shelter you, who say, you are Chri∣stians, and are not; but you will be found Lyars and Blas∣pheamers, and of the Synagogue of Satan, as they were found to be, who said, they were Jews, and were not. Did not Christ Jesus (whose Name you profess) say, Follow me: I am the Light of the World; he that follow∣eth me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life? as you may read John 8.12. Now if you are his true Followers, you walk not in Darkness (as he hath said) but you have the Light of Life. Therefore prove your profession, and the Way you walk in; for if you walk in Darkness (Wickedness, Sin and Trans∣gression) you are no true Followers of Christ, nor his Disciples, and so no true Christians: Wherefore see what Ground you have to claim to your selves this Name; for Christ puts forth his own Sheep, and leads them out of Darkness, and they are turned from it, and have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of it; but did (and do) reprove them, as may be read plentifully in the Scriptures of Truth. Ephes. 5. You were sometimes Dark∣ness, but now are you Light in the Lord; walk as Children of the Light. And again, 1 Thes. 5.4. Ye are not in Dark∣ness, ye are all the Children of the Light; we are not of the Night, neither of Darkness. And said Peter, Ye are a Cho∣sen Generation, a Royal Priest-hood, a Holy Nation, a People set at Liberty, that ye should shew forth the Vertues of him that hath caued you out of Darkness into his Marvellous Light, 1 Pet. .9. And said John, The Darkness is past, and the true Light now shineth, 1 John 2.8. These were called out of Darkness, and were come past it (and delivered
from) the Power of Darkness, and were translated into the Kingdom of the Dear Son of God, Col. 1.13. which Kingdom stands in Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. And they were taught by the Grace of God, to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present Evil World, as you may read Tit. 2. Now see if you (who profess these words) do walk in their Steps, and are come to be taught by their Teacher; Is their Way yours? for the Path of the Just throughout all Ages was and is the shining Light: Or is not your Way the Way of the Wicked, which is as Dark∣ness, who know not at what they Stumble. Read Prov. 4.19. and let the Witness of God in you (which is true) answer: And deal truly with your own Souls; for God will not be mocked, who is come to try you, and from whose Presence nothing can be hid. Did not the true Christians follow God as Dear Children, and walk in Love? Was not this the true Mark of Christ's Sheep, To Love one another, by which all men were to know them to be his Followers? And is this Mark found upon you, that pretend to be his Sheep? Or is not the Contrary, the Mark of Cain, who slew his Brother? Are you not all Brethren by your Profession of Christ's Name? should you not then Love as Brethren, and be Kind and Tender-hearted one to another? Do you not all in Christendom call God your Father; and with one Mouth say, You have one Father, even God? And did not the Hypocrites of old say the same? Consider it in the Fear of God. Did not the Apostle John say, He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is Love? 1 John 4. Then
what Good will all your Profession, and Religion, and Name do you, if you know not God (which is Life Eternal)? Are you better then Sounding Brass, or Tinkling Sim∣bals, if you have not the Love of God, and true Know∣ledge of God in you? Was not this Paul's Doctrine, whose Sepulchre some of you garnish, like your Fore-Fathers, the Out-side and Lip-Prosessors, whose Brass and Simbals sounded as loud as yours, and had as Long Prayers as you; and yet Christ told them, That they had not the Love of God in them; who neglected Judgement, Mercy and Faith, the weightiest Matters; and were paying Tythe of Annise, Mint and Cummin. Therefore come you to the Line of true Judgment, and measure your Path, your Race and Pedegree. Did not Christ Jesus bid his Disciples, Be Merciful, as their Heavenly Father is Merciful? And said, Blessed are the Merciful; for they shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5. And Blessed are the Peace-Makers; for they shall be called the Chil∣dren of God. Now if you had learned of him, as he hath commanded, where would then be room for En∣vy and Cruelty, Pride and Oppression, which this day abounds among you? Did he not bid his Disciples, Love their Enemies; and if they Hungred, to give them Meat; and if they Thirsted, to give them Drink; and to do Good to them that hated them & Despightfully used them? How much more ought you to love your Brethren, and your Neighbours as your selves? Surely had you all been found in this (second) Lesson [Thou shalt Love thy Neighbour as thy self] the Turks and Jews would have taken hold of your Skirts before this day, and acknowledged you to be True Christians. But through your Blasphemy, Hypocrisie, Falseness, Idola∣try and Superstition, which abounds among you, you have been a Sumbling-Block and a Cause of Reproach
to the Name of Christ Jesus unto many Thousands; and you have grieved the Lord, even beyond the Old World. O Christendom! of whom have you learned all this Wickedness, Madness and Folly, that is so plentifully brought forth among you, for which the very Turks do justly condemn you? Did you ever learn these things of Christ (whom you profess)? Is he your Way, Pattern or Example in these Abominations? What Accompt can you give of these things? Will not the Blood of Souls be charged upon you? O that you would consider it in this your Day, before it be too late! Are you like the Sheep of Christ Jesus, which he hath put forth? Do you bear his Image (the Holy Innocent Life)? Out of what are you put forth? You who live like Wild Beasts, and Fed Horses without Bridle, did you ever know what the Yoak of Christ was? you that are Rest∣less, like the troubled Sea, foaming out your own Shame one against another, to the view of Nations, let the Truth (God's Witness in you) answer. And do not daub any longer with Untempered Morter: for (as I said) The Lord God is arisen to try you, and your Pro∣fession of his Holy Name, and to search you as with Candles, and to manifest your Root and Branch, that the Shame of your Nakedness may more appear, who have hid your selves under Falshood in a Pretence of Religion and Holiness. Did not Christ Jesus (whom you profess) Rebuke those that did but desire Destruction to come upon their Enemies, to Destroy their Lives, who knew not what spirit they were of? Then how Ignorant are you, and greatly to be Reproved, who are so greedily Destroying your Brethren (striving who shall be Greatest) about the Earth, and Honour below, that shall Perish? What spirit do you think you are of, who spend your pretious
Time and Days in Pride and Vain Glory, serving divers Lusts and Pleasures; Envying, Hating, Oppressing, Robbing and Devouring one another; as if it were the Work of your Day and Generation, and the End for which you were born, to provoke the Righteous God to his Face in these things against you, who giveth you Life, and Breath, and Being, that you should Fear and Dread, and Serve and Worship him. Are ye not them that are without Natural Affection, Heady and High∣minded? Judge ye. Are these things the Marks of Christ's Innocent Sheep, or of the Ravenous Beasts of Prey, whether these are not the Unfruitful Works of Darkness? or whom do these things resemble? and from what Role do these bitter Fruits proceed, which Grieve and Dis∣honour God and Christ Jesus (whom you profess?) Judge you, whether these Fruits, you bring forth to o∣pen View will ever be a Means to Convert the Turks, Jews and Heathen to your Faith and Religion, and ac∣knowledge you to be in the Right Way of Everlasting Peace and Happiness; who under the Name of Christia∣nity make the World to ring of your Ravenous Impieties beyond Sodom and Gomorrah; as if by your Name of Profession you had a Priviledge to commit such Abomi∣nations, which are Abhorred and Condemned by the very Heathens: And yet, how Distasteful would it be unto you to deny you the Name of Christans? You in Italy Spain, France, England, Holland, Germany, with many other Kingdoms and Provinces, who have long been Professing Christianity, and have made a large Noise of Religion, and yet striving in your Wills to Exalt your selves over one another, contrary to Christ's Doctrine
and Example, who said, He that will be Greatest among you, let him be a Servant (or a Helper) to all: But instead of this, your Cruelty one towards another hath ex∣ceeded the Measure of Pagans; for which you may swiftly and justly expect the Dreadful Judgments and Fiery Indignation of the Righteous God to Consume you, who are thus Biting and Devouring one another, which will be your Portion, except speedy Repentance and A∣mendment of Life: Should you not all be as a Family, who profess one Christ your Head, and you his Servants? Should you not then help and love as Brethren? And is not he worse then an Infidel, that do not help and pro∣vide for them of his Family. O Christendom! be not deceived; what thou sowest thou shalt assuredly reap: For Christ is not divided, nor his Garment rent, who is the Leader of his People out of those things which you are found wallowing in, who is the Captain of their Salvation, of whom they have learned to be Merciful, and to Love Enemies, and to lay aside all Malice, and Guile, and Hypocrisie, and Evil-speaking, as New-born Babes, feeding on the Sincere Milk of the Ingrafted Word (which liveth and abideth forever) that is able to save the Soul, by which they are kept in the Love of God, and in Unity and Peace one with another; and as Christ Jesus said (so say I in the Name of the Lord unto thee, O Christendom) Verily, verily, Except a Man be born again, and become as a little Child, he can in no case enter the Kingdom of God: And except a man take up his Cross daily, and follow me (saith Christ Jesus) he cannot be my Disciple. Therefore confi∣der, whether you yet know what this New Birth mean∣eth, and the Cross of Christ, which Paul preached,
which was a Stumbling-block to the Jews, and to the Greeks Foolishness, by which he was Crucified unto the World, and the World was Crucified unto him? Was this a Cross of Wood, Stone, Brass, Gold or Silver; or an Ivory Cross, which some of you carry about you daily? Is this the daily Cross, think you, there spo∣ken of? O People (Papists and Protestants) Be no longer de∣ceived, but come forth, and Answer, if you can; who are so full of your Made, Invented, Ignorant, Dumb, Beggarly Idols and Crosses, without Life and Vertue, and even mad on the Works of Mens Hands in your Blind Zeal on those Lying Vanities, by which you grieve and provoke the Spirit of the Lord daily: But what World do all your Crosses crucifie unto you? Or is not the World alive in you, and you in it, without God in the World? for God is Love; and by the aboun∣ding of Iniquity Love is not only waxed cold, but e∣ven lost among you: And is not all that is in the World the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life; this is not of the Father, but of the World, 1 John 2.16. And is there any people under Heaven exceeding you (in these things) who are called Christians. O! How have you lost the very Remembance of the true Cross, notwithstanding all your Invented Cros∣ses to put you in Remembrance? You are such as have forgotten the Lord dayes without number, and there∣fore are you thus torn in pieces, and divided, and no De∣liverance will be found for you, if you Repent not spee∣dily: and if the Cross of Christ you did bear, which is the Power of God, which crosseth the Self-Will of Man; and if the Love of God dwell in your Hearts,
you would then feel a Daily and Hourly Remembrance of him; were ye but true Disciples indeed, as you profess in words to be, and not Mockers, you would soon throw down all these your Dumb Idols, which arose in the dark Imaginations from the Bottomless Pit of Ignorance, in the Alienation from God, when Iniquity abounded; and this state hath over-spead Christendom, who are Ig∣norant of the Strait Gate and Narrow Way of Rege∣neration, that leads to Life and Peace with God forever. Oh! how have your Leaders caused you to Err, and even destroyed you, like the False Prophets of old, who were Blind Leaders of the Blind? How do they still rule with Force and Cruelty over the Consciences, Souls and Bodies of People? still striving to keep them in the Chains, of Ignorance, Darkness and Blindness (as blind as Sodom) making Merchandize of them at their Plea∣sure, for their Filthy Lucre, Vain Glory, Pomp and Ambition sake: How do they dig in Darkness, and as deep as Hell, to hide their Designs and their Counsel from the Lord, and to mask and amuse poor Ignorant Souls, to make Havock of them, and to captivate them at their Wills? How are they, like Moules, Bats and Vulters, loving the Pathes of Darkness, and hating the true Light, the Path of the Just, which shines more and more unto the perfect Day? stumbling at (and Enemies to) the Cross of Christ Jesus; whose Godd is their Belly, who mind Earthly Things, whose Glory is in that which will be their Perpetual Shame, and whose End will be Everlasting Destruction, without speedy Re∣pentance. Wo be to you, ye blind Guides, ye Hypocrites, who love the Praise of men, and go in your Long and Distinct Robes, to be Seen and Honoured of men, ye
love Greetings in the Markets and Streets, and to be called of Men Rabbi, the exact Leaven of your Fore-Fathers, the Hypocrites of old, which is Pride and Hypocrisie, which the true Disciples of Christ were to beware of. This is your State, ye Idol Shepherds and Drones; by your Fruits ye are known and manifest to Thousands: Your Foundation and Root is Rotten∣ness, and your Building will fall in the Day of Storms that are coming upon you. How can you think that the Rabble of your Lip-Confessions, and Out-side Ser∣vices, and Blind Inventions, will stand you in any stead in the Day of your Accompt? How can you expect that God should hear your Prayers, while you thus re∣gard Iniquity in your Hearts? Is it any thing beter then the Vain Babbling of the Heathen? Who pray to be forgiven of God as you forgive them that trespass against you, who do not forgive one another; but are Implaca∣ble and Unmerciful one unto another, seeking Revenge and the Ruin one of another; not at all like unto Christ, who laid down his Life for Enemies, to bring them to God, out of Trangression, and bid them, Be Merciful, (that is, full of Mercy) and to do unto all as they would be done unto. And how can you blame the Infidels (as you call them) if they Judge and Condemn you for your Abomi∣nations, who make such a large Profession of Christianity? How can they believe you are good People, when your Works and Fruits declare you otherwise, both Root and Branch? So that your Name [Christian] you have justly made a Reproach; and the Fame of your Infamous Cruelty, Pride, Lewdness and Hypocrisie hath soun∣ded forth to the Amazement of Heathens, to whom you have been a Stumbling-block for Ages, the Guilt of whose Blood will never be wiped away in this World,
nor in the World to come from off you, but by a spee∣dy, true, and unfeigned Repentance; the Lord hath spoken it. Do not you call Christ Jesus (who is the Innocent, Holy, Harmless Lamb of God, the Just One) your Lord and Savi∣our frequently; & say in your Creed, I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, &c? But how came you hither? What Ground have you to call him your Lord (in whom Guile was never found?) And do you indeed believe [in] him? or do you only believe the Report, that there was such a one in Ages past, of whom the Scripture of Truth declares, which Thousands believe, and the Devils believe, which do not believe [in] him? Is he your Governour, and Ruler and Orderer? Are you commanded and guided by him, and led by his Spirit of Truth into all Truth? Do you take Coun∣sel and Direction from him, as your Captain, Law-giver and Counsellor? Do you obey his Commands, and follow him in the Regeneration? If so, then he is your Lord, and also your Saviour, and no otherwise; For he saveth none, but whom he guides and governs: He is the Anthor of Eternal Salvation to as many as obey him: They that are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Rom. 8. And not as many as can talk of him, and cry Lord, Lord, and call him their Savi∣our: It is not sufficient to call him so with your Mouth and Lips, and to imagine, he will be so to you while ye remain in open and secret Rebellion against him; ye take but his Name in Vain; it will avail you nothing in the Day of your Account; but add to your Misery, so to be deceived, and to de∣ceive one another, by promising your selves an Imagi∣nary Liberty and Freedom, while really and indeed ye are Servants to Corruption: For he that committeth Sin is the Servant of Sin, as you may read John 8.34. And it is written of Christ Jesus, He shall save his People from their
Sins (not [in] their Sins) And that no Man can call Jesus Lord, but by the holy Ghost: And let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.19. Are you come hither? You who so often name the Name of Christ, do you depart from Iniquity, or do you not rather mock at the Holy Ghost, and the Movings of it? let God's Witness answer: And if you dream of a Purgatory (as I know ma∣ny of you do) to purge and cleanse you between the Grave and Heaven, from all your Filthiness, though you live and wallow in it for term of Life: Be it known unto you (and I declare in the Name of the Lord) that this will deceive you; for it pro∣ceeded (in its Foundation) from the filthy Dreamer, which hath defiled both flesh and spirit; and when you awake at the sound of the last Trumpet, ye shall remember this Voice, [He that is filthy, let him be filthy still] and he that is holy, let him be holy still: For Time shall be no longer, but the great Gulf of Eternity, which is fixed between Abraham, the true Believer and Follower of God, and the Rich Man, that lived in his Fulness of Fading Pleasures; if you have Ears to hear, hear, Luke 16. And the Lord God o∣pen your Eyes, that you may see, and come to know and witness in this your day the Tree to be made good, and then the Fruit will be good also: For as the Tree falls, so it lies: And men do not gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles (as Christ said) But how hath Christendom (in this dark Night of Apostacy (wherein men could not work) been like a Garden all grown over with Bryers and Thorns, Weeds, Thistles and Nettles, bearing no good Fruit unto God, but Fruits of Unrighteousness, even like the Vine of Sodom; and this is yet the lamentable State of many Thousands, who are in a large Profession of God and Christ in Words, but in Works deny him, and are Reprobates concerning the true and living Faith, that works by Love, and purifies the heart, in which
the true Christians pleased God, & were (and are) accepted of him, in which Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain (that slew his Brother) And without this Faith (which is holy) it is impossible to please God. Therefore O ye peo∣ple of Christendom, whom these things concern, who are out of the true Faith, by which the Just lives, in the Strife and Envy, which kills the Just; Repent and Turn at the Reproof of the Lord, and fear before him, and be humble, and learn Tenderness and Love, and to be Mer∣ciful, that so ye might obtain Mercy from God in time of your Need: and leave off your Cruelty one towards an∣other, and your Envying, Warring and Fighting one a∣gainst another, which comes from your Lusts, which War against your Immortal Souls, lest ye are (like Cain) Vaga∣bonds from the blessed Presence of the Lord God forever, and Consumed and Destroyed with an utter Destruction without Re∣medy; and this from God is a Warning unto you in True Love to all your Souls. Blessed are the Merciful (saith Christ Jesus) they shall ob∣tain Mercy; and blessed are the Peace-Makers, for they shall be called the Children of God. But whose Children shall they be called, who are Peace-Breakers, and Unmercifully destroying and de∣vouring one another? Judge ye. Is not the Devil called a Destroyer and a Murderer from the Beginning? And were not the Scribes and Pharisees (who were Hypocrites, Envious and Ambitious) of their Father the Devil? though they covered themselves with saying, We have one Father, even God, and we are Abraham's Chil∣dren? Could there have been a higher Profession in words then this? And what was the Proof and Ground of Christ's saying so of them (who were so zealous and strict Professors, and so exact in observing the Sabboth, and
performing their Duties and Services to the Lord, as they judged?) Why this was the Infallible Proof [because his Works ye do] They did the Devils Works, and yet called God their Father: I could-wish with my Soul, we had no such evident Proofs in Christendom at this day; and my Soul even travels for the End of them: For what Peace can be expected to people or Nations, so long as the Whoredoms and Witchcrafts of Jezabel are so many (the Abominations that have made, & will yet make desolate) for God is not chan∣ged, but remains the same yesterday, to day and forever, Its not your many Pater-Nostors, or saying Our Father which art in Heaven; that will make you the Children of God; nor your saying, I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, will not make you True Christians, or Disciples of Christ Jesus, no more then their Sayings of old made them so, who had as large a Name and Covering of Profession (in their day) as you, and yet they had not the Love of God in them. Therefore read whose steps you tread in, and see who in∣deed is your Father, and whose Works ye do and bring forth; and let the Light (the true Witness of God) whose Property is to make manifest? arise in your Consciences, and answer. Or do you believe, that the Sheep's Clothing will cover the Inwardly Ravener better now under the Name Christian, then it would formerly among the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites? Or is Light and Dark∣ness changed from what it was? How dare you call God Father; or say that Prayer without Blushing and Confusion of Face, wherein you ask God, To Forgive you, as you Forgive them that Trespass against you? Do you understand what you say, and what you desire of him? Surely if you did, Terror might even Affright you while you are thus speaking; for you call
for Vengeance upon your own selves from God herein; and it will be even so; and out of your own Mouthes shall you be judged, according to your Works. For as you do Forgive others the Wrong they have done to you, even so will the Lord forgive you the Wrong you have done to him, and no otherwise, according to your daily Requests. And this I declare and testifie, in the Name and Hea∣venly Anthority of the Unchangeable God, who lives forever; That no people under Heaven (upon the Face of the whole Earth) hath done him the like Wrong, as you have done unto him, who have made such a large Profession of the Name of Christ Jesus, and live and act so contrary, which hath caused the very Turks and Indi∣ans to Despise and Blaspheme that worthy Name, to whom you have been a Stumbling-block, and an Offence for Ages, even against the Way of Truth, out of which no man can be saved, whose Blood cries for Vengeance against you; And therefore great is the Lord's Controver∣sie with you this day, who profess Christianity, and in your Works and Practices are found worse then the In∣fidels; and he will scourge you above all the Families of the Earth for these things; and thus am I commanded of the Lord to declare unto you, that you might be war∣ned and Repent: For I have seen a Dreadful Day that is hastening upon you, who have forgotten the Lord, and are walking like Blind Men at Noon Day, because of your Rebellion, spoiling and destroying one another in your Madness, Folly and Blindness, who should hearken to the Voice of God, the Trumpet that is now sounding, and be awakened, that you may see your Enemies to be those in your own House, the Universal Enemy of the Souls of Mankind, against whom should all your Strength
and Weapons be turned, and not against Mens Lives, which Christ Jesus is very tender of, who is come to de∣stroy the Works of the Devil: Therefore Fear God, and be Wise, and leave off these things, which grieve and vex his Righteous Spirit; and give Glory to him alone, who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters, in whose Sight all Nations are but as the Drop of a Bucket; What are you then, ye Sons of Men, who are seeking Glory and Honour one of another, whose Breath is in your Nostrels, as a little Vapour, that soon vanishes away, and then you are gone to your long home forever. Therefore I say again, in the Counsel and Love of the Almighty God, Be you Awakened, & Dread before him; for the Hour of his Judgments is come, and swiftly coming upon Thousands, that the Inhabitants of the Earth might depart from Iniquity, and learn Righteousness; and no more deceive themselves and one another with a Talk of Worship and Religion for an Out-side Shew of Feigned Humility and Righteousness, which will not serve, nor stand you in stead in this Day of God's Pure and Glorious Ap∣pearance. All is nothing without the Possession of Life; even the Life of him whom ye profess must be manifest in you; it must be brought forth to Light, to open View in you and through you, or else you confess not Christ come in the Flesh; but you are of Antichrist, and not of God, 1 Ioh. 4. For hereby shall you know the Spirit of God, Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God; and every Spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God: but this is the Spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard, how that he should come, and now already he is in this World [Mark] Little Children, ye are of God, and have overcome them: For greater is he that is in you, then he that is in this World. [Mark] They were the little Chil∣dren
(who were born again) that were of God, who confessed Christ come in the Flesh: Read you this Chap∣ter throughout, and let it serve as a Glass for all False Christendom, to see whose Image you bear. For if this be now the true Meaning of this place, That every Spirit that confesseth Jesus Christ come in that Flesh only born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, Sixteen Hundred Years ago, to be of God; if so, then is all Christen∣dom, both Papists and Protestant, of God; for they all con∣fess the same, both in England, Holland, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Scotland, Ireland, Portugall, Denmark, Sweed∣land, with many others in Europe; and so are all of God, notwithstanding all their Divisions and Separations in Mat∣ters of Religion and Worship, and all their Oppression and Cru∣elty, Fighting and Warring, Killing and Robbing one another for perishing things; and all the Whoremongers, Lyars, Adulterers, Swearers, Fornicators, Drunkards, Cheaters, Thieves, Stage-Players, Revilers, Slanderers, Hypocrites, Proud, Envious, Covetous, Ambitious, and all the Idolaters and Ungodly throughout all Europe, professing Christianity, are all of God, who have their Creed (or Belief, the Confession of their Faith) made ready to their hands, concerning Jesus Christ's being conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suf∣fered under Pontius Pilate, crucified, dead and buried, and rose again, &c. so that if this bear Confession of him come in that Flesh be the true Meaning of the holy Apostle John, then are all those before-mentioned of God, though they may out-strip the Heathens and Infidels in Unrighteousness, and exceed Sodom and Gomorrah, and the old World in their Wickedness, whom the Just God destroyed for an Example to all that should hereafter live Ungodly; the which I might hope, that none are so hardy, and wilfully blind as to believe or imagine: For then might I query with such,
Who are then of their Father the Devil in this Age? And where is the World, that lyeth in Wickedness? 1 John 5.19. And where are they to be found who profess they know God, but by Works deny him, and are Abominable, and Disobedient, and unto every Good Work Reprobate? Tit. 1.16. See if this come not near your Dwelling, who profess you know God and Christ Jesus, and believe in him (as in your Creed) but in Works deny him, and crucifie him afresh, and put him to open Shame, and cause his holy Name to be reproached, and the Truth and Way of Life and Peace to be slighted. For these things will the Lord plead with you, whose Anger is kindled against you, whose Rod you must feel, above all people; and for this shall your Hearts melt, and tremble at the Presence of God, and your Faces shall gather Paleness; for the Lord is risen in his dreadful Power to plead with all Flesh, and the Day of your Ac∣count hastens; the Stroke of his Righteous Judgments must come upon you for these things; Rocks nor Moun∣tains will not hide you from the Wrath of the Lamb; your Wealths, Honours and Strength will not deliver you, who have exalted your selves above all that is called God, above Truth, above Righteousness, above Love, Mercy and Meekness, above the Fear of God, and every Appearance of his Witness in you, as if ye were to be established forever in Unrighteousness, forgetting that God will bring you to Judgment for all the Deeds done in your Bodies, casting his Word behind you, and feeding on that which dies of it self, like the Beasts that perish: This is your state in the Sight of God, and of those whose Eyes he hath opened by his Grace, the true Light, which hath given them an Understanding, and taught them to deny Ungodliness, and to live Soberly. Therefore I say again unto you, Dread the Lord God Almighty, and Fear and Tremble before him, and come
down and Repent, all you high, lofty and exalted Ones, who are but as Chaff in his Sight; for God will make you Bow, and Trem∣ble, and Quake at his Presence, in this day of his Power, which is broken forth. And all you False Shepherds, Hirelings and Blind Guides among the People, who have undertaken to be Teachers of them, whom the Lord never sent, but run for your Filthy Lucre, who have not profitted the people at all, but have caus'd them to Err more and more from the right Way, and led them into the Ditch of Darkness & Destruction, for your Belly and Earthly Honours sake; Tremble ye Corrupters of the Earth, ye Hypocrites, ye Graves and Whited Sepul∣chres, full of Deceit and Rottenness, the Day of your Trembling and Astonishment is at hand, ye that love Pleasures more then God; you are Enemies to the Cross of Christ Jesus; you mind Earthly Things, though ye can talk of Heaven with your Tongues, but your Godd is your Belly, on which you go and creep among the Powers of the Earth; Dust is your Meat, and with the Serpent you are Cursed above all the people upon the Earth: For ye have been and are the Destroyers of the Souls and Bodies of Millions of poor ig∣norant People; and your Glory is in your Shame, and your End will be Everlasting Destruction, without speedy Repen∣tance: Dreadful is the Cup you have to drink, if ever any of you return to the Lord; But the Wine of his Wrath with∣out Mixture forever will be your Portion, if you Repent not; the Lord God hath spoken it. Therefore consider it, all you Pastors, that are Bru∣tish, and have not sought the Lord, nor the Everlasting Well-being of the Souls of People, but have sought your Gain from your Quarter, and Ruled with Force and Cruelty, like your Brethren of old, the False Prophets; Was not the End of Christ's Coming, his Sufferings, Ministry, Life,
Death, Resurrection, &c. to bring people home to God, to lead them out of Unrighteousness, and to Reconcile them to God? And can any be reconciled to him, while they live in Sin and Unrighteousness, in Disobe∣dience to him? For without Holiness no man can see the Lord, (or have Fellowship with him) Will assuming the Name or Title of Holiness make you Holy, either Pope, or Prelate, or any other? Will a Name to live be sufficient, while ye are dead, as to God, in your Sins and Trespasses? Was it not the Travel of Christ's Soul (which he hath seen) to bring and gather people out of Sin and Trans∣gression, the Evil that is in this World; and that they may come to behold his Glory, which was before the World was. And can any behold his Glory, who shut their Eyes against (and hate) the true Light, his pure Appearance, which shines in the Heart? For it was that which shined in the Hearts of the true Christians, that gave them the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus. And what was that Glory that was in him, which none of the Princes of this World knew, who pos∣sessed the Glory of this World? Was it not Grace and Truth which he was filled withal? And hath not the Grace of God (that came by Jesus Christ) which bring∣eth Salvation, appeared unto all men? and do not ma∣ny turn away, and shut their Eyes and stop their Ears from it now, as in dayes past, lest by it their Evil Deeds should be discovered and reproved? But the true Disci∣ples were (and are) taught by this Grace, To deny Ungod∣liness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World; and who said, By Grace are we saved, through Faith, not of our selves; for it is the Gift
of God: And they beheld the Glory of the Lord as in a Glass, by which they were changed into the same Image (or Likeness) even by the Spirit of the Lord, whose Labour also, and the work of their Ministry, was, To turn people from Darkness to the Light, from Satan's power unto God; and to open their blind Eyes, that they may come to see their Salvation, and to present them perfect in Christ Jesus: And if any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature (he is changed) and the old things are past away. Is not this the true and lasting Rule among all true Christians, which only avails with God (the New Creature avails) when neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision availeth any thing? Is not this the one thing then that is needful for all Mankind to consider? Did not Abel and Enoch walk by this Rule, and many others, before the Scrip∣ture was given forth? And did they not please God in their Day? Were they not then in the true Faith, which worketh by Love, without which it is impossible to please God, as it is written, Heb. 11.6? And did they not walk with God in this Faith? And were they not translated (or changed?) And did not Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesie, That (in the latter days) the Lord would come in many Thousands of his Saints (or Holy People) to give Judg∣ment against the Ungodly, and to convince them of their Un∣godly Deeds and hard Speeches? [Mark] The Saints, trans∣lated and redeemed Ones, whom the Lord hath sanctifi∣ed, and sent into the World, the Army that is in Heaven, that follow him upon the White Horse, who is come forth conquering and to conquer, whose Name is cal∣led the Word of God (if you have Ears to hear, hear) against whose Appearance Gogg and Magog have set them∣selves, and are gathered to Battel, but shall never pre∣vail;
for Death and Hell, Beast and False Prophet, Dragon and Whore, must be cast into the Lake by him that makes War in Righteousness, whose Sword pro∣ceedeth out of his Mouth; and out of the Mouthes of Babes and Sucklings will he perfect his Praise, even those who are weaned from the Brests of this Perishing Vain World, and who suck at the Breasts of the Heavenly Consolations of God; these are them, through, and by whom the Lord will accomplish his Mighty Work in the Earth, and confound the Wisdom of the Wise; For the Lord is with them as a Mighty King in Battel, and their Enemies shall fall before them; for the Work is the Lord's: Therefore Dread before him all you un∣clean Beasts of Prey, and all you Pale and Black Hors∣men of Death and Destruction, who can only talk of the Fame of Wisdom (which is justified of her Children) whilst you are wallowing in the Ditch and Mire of Pol∣lution, and yet pretending to help out others, and to cure them of their Sores, when you your selves are full of them, from the Crown of the Head to the Soal of the Foot, by your own Confession. Consider these things, ye blind Guides. For how can you declare against, and reprove another for the same things which you live in, and bring forth? How can you condemn one for falling into the same Pit, into which you are as deeply plunged your selves? Is not this like him (or worse) that said, Let me pull the mote out of thine Eye, when behold a Beam was in his own? This is the State of you Blind Leaders in Christendom, who have caused the people to err, at whose hand the Lord will require their Blood, though they pe∣rish in their Iniquities: But Blessed be the Lord forever, who hath opened (and is opening) the Eyes of Thousands, who see these Deceitful Workers, who can no longer be
led nor deceived by them, whom he hath plucked as Brands out of the Fire, and the Knowledge of God is increasing, and Truth exalting, and Deceit and Ignorance shall vanish away, and the Mouth of Iniquity shall be stopped; and he will bring forth his Glorious Work (al∣ready begun) in these last dayes; he is gathering a Seed and People unto himself (from among the Heathen, which know him not, though they profess his Name) which shall live to his Praise, and shew forth the Vertues of his Grace and Love, who shall confess Christ to be come in the Flesh even before men, and follow the Lamb where ever he leads them. But this is written as a Warning unto all you, who pro∣fess Christ in Words, but in Works deny him; with whom the Lord is striving, as with the Old World before the Flood; but his Spirit will not always strive with you, who so greatly disho∣nour him, & so dreadfully provoke him daily to Anger against you. Therefore fear the Lord, all ye people, who are in Trans∣gression against him, High and Low, Old and Young, Male and Female, and Repent, and Turn with Speed from your evil Wayes; For the Dreadful Day of the Lord is come, wherein he is cutting short his Work in Righteousness; for a short Work will the Lord make in the Earth: And remember, That without Holiness no man shall see the Lord in Peace [no man] let him profess what he will, the Flaming-Sword will keep him out, while in Transgression; and this is the Word of the Lord God to all Christendom, whether you will hear or forbear. And so having sounded the Trumpet of the Lord unto you (in the true Sight of your Sad and Miserable State) I am clear of your Blood, if ye perish in your Iniquities.
Hear the Word of the Lord all you Priests and People, who cry-out, and say, Visions and Revelations are Ceased in these dayes. WHere there is no Vision the people perish, Prov. 29.18. And without Revelation there is no true Knowledge of the only true God, and Je∣sus Christ, whom he hath sent, Mat 11.27. And its for want of Knowledge that the people perish, Hosea 4.6. So that if Visions and Revelations are ceased among you (as you say) then you are all in a Perishing State, and without the Kowledge of the true God (your Crea∣tor) and Jesus Christ the Saviour (whom you profess, and talk of) whom to know is Life Eternal; so ye are ignorant of Eternal Life. And this is the Word of the Lord God unto you all, Priests and People, In this State you will all Perish; and of him am I commanded thus to declare unto you, that you might yet at last be Warned, and Awakened, before the Day of your Visitation be wholy over, and you left in utter Darkness to Perish forever. O People! Awake; Why should you thus sleep the Sleep of Death? For how can it be otherwise with you, then to cry, Visions and Revelations are ceased, who Deny and Gain-say the True Light of the Son of God, which doth make manifest, or reveal? How can you see, who close your Eye? and how can you hear, who stop your Ear at the Voice of Wisdom?
If Visions and Revelations be indeed ceased among you (as you cry, who are the Leaders and Teachers of the People (and I believe its true) then is this Prophe∣cy fulfilled upon you, Mic. 3.5, 6, 7. Thus saith the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people Err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace; and he that putteth not into their Mouthes, they even prepare War against him: Therefore Night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a Vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not Divine; and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and their Day shall be dark over them: Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded; yea, they shall all cover their Lips; for there is no Answer of God, &c. So read your State, and the Cause and Ground of your Darkness, which is as Just a Judgment from God upon you now, for your Rebellion and Pride, Cove∣tousness and Hypocrisie, as upon them; and this is as really your State and Condition, who have caused Thousands to Err in your dayes: Visions are ceased as to you, and Darkness is over you, and Blindness is hap∣pened to you, and therefore Shame and Confusion must cover you, as it did them in whose Steps you are, as you might see, as in a Glass, whose Image ye bear, and whose Path of Darkness ye walk in, where you have no Vision, nor Answer of God; but Darkness is over you, which is a Woful, Miserable, Perishing State. For Vision is Sight; and without Sight ye are all Blind, both Lea∣ders and Followers, and as Christ said, will surely fall into the Ditch, Mat. 15.14. Therefore he bid the people, Believe in the Light, that they might become the Children of the Light; and bid them all, Watch and Pray, lest they enter into the Enemy's Tempta∣tions (as his true Ministers exhort people now) John 12.36. Mat. 26.41.
And how could they watch without Light, and with∣out Eye-sight? How could they see the Enemy? And how can you see or have sight, who shut your Eyes, and Deny, Hate and Oppose the Light, which ye should believe in, and watch in, which would give you a true Sight of your own States and Conditions, and the Knowledge of God (did you believe in it, as Christ commanded) as they had who believed in the Son of God in dayes past, and as they have who do believe in him now. And were not the Prophets of God in old time called Seers? And how could they see without Light? And did they not see the States and Conditions of the people, and warned them with their Rulers and Teachers in the Name of the Lord, as they were moved, who through them declared the stretching forth of his Hand all the Day long unto a Gain-saying and a Rebellious People, who were set as Watch-men to awaken them; who declared Freely what they had seen and received of the Lord, that the Blood of Souls might not be required at their hands? O People! harden not your Hearts, nor shut your Eyes any longer; for the Lord God hath caused his Day to dawn, and his Trumpet to sound a certain Sound unto you in this your Day, through his Servants, as certain as ever he did since the World began. And this am I moved of the Lord to write unto you, that I may be clear of your Blood, and you will one Day know, it was God's Visitation of Love to your Souls, that ye might not perish forever, and you will be left without Excuse. How could the Hard-hearted, Rebellious, Blind Ae∣gyptians but cry out, Visions are ceased, and Revelations are
ceased; yea, and also, that Light is ceased, and that the day was Dark over them, when Darkness (that might be felt) was three dayes over all their Land, as a Plague upon them, because of their Rebellion against God, in which they saw not one another, Exod. 10. Therefore Fear and Dread the Lord, all you Blind People, and Awake, and Consider your Miserable State, and the Ground of your Out-cry against Visions and Re∣velations in your dayes, and Repent speedily; for there is Light in Goshen, and the Pillar of Fire goeth before the Israel of God (the Inward True Jew) while Darkness remains over all your Egyptian Land of Bondage, Re∣bellion and Wickedness: For it is the Wicked that walk in Darkness, and the Rebellious that dwell in a dry Land, Prov. 4.19. Psal. 68.6. And might not the Sodomites have cryed out, Visions (or Sight) is ceased (as well as you) when they were smitten with Blindness, and could not find Lot's Door? And was not that a Plague upon them from the Lord, for their Rebellion and Wickedness? And might not Elimas the Sorcerer have cryed out, Visions and Revelations are ceased, and the Day is become Dark ever me, when he went about seeking some to lead him by the Hand, being smitten in Judgment for his Iniqui∣ty, who withstood, and sought to pervert the Right Way of the Lord, as many of you have done, who have cryed, Visions and Revelations are ceased, who should cry and tell the people, Your Sight is ceased, and that you are smitten with Blindness (for Vision is Sight) and so then, what difference between you and the Blind Guides of Old, the Aegyptians, Elimas the Sorcerer, and the So∣domites?
And were not they foolishand false Prophets, who followed their own spirit, and had seen nothing in days past? And was not the Wo pronounced against them from the Lord through a true Prophet Ezekiel? And what Prophets or Teachers must you be called, that see nothing, and that cry, Seeing is Ceased; for if Visions and Revelations are ceased, then Sight and Knowledge is ceased, and Blindness, Darkness and Ignorance is over you, and Night is upon you, as was upon your Brethren and Fore-Fathers, the False Prophets; and this is a Plague and Just Judgment from God upon all you who hate the Light, and love Darkness, striving to stop and shut out every Appearance of it; How then should it be otherwise with you, who are thus wilfully Blind, op∣posing that which makes manifest and reproves your E∣vil Deeds; to whom the Eye-Lids of the Morning are as the Shaddow of Death, Job 24. O you Priests and Leaders of the People! who have filled their Ears with Out-cries against the Light, and that Visions and Revelations are ceased; thus saith the Lord God, Your Lips shall be covered, and your Mouthes stopt; and I will bring my Judgments upon you, and make you an Abhorrence to the People; it had been good for you that you had never been born, and that the Womb had been your Grave: And this shall you know in the Day of your Account, in which your Reward shall be according to your Works. What Darkness and Blindness must you needs feed the People withal, and lead them into, who see nothing, but follow your own dark spirit? Whither can you lead them, who follow you, that walk in Darkness, and know not whither you go, whose Sight is ceased and gone,
as you Blind Guides confess and publish, that Visions and Revelation are ceased: So you will all perish, both Leaders and Followers, if you come not out of this State of Dark∣ness, according to that true Saying, Where there is no Vision the People perish, Prov. 29.18. How dare you Blind-Guides thus presume to lead the Blind People, making Merchandize of them for Filthy Lucre sake? For ye do in effect say, That ye are all blind, and have no true Sight at all, nor no Answer of God, (for its the same thing) For Vision is Sight, and Revelation (or Revealing) is opening, Manifesting or Shewing, as Christ Jesus said to his Disciples, who were led by the Spirit of Truth, That it should shew them things to come, and that he would shew them plainly of the Father, who opens and no man can shut. And a Minister of Christ said, God shall reveal even this unto you, Plil. 3.15. And God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, who hath in these last dayes poured forth of his Spirit, and his Sons and Daughters do prophesie, and the Young Men do see Visions, as in dayes past. And the Mysteries of his Kingdom are hid from the Wise and Prudent of this World, and revealed to Babes, who be∣lieve in the Light, and are led by the Spirit of Truth, as in Ages past. Did not God reveal his Son in Paul, who before was a Persecutor of his People, and had the Scripture and the Law without, yet knew not God, till he revealed his Son in him. Gal. 1.16. And did he not call the Appearance of Christ to him, a Heavenly Vision? Acts 26.19. And did he not come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, and witnessed them? 2 Cor. 12.1. Gal. 1.12. and 2.2. Ephes. 3.3.
And did not Peter know more of the Mind and Coun∣sel of God by a Vision, who said, Now I perceive that God is no Respecter of Persons, &c? Acts 10. But what do you perceive (or discern) who are oppo∣sing the Light, and are wholy blind, denying Revelations and Visions, the Sight which God would give you, were you obedient to that which checks and reproves you for your evil Deeds, Words and Thoughts? Is not that the Natural Man, and Carnal Mind (that is in Enmity against God, and not subject to him) which perceives not the things of the Spirit of God (that are Spiritually discerned) Judge ye: And how can any per∣ceive who are from the Light which they be lighted with∣al and hates it; for every one that doth Evil hates the Light, and loves Darkness? This is the Ground of your Rage and Out-Cry against the Light (which discovers you) and that Visions and Revelations are ceased; You love Darkness rather then Light, because your Deeds are evil, and so the Light is your Condemnation. And in this dark State you have caused many to Err, and strengthened the Hands of the Wicked that they turn not from their evil Wayes, whose Blood the Lord will require of you. For whether can you lead People who are thus blind, but into Darkness, Blindness, Dangers, Condemna∣tion and Destruction? as the foolish false Prophets and bruitish Pastors did, who followed their own Spirit, and had seen nothing, Ezek. 13. who destroyed the Flock that followed them, as you have done by seducing the People from the Anointing within them, for filthy Lucre, ye are the evil Men and Seducers spoken of, that wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, resisting
the Truth as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; but your Folly, Blindness and Madness is making manifest, as theirs was, and ye shall proceed no further, but to fill up the measure of your Fathers, as they did who opposed and cryed against the Light of the World, as you do in your Day. Therefore I warn and charge all you Blind Guides in the Name and Authority of the Lord God, cease de∣ceiving the People; cease preaching to them till ye have seen something, as the true Prophets and Apo∣stles of Christ did and do, (who have stood in his Counsel and caused the People to hear his Word, and turned them from their evil Wayes) as ye will answer it before him, & as ye would have the Guilt of the Blood of Souls wiped off you, which otherwise will sink you forever; and this is the Word of the Lord unto you, whether you hear or forbear. Let not your Pride, Ambition and filthy Lucre de∣ceive you any longer, for which you have deceived and beguiled Ignorant People these many Years, both Body and Soul, as Thieves and Robbers who have climbed up another way then by the Door Christ Jesus, the true Light that lighteth every Man that cometh into the World, stealing the words from your Neighbours to make a Trade and Gain of, as your former Brethren did, Jer. 23.30. And this shall as surely be laid to your Charge in the Day of your Account, as it was to theirs, against whom the Woes were denounced in their day, as ye may read, Jer. 23, 1, 30. Ezek. 13.3. Zech. 11.17. Mat. 23. And how can you declare and preach and talk to others of God whom ye know not? For all who deny Revelation and Vision know not God, as its written, Mat. 11.27. No Man knoweth the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any Man
the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him: So that without Revelation ye can have no Knowledge of God. So you that deny Revelation speak only by Hear say of your Neighbours Words, which ye steal (as aforesaid) for your Bellies sake, and are as blind and Ignorant of the true God as your Brethren, declared against by Isaiah, Chap. 56.10, 11, 12. His Watch-men are Blind, they are all Ignorant, they are all Dumb Dogs, they cannot bark (to awaken the People) sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; yea, they are greedy Dogs, that can never have enough; and they are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own Way, every one for his Gain from his Quar∣ter, &c. See now if this be not your State, and exact parral∣lel; Do not you look to your own Way, and for your gain from your particular Quarter (or Parish) as they did, and are not you as void of true Understanding, and the Knowledge of the Lord as these Shepherds were? Examine your selves a little, every particular of you, and see if thou be not the Man, thou that hast thy Gain from thy Quarter, and yet denyes Revelations, and so thou denyst to know God, and so art an Heathen, and no Christian; for the Christians own Revelations and Visions, as may be read plentifully in the Scriptures of Truth, and they knew God, and had Fellowship with him, and walked in the Light, and saw his Glory in the Face of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.6. But you have seen nothing but Darkness who shut your Eyes and deny the Light, in which the Saints Fel∣lowship is, and God is Light, so you deny God, and Christ, and his People, and their Fellowship, and the Saints Inheritance which is in the Light, Col. 1.12. Acts 26.18.
So ye are without God in the World, and you speak in the Spirit of the World, and that Spirit it is that hears you, as John said, 1 Joh. 3.5. And its that Spirit that upholds you, to whom ye can speak Peace while they put into your Mouthes; but them that are redeemed from that Spirit by the precious Blood of Christ (as of a Lamb without Spot) and cannot put into your Mouthes, you prepare War against them, and Reproach them for your Bellies sake, which is your Godd, who mind Earthly things, Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose End will be Destruction, Murmurers and Complainers, walk∣ing after your own Ungodly Lusts, as your Brethren did, who cryed, Where is the Promise of his Coming; for since the Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were; Clouds without Rain, carried about with a Tempest, for whom the Blackness of Darkness (which you love) is reserved for∣ever, if ye Repent not speedily. For you cry, Since the Apostles dayes, Visions and Reve∣lations are ceased, and no Freedom to be expected here in this Life: So then this follows, No Knowledge of God here, nor no Sight of him here; but his Hand is shortned that he cannot save, and his Ear is heavy that he cannot hear; nothing but Blindness, Darkness and Bondage, (a Prison a dark Dungeon) can be expected here: This is the Conse∣quence and Effect of your Belief, Principle and Doctrine. O Miserable State! Miserable Comforters are ye all; surely the Lord never sent you with this Message to poor Captives; for his Messengers brought Glad-Tidings, they proclaimed Liberty and Freedom, and turned people from Darkness to the Light, from the Power of Satan (that captivated them) to the Power of God (that redeemed them) and they did and do witness plentious Redemption, Psal. 130.7. 103.8.
So you are false Messengers, your Message is false, and not from God, and you are False Ministers and False Teachers, and false Prophets, keeping People in Cap∣tivity and Bondage, ever learning (and so ever paying you) and never are able (by you) to come to the Know∣ledge of the Truth which makes free, Joh. 8.32. But the Children of Light have found you to be Ly∣ars, who witness the Lord's Hand is not shortened, &c. but Life and Immortality is brought to Light through the Gospel, which is the Power of God to Salvation to every one that believe and obey him; and this is Glad-Tidings to them now, as it was to Abraham, who saw Christ's Day and rejoyced, Joh. 8.56. So you are not of Abraham's Seed nor Belief, but of that Generation, from whom Light (or Sight) is with∣holden, as ye may read, for it is the Candle of the Wicked that is put out, who rebel against the Light, Job 38.15. and 21.17.24.13. And its your Iniquities and Sins have hid his Face, and with-holds good things from you: And its the Rebellious that dwell in a dry (or dark) Land, where ye are separated from the Sight and Presence of the Glory of God, and so no marvel ye cry Sight or Vision and Revelations are ceased, who speak what you see with your Father, the Prince of Darkness, whose Messengers ye are, and who do his Work. But the pure in Heart see God, who walk in the Path of the Just, which is as a shining Light which shines more and more to the perfect Day. So its the Corrupt Heart that cannot see God, and the corrupt mind, where Visions and Revelations are ceased: This is your State, Men of corrupt Minds, Reprobate con∣cerning the Faith, which purifieth the Heart, in which
holy Faith the Children of Light are builded, and build∣ing upon the Rock of Ages, which the Gates of Hell and Darkness cannot prevail against, blessed be the Name of the Lord for ever. But Night is upon you, that ye cannot divine, and ye have no Answer of God, the day is dark over you, the Sun is gone down from you, but is risen to them that fear his Name, with healing under his Wings; a Mystery to all you blind Physitions of no value, to whom Visions & Revelations are ceased, to whom the Knowledge of God is ceased, and Eternal Life is ceased, and Salvation and Hope of Deliverance is ceased, so ye may justly mur∣mur and complain (as ye do) and cry where is the Pro∣mise of his Coming? Who is come in the Clouds (Wit∣nesses) of Heaven out of your Sight, whose Eye the God of this World hath blinded, lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ which is the Image of the In∣visible God should shine unto you. 2 Cor. 4.4. But blessed be the Lord for ever, who hath caused his Day to dawn, and his Day-Star to arise in the Hearts of many, and his Son to shine as in a Morning without Clouds, which gives us to see his Salvation: And in the same Light do we see and witness against all you false Shepherds and Hirelings, filthy Dreamers and blind Guides, who have caused the People to err, and de∣stroyed them for lack of knowledge, who are ignorant of God and his Way of Truth, and speak Evil of it, whose Knowledge is only Natural, in which like bruit Beasts you are corrupting and sporting your selves with your own Deceivings, whose Mouthes God will stop and put to Silence (and the time is at hand) for its only our Bellies (your filthy Lucre) and your Ambition  opened them, and your Nakedness and
appear to the People, that yet see you not as you are. The Rocks and Mountains shall not be able to hide you from the Wrath of the Lamb which is kindled against you, for the Lord is against you. And the Lord will open the Eyes and Mouthes of Babes and Sucklings more and more, to the Manifesting and Confounding of you, and all that uphold you and follow you. And this was I moved and commanded of the Lord to write; and I am thus far clear of all your Blood, whether you hear or forbear. Who am a Lover of (and a Travellor for) the Well-fare of the Immortal Souls of People, William Bayly.
Postscript. THis is our Message (and this we declare, as mo∣ved of the Lord) That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: And he that saith, He hath Fellowship with him, and walks in Darkness, is a Lyar, 1 Joh. 1.6. And this God hath given his Son Christ Jesus a Light, to lighten the Gentiles (as well as the Jews) who is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that feareth God and worketh Righteousness is accepted of him: And he that be∣lieveth in him shall be saved, but he that believeth not in the Son of God shall be damned, John 3.18. And Christ Jesus, the Eternal Son of God, is the true Light, that lighteth every Man that cometh into the World, (this was John's Message, and this is ours) that all Men through him might believe: And this was Paul's Work, To turn People's Minds from Darkness to the Light: And Christ's Exhortation, To believe and walk in the Light, that People might become the Children of the Light, Joh. 12.35, 36. And a Talent (the Manifestation of the Spirit of God) is given to every Man to profit withal (which is Light) And all are left without Excuse before him in the Day of Account; where none will be Condemned because they had not a Tallent, but because they were Unprofi∣table Servants, and did not improve that which was given them of God: For the Condemnation is not, Because Light is wanting amongst the Sons and Daughters of
Men; but this is the Condemnation, That Light [is come] into the World, and Men love Darkness (that which is not of God) rather then Light, because their Deeds be Evil: For every one that doth Evil hateth the Light, neither cometh to the Light, lest his Deeds should be discovered and reproved; but he that doth Truth comes to the Light, &c. This is the Testimony of the Scriptures of Truth, John 3.19. And this true Light (which is Universal) is that Grace of God which hath appeared to all Men, which bringeth Salvation to them that believe and obey; of which the Apostle Paul declared to Titus, Chap. 2. which was their Teacher, that taught them to deny Ungodliness (that which is contrary to the Light) and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this [present] World. And by Grace they were saved through Faith [mark that] And this Grace is not of our selves, it is God's Gift, as ye may read, Ephes. 2.5. & 8. And it is Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, that sepa∣rates People from God, their Creator, who hath no Fel∣lowship with them that walk in Darkness; neither can any be reconciled to him, but as they depart from Ini∣quity, which is the Partition. Wall and Ground of Se∣paration between God and Man: For there is no Peace to the Wicked; and he that believeth not, the Wrath of God abides on him, as it is written, John .36. And all peo∣ple who believe not in the true Light (which they be lighted withal) are still in the Unbelief, and the Light is their Condemnation, according to the Testimony of Jesus Christ, the beloved Son of God, whom all are to hear, obey and follow. So all People who desire Life and Peace, and to escape the Wrath to come, Believe in the Light, and bring
your Deeds, Words and Thoughts to it, that they may be proved; and learn of the Grace of God which hath appeared to you, which is Truth, and is no Lye which Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, who lighteth eve∣ry Man that cometh into the World; a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and is the Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; and there is no other Name under Heaven whereby me shall be saved. So this is the Day of your Visitation; and happy will you be that obey the Lord, and turn at his Reproofs. But the Rebellious dwell in a dry Land, and the Pit wherein is no Water (of Refreshment) will be their Portion forever; and this shall ye all know in the End, and that you were warned hereof in true Love to your Immortal Souls, By W. B THE END.
