C3297 21.h.2[108] R36144 99890153 191297
arms of Charles II C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the King. A PROCLAMATION Enjoyning the Prosecution of all such Persons as shall Make or Utter any Farthings, Half-Pence, or Pence of Brass, or other base Metals, with Private Stamps. CHARLES R. WHereas His Majesty having by His Royal Proclamation of the Six∣teenth of August, in the Four and twentieth year of His Reign, forbid∣den the use of all Private Farthings, did cause sufficient quantities of Copper Farthings and Half-Pence of the Intrinsique value, to be Coyned for the general good and convenience of His Subjects; Never∣theless, His Majesty hath been informed, That several Persons and Corporations remote from London, have forborn to Call in their Private Far∣things, and do still presume to make use of, and utter the same; whereby they not onely continue to Violate the Laws of this Kingdom, and Defraud His Majesties good Subjects, but hinder the Vending of those Half-Pence and Far∣things which are provided for necessary Exchange, which would have been ere this time dispersed in those parts, if the said Abuses of Stamping and Vttering of Private Farthings had been duely Suppressed. His Majesty therefore, to the end that all Offenders in the Premisses, who are now left without excuse, may know the danger they daily incur, and desist from any further proceeding in the like kind, hath thought fit by this His Royal Proclamation, to Publish and Declare His Royal Will and Pleasure to be, That a strict and severe Enquiry shall be made of all persons that shall after the Second day of February next ensuing, Stamp, or cause to be Stamped, Vend, Vtter, or any way make use of in Payment or Ex∣change, any Half-Pence, Farthings, or pieces of Brass, Copper, or other base Me∣tals whatsoever, other then the Half-Pence and Farthings by His Majesties Royal Proclamation Authorized and Allowed; And whosoever shall be found culpable therein, shall be severely punished. And for that purpose, His Majesty doth hereby Will and Command all His Iudges, Iustices of Assize, Iustices of the Peace, and all other inferiour Officers and Ministers of Iustice whatsoever, That they take care at their several and respective Courts, Assizes, Quarter-Sessions, and other in∣feriour Courts, that have, or may have Conuzance, or Punishment of the said Offences, That after the said Second day of February, they cause all such as shall Offend in the Premisses, to be proceeded against and Punished as they shall deserve. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Fifth day of December, 1674, in the Six and twentieth year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.
