E2635 [ocm]10285326 204651
AN ORDER FROM THE HOVSE Of Commons in Parliament, Assembled for the Protection and rescuing of any Member of the House, that shall bee attached without Order from the House. As also, An Order for their sitting at Grocers-hall: With a Discovery of 1500. of Armes, provided by the Arch-Bishop of Yorke. January the 6. 1641. arms of Charles I C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE London Printed by The: Paine, in Red-Crosse-streete 1641.
January the 6. 1641. REport came to the Com∣mittee of the House of Commons, sitting at Guild-Hall in London, that John Williams, Arch-Bishop of Yorke, late Bishop of Lincolne, provided 1500. Armes, which hee bargained with one Mr. Nalian, in Baldens Rents, in Grays-Inne-Layne, at fourteene pound the score, to provide for him, all which was done but some few daies before the said Bishop of Yorke with the other 11. Bishops were Committed to the Tower for high Trea∣son: And these Armes, the Complainant doth not doubt but to discover where they are to be found.
Also the said Gentleman (who discovered this plot, being a Gentleman of the Inner Temple,) did report to some freinds of his that he went with the Cavileroes at White Hall: and hee protested that it greived him to see what deboist men the Cavelist were. And he demanded fo some of them, whether they did not intend to stand out against the Par∣liament especialy against M. Pimme, &, And one of them answered to this effect, that he loved M. Pimme from the bottome of his hart, he knew him to be so honest a Gentleman and so harmles: and moreover they said that the would not by any meanes offer the least hurt in the world to any Member of the House. But they said, that they had a good mind to pil∣lidge the City. There was a debate about there sitting on the morrow being Fryday, the 7. of Ianu. 1641. about their sitting in some more conveni∣ent place. Some propounded Guild Hall to be a convenient plac, in respect (not only of that Hal alone but) because Haberdashers Hall is so nere to it also. others thought Grocers Hall fitter for the purpose, &c. Resolved upon the question. THat the Committee should meete on the next day (being Fryday, at Grocers Hall.
An Order by the house of Commons. 1641. IT is this Day Re∣solved, upon the Question, and Ordered by the Commons House of PARLIAMENT, that if any Per∣sons what-soever, shall come to the Lodgings, of any Member of this House, and there to offer
to Seale the Trunkes, Doores, or Papers of any Member of the House, or to Seize upon their Per∣sons; that then such Members shall require the Ayde of the Con∣stables to keepe such Persons in safe Custodie, till this House doe give further Order. And this House doth further Declare, that If any Person what-soever, shall offer to Arest, or Detaine the Person of any Member of this house, without first acquainting this house there∣with, and receiving further Or∣der from this house: That it is lawfull for such Members, or any Person, to
Asist, and to stand upon his, or their Gvard or Defence, and to make Resistance, according to the Protestation taken, to defend the Priveledges of the Parliament. This was Redd three times at the Guild-Hall, in the presence of many thousand Citizens, with great accla∣mation and joy. God save the KING. FINIS.
