E3829 C.121.g.9[52] R229213 99888242 201023
An excellent new Song, Much in Request. Of a young Maid that built Castles in the Air, and at last was forced to take a Cobler to her Fair. I Am a maid of beauty bright, Who doth in pleasures take delight, And if I might have to my mind, I would no grief not crosses find, I would my youthful fancy please, Likewise live and take my case, From worldly care and labour free, For work will never with me agree, I would some Barron would marry me, Or some great Lord of high degree, That I in my gilded Coach might ride With Leckies running by my side, And when I sit me down to meat I would choice of musick sweet To charm my senses with the sound, Let me be with these blessings crownd. And in the sumptuous bed of down, Rocked in the arms of high renown, I would pass the silent night, And ripe the pleasure of delight, I will wear rich Corners every day Silks and Satins fine and gay, Decked up with Jewels and Diamond Pearl, Then I should seem a tearing Girl, THE REPLY. But mark what after came to pass, While this youthful bonny Lass, Was building Castles in the air, A Cobler till her did appear, And says and thou will be my Wife, We'll live together a merry life, Although I have no estate at all We will work rogether in the stall, Begone you poor and handy Knave, Does thou imagine that I will have A Cobler void of common sense, Take up your aulls, and get you hence. Shall I spin shop-threed in your stall, Or be at such a rascals call, I hope I have a noble peer, To live in glory and splendor here. O Jenny, then the Cobler cryed, Are you addicted so to pride, Nay then in truth farewell, adieu, I hope to have as good as you. He turned about to go his way, She straight intreated him to stay, And says what makes you on such haste▪ For what I spoke was but in jest. Although I mighty things did aim▪ Yet since your love to me did come, I will take a Cobler, then she said, Ere I do longer live a maid. And these two lovingly agreed, And they were married with speed. Here ye may see what maids will do Ere they will keep their maiden-head. FINIS.
