F1953 R39549 [ocm]18429067 154423
To Friends in Barbadoes, Virginia, Maryland, New-England, and els∣where. OH Friends, You all that have tasted of the Power of the LORD GOD, and of his Truth, that is pure, and doth not admit of any impurity nor change. O therefore the holy Truth mind, which will let nothing that is unholy live: for nothing that is un∣holy can enter into the Kingdom of God; and no disobedi∣ence to Truth must enter into the Paradise of God: for the cause of disobedience was Man and Woman put out of Para∣dise. And therefore all every-where mind the pure Power of the Lord God, and the Truth which first convinced you; and whatsoever is gotten up through the Reason, and your Eyes going from the Power of God, and that which doth con∣vince you, let that be purged out of your hearts; if not, it will lift up your hearts to consultations and subtilty, question∣ings, reasonings and disputes. Oh I feel too much that hath gotten up into the wrong understanding part, through which wrong liberty gets up, which will bring a plague in the heart, which is worse than an outward Plague. O therefore consider the Life and the Power of God hath not the supream in all; for I feel some minds, and some bodies, have let in that which hath defiled them, and doth defile them: O cleanse, cleanse, clean, and joyn to the pure immortal Power; for the Power of the LORD GOD will make room for it self either in cleansing, or in vomiting, or casting out them; and that that doth not joyn to the Power of God, Sodom that whorish and adultrous spirit, it must to the Fire, and gainsaying Core into the Earth; and it will throw down that which hath been
ifted up; the Beesom of the Lord is going forth to sweep, the Candle of the Lord is lighted to search every corner of your houses; for the Just walks in the path which is a shining-light, which admits of no rubbish in his path. O come out of all these things which you have entertained in your minds, which you received not from them that came to minister unto you in the beginning. Oh dwell in the Power of the Lord God, for to keep you low; and O take heed of getting up into Conceitedness and the Air; and to set up that which per∣tains not to the Kingdom of God, but to strife, which never the Apostles, nor the Saints since, in the Power of God set up; for if you do, the Power of God will clense it and you all away. And O you that come to be Vessels of Honour, and Vessels of the Mercies of God, O have esteem of your Bodies: for such as defile their Bodies, are neither Vessels of Honour, nor Ves∣sels of the Mercies, but of Wrath and for the Wrath: therfore keep out Strife, keep out Fornication and the Adulterous Spi∣rit; keep out Lust of the Eye, Lusts of the Flesh, and Pride of Life, which is not of the Father, that that which is of the Father may be received and have an entrance into every vessel. O be not lifted up with a vain mind; and let Balaam be slain that erreth from the Spirit, and raiseth stumbling-blocks; and such as keep nor their first habitation in the Power of God and his Truth, become Enemies to such as be Heirs of the King∣dom and the Power of an endless life. Therefore all Friends and People, mind that which first convinced you, that Power of God which first awakened you, and arise and live in it, that all your eyes, minds and hearts may be kept single and naked o God and one another, and uncloathed of all that which is contrary, and is got up since: for the Seed and the Life of Christ Jesus reigns and rules, Glory to him for ever. I have been uncapable to write or receive Writing a long time, or to speak or be spoken to, but have been as a Man buried alive, and the Sepulcher watched as with a Sword and a Gun, for else I should have writ to you before now; and
therefore, O dear Friends, give no occasion of stumb keep tender; for hardness of heart is worse than an outwa plague, for that brings destruction many wayes: and so grie not the Spirit in others, nor in your selves. And whatsoeve is decent and comely, follow; honest and of a good repor that makes for Peace, and not for Strife, under pretence Love; for that's not of God: for God who is Love, is the Author of Strife and Confusion, but of Peace. So I¦sire you to let Copies of this be sent into Virginia, Marylan and New-England, to be read amongst Friends in all th Meetings. Things are pretty well here, Friends being in Love and Unity, and the dread of the Lord God is amongst us, who raigns and will raign. G. F. London 29th of the 9th Month, 1666.
