I483 G. 5869[56] R226152 R232443 R226152 99886545 186765
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR JE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other BY THE Lords-Justices and COUNCIL, A PROCLAMATION. CHARLES PORTER, THO: CONINGESBY. WHEREAS By Our Proclamation of the fifteenth of June last past, in serious consideration of the then deplorable state of this Kingdom, We did enjoyn and command that the first Friday in every succeeding Month during the War should solemnly and devout∣ly be observed (as it hath ever since been) as a Monthly Fast to be kept throughout all places under Their Majesties Obedience, by Solemn Hu∣miliation and Repentance of our Sins, to depre∣cate his Deserved Iudgments, and implore his undeserved Mercies to this poor afflicted King∣dom. And forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of his Infinite Goodness, in answer to the Prayers offered up on that occasion, to protect His Majesty from great and manifold Dangers, in His late Expedition beyond the Seas, and to bring him back in safety, and to preserve Their Majesties and Their Government against all the wicked Machi∣nations and Designs of Open and Secret Enemies, and by a wonderful suc∣cess of Their Arms to reduce this Kingdom of Ireland entirely to Their Obe∣dience notwithstanding the Powerful Support of France. We therefore with all Humility adoring the Mercy of the Divine Providence manifested to Them and Their People, and duly considering that Publick & Signal Blessings do call for Publick and Solemn Acknowledgments, Have thought fit, and do hereby Ap∣point and Command, that a General and Publick Thanksgiving to Almighty God the Giver of all Victory be observed for these Great Blessings throughout this whole Kingdom on Thursday the Twenty sixth day of this present No∣vember, and for the better and more orderly solemnizing of the same have caused a Form of Prayer suitable to this occasion to be composed by the Bishops of this Kingdom, to be used in all Churches, Chappels and other places of Publick Worship, and to take care for the timely dispersing of the same through their respective Diocesses: And We do strictly Charge and Command that the said day of Publick Thanksgiving be Religiously observed by all Their Maje∣sties Loving Subjects as they tender the Favour of Almighty God and the Punishment the Law can inflict upon the Contempt or Neglect thereof. And lastly, We Command that this Our Proclamation be Read to the People there assembled the Sunday before the said day of Thanksgiving, that none may pre∣tend Ignorance of these Our Commands and their own Duty. Given at the Council-Chamber the 9th day of November, 1691. Fran. Dublin, Longford, Drogheda, Anth. Meath, Ri. Pine, Jno Hely. GOD Save the KING and QUEEN Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook Assignee of Benjamin Tooke Printer to the King and Queen at their Majesties Printing-House on Ormonde-Key 1691.
