I440 G. 5869[9] R226105 99886505 186718
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE JE MEIN TIEN DRAY BY THE LORDS JUSTICES Of IRELAND, A PROCLAMATION. Sydney, Tho. Coningsby. WHereas several Persons, in the Habits of Private Soul∣diers, without sufficient Passes from their Officers, not being inlisted in the Regiments of Colonel Foulkes, and Colonel Herbert, who are at present the only part of their Majesties Army that are Quartered by Au∣thority within this City of Dublin, and the Suburbs and Liberties of the same, daily resort to the said City, it's Suburbs and Liberties, whereby Disorders fre∣quently happen, and the Government is endangered, It being easy for their Majesties Enemies to and We are informed that several have, sheltred themselves un∣der such Habits. We do therefore, hereby will and require the Lord Mayor, She∣riffs, Iustices, of the Peace, and all Magistrates and Officers of the said City, Suburbs, and Liberties, from time to time, as often as there shall be occasion, to apprehend all Persons in the Habits of Private Souldiers, who shall be found in the said City, Suburbs, and Liberties, not being enlisted in the said Regiments, or at present lodging in the Hospital at Killmainham, or such, as shall hereafter be Quartered in the said City, Suburbs, or Liberties, by Authority from Vs: And them so apprehended to bring before the said Collonel Foulkes, or the Governour of the City of Dublin, for the time being, that they may be proceeded with as Deser∣ters, and such as run from their Colours. And We hereby discharge all their Majesties Subjects of this City, Suburbs, and Liberties, from Quartering any Souldiers whatsoever, but such as shall bring Billets from the Sheriffs, or Con∣stables, and the Sheriffs and Constables are to give Billets to none, but to Officers and Souldiers of the two Regiments above-mentioned, and such others as We shall hereafter direct. Given at their Majesties Castle of Dublin the Seventh day of October, 1690. And in the Second Year of their Majesties Reign. God Save the KING and QUEEN, JON. DAVIS. DƲBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Assignee of Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesties; and are to be sold on Ormonde-Key.
