I869 C.21.f.12[23] G.6022[24] R225852 99886336 186595
I R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the other BY THE LORD DEPUTY AND COUNCIL. TYRCONNELL. WHEREAS several Merchants of this Kingdom have driven a considerable Trade in salting of Sal∣mon, and making them up in many parcels, and transporting them beyond the seas, which brought to them considerable Returns, that We have had of late great Complaints of a considerable decay in the said Trade by the scarcity of Salmons in the several Rivers within this Kingdom: Which is much occasioned, as We are informed, by the un∣lawful destruction of the Salmon-frie; and of kil∣ling Salmon at unseasonable times of the Year, contrary to the known Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom. And the said Matters being taken into consideration, We the Lord Deputy and Council, for the prevention of the said Mischief, and for the encrease of the Salmon trade within this Realm; Do hereby require all Iusti∣ces, Iudges of Assize and Goal-Delivery, Iustices of the Peace, and other Magistrates and Officers within this His Majesties Kingdom, to take parti∣cular Care that all the Statutes in force in this Kingdom for the preservation of the young Spawn, Frie, or Breed of Salmon, as well in salt Rivers as in fresh Rivers, Loghs, Plashes and Marishes within this Kingdom be put in Execution. And also all Statutes prohibiting the Killing and Destroying of Salmon at unseasonable times of the year. And that all Offenders against all or any of the said Statutes be prosecuted and proceeded against according to the utmost Rigour of the Law. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin the 7th. Day of March, 1686. A. Fytton C. Franc. Dublin. Granard P. Clanricarde. Tyrone. Longford. Lymerick. Gormonston. Galmoy. Rosse. John Davys. Rob. Hamilton. Tho. Newcomen. N. Purcell. GOD SAVE THE KING. DUBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham Assigns of Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty; And are to be Sold by Andrew Crook at His Ma∣jesties Printing-House on Ormonde-Key, and by Samuel Helsham at the Colledge-Arms in Castle-Street. 1686.
