M2754 99829446 207135
ALLEGATIONS In behalf of the High and Mighty Princess THE LADY MARY, NOW Queen of Scots, Against the Opinions and Books set forth in the Part and Favour of the LADY KATHERINE, And the rest of the Issues of the French Queen, Touching the Succession of the Crown. Written in the Time of QUEEN ELIZABETH. London, Printed by J. D. in the Year 1690.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. I Thought it not improper to subjoin the following Trea∣tise, written by a Lawyer in Queen Elizabeth's Time, whether ever printed or no I cannot say, in favour of the Title of the Queen of Scots, against the Pretences of the Lady Katherine, descended from the French Queen, Sister to H. 8. and married to Charles Bran∣don, Duke of Suffolk. The Author shews himself skill'd in the Civil, as well as the Common Law; and tho he had occasion to maintain a strict Right of Succes∣sion to the next in the Line, according to which he will have it, that H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. with-held the Crown by wrong; Which I sup∣pose proceeded from his not observing what Parliamentary Confirma∣tions their Possessions had; Yet himself says, That we are all bound in Reason, to have always more regard to the State and Dignity of the whole Weal Publick, than of the private Preferment or Commodity of any particular Person. Nay, he says it appears from History, that many Princes settled in their Kingdoms, have been judged unworthy of their Cal∣lings, for what would now be look'd on as a very slight Matter. And many things he speaks with great Judgment, which tend to∣wards the justification of what has lately been done for the Publick-Weal, and Preservation of the State and Dignity of this Realm.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER. AS every man may thinke it very necessary, bothe for the greate weale, and greate quyetnes of this State, to know certenly, to whome, of right, the Honour and Dig∣nitie of this Imperiall State, and Crowne of this Realme of England shuld fall, or descend unto (yf ought shuld happe to Queene Elizabeth our supreame and most gra∣ciouse Governour) whome it may please God longe to prosper with longe Lyfe, good Husband, and meny Children, to her Highnes contentation, and the generall weale and reastfull dayes bothe of her Majestie, and of the whole Realme: So thinke I that none can lyke well, that any, with eny coloured or deceyueable meane or argument, shuld go about to sette forth or perswade the naturall and lovinge Subjectes thereof; that the Succession appertayned to those, that in deede have no just Right, Title, or Interest to the same. And ther∣fore because some have endevored themselfes by wrytinge to shew, that the Succession apperteyned unto the Lady K. Grey, the which, as may appeerr, by no dyrect right or reason, can pretend eny just Title or Clayme thereunto. I have not thought it unfitt, heerby to shew the state and troth therof more playnly, to such, that ells, either by such practises, or ells by such workes, mought otherwyse rest deceyvid. And that I shal be thus occasionyd to utter heerin, neither is, nor shal∣be with eny mynd or motion to offer eny injury, or to stayne or spotte the Name or Honour of eny, but onely to answer those Ar∣gumentes, the which as they be grounded upon no truth, ar so, worthy of no favour. And to answer therin, without wrestinge or applyenge eny case otherwyse, then the state of the mater doth most playnly and truely crave the pronunciation of the Law. So that yf any thyng be sayd, it is the very necessitie of the cause, so necessa∣relie for this state and this tyme, to be thus touched, and the judg∣ment of the Law towchinge the same, that speakith or vtterith eny thinge, and ells no other disposition. And bicause our Bond and Duty is rather to haue regard of the State and Dignity of the whole Weale Publik, and of the good successe, prosperyte and quietnesse therof, then of the undue title, or interest, of eny particuler person or persons. I trust this travaile may the rather be acceptid and taken in better parte.
And so to the Matter. First to the illegitimacion of the Lady K. and the reste of th' Issues of the Frenche Q. And after of theyr Force or Interest by the Wyll. Touchinge the First. It is notorious and well inough knowne, that when Charles Brandon Duke of Suff. maryed with the Lady Mary the Frenche Q. that he had then an other Wyfe lyvinge, which was the Lady Margaret Mortimer, with whome after mariage he li∣ved dyvers yeres as lawfull Man and Wyfe: and after upon certayn discorde betweene theim, of his owne motion, without any fourme or maner of lawfull judgement, that he seperated him selfe from her and forsoke her. And what rashnes or rather foly may it be comp∣tid, to reply or wryte against so manyfest a troth with conjectures? as to say, it is not likely that K. Henry wold ever have consented that his Sister should mary one which had an other Wyfe lyvinge. Since that ther is yet so meny lyvely Wittnesses, the which of certeyn knowledge can be Testes, The saide Charles mat∣chid with the Frenche Queene 1515. She di∣ed Anno. 1532. La. Mortimer died An. 1533. that Charles Brandon and the Lady Morti∣mer wer Man and Wyfe, and have seene and did know the Lady Mortimer longe after the mariage, yea, and peradventure after the death of the said French Q. And touchinge the K. although it is to be thought, that yf he had known that the Duke had had an other Wyfe lyving, that he wold not have consentyd that his Sister shold have maryed him: It might be notwithstanding full well, and it is possible that yet he had one, and that the Kinge mought not know thereof. For as Princes have ben the greater or the mightier, so much the lesse, comonly, have they ben wontyd to understand of the doinges in such maters of pryvate Persons. But in this case ther be as perfecte Clerkes, and of as goode understandinge as any were, at th' advise of these Bookes abrode, that ar of opinion cer∣ten, that the French Q. and the Duke wer matchid before the Kinge was prevy thereof: and some Pardon or Pardons obteyned for the same, upon small search, may happen to be founde that may te∣stifye as much; and of necessity, we can no otherwyse thinke, but that it was so: Synce that as much as is sayd of the Lady Mortimer, may be affirmyd by the sayd Witnesses as a thinge most certeyne and notorious. The which beinge true, then is it certeyn that the Lady Mary, the said French Q. cold not be his lawfull Wyfe. And that the said Charles, Duke of Suff. could not lyve with her but in Adul∣tery. For the wordes of the Lorde be playne. Mar. 19. & Marc. 10. Quicun{que} dimise∣rit uxorem, nisi ob fornicationem, & aliam duxerit, maechatur. Et qui dimissam duxerit, maechatur. Nowe that one borne in Adultery, and notwithstanding is legitimate, that cannot be: And therefore the Lady K. beinge comme of one not legitimatly borne, cannot inhe∣rite, or be capable of the Crowne. And heerin it is to litle pur∣pose to cavill with Canons or Decretalles of the Pope, against the playne and manifest Word of God, from whose usurped Power, as this Realme is most happely delyvered; so hath his Lawes in the same loste their force and vigore. But admitte that the Pope's Lawe had in England any Authoryte, at least it shuld be an impious
thing in what place soever it wer, where the Worde of God is so cleere and certen, to sticke rather to the Pope's Law, then to the Lawe of God. Parnormi in ca. super ii∣la de secundis nuptiis. But all this notwithstandinge, lette us see what Reasons they be besydes, that ar brought in the favour of the Lady K. One is, forsooth, that the Lady Mary, the French Q. and the Duke of Suff. havinge lyved meny yeres togither as Man and Wyfe, and their Matrimony celebrated publikly in the face of the Churche, without eny thinge sayd agaynst theim duringe their lyves; that therfore though he had twenty Wyves then lyvinge, that yet the Children of the Queene and Duke are to be taken no other then as legitimate. And th' other, that it is sufficyent for the legitimation of their Children, that the French Q. seemyd to have no knowledge that he had eny other Wyfe lyvinge. To these greate Reasons, and their Authority, it is easy ynnough to answer. For it is a Maxime in the Civill Lawe, That that which from the beginninge is not good or lawfull, cannot with eny Processe of tyme be betteryd. L. quod mitio ff. de regu. juris. And therfore the Matrymony not beinge lawfull at the first, no tyme is sufficyent or able to make it lawfull. And yf that which is sayde of the long contynuance of the Matrymony, without eny thinge sayd agaynst it, had ben such to have comme in eny consideration, it might have had some colour or shew of reason; the rather, yf the parsons agaynst whom eny such controversie shuld have rysen, had ben of such degree or condi∣tion, as eny might freely have proceedid against theim. But they were Princes, the Woman the Kinge's Syster, and the Man a Duke, and in greate favour with the Prince, in such sorte, that the greate and the iminent danger and perill that did depend therof, was, and is the aparaunt and manifest cause why no Man did or durst begin with theim, or attempt eny such matter, and specially in a thinge that touchid any whitte the displeasure or dishonour of the Kinge himselfe: And therfore that long contynuance in Matrimony, after that sort, without controversy, is not to be countyd for quiet and peaceable, but rather injurious and violent. Arg. l. in. fi. C. de ann. exe. & l. 1. §. si quis autem ff. de iti. act. pri. C. quia. de conces. pre. l. §. 1. ff. quod vi aut clam. & l. de pupillo. §. si quis ff. de ope. noui nun. cum ibi not. per Bar. & a∣lios. And such as can∣not help eny thing to the legitimation of the Children born in Adul∣tery. To th'other, touching the ignorance of the Queen, although it were graunted, that some ignorance, in some sort, might the rather shadow the illegitimation of the Children; yet it is not therfore that every kynde or sorte of ignorance mought be acceptid to bolster forth such causes, but a probable ignorance: for the Lawe tendith to the favour of the vigilent and diligent in their own causes, and not to the wilfull, sloathfull, or negligent. And those that con∣tractith with eny, they ought to know and understand eche of the others State and Condition, l. qui cum alio contrahic. ff. de regu. ju∣ris. and not to understand that is com∣monly brutyd, is to be attributed unto the Parties default. l. quod verba ff. de pon. & l. siut certo. §. nunc videndum. si. commo. cum ibi notatis. And such a kind of ignorance is callid a Voluntary, or ellis a dessembled Ignorance, and helpith nothing to the ligitimation of the Children, the Matrimony beinge contrary to the publike Lawe of Honesty, even by the Canonicall and Civill Law; Cap. cum inhibitio. de clan. desp. for synce Charles Bran∣don, after Duke of Suff. had lyved with the first Wyfe so long, being of such a callinge, and she his Wyfe, of such a House, and such a Lyvinge, and in the same Countrey; It had ben very easy, with eny
never so little a diligence used, to have come to the knowledge, whether he had had eny other Wyfe lyvinge, or no. And the Lawe entendith, that one that either doth understand, or ells is in abilitie easily to understand, to be all one. l. pen. ff. ad maced. l. in bonorum. in fine ff. de bo∣norum poss. Since then the French Q. yf she had lyked eny thinge to have herkened, searched, or demaundid, moght easely have had intelligence, whether the Duke had eny Wyfe lyving or no; It is as much as if she had known it: so doth it manifestly appeere that the Children born in such Matrimony, can∣not, by eny meane, be reputyd or taken for legitimate, or able to eny Enheritance, and much lesse of the Crowne, synce that for the Honor and Dignitie of the Realme, whosoever shuld be worthy or capable of the Crowne, it is meete, that not onely they shuld be free from eny stayne or spotte, but also from all suspicion of eny. As Julius Cesar sayd of his House, when, for the onely suspicion of Adultery, he did put away his Wyfe, sayenge; That the House of Cesar ought not only to be without Vyce, but also without all suspicion of eny. Besydes, if you should consent to put your selfes in subjection to such so unworthely born; Behold, and consyder, I pray you, by the way, how farre off yow should shew your selfes inferior in con∣sideration, from the many and noble Examples left unto us by other Countreys, as particulerly of later Memory, by the Noble Nation of the Spayniardes. Where a Daughter beinge borne of the Queene, Wyfe to Hen. 3. Kinge of Castile, and most speache, great pre∣sumptions and secreat murmuracion therof passinge, that not the Kinge, but an Adulterer, shuld be the Father therof. The Barons, Earles, and other Nobles of the Realme, did assemble together; and consydering what spotte and infamy it shuld be unto the whole Nation and Countrey, yf in time cominge they shuld have their Q. a Woman thoght of, and esteemyd but as a Bastard, did not only deliberate not to acknowledge, or not allowe of her as legi∣timat Heyre of the Realme, after the death of the Kinge; The Case of the putative Prince of Wales. But wold without delay be dischargid, and assurid from that gratte dishonor and infamy. And therupon so became most humble Suters to the K. that as it apperteynid unto the Honour and Dignitie of him and of the whole Realme; It moght so please him to repudiate the Q. as Adulteresse, and declare that Daughter not to be his, but borne in Adultery. Shewing him besydes, that yf he wuld not have regard unto his owne Honour, and to do that, that touched so much his Estate, and the Dignytie of the whole Countrey; that they, for their partes, could not, nor would not so much forget their Duties to suffer it. But rather determyned to depose him, as a Man that made small compt, either of his Callinge or Honour, and therefore unworthy of the Crowne. By which yow may see how farre such Occasions may sometymes cary Men past the termes of their Cal∣linges; wherof did grow afterward greate Contention, and finally that Daughter never admittyd unto the Crowne, but the Succession transferred unto the Lady Isabell, Sister of the K. A Queene, for her Valour and rare Vertues, of great Fame and Renowne. And yet, notwithstanding, accordinge to the Canonicall Lawe, (of force and strength in such Cases as most proper Judge) although the Adultery of the Queen indeed wer more then manifest, yet moght they have presumyd that the Child had ben rather of the Husband,
then of the Adulterer; so favorable are those Lawes unto the Birth. But those Noble Men, as jelous of the Honour, Fame, and Reputa∣cion of their Countrey, did thinke that it importyd a great deal more to maynteyne and assure the Dignitie of the whole Realme, refusinge a Person of doubtfull Birth, then to have respecte unto the particuler Interest of that Child. And thus tendrid these so much this Honour, that they could not, nor wold not tary the tyme to entreate of the Succession, when it shuld happe, but wold, by and by, put the mater out of doubt. And you, when it is so needfull, and the tyme doth so require it, to knowe one certeynly for your Prynce and just Governour heerafter; Will you make no compt herof? They, I say, for these respectes, did refuse one, that ac∣cording to th' ordinary course of the Law, they moght easely have presumed of to have ben legitimate: And will yow submitte your selfes to a person, that, accordinge to the ordinary and Canon Rule and Order of the Lawe, is so manifestly knowen, taken and shewyd, discendid playnely as illegitimate? Oh take heede, for yf ever this happe in your Heddes, what other thinge will it turne or growe un∣to, but vnto an open and universall declaration unto all the World, that yow, betweene Honour and Dishonour, Right or Wronge, causes of Prosperyte or Ruyne, do make no difference at all: Which opinion once conceyvid of yow, boast, bragge, or compare after, the Nobilitie or Excellency of your Countrey, or the Stoutenesse of your Selfes, with other Nations, ye may well ynuough; but whoe wyll not rather mocke or scorne at your madnesse or folly, then be∣leeue yow as of eny Reason or Judgment? And this that is sayd (as is before touchid) hath auctoryte, and is, both accordinge to Divine, Canon, and Civill Lawe, and besydes, accordinge to the Lawe of Nature and Reason. But though we shuld admitte, that by the Canon Lawe theise descendentes of the French Q. were to be tolleratyd or allowid as legitimate, yet doth it not follow, for all that, that in this Realme they ought to be ta∣ken or accompted for ligitimate or inheritable: Bicause that for eny to be borne legitimate, heritable or Bastard Heere, is judged, not accordinge to the Canon Law, but accordinge to the Lawe of the Realme. And this doth appeere manifestly, by the Statute of Merton, Cap. 9. Where the Bishops instanced the Lordes, that they wold consent that all such as wer borne before Matrimony, shuld be legitimate according to the Canon Lawe, as well as they that wer borne within Matrimony. Which could not be obteyned; but determination made, that they shuld stande unto the Lawes of the Realme, and not unto the Canons: And that one borne of a second Wyfe (the first still lyvinge, by occasion of ignorance, that the se∣cond Wyfe may pretend, that the Husband had no other Wyfe alyve) shuld be taken or compted for ligitimate or inheritable, is not aucto∣rized by our Lawe. But playnly the contrary, as may appear by Bracton, Glandvill, Britton, Parkins, and the whole course of the Lawe. Wherfore to alledge that it is not lawfull to compt such for Bastardes after their death, though during their Lyfe they wer ta∣ken or compted for no other, then as legitimate, is a poore healpe, a slender proof, and to this purpose makith nothinge at all; for Litle∣ton, Cap. of Discentes doth declare, that this continuance to purge
the Bastardy, is not to be alleadgid in every sorte of Bastardie, but in that onely that is born of the Woman that the Father doth after mary, with other Circumstances, as may appeer, farre from this Mater. But to object that heerin might further have fortunyd, though peradventure there hapt never eny such mater, because no∣thinge may be thought of now, or ells remembrid heerafter, that in this case to the uttermost that might have chaunsed, may not pre∣sently be fully sayd unto, and answeryd; Let us admitte, for the sal∣vinge of the Bastardy of these Issues, that the Pope's Bulle mought have been obteynid, (which though both agaynst eny godly and lawful Matrimony, and agaynst the Law of the Lande, perhappes, mought easely have been compassed) yet notwithstandinge shuld the same have made as little to the purpose, as th' other proper Reasons before alledgid: For such a Bulle (though it had ben of valour in England, as it is neither now, nor yet ever was when the Pope was heere in greatist Authoryte) shuld either haue pronounced and de∣clared the same Children to haue ben legitimately borne; or ells of Bastardes, it shuld have made theim legitimate. In as moche as it shuld have declarid theim to haue ben legiti∣mately borne, it had ben needefull that it shuld haue ben with pro∣nuncinge the Matrimony with the said Queene and Duke legiti∣mate, notwithstandinge the other Wyfe had ben alyue; and that could not have ben grauntyd, (the case being as it was) but vpon some false or fayned surmise. And therfore, accordinge to their owne Lawes or Canons, it shuld haue ben of no force or valour. But let it haue ben accordinge to what Canon they had lysted; the Com∣mon Law of this Realme of England shuld never haue ben bounden by any such Bulle, and specially when the mater vpon eny Poynt of Illegitimacion is to be callid in question, by reason of eny Issue joy∣ned vpon Bastardie, after the death of the Parties, which ar to be impeached as Bastardes, by reason of eny second, or other Mariage, during the Lyfe of the first Wyfe, the same being never upon eny Sute at the Common Lawe brought in Question, whilest the parties in whome Bastardie is not allegid, lyvid. Vid. Bracton, F. 216. upon the Statute of Merton, he men∣tions a special return at that time required. Of which more in the second Part. The greatest doubt that in such case mought haue hapt, is, that if the mater had ben callid in question at the Common Law, duringe the Pope's Jurisdiction in the Lyues of eny of the Children of the said Duke and the Frenche Queene (which be now all deceassed) and an Issue had ben joined vpon general Bastardy, or vpon some other generall Issue of Divorce, the same shuld then haue ben tried by the Certificate of the Ordina∣ry; and therby, perhaps, by somme such sleightful Certificate, the vnlawfull Doings of the Pope (if eny such had ben in his tyme) might so haue ben allowed covertly. But allowing it were triable at this day by the Ordinary, the Pope's Dispensation carryeth not in our Law the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary; nor is not so to be re∣ceyvid, but it must recyve a Tryal directly by th' Ordinary, whose Certificate must proceede accordinge to such mater as may informe a Truthe, or ells it must receyve the Tryall by a Jury of twelve Men, according to the common usage of Tryalles. And whoe can thinke, if the cause of eny such separation, stirred upon no just Motion, but onely of corrupte or fleshly disposition, shuld come now in question; that either eny Ordinary, or ells eny Jury, in so
playne and open Bastardy, wold either so farre forgeete or hazard theimselfes, or elles exceede the Bondes of their Dutyes to God, their Countrey, or all honest Reputation to the World, to certify such Issues to be ligitimate; wherby no Controversy shuld be decy∣ded, but rather dangerously encreased, and the whole Government of such a Noble Realme therby brought unto a double Bastardy as the case now standith: For touchinge th' Issues betweene the Duke and the French Queene, yf question be askyd whether they be law∣full? answer is made, They are not, because the Duke was first lawfully marryed to the Lady Mortymer, and contynued with her aboue seven Yeres; and that he was maryed after to the French Queene, duringe the sayd Lady Mortymer's Lyfe, whoe overlyved the byrth of all the French Queenes Children: Which answer, by our Law, cleerly distroyeth the seconde Marriage, and makith it voyde, and so all the Issues cleerly Bastardes. And this is th' abso∣lute Judgement of our Lawe, so as now th' Issues of the French Queene cannot eny way help theimselfes, but they must first destroy the first maryage, which our Lawe will never disallowe untill it be first disanulled. And therfore yf the Duke of Suff. had had eny Issue by the L. Mortimer, those Issues shuld haue ben allowed his Heyres, by our Lawe, notwithstandinge the Mariage after with the French Queene. And therfore for that the French Queenes Issues rest dis∣sabled in poynt of Common Lawe, they must make theimselfes able, by some such proofe as may satisfye the same Lawe, before they can be receyvid. And yf they seeke their relief by eny dispensation from Rome (as is sayd) it servith not, although ther wer a Dy∣vorce to be proovyd by eny such Instrument. And it is most true, that they ar able to proove no lawfull Devorce within the Realme, though by search it hath not onely ben perceyvid, but is evidently to be provyd howe meny corrupte and subtile attemptes by sundry meanes hath ben taken in hande to cowntenance those matches with the French Queene and other, as by a supposition of a Sute sued be∣tweene one Anne Browne and the said Charles Brandon, wherof shuld aryse the displeasure betweene the Lady Mortimer, and the said Charles her Husband, seven Yeres and more after their Mari∣age: During which time the said A. B. God wotte, never tooke it so earnestly as she once complaynid to the Lawe, or ever thought of the Mater, nor as it seemith wold ever haue done, yf in this tyme the sayd Charles had not consumyd the sayd Lady Mortimers Welth and Lyvelyhoode, and found her Yeres not answerable to his Yeouth and wanton Disposition; for satisfyenge wherof, this Acquayntance, that Bely risinge, and these Practises after hapt with the same Anne. Wherof riseth now these feeble-groundid Histories, this Speche, and these Devices, that she forsooth shuld be precontracted to him before, and had a Childe; which Childe, eight Yeres after, is knowen well inoghe, was but two or three Yeres olde at the moste. A strange case; and yet she had it at seventeen, or ninteen, and was but twenty at the tyme of this supposed Divorce, when the sayd Charles and she came togither. Well, I say no more, for the Case is skant worth the speakinge of; but yf this Mater wer to be shewid, ye shuld see such a patron of a Divorce, as they that faynest wold have it, wold soonest be ashamyd to countenance their Title
upon the same; and yet these Passages thus hapt in these Dayes, and in that Lyfe, from better to worse, advoutry upon advoutry, and such other stuff. But how vayne is it to wryte, or to occupy yow with these Di∣gressions, as with what mought haue ben, what is supposed to haue bene, or such other vayne and frivolous practises or shifts; as heerafter may be, when it behoovith so much presently to consyder what in this case properly may and ought to be? And therfore be∣cause it is one of the most assuryd wayes to understand what the Lawe willeth, or is in eny question to admitte, that the Mater were at present to be decided by dewe course of Lawe, with all the Pol∣licies that on bothe partes may be used for their most avayle and pur∣pose, and so to bringe the same in Forme of Lawe to such a poynt, as judgement may be therof gyven rightly. Take heerin for En∣sample, that I. S. made a Gifte of Lande to Charles Duke of Suff. and the Frenche Queene, after their Mariage, and the Heires of their Bodyes; and now the same I.S. bringith his Action of Forme∣downe in reverter for the same Lande, agaynst the Lady K. and her Sister, and the resydue of that Lyne; and supposeth that the Land ought to him to revert, for lacke of Issue lawfully begotten betweene the Duke and the French Queene: and they come and pleade, by way of Barr, the Mariage betweene the French Queene and the Duke, and convey the Pedegree lineally. Wherunto I. S. replieth, and shewith a former Maryage with the Lady Mortimer, and averrith her Lyfe after their Birth. And the Lady K. and the rest, cannot by Lawe maynteyne their Barr, and destroy his Title, unlesse they pleade a lawfull Divorce; and yf they pleade eny such, yet the same shall not be under the Pope's Bulle, but by the Certificate of th' Ordinary, and for that th' Ordinary hath no Recorde, or other lawfull Proofe, wherupon he can lay eny Foundation to certify any lawful Divorce, therfore the Certificate cannot be avaylable. And so to conclude, ther is no doubt in the troth of the case, and by lyke reason no doubt in Lawe (if you will allowe the Proceedinges ac∣cordinge to troth) but that the Bastardie remaynith, and is not able to be purged. And yf the Bulle shuld have ben to make the Children of the sayd Queene and Duke of Bastardes legitimat, besydes the Reasons before alledgid, which ar as effectuall in this purpose as in the o∣ther; yet it is most true, that such legitimation had ben of no more force or Vertue heere in this Realme of Englande, then they be of in those Contreyes that ar at the Pope's Obedience. And who soever is legitimated ther of the Pope, is not to be understandid for all that, to be legitimate to inherite, but in the Lands that do belonge vnto the Churche. Imo, in ca∣per venerabi∣lem qui filii sint legi.. And besydes, who soever, is legiti∣mate, and abled generally to eny Dignitie, is not in that neither to be understandid legitimatid vnto a Royall Dignitie. Barthol. & Bal. in l. eam quam. C. de fide. con. And the Reason is, that whosoever is borne Bastard, though he be after made legiti∣mate, is ever reputyd, notwithstandinge, as infamous. Bal. in lege generaliter §. cum autem. C. de inst. & sub∣sti. sub condi. factis. & Alex∣an. in 3. ff. de il. & post.. And these Reasons may serve also to the Allegations before sayd, of the innocency of the Queene, and the contynuance of the Matrimony without controversy: for they do declare playnly, that although the Lawes, where they entreate of eny other Enheritance, shuld make
as legitimate the Children so borne (the which indeede they no ways can do, as we have partly proovyd) notwithstanding that the same Laws could never be alledgid in case of Succession to eny great Dignite, and chiefly vnto a Royal Dignitie, in the which the whole state of the Common Wealth hath interest. And besydes, touching the dooble Bastardy before remembryd, though we shuld admitte that of the legitimacion of the Lady K. there wer no doubt or question, yet such hath ben her Life, and Behavour, and so much hath she stayned her self and issue; as she is to be thought unworthy of the Crown: for she was maryed (as ye know) to the Lord Herberd: The Mariage was perfected by all necessary Circumstances, ther was consent of the Parties, consent of the Parentes, open solemnizinge, contynuance after, till lawfull Years of consent, and in the mean time carnall Copulation, all which, save the last, are commonly knowne by dyuers that sawe theim, and the last, which to all other might be most doubtfull, is known by the confession of them both, and so made the more lykely to be true, bicause she her self (though in such thinges that Sexe be most covert and shamefast) hath yet earnestly acknowledgid the same: after which Consummacion every Man knowith that albeit the Ma∣trimony had been before for lacke of Years not vaylable, that yet thereby it commith and is made perfect, and of full force and valor. In sorte that the Divorce and Sentence that was so dryven, procured and practised by the means of the Erle of Penbroke in Queen Maryes Reign (for respects then well ynough knowne) agyinst both the Parties Wills as most manifestly appeeryd, not onely by their greate un∣willingnesse unto it then, but also by their affectionate and willinge manner of lyving, continent meny Years after, continuing in mu∣tuall Love testified by sondrey means, meny Tokens, Messingers, and other signes of the same, cannot be of eny force to breake the sayd Matrimony, nisi de facto. De spon∣sal. cap. 30. is qui fidem. But during this delay, she by daliance fell to carnall company with th' Erle of Herforde, which was not descryed till the bignesse of her Belly bewrayd her yll happ. In which what was commityd on both theire behalfes, while he th' Erle unlawfullie companyed with the Wyfe of an other Man, and she the Wife of one Man, did gyve her Body to be used of an other Man unlawfully, ye may easely judge. But this done the L. Herbert seeinge himself thus deceyvid by his Wyfe, did (as he might lawfully) joyne himselfe in Marying with an other Woman, and that Lyfe and Usage betweene the Lady K. and the Erle beinge confirmid by dooble Issue, as it was utterly unlawfull before God, so was it founde unlawfull before such Bishoppes, and other Commis∣sioners, as had the heeringe of the same, and their Issue bastardid; wherupon doth fall out, as ye see, greate wickednes and lashnes of Life in the Mother, and bastardy in the Children. And it is not unknowne, to those conversant in the Historyes, that meny Princes sett∣lid in their Kingdomes, have ben judged unworthy of their Callinge for lyving in Whoredom; And how can she be countyd worthy to come to a Kingdome, which, as her Case standith, cannot but lyve in lyke manner? Surely, yf she were the next Heire of the Bloud Royal, her Fault is much the greater so fowlie to have spottyd the same: For as by this Whordome she hath deservyd grevous Punish∣ment,
in disparaginge and disablinge the Bloud; so hath she, by vyo∣latinge Maryage, cut off all hope of havinge lawfull Issue by her to succeede and possesse the Crowne heerafter: For by the Law that God gyveth, Deut. 23. Deut. 23. A Bastard, and unlawfull borne Person, may not beare Rule in the Church, or Common-Weale: He is counted a Stranger, as the Hebrewe word importith; and to the per∣petuall detestation of Whoredome was this Lawe made, to punishe the Parentes Faultes justly in their Children. The Civil Lawe lykewyse doth not onely punishe such Personnes as make such unlaw∣full Matches, but removith the Issue, so borne, from the Inheritance, or takinge by Legacy eny thinge of the Parentes. Co. de in∣cest. & inut. nup. And thus do yow see, by the way, thus much of this double Bastardie; and what Stay, Comfort, or Consolacion is lykely to come to this Realme of England, by the L. K. and such Issue as she now hath, or is lykely to haue heerafter, though she her self were by her Parentes free from Bastardy, as by the Proces, and Allegacions before alledgid doth playnly appeere she is not. Wherfore, to retourne to the Mater be∣fore in hand, and to conclude therof. Since eny Spotte, or suspicion of eny, is sufficient barre from th' Inheritance of a Crowne, much more cause is this playne and open Bastardy; for we ar all bounde in reason to haue alwayes more regard to the State and Dignitie of the whole Weale Publique, then of the pryvate Preferment or Commodyte of eny particuler Person. And so doth it appeere, that by no way, neither by the Divine Lawe, nor by the Common Lawe of this Realme, nor yet by the Canon or Civill, that the Children descendid of the sayd Queene and Duke, can be capable of the Crowne by their Birth. But touchinge the other Parte, they alledge in favour of the Lady Katheryne, Kinge Henry the Eight his Will, by which they say she is lefte as Heire. Which may be as playnly and easely answerid; For it is as certeyn that Kinge Henry shuld have had no Auctoritie or Power to dispose of the Crowne by Will, yf by Parliament it had not ben gyven him. And therfore as much as the Force and Auto∣rytie of the Parliament dothe extend unto, so much might he do, and no more. And the words of the same Statute, though they be generall, they may not, for all that, be so largely taken or under∣standid, as they may be stretched vnto: For who will say, that by those wordes, there is Power or Facultie gyven to appoynt or gyve the Crowne to eny Person, ☞ that accordinge to the Lawe and Dignitie of this Realme, is not meete or capable of the same? As vnto a Turke, an In∣fidele, an infamous or opprobrious Person, to a Foole, a Madde-man, or generally to eny kynde of such Person; as of the which, if special mention had ben made, it is lykely that the Parliament wold never have consentyd or agreid thervnto: as at the makinge of the same Statute, yf eny had gone about to have pennyd it in this sorte; that such shuld suc∣ceede and enjoye the Crowne, as K. Henry, either by his Letters Patentes, or elles by his last Wyll, signed with his most gracious Hand, had namyd, what Parsonnes soever they had ben, although they were infamous, madde, impious, or such other before rehearsed: it is not lykely that in this maner or forme the Parliament wholde have allowed or passed such a Sta∣tute. And that, that is not lykely they wold have consentyd vnto
by wordes in such sorte specially expressid, It is not to be thought, or understandid, that such Persons shuld be capable and fit for that Callinge, & omni exceptione majores. And it is playne and notory∣ous (as is before-sayd) that to be borne in Adultery, or of eny other unlawfull sorte or matche, is reputid and taken a Spotte, and that a greate one, not onely by the Lawes of Man, but also by the Lawes of God, Sapien. 3, & 4. Deut. 2, 3. and so unworthy and unfitte, ar such to be thought capable of the Crowne, that in all States, where they use to gyve or graunte eny Seigniories, Titles, or Liberties in Fee, as Baronyes, Erleshippes, Markeshippes, and such other, the Bastardes ar never thought worthy to be admittid unto the Succession, although that they be made legitimate. But they must specially be ablyd vnto the succession of the Fee by the Prince. Bartol. & Bald. in l. eam quam. C. de fi∣dei com. And yf they cannot in∣herite, or be capable of their Titles and Honours, which ar not, nor cannot be comparyd vnto a Royall Dignitie, how shuld they be thought worthie or capable of a Crowne? And that, that is sayde of Bastardes, is to be understandid also of those that pretendith the Succession as Heires of Bastardes. And synce this Realme makith no lesse esteme of the Honour and Dignity of the same, then eny other Nation doth of theires, it is not lykely that specially they would graunt unto the Kinge Power or Authoryte, to gyve or leve the Crowne to eny Person not legiti∣mately borne, or to their Children, or to eny such Person, upon whose Birth and Proceedinges there might growe such stryfe, dispute, or con∣tention, accordinge to the saying of Cesar, and example of other a litle before remembryd. And since it is not lykely that the Parlia∣ment wold haue condiscendid specially unto it, it followith, and we must conclude, that such a Graunt cannot be comprehendid by general words. But though he had Power or Authority to dispose of the Crowne, to the Heires of the Lady Francys, and the Lady Eleanor, it is trewe yet notwithstandinge he could not do that, but with the Condition and Forme, that by Power of the Parliament was gyven him, that is, either by his Letters Patentes, vnder the Greate Seale of Eng∣land, or ells by his last Will, signed with his most Gratious Hande. By Letters Patentes without doubt he hath not done it, and so of the Will is the Controversy. But beinge able to make a sufficient and perfect Will, to all other intentes and purposes, either in put∣tinge to his Hand, or ells in not puttinge to his Hand; yet yf the Kinge have made his Will, without puttinge unto his Hand (as ther be Wittnesses sufficient, and some of those that subscribed the same Testament, in that behalf can so truely and plainly testify, that he hath, as there is no such Cause left therfore either of such doubt, or elles of such conferringe, or comparinge the Prothocall with the Signe or Stampe, as those that haue sette foorthe these Books wold seeme to make; then it is playne and manifest that he hath not done it to this purpose, accordinge to the forme and maner prescribed vn∣to him by the Statute. And every Acte or Deede that is done with∣out the Forme prescribed by Lawe, is insufficient, L. 1. in pr. ff. de stipula. l. traditionibus. C. de pac. l. 1. C. de pred. cur. lib. 10. as well ac∣cordinge to th' Exposition and Rules of the Civill Lawe, as ells by th' Exposition and Rules of the Common Lawe of this Realme
for accordinge to the Civill Lawe it is playne, and so taken, though the Matters they entreate of be in favourable Causes; yet the lacke of Forme is no wayes borne withall or excused. L. cum hi. §. si pretor. ff. de transa. Bal. cons. 324. vo∣lu. 20. And much lesse heerin, consideringe the Forme requyrid by the Statute, is compiled with so meny greate, goode, important and probable Reasons: For the Succession of the Crowne beinge a Cause of such greate weight, and in which ther was so greate occasion to doubt so many hassardes of indirect or subtile dealinge, they had goode cause to prescribe such a Maner and Forme to make the Will by, as wherby they had least occasion to feare or suspect eny counterfetinge, confuse, or sinister behavour in the same. And so, accordinge to the Civill Lawe, in that Testament that they call a Solempne Testament, in the which there is required meny Circumstances; yf eny of those do lacke, the Testament, or Will, is of no force or valour. Justin. de testa. & lege jube. C. ibidem. Besydes, ac∣cordinge to the same Lawe, all Statutes, or Agreements made, that takith away, or correctith eny thinge of or from the Course or Body of the Lawe, is reputed and taken as odious, and ought to be taken strictly, even accordinge to the Letter as the worde standith. And this Statute wherof we now speake, is such a One: For wher the Succession of the Crowne shuld have gone whither the Common Lawe had apoynted or directid it, as vnto the next by the Statute of 35 of Henry the Eighth; K. Henry had Auctority to leve it to whome he lysted. And therfore this Statute is to be interpretid strictly and precisely as the worde gyveth: That is, that Kinge Henry onely by his Letters Patentes, vnder the Great Seale of Eng∣land, or elles by his last Wyll, signed with his most gratious Hand, might name whome he would to the Succession of the Crowne, and not otherwyse. And lykewise by the Common Lawe of this Realme, the Statute is most plainly a direct abridgement of the same, by reason it takith from the Common Lawe, the naturall limitation of th' Inheritance of the Crowne, and appointith it owte of the Rule of the Lawe, to the Order and Limitation of Kinge Henry; beinge in this respect authorized but as a private Person. And it is in some degree a Penal Lawe, for it takith the Title of a Kingedome from those that by the Common Lawe have a Right, and makith, in poynt of execution, a Subject of a Prince, and contrarywyse a Prince of a Subject; which is not onely penall, as hauinge respect to the losse of their Title to the Crowne, yf it shuld so happe, as God for∣bidd; but also it is so penall, that if such ill Chaunce shuld unfor∣tunately befall, it makith Traytors of those that will clayme their Inheritance, although their intent were but to try their Titles. And it is a Learninge by the Common Lawes of England, that longe hath ben so receyvid, that in every such case as eny of these hap∣pen, no Exposition is to be allowed; but the Lawe willith us to cleve to the Letter, without eny further wrestinge therof, then the Letter naturally and strictly will reache unto. So that if it be not a stricte observation of the Letter, according to his natural entent, in any of these cases the Common Lawe allowith it not. And the rather the Lawe is precise herin, for that it is a newe Statute, which seldome ar taken by equite in eny point, because they ar all pennyd at large. As for Example; I will remember one or twoe, which
may suffice to such as be Learnyd, to search for other of lyke effect, wherof ther ar not a few. In Anno 1. of Kinge Edward the 6th, ther was a Statute made, That if eny were condemnid for the stea∣linge of Horses and Mares, they should lose their Clergy; and because the words Horses and Mares were the plurall nombre; it was taken not to extende to one Horse, or to one Mare. And so for that cause a new Statute was made, Anno 2. of the same K. that made lyke Lawe for stealinge one. Horse, or one Mare. And the chief cause of this was, because it is a Penall Statute, in takinge from a Man that, wherby his Lyfe might be savid. In K. Richard the 3ds Tyme, there was a Statute made to Auctorize Cest a que use to enter vpon his Feoffees, and make Feoffementes. And it was in question, in Anno 9. of H. the 7th, yf he made a Letter of Atturney, whe∣ther this were good by the Statute, and lefte therfore a doubtfull question, by reason the Statute gyveth auctoryte onely, which must in all poyntes be observed. And ther is a greate deale more coulour to make that Feoffement goode, being by Letter of Atturney, then to make this Will to this purpose goode, not signed with the Kinges owne Hande: For if eny other put his Hande therunto, and not the Kinge himself, then it is signed with an other Hande, and not the Kinges Hande. And yf I gyve Auctorytie to my Executors to sell my Landes, and say no further; then, yf they sell the same by Wrytinge, or without Wrytinge, it is sufficient; but if I adde these wordes, That they shall sell my Landes, so that they do it by Wrytinge, signed with their proper Handes; yf now they sell the same, and th' one cause the Residue, in all their presence, to wryte all their Names, as thoughe every one had severally subscrybed; I hold it no question, but this Sale is not good; for they must pur∣sue their Auctortie strictlye, and otherwyse it is of no effect: And consyderinge, as is partly before remembryd, how greate a mater it was to committe such a Trust, it were a greate lacke and slander to the whole Parliament, to thinke that they wold condiscend to the committinge of so high and weightie a Confidence, as wherof the whole Estate and Weale of the Realme shuld depend, but that they did forsee that their doinges therein shuld not be blynded by a Wrytinge signed with a Stampe, The same thing was urg'd by Lethington the Secretary of Scotland, in a Letter to Sir Will. Cecil. Appendix to the 2d Vol. of the Hist. of the Ref. F. 269. which might be put vnto, either when the Kinge was voyde of Memory, or els when he was de∣ceassid; as indeed it after happenyd, as most manifestly appeeryd by open declaration made in Parliament by the late L. Paget, and others, that King Henry did not signe it with his owne Hande, as it is playne and probable inough by the Pardon obteynid for one William Clerke, for puttinge the Stampe vnto the sayde Will after the Kinge was departid: and who doubtith but yf his meaninge had ben such, so to haue disposed of the Crowne, but that he wold have put this mater out of doubte, by signifyenge the same with his owne proper Hande. And touchinge the two chief Examples that ar brought foorth, the one of the 21 and 33 of K. H. th' Eight, wherby K. H. was aucthorized to gyve his Royall Assent to Actes of Parliament, by his Letters Patentes, and so foorth: and th' other, for that Queene Ma∣ry omittyd the style that was apoyntid by Parliament, in 35
of H. th'Eight, in her Parliament Writts, howe little they make to the matter every Man may judge: For the Statutes of 21, and 33 of H. 8. were only made in affirmance of the Common Lawe, and such a Royal Assent wold suffice, by Letters Patents without eny assurance thereof by the Signe. And this Statute was but to put such matter out of question; for if the Common Law had ben such before, there is no doubt but that he must haue signed every Patent with his proper Hande; and so these Cases are no way lyke. And touchinge the seconde, yf the Statute that conteynith the King's Style be well consyderid, there wold be made thereof no such Col∣lection. For the same apoyntith a punishment to such Subjects as of purpose depryve the K. of the Realm, of that Stile. But there is no doubt, but the Writts that wantyd the Stile, were in Lawe sufficy∣ent, and the Parties that made the same, punishable. So that these Examples cannot be wrestid to serve eny whit for the purpose. And where ther is made a great mater by reason the Will was in∣rollid in the Chancery, and Constats thereof made under the Broade Seale, and the Legacyes thereof in all poyntes performyd. To that may be answerd; That all that is therein affirmed may easily be confessed, and yet it proovith nothinge to th'intent applied; for it was his Will is ever he condescendid thervnto, though he did never signe it with his Stampe, nor with his Hande, and a goode and a perfect Will to all Entents and Purposes, whereof he had by Com∣mon Lawe Authoritye to make his Will of. But it is not, or cannot be the more a perfect Will to this respect or purpose, vnlesse he did execute the auctoritie apoyntid by the Sta∣tute of, 35 of H. 8. as is before remembryd. Since then the Duke had a Wyfe lyvinge, when he maryd the Frenche Queene, and by the Statute ther is nothinge to be Claymid, onles K. Henry had pas∣sed eny things either by his Letters Patentes under the Broade Seal of Englande, or ells by his last Will signed with his most gracious Hande: And that it is trewe, that he had a Wyfe lyvinge when he maryd the Frenche Queene; that so if it were requisite, or hereaf∣ter may be, there mought be avouchid more then one, with much other matter touchinge that poynt of Illegitimacion and Inhabilitie, as well in thinges paste, as also in thinges present: And that most certeynly there was never either eny such Letters Patentes past un∣der the greate Seale of England, nor yet eny such Will signed with his most gratious Hande, as sufficient Witnesses yet lyvinge can well testify. Theise two maters touchinge the legitimation and validi∣tie of the Will in that behaulf, of eny indifferent Person, I trust, may be acceptid as fully and truly answeryd. And thus (lovinge Reader) have I vtteryd and layd before the theise cases as they ar. And whome wold it not moove to commpas∣sion, to behould the state of these thinges? or whose English Harte wold it not grieve, even to every parte of it, to fynde any such Bookes countenanced, or accompt made of such Bastardie slippes (as appeerith by those Opinions and Bookes, spredde) to enherite so noble a Realme, our most deere and natural Countrey? as though it wer either so infortunate, so curs'd of God, or else so farre from
Mercy, that such shuld be fitter for the same, without eny colour of eny just Title, to plague it with most infamous Dissention, Warre, and all other Confusion, and so to bring it to vtter ruyne and de∣struction; then those to whome of right it ought, both by the Lawe of God and Man most iustly to belonge vnto. What is he that e∣steemith or tendrith the prosperyte of the Countrie in the favour of God, or the good fame or fortune of the Worlde, that wold seeke to exalt vnto the Government therof such infamous and spottyd titles, with which is lynked alwayes such wrathe of God, and th'Effectes thereof, with such continuall stryfe and contention; before the vn∣staynid true and perfect Inheritors apoynted by him, and by his Lawes, to sette forth his Glory: and by whose Justice such ar al∣wayes prosperyd and defendid: to their own honour, and the great weale and safety of their Subjects, as longe as they remayne in his feare, and obedyent vnto his Lawes and Ordinances. But what might be sayd further: Yf those in greate face and shew of great zeale and iustice, and in greate authoritie, hath so much neglected their Duties, and so much preferryd theire owne Ambitions and corrupte De∣syres, before the Honour and Service of the Realme, as such have not sticked to further these spottyd and coulerid Titles, and also to encourage other to fall vnto the same. What a case is this, that such so placyd, shuld go aboute to extol such motions of Dishonour and ruyne of their naturall Countrey, and yet remayne with their Callinge in so greate coun∣tenance of honour for their Good and faithful Service. O England, blame thow not the inferior sorte so much, that doth but receyve these thinges as it is ministryd unto them, by whose credyte and persuasion they may be easily abusd. But seeke thou to decifer and discover such Abu∣sers, as have more regard to mainteyne theimselfes, by whose over∣throwe, or what wronge so ever it be, then to proceede dirertly to thy Service, either to the Honour of GOd, Author and Favorer of all Truth, or els to thy Weale, Prosperytie, and quietnes. And I exhorte the, and exhorte the agayne, not to suffer thy self to be ledde and caryd away with eny such foule iniurious Perswasion, either of ambitious Abuser, or such other corrupt or vnadvised Person. For such foule iniurious and false persuasions ar apt to no other ende, but to serve Sedition, Discord, and Dissention in the, and overthrow also all those that dealith with theim. And how hard and perilous it is to obteyne a Crowne by eny injust or sinister Title, and how much harder the things got∣ten, it hath ben to contynew and keepe the same, we may daily see and learne in dyvers Historyes of sondry places by such lyke For∣tunes, and of the in that of K. H. 4. H. the 5. and H. the 6. who after they had withholden the Crowne by wronge, with the losse of meny a Manne's Lyfe, two discentes, wherin passed forty Yeres and more; at last were overthrowne and quite confoundid, and it re∣storyd to Kinge Edward the Fourth, that rightly requyrd and law∣fully obteynid the same. Compare these togither, and consider what multitude of Friends such continuance in possession was lyke to make, and of what fame and worthynesse the Princes were, and yet that the 3d. and last could not enioy the same, all that notwith∣standinge. And it may be supposd, that there is fewe so simple, so farre from reason, or so affectionate, but may thinke that K. H. the 6
was much more abler to defend so longe a contynued Possession, then the Layd K. or eny comminge of the French Queene is able both to gayne the lyke, and afterwards to keep it. By which, and such o∣ther Examples, we may call to mynde, that God doth not favour those that doth vsurpe with eny injust or indirect Title agaynst his Will and Ordinance. And what greater mishappe, discomfort, or Misery can happ to eny, then after the liftinge up to such a degree, or th' attaininge of eny such desire, in a moment to lose all, and to be cast downe to vtter confusion, both they and all their Freendes for ever. Consider, for the love of God, the Ho∣nour of your Countrey, the Suretie and Quietnes of your Freendes and Neighbours, Kynsemen and deere Country-folkes! remember the Threttes pronouncyd of God against all Injustice, and call to remembrance where aboute yow goe, ye that study and endeavour your selfes to sette forth these false and deceyvable Titles in the parte or favour of eny; and beholde, that insteade of the shadow of your vndewe Desire, to the greate hazard and perill of the tranquill and peaceable state of your most deere Friendes, and natural Contrey, that yow do but procure bothe to such as how wold seeme to favour, and also vnto your selfes, such danger, grief and sorowe, with such yll and adverse Fortune, as your most bitter and dedly Enemyes could no way wysh yow greater. And to conclude, thus much is due to th' Answer of the Bookes a∣broade, with th'advancement of the Lady Mary the French Queen's Issue, and settinge foorth of these Cases of Bastady, before yow: that after these maters thus manifestyd, there shuld insewe of such Errors the lesse inconvenience, and that ye might thereby hereafter the better judge what were in these cases the fittest, both for the honour of God, and the Weale, prosperyte, and quyetnes of the whole Realme. But thow, O England, ar, by the Grace and greate Mercy of God, vnder the Gouernment of our most Gracious and Prudent Queene, who hath the same tender and lovinge care of the Weale-Publike, that the most carefull and lovinge Mothers have not greater for the Weale & Saufety of theire most deere and best-belovyd Chyldren; of the which there may be daily seene most apparente and manifest Examples. Her maiestie havinge governid thee, with the noble assistance of her Counsell, so meny Years, without mani∣fest Danger, and greate perill of Civill Warre, and most miserable slaghter (as the case yet standith) it is not to be thought, but that the Floude of Bloode (from which God defend thee) that other∣wise might be shedde, doth continually flowe before her Highnes pitifull and most mercifull Eyes. And that her Maiestie taryeth but some goode tyde, most carefully to provyde for the same, as may be possible. Which it may please God to graunte vnto her Highnes, for th'Honer of Him, and the greate Benifyte of the whole Realme, with most convenyent speede. Amen. 20. Martii 1565. God save Queene Elizabeth.
