P615A [ocm]12251444 199174
ANNƲS MIRABILIS OR Strange and Wonderful PREDICTIONS AND OBSERVATIONS Gathered out of Mr. J. PARTRIDGES ALMANACK 1688. With some Remarks also, out of his ALMANACK 1687. Both of them Printed in Holland. Licensed and Entred according to Order. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1689.
TO THE READER. THO' I am not one of them that put any great stress on Judicial Astrology, nor do I think that short sighted Man can Read much out of the Stars concerning future Events, yet, seeing Mr. Partridge has by his Art (for honest John does not pretend much to the Divine Spirit) hit upon many things Remarkable, especially in the Month of June, and so to the End of the Year 1688. and also in the foregoing Year 1687. I have to gratifie the Curious Collected together such things as may be truly called Won∣derful Predictions and Observations. The Revolutions in England in a few Weeks, are so stupendious, that may convince the most obstinate Atheist that there is a God, and that that God does superintend in all Humane Affairs; according to that Old Verse in some of our Almanacks. Astra regunt homines, sed regit Astra Deus. Such Divine Characters are to be seen in these present Providences, that we may Cry out with the Psalmist, (Psal. 118. 23.) It is the Lords doing, and it is Won∣derful in our Eyes. On which Text the Great and Learned Dr. Burnet (a Person to whom the whole Na∣tion is infinitely Obliged) hath provided Excellent Me∣ditations for every Pious Mind, in a Sermon lately Preached before his Highness the Prince of Orange.
To the Haters of Popery, by what Names or Titles soever dignified or distinguished. THus 'twas of old: then Israel felt the rod, When they obey'd their Kings, and not their God, When they went whoreing after other Loves, To worship Idols in new planted Groves. They made their Gods of Silver, Wood and Stone, And bow'd and worship't them when they had done. And to compleat their sins in every way, They made 'em things call'd Priests: Priests did I say, A Crew of Villains more prophane than they. Hence sprung that Romish Crew, first spawn'd in hell, Who now in vice their Pedagogues excel Their Church Consists of vicious Popes, the Rest, Are whoreing Nuns, and bawdy Bugg'ring Priests. A Noble Church! dawb'd with Religious Paint, Each Priest's a Stallion, every Rogue's a Saint. Come you that Loath this Brood: this murdring Crew, Your Predecessors well their mercies knew. Take courage now, and be both bold and wise; Stand for your Laws, Religion, Liberties, You have the odds, the Law is still your own, They're but your Traytors, therefore pull'em down. They struck with fear, seek to destroy your Laws. They're raving mad, you see they fix their paws, Because from them they fear their fatal fall, And by them Laws, they know you'll hang'em all. Then keep your Laws, the Penal, and the Rest, And give your Lives up, ere you give the Test. And thou great Church of England hold thy own, Force you they may, otherwise give up none. Robbers and Thieves must compt for what they've done; Let all thy mighty pillars now appear, Zealous and brave, void both of hate and fear. That Popish Tops may grin, lye, cheat and whine; And curse their Faith, while all admire thine, And thou Brave Oxford, Cambridg, and the Rest, Great Hough and Fairfax, that durst beard the Beast, Let all the Just with thanks record their name, On standing Pillars of immortal fame. Let God arise, and his Enemies perish.
Mr. PARTRIDGES WONDERFUL PREDICTIONS, Pro Anno 1688. THE first three Months of the Year are always con∣sidered from the positions of the Suns entrance into the Tropical sign Capricorn, which was [from the Caroline Tables] in 1687. on the eleventh of December, at 2. hours 24. minutes P. M. at which time three degrees of Aquary was on the M. C. and 7. degrees of Gemini on the Ascendent: Saturn is in 23. degrees of Libra, in the sixth House: Mars in 26. deg. of Pisces, in the eleventh, and Jupiter in conjunction with the Sun, in the eighth, in Capri∣corn his fall; Combust and Occidental, and Venus in the sixth in Scorpio her detriment. So that the two Fortunes are in a poor weak condition, and none of the seven Angular but the Moon. At the Preventional full Moon all the Planets were under the Earth, except Mars and the Moon, and they in a double Square from the tenth and seventh Houses: And the Sun likewise in Square to Mars. At the Postventional New Moon the Sun is in the tenth, and Mars in Aries in the Ascendent, in Square to Jupiter and Mercury. And now let us examine what will be the effects of these positions. At the Ingress and the full Moon, the Planets are gene∣rally under the Earth, and in obscure Houses, which shews close Consults, Councils and Cabals in divers places and parts of Europe, and that the principal part of this Quarter will
be spent in debates, and affairs of that nature. The things in debate are two, and those are Religion and Dominion, or rather a power to impose the former upon mankind, the better to introduce some other projects. And this is shew∣ed by the position of the Sun in conjunction with Jupiter, and he in Reception with Mars; Jupiter (you must observe) always personates the Clergy of Nations, and they you know generally love to be concerned in Government, and accordingly he is here got under the Suns protection, who is the real Patron of Government and Rule: and Mars is to be his Hector to manage the affair by force, if no other way will do. But if Bonatus says true, They will be cru∣elly disappointed; for he says, the Sun in the eighth House significat depressionem divitum & magnatum seu Nobilium, &c. and in another place speaking of Mars in Pisces he says, Mortem Magnatum & Divitum significat. So that between depression and death they are like to lose their long lookt for, and wished for desire, to the great Grief of Mother Church and her Babes. But yet to make it more clear that the thing is Religion, pray observe that Saturn, who is Lord of the ninth and tenth Houses, hath been lately in Sextile with the Sun; and Mercury the little foot-post among the Stars, is in the ninth House Retrograde, and his first application is to the Bodies of Jupiter and the Sun: From whence it is more than probable, that the design is so. If we consider, that immediately after the Ingress, the Sun, Jupiter and Mercury meet in the beginning of Capri∣corn, and this in the eighth House, about which time we may conclude, that there was some considerable thing ta∣ken into consideration, that is fit and serviceable for the present juncture of affairs; but while it is under conside∣ration, the advantage propounded is spoiled. For Mars
comes up presently after to the Square of Mercury and Jupiter, and the Sun shortly after to the Square of Saturn, which divides their Councils, and destroys the design; so that when Mars comes to the Opposition of Saturn in the end of January or thereabouts, you may hear of Favourites turned out, and new ones entertained. Fresh Dragooning in France, or something like it, new attempts in England, to wheedle a people to chuse a Parliament, to destroy their Laws and Religion. But under the effects of that Opposition of Sa∣turn and Mars, will be laid the project or design of some cursed attempt, to be performed about June following, for that opposition is celebrated upon a New Moon, from Active parts of Heaven, attended by bad Aspects, and the Sun and Moon at the same time in Opposition to the pla∣ces of the last great triple Conjunction in Leo. And Bonatus tells us, that Mars joyned to Saturn by Opposition is of a per∣nicious consequence. Insurgent enim in eos ex guerris, & nitentur contra eos, and again he says, Mars in Ariete signi∣ficat victoriam in bello civibus civitatum illarum: & habitato∣ribus illarum regionum super inimicos eorum, qui venerint de aliis partibus ad illas causa nocendi eis. That Mars in Aries signifies Victory to the Citizens and Inhabitants of those Cities and Countries under that sign (I suppose he means if they have occasion to fight) and that they shall put to flight all those that come to offer them either Violence or Injury. And to say the Truth, I do believe that Op∣position with some other Positions and Configurations, will be the occasion of such differences, that will come both to blows and blood, in what part of the World, I shall leave to time to shew: Only this I will say, those Cities and Countries under Aries and Libra will feel the smart of it. The effects of this Quarter will consist more of Con∣sults
than action, and the contrivances thereof will be the work of the following Summer. And so I come to consider the vernal ingress of the Sun, which is March the ninth at four hours P. M. 1688. At the time mentioned of the Suns entrance into Aries, there is two degrees of Ge∣mini on the M. C. and nine degrees of Virgo ascending▪ Saturn then in twenty three degrees of Libra, Jupiter in twenty two degrees of Capricorn; Mars in twenty four de∣grees of Taurus, among the Pleiades; Venus in eighteen de∣grees of Aquary; the Moon in eleven degrees of Scorpio; and Mercury in twelve degrees of Aries. The first and the prin∣ciple thing remarkable in this figure, is the Square of Jupi∣ter and Saturn from Cardinal Signs, and this of it self will bear the general sway in the effects of the three following months, and ought to be considered two several wayes. First from their Aspect, and secondly their Position. As to the Aspect: it never gives any thing, that is either sudden or very violent, but it stirs up differences in Societies, gives Treacheries and Villanies, with the discovery thereof; gives Nations and Kingdomes suspicions of their Governors; and this sometimes not without a cause; but it alwaies begets Trou∣bles, Animosities, differences, and the like, from whence pro∣ceeds greater mischeifs, which certainly shew themselves by some great Irruption in the State, or alteration in the Go∣vernment by some misfortune of the then King, Prince, &c. And this the more certain if there be three Squares of Saturn and Jupiter, as there are now, and be sure their effects fall always in those Countries subject to the Signs they are in, or their Quadrangles; but when they happen to be in Cardi∣nal Signs (as they are now) then is their effects the more lamous and remarkable. And for the truth of this be pleas∣ed to consider the precedeing Presidents of this kind, before the cursed Popish Plot in 1678. there was a single Square of
the two Superiours from Gemini and Pisces, here Lon∣don and England suffered sufficiently by that damned de∣sign of the Papists, and those Villains, their Accomplices. In 1668 there was a single Square from Aquary and Taurus, this did not at all concern England, neither was that then disturbed. In the Years 1657. and 1658. there was a tripple Square of Saturn and Jupiter from Libra and Capricorn, Saturn then opposite to the Horoscope of England. At that time there was murmurings and plot∣tings against the then Oppressors, which at last was con∣cluded with Olivers death, and a general mutation in the Government, with divers other Changes and Alterati∣ons, as those that then lived can well remember. Like∣wise when Oliver turned out the Long Parliament and took the Government on him, it was just after an Opposi∣on of those two Superiors. In the year 1647. and 1648. there was then also a tripple Square of Saturn and Jupiter from Gemini and Virgo; What plotting contrivances there was then against the Government, let the affairs of Wales, Lancashire, and Colchester inform you, which cost many thousand men their lives, and last of all the King lost his head. In the year 1637. and 1638. there was a tripple Square of the two Superiours from Libra and Ca∣pricorn, and Scorpio and Aquary, What murmurings there then was among the people of all sorts, for their Oppressions they then laboured under, let History inform you, which was at last followed with a War, &c. I could go further in these Historical Passages; but I think these five Examples are sufficient to prove, that a tripple Square of Saturn and Jupiter from Cardinal Signs doth certainly make an Irruption in the Government of England, espe∣cially when it stands tottering, as at this time, and the
first of them happens in March 1688. the second in July, in the same year, and the third the January following, which by the Grace of God will in time have their Effects also. Secondly, as to their position, we find the one in the third House, and the other in the fifth, and nearly in pa∣rallel, without any Configuration or Aspect to any of the other Stars, and both under the Earth, which shews as if there were some designs in hand, that the Managers are either afraid or ashamed to have known; that they are few in number is plain from their position sine Confi∣gurationibus, and that they are very private, from their being under the Earth in succeedent Houses. In short, the position and the Aspect considered with other things, doth certainly presage some villanous Contrivance by the Papists, which will be the ground of their Ruin, and when their turn is come, I hope the Protestants will not forget to hang them for all their kindness an good na∣ture to us. And now if we consider Mars, who is the o∣ther Malefick, we shall find him in Taurus in the twen∣ty fourth degree thereof, and in Trine to Jupiter in the fifth, the House of Children, Venus in Aquary in the sixth, and the Moon in the third house cadent in Scorpio, that Villainous, Treacherous, Cheating, Perfidious, Truce-break∣ing, Whoreing Sign. And the first Aspect the Moon makes in the Zodiack is the Square of Venus, then to the Trine of Jupiter, and lastly to the Opposition of Mars, and all these from that Pious sign Scorpio. Hence I judge that there is some bawdy Project on foot, that must be managed by such people as are described by the Moon in Scorpio. And this is either about buying, selling, or pro∣curing a Child or Children for some pious use. Perhaps it
may be nothing else but the taking care of Fa. P—rs Child that he got on Mrs. Betty at the Bath last Summer, and that I may do you all the service I can, I will here describe what manner of mad Persons they are that are to be concerned in this bawdy project. And they are a sort of scandalous, impudent, mercenary people, that will sell or ruin their own Souls, to serve the cause they are dipt in, of a fat corpulent Body, not very tall, perhaps but short; for they are like the Moon in Scorpio, which may give both, but alwayes fat or inclined to it. But besides this there may be other designs in hand suitable to this position, and that is some Embassy, or for∣reign Message, to be negotiated a few weeks after the Ingress, about a weighry affair now in hand, and since we find Jupiter, Venus, and Mars to be concerned in it, the business may be about Money, Counsels, and Souldi∣ers. And the reason that induceth me to believe it to be beyond the Seas, is because the Moon is in the third, the house of Journeys, Jupiter in the fifth, the house of Embassies and Ambassadors, and Mars in the ninth, the house of Long-Journeys, and Voyages by Sea: and that it is about Souldiers and armed Men, because of the Moon and Mars in violent and pernicious parts of Heaven. But if you consider Mercury swift in motion, in his Ori∣ental Occidentality, and separated from the Sun (who is in exact Sextile to the tenth) and next apply's to the opposition of Saturn and Square of Jupiter in the Zodi∣ack, and to the Sextile of Venus and Square of Jupiter in Mundo all from Aries, the Ascendant of England. So you will see a fine issue of these things a few dayes af∣ter the Ingress, whether it will be discoveries of Trea∣chery with loss of Honour and Court favour, or Im∣peachments,
or both, I will not take upon me to deter∣mine; but the time you may expect it, will be in April and June. Perhaps when Thieves differ, there may be work for the Hangman. But one thing more I shall observe from this Ingress, and that is, when Saturn and Jupiter make their second Square, which is in July; Then the Sun and Mars are in Leo, near the place of the last great Conjunction and they both keep within ways, during their passage thro' that sign; why may not the Turk again feel the sorce of his Enemies Arms, or Italy receive some disturbance from a neighbouring Invader. In short, the figure of the Ingress doth not promise any great Action in publick, that is generous and brave; but abundance of deceit, wheedle, Tricking, and such kind of base under hand dealing, wrought in the dark, as the Popish Faction usually do. And so I come to consider the Autumnal Ingress, and that is, when the Sun enters the first scruple of Libra, which is this year, September the twelfth at 30 minutes, past six of the Clock in the morning. In this figure we find Cardinal signs possess the four Angles, which according to some Learned Coxcombs in our profession, is a mighty thing; but for my part I know no reason for it, nor they neither; but only some Bouncing Huffs will impose, and find easie People to believe them. Any signs on the Angles with Planets in them, are great positions, but Cardinal Signs there without Planets signifie little, but si popalus vult decipi. &c. but in this Fi∣gure we have three Planets Angular, and yet they signi∣fie very little to the advantage of the position in gene∣ral. For Jupiter is in his fall in opposition to the Angle
of dignity and grandeur, and in Square to Saturn, and Saturn is in Libra his Exaltation, applying to the Mun∣dane parallel of the Sun, and in the Ascendent also: of which thus speaks Bonatus, Saurnus in Ascendente; sinificat moerorem multorum hominum, that it shews much grief and sorrow to many men. And if other positions and Aspects say true, it is more than proba∣ble too. And he says the same also of the position of Mars in the twelfth, which must be aggravated and increased by his being Combust, Significat moerorem & tristitiam venturam: and I judge, he might also have said, Causa Criminuns & Careris: for Mars in the twelfth house afflicting the Sun, gives sorrow, loss, imprisonment, and divers other Calamities of that kind, and this to such persons as are signified by the Sun and Mars, But what means the Sun in the twelfth, within six degrees of the Body of Mars, and not far from the body of Saturn, and this in Libra his fall? this is a position of pernicious consequence, of which hear what Bonatus says: Significat diminutionem atque depressionem divitum & Magnatum. Nebilium quoque & eorum mortem: eorumque dignitatum ablationens: & injurias eis illaturas ab ignobilibus. It signifies, says he, the fall and depression of great and noble men, and their death also: Loss of their dignity, and af∣fronts to them from the common people: and indeed whether Bonatus says so or not, Common reason will tell any man, that such effects must be the con∣sequence of such a position, if he understands Astro∣logy: and as the Sun goes from the body of Mars, so he apply's to the body of Saturn, who is Lord
of the Eighth from the tenth; and for that reason also seems to threaten danger to great men in this Quarter, and perhaps a King or Prince too. For the Sun signifies Kings, &c. Besides, the Moon, who is Lady of the tenth, the house of Kings, is hastening to the body of Mars and Zodiacal parallel of Saturn, which exceedingly strengthens the forementioned Aphorism and Judgment. But to Conclude the Judgment of the whole year, and this quarter in particular, I shall only add this that there are various and many mutations at hand, and I believe the Effusion of some blood also. Observations on the twelve Months. JANƲARY. AT the beginning of this Month the Sun meets the Square of Saturn, from which you may Expect some damnable intrigue of the Papists, newly Contrived, of which you will hear more toward the End of the Month. But besides this, it shews the death of some old infirm Statesman, or else he is turned out and discarded. It Likewise gives ground for new differences between great and eminent men, and that there shall arise quarrels between those that least expected it, according to that of Bonatus, Erunt vixa atque discordiae inter divites & Magnates. But at the New Moon in January we find an oppo∣sition of Saturn and Mars from the first and seventh Houses, and Mercury in the fourth, in Square to them
both, the Effects of which particularly concern En∣gland. And it hath two sorts of Effects attend it: the first is, great differences among those of the Govern∣ment (as they call themselves) by which means their present affairs are either neglected or put to a stand, and perhaps some Contrivance about a foreign Army next May or June. The second is, turning out divers of their Creatures, either because they are not able, or not willing to serve them any further, so that in February you may Expect that the Eastwind will rise and send in a new cast of Catterpillars. FEBRƲARY. At the beginning of this Month we find the Sun in Trine to Saturn which promiseth preferment to some old Cunning Hypocrite, that was formerly Kickt out, is now received to Court again upon promise of obedience, you know to what. This month is spent in preferments to those that are quallifyd with ver∣tues fit for it, and divers new players are brought in about this time. MARCH. The first thing Considerable here is, the Sextile of the Sun and Jupiter, and the Square of Saturn and Jupiter: now if you make your Compute right between these two Aspects, it will make a very pleasant mixture fit for the time it falls in, the Sextile is great, generous, and brave, but the Square is all Trick, Cheat, Hypocrisie, &c. So that I Con∣clude there will be about this time some Clergymen preferred, men of Excellent parts and great proficients
in Atheism, Socinianism and Popery. For Example, suppose Sa. Par—r. of Oxford, or C—ht of Chester: but whether it is from their preferring Scan∣dalous villains, or any other intricate cause I cannot say, but about this time the Popish counsels in En∣gland go on but Heavily, some designes take air too soon, others are frustrate, and some of their own Creatures disappoint them in their service, tho many of them are Rogues Enough. The last Month seem'd to Countenance an Approaching war with some neigh∣bouring Nation, and much talk there was of some∣thing to be done by Sea and Land, but now all that noise is laid aside, and perhaps those preparations then visibly may be imployed to some other Cursed design, which is not yet publickly known. APRIL. From the opposition of the Sun and Saturn at the end of the last month you may expect more changes and turnings among those called Ministers of State, and if I mistake not, there is now some new regulation among the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and the Square of the Sun and Jupiter tells you for what, that is, there are now new Orders and Commands sent down to Ox∣ford, and those new Gamesters are to execute them; but this is certain, there is now some new villany to be acted by the Papists at Oxford, by what persons or what Authorit I will not be positive. Besides, this Square of the Sun and Jupiter doth also portend some difference among the Clergy and Caurtiers, or else some Considerable Clergymen turned out of favour, perhaps both. Mars now in Gemini puts the City of London
in fear, and there is good ground for it too. The Sextile of Jupiter and Venus speaks great things about Liberty, Religion, and Priviledges, but believe it who pleaseth; but the double Square of Jupiter and Mercury gives some contentious Books and Pamphlets about Re∣ligion: and the Suns Eclipse threatens Ireland. MAY. Will not afford much action nor cause for it, but the affairs of this Month depend on the Influence of the last, only the Trine of the Sun and Jupiter gives some Loyal Fellow preferment in the Law, and it is to serve a particular end too: there is also at this time great endeavours used to prepare the way for some precious Villanies to be acted in the next month. The Trine of the Sun and Saturn gives some old Renega do preferment in the City of London: alas poor old Fop! thou hast lived to a fair age, turn—at last. JƲNE. This is a month of Action with a Witness: the Square of Saturn and Mars will (you need not question) give villany enough, now they use Violence to pre∣pare for Wheedling; for it is best fishing in troubled Waters: new Inventions trumpt up; Priviledges and Laws invaded more than formerly; Popery appears more bare-faced than it used to do. Some Child topt upon a Lawful Heir to cheat them out of their Right and Estate. God preserve the Kingdom of England from Invasion. For about this time, I fear it in earnest; and keep the Protestants there from being Dragoon'd. A great Clergyman or Lawyer dyes, and perhaps it may be judged by Pson.
JƲLY. Is not less active than the preceeding Month: the square of the Sun and Saturn will again put things into a strange and unusual Ferment, differences between great Men grows still higher and more violent and publick: the Popish Sham's will not do, neither will they pass upon the people as they expected; and indeed they are too fulsom to be indured. With this the Opposition of Iupiter and the Sun takes place, and perhaps you will think it strange, that a great man should quarrel with his Priests, or they with him. But some such things will be, and also some Rogues lately taken in turn'd out again. These positions considered with the Square of Saturn and Jupiter the second time, and Mars on the place of the last great Conjunction, will put things into a very violent posture and strange disorder. Those that are dipt in Treason, now begin to be de∣sperate, believing the Gallows to be their due if the design perish, as it undoubtedly will, let them try all Tricks they can, and make use of all the treasonable practices that Villains can put them upon: for they are almost come to their ne plus ultra. AƲGƲST. The Square of Saturn and Jupiter puts the whole faction upon Council, and the Question is, what shall be done next. The Sun and Mars in Leo on the place of the Conjunction seems to shew their Councils incline to violence, and blood, and the rather because in Leo the Ascendent of Rome. But their Councills are divided, and they Cannot yet throughly agree. But on the
15th day there is a violent Lunation in Virgo, and a Conjunction of the Sun and Mars a few days after in the same sign, in Square to Gemini the Ascendent of London, if ever the Papists put it upon a bloody desperate issue, it is now at this time. But I think they will not because I believe they have not Courage and impudence enough to do it, but I am sure they are willing Sol & Mars Conjuncti in Virgine, significat Essufionem sanguinis, and the reason is because it is a humane sign. Yet I am of the opinion that there will be divers sorts of Violence attend it, and blood may be as well shed by the Law, out of a Malicious design, as if it were done publickly by the hand of Mars. But I would now advise the People of England to provide themselves with Nets of all sorts, for they will shortly have great occasion to use them. Your Priests Nets ought to be made firm and good and as strong as if you were to Catch foxes and wild Boars in them; for they are a Crew of plaguy strong Rogues, Especially those that Carry Saints about with them, and for this sort of Game let your Nets be spread at Charing Cross, London Bridge, Gravesend, Dover and Portsmouth. But the Judges Nets need not be altogether so strong, such as you used to Catch Owles and Buzards which will do well enough: and your best places to spread them in are the Temple staires, Serjeants Inn Gates, and Chancery Lane: you may also try your Nets to Catch two or three Bishops; But in my opinion you had better Angle for them, and your best Bait, is a Cardinals Cap. with which you will be sure to Catch them: you must be also provided for some Mushroom Lords, it was the way formerly to Catch them by their honor,
but now you must not trust to that, for these never had either honor or honesty, and therefore your Nets and Tackling must be good. And for the rest of the Crowd, whether they are Knights, worthless Gentlemen, or any of the new Converted tender-Conscienced Catholicks in gross, you may Catch them as they do Larks in winter, with a Low-bell supposing it calls them to Mass. And when you have taken your game, pray be as kind to them as they deserve. Especially to Lord J—rys. SEPTEMBER. The Trine of the Sun and Jupiter at the End of the last month seems to indicate preferment to some Lawyer or Clergy man, or both: and the Trine of Jupiter and Mars at the beginning of this Month gives advancement to a Souldier for some Eminent service by him done either by Sea or Land. And also there seems to be a noise and report of some great body of men to meet about matters of State; either in Parliament or some other great Council, &c. Mars keeping Company with the Sun so Long will give an unwholsome and an un∣healthy season. Perhaps some new kind of feavers, or a distemper of the bowells may ensue. The Con∣junction of Mars and Mercury in Libra will Lay some knavish design either for Cheating or thieving. But their being so near the Sun beames, it may be discover∣ed before they are aware, and they rewarded before they are willing. OCTOBER. Here are no Less than five of the seven Planets in Libra and suddenly after four of them in Scorpio. And
all of them out of their dignities [termes excepted,] this can shew no other than great and frequent meetings to consult upon some affairs that seem to require both Speed and secrecy. The Planets are Saturn, the Sun, Ve∣nus and Mercury. Here are People of all sorts Con∣cerned in it: old, Young, Noble, Ignoble, Men, Women, Lawers, Statesmen, &c. Well let them go on with their designe, and manage it is well and as wisely as they and their Counsellors can Contrive. But in the Next place we find the Sun in Conjunction with Saturn in about 27 degrees of Libra: this is an untoward position, and I doubt will make some Peoples hearts ake. Saturn according to the Common notion in Astrology is strong in Libra, it being his Exaltation, and the Sun is weak there, it being his fall. So that the Sun is afflicted by the presence of Saturn, and I Expect the death of some great man for that reason, &c. the Eclipse of the Sun doth also shew the same, it being in the beginning of Scorpio among violent stars, and his death will be of the nature of Saturn, Mars, and Mercury: the Square of Jupiter and Mars from Capricorn and Libra shews some great Lawyer or Clergy man, or both, to be in an ill Condition, when the heavens frown, then it goes hard. In short, I can tell you that this will be a Month of more talk than trade. Farewell. NOƲEMBER This Month begins with two remarkable Aspects the first is the sextile of the Sun and Jupiter; this shews that there is a very great Lady in Europe, that will shortly Ascend to a very great degree of Honour and Grandeur, and Long may she injoy it with peace and plenty;
it is the Effects of her Midheaven to the body of the Moon and Sextile of Venns, the Trine of Jupiter not being far of: the second is the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars on the place of the Last Eclipse; This shews the ruin and destruction of many men that a few Months ago did little think thereof, and these, men of no small quallity; it falls in Scorpio the dignity of Mars and a fixt Sign, and will be therefore both violent and durable: Let them look to the Consequence thereof. These two Aspects would take up a whole treatise to Explaine them, but I am Consin'd to a small space of Paper, and I need not tell you any more Effects of this Month, for these very actions will drown all other affairs. God keep all quiet at home. DECEMBER Concludes this wonderful year, and indeed of the whole, the Latter part is most to be admired, because of the variety it produceth; for we find Venus on that Great Ladies Midheaven in Sextile to Mars, and Jupiter on the place of her Radical Moon, in Conjunction with Venus, and about three Months preceding, Jupiter Stationary on the degree [almost] of her Midheaven; greater positions cannot be to Concur so Exactly, and I doubt not but their Effects will be as Considerable, and glorious. Nay I might add yet another, and that is of Jupiter on the place of her Radical Moon in Sextile of Mars, who is in the beginning of Sagitary, in Exact sextile to her Radical Midheaven, and this near an Emi∣nent fixed Star of the Nature of Mars and Jupiter: and so I will Conclude with that passage of the Prophet Isaeiah Chap. 66. ver. 10. Rejoyce ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that Love her: Rejoyce for Joy with her, all ye that mourn for her.
SOME OBSERVATIONS and PREDICTIONS GATHERED OUT OF Mr. PARTRIDGES ALMANACK 1688. IN MAY The Sun enters Gemini, the Ascendant of London, and there in Trine to Saturn; and before the Sun gets through that Sign, he meets the Trine of Mars and the opposition of Jupiter, from Sagitary and Aquary, this will affect that City with some new model in its Councils and Government, and some alteration in the Militia and Souldiery. But be it what it will, it neither takes, nor pleaseth, but is opposed by those that were least suspected, and this gives occasion for a new Change among the Grandees of that Place, and this as well among Judges and Councellors as Clergy∣men; Popery will not do, neither is it a good way to pro∣mote it, to prefer scandalous Favourers of it. The Month Ends with murmuring, and news from divers parts, Spain, Germany and the Northern King∣doms.
Who ever he is that hath Saturn in opposition, and Mars in square to his giver of life, will be sick and crazy, and in some danger thereby, but it will go over, and no such consequence follow as was and is feared, how∣ever old men must dye. Mars in opposition to Mercury from Leo & Aquary, gives a great noise of some new plot and conspiracy. hence follows accusations for treason, others out of favour at Court, and this concerns the two Nations of England and France: besides this, there is a discovery and apprehension of Clippers and Coiners, and other such like trades-men, and some great Bankers or Mer¦chants retire, which is commonly called breaking. Europe it now in great expectation of some great action or thing to be done in the month following. The Moon, who signifies the people in general, and those of London in particular at this time, (by her position in Gemini, the Ascendant of that City) is doubly cadent, in the twelfth house, and in Gemini the twelfth Sign from her own house, likewise affli∣cted by Jupiter and Mercury; this shews that the peo∣ple of England will suffer considerably by Losses Dis∣contents, Abuses, &c. But as the Moon is in an active Sign in the ascending part of Heaven, and also among the Stars of Orion, which tho in part is a misfortune, yet it gives in the conclusion, Resolution and Cou∣rage; and for that reason the People of that Nation shall again take Courage and release themselves from the Oppressions they now labour under, and this I say in a few months; for it doth indeed not reach to Years: and this is confirmed by the square of Jupiter and Mercury, who are the two Stars that personate
and describe the King and Governours of that Nation; for Mercury is under the Sun beams, which shews the Curse of Diseases, and Jupiter is in a Zodiacal parallel with Mars, which shews want of mony, and also danger of death; these considered plainly shews a Catastro∣phe approaching, and that there will be a change in that Kingdom, and Government also, and this in a short time. But yet there are some other things that ought to be taken notice of and mentioned, as effects caused by these Aspects, and then we must consider Jupiter as Lord of the tenth, and Mercury of the seventh House, and the Moon Lady of the fourth and fifth Houses from the tenth; this shews great and high contests between that King and some other neighbouring Princes or States; and that these things shall be debated and ma∣naged with much industry on both sides: But in the end it shall be to that Kings disadvantage and loss; some Ambassador of his shall be trickt, and put upon to his shame and disparagement; the reason is, because the Moon who doubly signifies Ambassadors, is afflicted by Mercury, Lord of the seventh House. But perhaps you may ask, Why this should be the con∣cern of England? Why not of some other Nation or Coun∣try as well as that? To this I answer, I cannot deny▪ but it doth con∣cern some other Kingdomes and Cities; for I know it doth; but it doth in particular, and more remarkably concern that Prince and Nation, and that for these rea∣sons following; First, the Sun and Venus are in the as∣cendant of England, in opposition to Saturn; Secon∣dly, the Moon is in Gemini the Ascendant of London, and
there opposed by Jupiter, Lord of the tenth, the Sig∣nificator of Kings, and squared by Mercury from the tenth House also; and Thirdly and Lastly, because Saturn is in opposition to that Princes part of Fortune in his Radix, and that giver of life, Ptolo. lib. 3. cap. 12, 13. and will in a few months be directed to a malle∣fick ray of Saturn, which very aptly agrees with this present position and Aspects; but the particulars you must expect in my next years, the effects mentioned not being to happen within the compass of this. The further Effects of these Configurations gives ground for discontents, that breeds Grudges and ill opinions, and these beget Differences, Debates, and Disputes about Property, Priviledges, and Religion, which suddenly after the Ingress will appear, and the result of Counsels then be put in practice,—the tenth House signifieth Princes, the eleventh their Ex∣checquer and Treasury, on the Cusp of which the Sun is placed, in opposition to Saturn, and square to Mars the Lord thereof; hence, the want of Mony and ways to get it may be a cause either of the deferring or diverting the designs now intended for some time; for at this time the Princes of Europe are not richly provided, and so I come to speak of the Sun in Aries, and of those Aspects with which he is beheld, &c. The Sun going to the Square of Mars on the cusp of the Seventh House, and Saturn and Mars to a Square also, considered with the Opposition of the Sun and Saturn, doth according to the Rules of A∣strology shew a War will break out in the former part of this Year 1687, and this for some old Grudge, that hath long layn sleeping, because Saturn the Pa∣tron
of Malice is under the Earth, and there afflict's both Mars and the Sun, and this seems to be a Con∣federate War, and managed with much Courage and Resolution on both sides; but let those that begin it Expect to smart by it, and feel the Effects of a rash giddy action. For the Sun soon after the Ingress, joins with Mer∣cury, a rash giddy brain'd fellow, who immediately gives his Advice and Council, and so they fall soul on Saturn and Mars, and break the peace; and indeed it is no hard matter for a man at any time to begin a quarrel, if he will run the risk of a broken head. But I judge there will be some body, or other in this broil that may begin it, but shall never live to see the end thereof; for you see the Sun is going to the Square of Mars on the seventh, the tenth from the tenth, this shews the beginner that his success shall be vain, which will vex and grieve him sore, and then the Sun goeth to the opposition of Saturn in the fifth, the eighth from the tenth; this shews his death so plain and naturally, that a Painter with choice colours could not draw it more to the life, &c. Thus much of the general Effects of these positions, I now come to the rest that are more particular either to Nations or private persons. The parts of Heaven from whence the Rays and Beams are reciprocally cast, are Cardinal Signs, the Stars and Planets are the Sun, Saturn and Mars, to which we may also add the Moon, Jupiter, and Mercury, these personate the Great Men of Nations, the Favo∣rites and Counsellors of Princes, great Martial Offi∣cers, &c. Secretaries of State, Judges, Governours
of Towns, and such like, that call themselves Mem∣bers, or a part of the Government. Now among these People there will be many sudden and violent Hurry-Canes, turning some out of Favour, others out of Place and Favour both; some prefer'd, and as soon found useless again; and among those of lower qua∣lity, Impeaching, Detecting and betraying one ano∣ther; either in hopes of Gold, or Reward of their Places, &c. The Kingdoms and Dominions were these things shall be most practicable, are Germany, France, Sweden and Denmark, but most in England; for that Nation seems to be pointed at in particular, as you may easily see, if you do but consider Aries as Englands Horoscope, and Gemini as Londons; and thus will there be turning and overturning till the great turn comes, quod faxit Deus. And here by the way, give me leave to tell you, that it is convenient and reasonable that these things should be; for Nature observes an order and course in all her actions; for it seems as if things were now pre∣paring as fit matter for the Square of Saturn and Jupiter to work upon in the year 1688. and so forward; for then they make their first Square from Libra and Ca∣pricorn, and will give considerable actions and chan∣ges in the Kingdoms of Europe; and these Influences will be spent about Religion and Government; for Europe hat yet seen but the beginning of the Effects of Saturn and Jupiter; but in the year 1688 and in 1689 we shall see much more, when they come to a quartile at three several times, but most of all in 1692 and 1693, when they make three Oppositions from Gemini and Sagitary: And then I hope London may
begin to look a little like her self again; for about that time the Government of that City will be changed again, and I hope for the better. And I shall yet go further, and say, that the effects of that Conjunction in Leo will turn up Laws and Government, but settle none, I mean for a continu∣ance; and this let the thinking Reader observe in the following 16 years; Nay, there are but few King∣doms and Governments in Europe and its Dominions, but what shall receive a shock and damage even in their Fundamentals, under the effects of this Conjun∣ction in Leo; and the reason is, because Mars was with them in September 1682. and all three within a degree of each other: And so I come to sum up the whole in a few words. The Sun and Moon personate all Mankind in gene∣ral; the Sun represents Kings and Great Men, the Moon those of meaner Rank and Quality, and Mer∣cury is joyned with the Sun in signification. Now observe, the Sun and Mercury are both in parallel with Saturn, and he the Patron of Envy, Destruction, He∣resie, Schism and Popery. The Moon is in parallel with Jupiter and Mars, the Patrons of Liberty, Cou∣rage and Piety. Hence I judge the advantage is far greater for those last mentioned, than for the former; and in short, Popery, &c. will not stand in England ma∣ny months, nor in France many years, but decline and perish, which God of his Infinite Mercy hasten, and then Run Rogues.
His Advices to Germany, thou hast had the Blessing of Heaven, and thy good Stars: Let thy present Conquest against the Pagan Crescant satisfie thee; and now bend thy Force against the Christian Turk, and prosper, for thy Arms are still Victorious, if they are imployed as design'd by Heaven. Holland, reasume thy thy pristine Courage: Stand to thy Arms and be bold, and thou shalt yet plow the Ocean with success, and tame the Insolence of thy Enemies, A good Cause and Conscience, is better than a hated Monarch. Denmark, be wise betimes: Let not the promises of great Sums discover the weakness of a staggering Prince, and betray the Interest of a righteous Cause. Sweden, Thou art designed for a great and a good work; let not thy fears prevail. Venice, Thou mighty State, let the World still see that the blessing of God still attends thy Govern∣ment and Constitution, more than thy Religion. France, I must tell thee, that tho thou hast past the Sun to the mundane Square of Mars, yet the Zodia∣cal Square of Saturn is yet behind; prepare thy Soul to submit to Fate; and know that thou hast a three years mischief now at the door; Remember thy Vil∣lanies. England, Thou shalt yet make a further advance, for it is yet more than three months to the Harvest, and at thy appointed time shall thy deliverance come, even at that time when the Sun makes the Scorpion a second visit, and then will the Spanish Apple (that is an Orange) be grateful to the English Palates.
To the HONEST PROTESTANTS of England, &c. By way of EPILOGƲE GENTLEMEN, NOw to your Cost you've seen (with Greif & Tears) The tricking shams of the preceding Years, You that have seen, scorn'd to believe it then, Impos'd upon, even by the Worst of men. Thus folly still, help'd to compleat your fate, And all that can be said, you did repent too late. But come, Chear up: Heaven has reliev'd your need, 'Tis from that Throne your happy fate's decree'd, For when the Angel, Arm'd with anger flew, He had his orders then, to spare you too: A Little whipping is the Schollars due. Tho troops of Gods are brought you to caress, The dextrous art of Priest's and Idleness, Religions Scandal, to increase Romes store, Which Fools believe, and Madmen do adore. Tricks made by Priest's th' Ignorant to surprise, Who Sacred Writ, and reason doe despise.
But you know better, and have oft been told, Of those damn'd Cheats, you know they want your gold. Preserve your Faith, your Ancestors have won; You know the Truth, the Mystick three in one; Stoop not to Idols, nor lay reason by, Give not your Faith up, nor yet tamely dye, The Sun is up, the Actors fill the stage, And now you see, a twelve month's not an Age. Let England henceforth loath Rome's fulsome Whore, And that damn'd Cheat be never thought on more. THE SPIRIT of POPERIE Truly Represented in VERSE by Mr. J. Partridge. TOucht with a teeming Strain of English growth, My burning Muse into a blaze breaks forth. In Sacred passion; Scorns to be affraid, Of those vast Murders pious Rome hath made. A gracious Mother, merciful and good, Her thoughts are Murder, and her Bosom's Blood.
The Priests of Rome are like their Mother, true, Lazy and Letcherous, yet obedient too: Furnisht with all the vice that nature gives, They are the onely Epicures that Lives. Yet they Converse with God, disperse their Prayers, Confess your Wives, and also get you Heirs. Of all the Arts the Devil yet made choice, This thing of Popery was his Master piece: For in revenge, (with heaven being at odds) He taught the Papists how to eat their Gods, Then't would not be amiss since thus they do, To make clear work and eat the Devil too. Can ye for swear your Faith, give God the lye? Cant with a Priest, and Lay your reason by; Lay down your wealth to serve the Church, and they That suck your blood, when they pretend to pray? Can yee be Priest-rid, and be aw'd by threats? Can yee believe a Crew of pious Cheats? Can ye believe a little Dough-bak'd God, A Conjuring Bell and a Good-fryday Rod, A Lying Legend, and a Priestly Curse, A Dish of Holy Water and a Cross? When Rome grows rampant, Hell it self contrives; When Satan Preacheth, Belzebub believes. What Man can think the Inquisition good Where Church-men wash their Hands in Lay-mens Blood? Can ye Adore a Cross, be damn'd in Jest, Cheat all your Senses, and believe a Priest?
Hereticks can't believe, ye're only fit, True Slaves to Rome will never question it. Should but a Priest say to his Zealot, Go, Murder that Heretick, it must be so: He dares not ask the Reason, goe's his ways, The Father says it, and the Fool obeys. What Man of sence, but must amazed stand, To see Fools act, what bloody Rogues command? Consider Spain and France, see what's there done, Ʋnder what plagues those Neighb'ring Nations groan: And all this done by Holy Churches Care; For where Priest's Sway, be sure Oppression's there. Priest! p—on the Name, I loath the very smell; They're wretched things, scarce good enough for Hell. The flux of Fate, that gives us hopes and fears, Sets Rome in Triumph, London all in Tears. That brood (by Flames) that made your City rue, Will if they can next burn your Bodies too. Rome's bloody Bigots London's Fate once Chang'd, Yet of a Crew of Rogues but one Fool hang'd. Apostate Church, a Faith built up in Blood, A Lazy Priest, a little senceless God: All their Religion's Lyes, its proof's a sin; When Scripture failes, then Miracles come in. Yet n'er forget, nor yet forgive the Knaves, While Martyr'd Godfrey's blood for Venegeance Craves.
Creation! what is that, what noise ye make! The thing's not strange, the Priests that undertake. Nay, And do more: the Church hath here the odds, God made but Man, but now the Priests make Gods. Never be bubbl'd by a Popish lye, Rather than that, resolve, Revenge, and dye. Let not Romes Court, how proud so er'e expect, O're English Men her Lawless Laws t' Erect: Nor let the Popish brood think to controul, One single Attom of a true English Soul. God Loaths their Worship, they hate Holy Writ; We hate their Faith, Hell waits to punish it. The Authors Farewell to his Book. GO little Brat, Expected by the Just; Hated by Villains, and by Papists Curst: Thy foes are such, whom time it self shall hate; Whose horrid actions shall compleat their fate. Fools, Villains, Traytors, by true Name descry'd; Was ever Cards with such a Pack supply'd? But here's thy Comfort, go and tell about, The Fools that pull'd 'em in, shall kick 'em out. Gird up thy Loins, begon, thou'rt call'd away; For time and tide make the whole World obey, Go tell thy Friends, and let them think upon't, The Ancient Government the Kingdoms want: No Plots grow there, poor Mankind to abuse; Those little Tricks of State that Tyrants use:
No Cut Throats there do Murder with applause; No Burning Cities to promote the Cause: No Charters seiz'd for Rome by new found writ, Nor City Rights question'd as they thought fit, And Rogues made Judges to determine it. No Monster of a Mouth we there yet saw Made Judge of Equity, that ne'r knew Law; Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potentem Imposuit: fixit Leges precio, atque refixit. No Judges are permitted there to live, That dread the Sentence the grave Senate give; That punish Treason, under which they groan, Villains unparallel'd, Excell'd by none: No fidling Justice there perks up his Head, Preferr'd to Cheat the Church that gave him Bread, A snarling Curr, kept under Chain and Clog, Performs the Office of a watchful Dog; Cambridge, that cry'd him up, now calls him Rogue. No Priests sit there in Council, nor debate Their Jugling politicks to plague the State, The only Curse poor England felt of Late, No Burtons, Grahams, Rogues set up in spight; To squeeze and plague the people, not do right. Such Villains in a State are only fit To grace a Gallows, and hang under it. FINIS.
