R1657G 99827723 197974
Robin Hoods Chase. OR, A Merry Progress between Robin Hood and King Henry. Shewing how Robin Hood led the King his Chase, from London to London, and when he had spoken with the Queen, he returned to merry Sherewood. To the Tune of, Robin Hood and the beggar. COme you gallants all, to you I do call with hey down, down, an a down, that now is within this place, For a song I will sing, of Henry the King, how he did Robin Hood chase. Queen Katherine she a match did make, with hey, &c. as plinly doth appear, For three hundred tun of good red Wine, and three hundred tun of beer. But yet her Archers she had to seek, with hey, &c. with their Bows and Arrows so good, But her mind was bent, with a good intent to send for bold Robin Hood. And when bold Robin hood he came there with hey, &c. Queen Katherine she did say: Thou art welcome Locksly said the Quéen and all thy Yeomen gay. For a match of shooting I have made, with hey, &c. and thou on my part must be: Robin. If, miss the mark, be it light or dark, then hanged I will be, But when the Game it come to be play'd with hey, &c. bold Robin then drew nigh, with his Mantle of green, most brave to be séen he let his Arrows flye. And when the Game it ended was, with hey, &c. bold Robin wan it with a grace, Then after the King was angry with him and vowed he would him chase. What though his pardon granted was, with hey down, &c. while he with them did stay, Yet after the King was vex'd at him, when he was gone his way. Soon after the King from the Court did hye, with hey, &c. in a furious angry mood, And did often enquire, both far and near, after bold Robin Hood. And when the King to Nottingham came with hey, &c. bold Robin was in the wood: O come now said he, and let me see, who can find me bold Robin Hood. But when that Robin Hood he did hear, with hey down, down an a down, the King had him in chase: Then said little John, 'tis time to be gone and go to some other place.
THen away they went from merry Sherwood with hey down, &c. and into Yorkshire he did hye, And the King did follow, with a hoop and a hollow, but could not come him nigh. Yet jolly Robin he passed along, with hey, &c. he went to Newcastle town, And then stayed he, hours two or three, and then he for Barwick was gone. When the King did see how Robin did flee with hey, &c. he was vexed wondrous sore, VVith a hoop and a hollow, he vow'd him to follow, & take him, or never give o're. Come now let's away, then cry'd Little John, with hey, &c. let any man follow that dare, To Carlisle we'l hye, with our company, and so then to Lancaster. From Lancaster then to chester they went hey down, &c. and so did King Henry, Then Robin away, for he durst not stay, for fear of some treachery. Says Robin, let us to London go, with hey, &c. to see our noble Queens face, It may be she wants our company, which make the King so us chase. VVhen Robin he came Quéen Katherine before with hey, &c. he fell low upon his knee, If it please your Grace, I am come to this place, for to speak with King Henry; Quéen Katherine she answer'd bold Robin again, with hey, &c. the King is gone to merry Sherewood, And when he went away, to me he did say, he would go seek Robin Hood. Then fare you well my Gracious quéen, with hey, &c. for to Sherewood I will hye apace, For fain would I sée, what he would with me if I could méet his Grace. When as King Henry he came home, with hey, &c. full weary and full vexed in mind, Then he did hear, Robin had been there, and blamed Dame Fortune unkind. You are welcome home queen Katherine cry'd with hey, &c. Henry my Soveraign Liege, Bold Robin Hood, that archer good, your person hath been to seek. And when ing Henry he did hear, with hey, &c. that Robin had been there him to seek, This answer he gave, he's a cunning knave I have sought him this whole thrée wéek A boon, a boon, Queen Kaherine cry'd with hey, &c. I beg it here on your Grace, To pardon his life, and seek no more strife, and so endeth Robin Hoods Chase. FINIS. London, printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
