10380.5 24456557 27689
ARCTICLES TO BE INQVI∣RED OF, IN THE VISITATION OF the most Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, by the Providence of GOD, Lord Arch-bishop of York, Pri∣mate of England, and Me∣tropolitane. Had in the Yeere of our Lord God, 1636. LONDON Printed by JOHN NOR∣TON. 1636.
The Advertisemnt. THe Minister, and Church-wardens are to call unto them the Neyghboures of the Parish, and out of them to make choyce (according to the custome of the place) of two of the discreetest parishioners to be Side-men, and they al∣together are to reade over these Articles divers times. Then, after they have duely considered of them, they are to write their answere or presentment unto every Article particularly, and truely, according to their consciences. Lastly, they are all of them to bring their presentments to the Visitation, and there the Church-wardens, and Side-men upon their oathes (but the Minister according to the Canon in that behalfe) are to deliver them up under their handes. The oath to bee ministred to the Church-wardens, & Sworne men. YOu shall sweare, that all affection, favour, hatred, hope of reward, and gaine, or feare of dis∣pleasure or malice set aside: you shall upon due con∣sideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such person of, or within your Parish, as hath committed any offence or fault, or made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected, and defamed of any such offence, fault or default: wherein you shall deliver uprightly, and according to truth; neyther of malice presenting any contrary to truth; nor of corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceale the truth, having in this action God before your eyes with an earnest zeale to mayntaine truth, & to suppresse Vice; so helpe you God, and the contents of this Booke.
Touching the Church, Church-yard, Parsonage, and Vicarage-house FIrst, whether your Church, Chappell, and Chancell be well, and sufficiently repaired in the walls, and roofe, the Seats conveni∣ent, the floore paved, the windowes glazed, your Bells in tune, and all these cleanely kept, and the mansion-house of your Parson or Vicar, with the building thereunto be∣longing, be likewise well, and sufficiently repayred, and your Church-yard well fenced with walls, rayles, or payles, and cleanely kept. 2 Whether hath your Church or Church-yard beene abused, and prophaned by any fighting, chiding, brawling or quarrel∣ling, any playes, Lords of misrule, summer Lords, morris, dan∣cers, pedlers, bowlers, bearewards, butchers, feasts, schooles, temporall courts, o Leets, Lay Iuries, musters, or other pro∣phane usage in your Church or Church-yard, any hells super∣stitiously rung on Holidayes or their eeves, or at any other time without good cause allowed by the Minister, and Church-war∣dens: have any Trees beene felled in your Church-yard, and by whom? 3 Whether are your Almes-houses, and Church-House if you have any sufficently repayred, mayntained, and to godly, and their right use imployed? 4 Whether have you in your Church all things necessary for common prayer, as the Bible in the largest volume, the books of common Prayer, the booke of Homilies allowed, two bookes of common Prayer, a convenient Pulpit for the preaching, a decent seat for the Minister to reade Service in, conveniently placed, a strong chest, with three lockes and keyes, one for the Minister, the other for the Church-wardens for the keéping of the Register booke of the Christnings, Marriages, and Buri∣als, and a poore mans boxe with three locks; conveniently placed neere the Church doore?
5 Whether have you in your Church a font of stone for bap∣tisme set in the ancient usuall place: a decent table for the com∣munion conveniently placed, covered with silke, or other decent stuffe in time of Divine Service, and with a faire linnen cloth over that, at the administration of the Communion? 6 Whether have you all such bells, ornaments, and other uten∣sils as have anciently belonged to your Church, a communion-cup of silver with a cover, a faire standing pot or two of pewter or purer metall for the wine upon the communion table, a come∣ly Surplesse with sleeves, a Register booke of parchment, for christnings, marriages, & burials, a booke for the names of all strange preachers, subscribed with their names, and the name of the Bishop, or other, by whom they had license to preach. 7 Whether is the Almes for the poore duely distributed, and are the names, & surnames of all persons married, christened, and buried, and of their parents, with the day, and yeere entred in your parchment Register booke? 8 Whether are ye ten Commandements set up in your Church or Chappell, and other chosen sentences of holy Scripture up∣on the walls in convenient places, and the Table of the degrees prohibited in marriage, set forth 1563? 9 Whether have you in your Church or Chappell the booke of the Canons agreed upon in the convocation holden at London Anno. Dom. 1603. and confirmed by his Maiesties royall autho∣rity, and whether your Minister have read the same in your Church or Chappell once every yeere, according to his Maie∣sties Iniunctions in that behalfe? Touching the Ministery, Service, and Sacraments. VVHether is the common prayer said or sung by your Mi∣nister both morning, & evening, distinctly, & reverently every Sunday, and Holiday, and on their eeves, and at conve∣nient and usuall times of those dayes, and in most convenient place of the Church for the edifying of the people? 2 Whether doth your Minister observe the orders, rites, & ce∣remonies prescribed in the booke of common prayer, in reading holy Scriptures, prayers, & administration of the Sacraments
without diminishing (in regard of preaching or any other re∣spect) or adding any thing in the manner or forme thereof? 3 Whether doth your Minister on wednesdaies, and fridaies not being holidaies, at the accustomed houres of service, resort to the Church, and say the ordinary prayers, and Letany pre∣scribed? And doth your Clarke or Sexton give warning before by tolling of a bell on those daies? 4 Whether any Minister leaving the use of the Font, doe in your Church or Chappell christen or baptize in any basons, or other profane vessells: or whether your Minister do baptize or christen any out of the face of the Church, & Congregation with∣out speciall cause, or without Godfathers or Godmothers: And whether any person or persons be admitted to answere as God∣father, & Godmother at the christening of any child, except he or sh have before received the holy Communion: and whether doth your Minister in ye baptizing of children, observe ye orders rites, & ceremonies appointed, & prescribed in the booke of com∣mon prayer, without addition omission or other innovation? 5 Whether doe you know any Parents that keepe children unchristened, or that were not christened at their owne Parish Church or Chappell, & for what cause they remaine yet unchri∣stened, or have not beene christened at their Parish Church or Chappell: or doe you know, have heard, or vehemently suspect any parents, whose children have beene christened by any Po∣pish Priest, or otherwise than by the lawes of the Church of England is allowed? 6 Whether doth your Minister as oft as he administreth the communion, first receive it himselfe in both kinds, and whether doth he use in the administration any bread, and wine newly brought before it be set upon the Communion Table, and the words of consecration be rehearsed, & doth he deliver the bread, and wine to every communicant severally in such sort as is prescribed? 7 Whether doth your Minister give warning publikely in the Church at Morning prayer ye Sunday before he administreth the communion for the better preparation of the parishioners? and whether doth he administer the Sacraments so often as that every parishioner may receive thrice in the yeere at the least, whereof Easter to be one?
8 Whether hath your Minister administred the Communion to any but such as kneele, or doe you know any that refuse to kneele: hath he administred to any that are under Ecclesiasti∣call censure, as for refusing to bee present at publike Prayer, or who hath depraved the booke of common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments or the Rites, & Cere∣monies, prescribed, or the Articles of Religion agreed upon, or the Booke of ordering Deacons▪ Priests▪ & Bishops, or against his Majesties Supremacy: or hath committed other the like en∣ormities, and what be their names? 9 Whether hath your Minister more Benefices than one: if he have, how far distant are they, how often is he absent in the yeere? when he is absent from your parsonage or vicaradge, hath he a licensed Preacher for his Curate? 10 Whether your Churches or Chappels be or have beene destitute of a Curate? And how long, and by whose default? And whether any Curate have served, or doe serve without li∣cense of the Ordinary? or doe any officiate in any cure that is not in holy orders. 11 Whether doe youknow any Popish Priests, Seminary, Jesuite, or runnagate persons, that doe preach, say Masse, or mi∣nister any Popish Sacrament or ceremonies, or else doe resort secretly or openly into your Parish: And whose house doe they resort unto and of whom are they harboured, and what be the names of such Popish Priests, Seminaries, Iesuites, or Runna∣gates▪ and such as so harbour and releeve them? 12 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or any other per∣son in your parish be a favourer of the Romish Church or Reli∣gion, or any other Sect or Schismaticall opiniō, or hath or doth maintaine or teach any doctrine contrary or repugnant to Gods Word or to any of the Articles agreed upon by the Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, An. Dom. 1562. And whe∣ther they have taught publiquely or secretly any doctrine ten∣ding to the discredit, and disprayse either of the Booke of Com∣mon Prayer, or of the Preachers, and Ministers of the Word, and Sacraments, or of the received order for government by Arch-bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch-deacons, and other offi∣cers in the Church of England, or make any other innovati∣on▪ And whether have they permitted any man so teaching
or making such innovation, and not made the same knowne. 13 Whether is your Minister an allowed Preacher: if he be, doth he every Sunday in your Church or some other next ad∣ioyning, where no Preacher is, preach? 14 Whether doth your Minister being no Preacher allowed presume to expound the Scripture in his owne Cure or else∣where: doth he procure every month a Sermon to be preached in his cure by preachers lawfully licenced, and on every Sun∣day when there is no Sermon, doth he or his Curate reade some one of the Homilies prescribed? 15 Whether your Minister doe openly every Sunday after he have read the second Lesson at Morning & Evening praier, ad∣monish & warne the Church-wardens, & Sworne men to looke to their charge, & to observe who offend in absenting themselves negligently or wilfully from their Parish-church or Chappell, or unreverently use themselves in time of divine Service? 16 Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinary under his hand, & seale to serve for your cure, and whether doth he serve two Churches or Chappells in one day? whether is he Dea∣con at the least, & what stipend hath he for serving the cure? 17 Whether doth your Minister alwaies in saying publike prayer, & administring the Sacraments, weare a decent surplesse with sleeves & being a graduate, doth he alwayes weare there∣with a hood by ye order of the Vniversity, agreeable to his degree? 18 Whether hath your Minister or any other Preacher in your church, preached any thing to confute or impugne any do∣ctrine delivered by any other Preacher, & hath he, & they prayed for Christs Catholike Church, the Kings Majesty, the Lords Arch-bishops, and Bishops, &c. as is prescribed, Canon 55. 19 Whether hath or doth any preach in your Church, which re∣fuseth to conforme himselfe to the Lawes, Rites, & Ordinances established, or which hath not first shewed a sufficient license. 20 Whether doth your Minister in his sermons foure times in the yeere at the least, teach, and declare the Kings Majesties power within his realmes to be the highest power under God, to whom all within the same owe most loyalty, and obedience, and that all forraine power is iustly abolished? 21 Whether doth your Minister every Sunday, and Holiday
halfe an houre before Eevening prayer or more, or at some other convenient time at Eevening prayer examine, and instruct the youth in the ten Commandements, the Beleefe, the Lords Prayer, & the Catechisme, set forth in the Booke of Common prayer, and whether doe the Church-wardens assist the Mini∣ster herein? 22 Whether hath your Minister married any which have not beene three severall Sundaies or Holydaies asked in your Church in the time of divine service, without licence or without a ring: or hath he with licence or without, married any, where∣of neyther dwelt in your Parish? 23 Whether hath your Minister with licence or without, married any, at any other times than betweene the houres of eight, and twelve in the Forenoone, or in any private house, or when there is no licence, before the Parents, and Governours (the parties being under the age of 22. yeeres) have testified their consents? 24 Whether hath your Minister declared to the people every Sunday at the time appointed, what Holidaies, and Fasting∣daies be that weeke following: doth he being a Preacher confer with all recusants, and persons excommunicate or suspended? being no Preacher doth he procure a sufficient Preacher to reclaime them thereby? 25 Whether doth your Minister keepe a note of all persons excommunicated, and declared so to be, and once every sixe moneths doth he denounce them which have not obtained their absolution on some Sunday in service time, that others may be admonished to refraine their company? 26 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, be diligent in disiting the sicke, and comforting them, and whether they bury their dead in such christian, and comely manner as is prescribed in the Booke of Common prayer, and whether any Lay man, other than a lawfull Minister, hath taken upon him to bury the dead contrary to Order? 27 Whether hath your Minister refused to baptize any childe brought to the Church, or to bury any corps brought into the Church or Church-yard, or to Church any woman, having had convenient warning thereof?
28 Whether hath your Minister being truely informed of the danger of death of any infant vnbaptized, and being destred to go to the place where the child is, to baptize it, neglected to go, by meanes whereof the child hath dyed unbaptized? 29 Whether doth your Minister at any time preach or admi∣nister the Communion in any private House except when they are so impotent that they cannot goe to Church; or very danger∣ously sicke? 30 Whether doe any Chaplens in your Parish, preach, or admi∣nister the Sacrament in any Chappell not consecrated, or in any House having no Chappell allowed by Law, and doe the Lords, and Masters where such Chappels are, resort often to the Pa∣rish-church, and there receive the Communion once at the least every yeere? 31 Whether hath your Minister held or appointed any pub∣like fast not appointed by Authority, or beone present at such: doth he or any other in your Parish hold any lecture or exercise, or attempt by Fasting, or Prayer, or otherwise, to cast out any Devils, without the privity, and allowance of the Bishop under his Hand, and Seale? 32 Whether hath there beene any secret Conventicles or mee∣tings in your Parish by any Priests. Ministers, or others, ten∣ding to the depraving of the forme of Prayer, Doctrins or Go∣vernment of the Church? 33 Whether doth your Minister weare decent apparell, doth he in publike goe in his Doublet, and Hose, without a Coate, or Cassocke, or Cloake, and doth he weare any unseemely, and light∣coloured apparell? 34 Whether doth your Minister make accustomed resort to: any Taverns, or Ale-houses, except for his honest necessities or doth he boord or lodge in any such place, doth he use any base or servile labour, or frequent drinking, riot, dice, cards, tables, or any other vnlawfull games: is he contentious with his neigh∣bours, or a Hunter, Hanker▪ swearer, dancer, usurer suspected of incontinency, or doth give evill example of life? 35 Whether is there in your Parish any Minister or Deacon who hath forsaken his calling, using himselfe in his course of life as a meere Lay man.
36 Whether is his Majesties declaration lately published for quieting, and silencing the controversies lately stirred up to the disturbance of our Church with new questions, strictly obser∣ved by your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or whomsoever else that preacheth in your Church? 37 Whether doth your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, catechize the youth of the Parish in your Church, every Sun∣day after dinner by question, and answere; and apply his after∣noone preaching, and exhortation, to the instructing, and edifying of the congregation in that kind of catechizing if he Preach? 38 Whether have you in your Parish any weeke-day Lecture, or not? And if you have, by whom is the same performed; whe∣ther by one particular man thereto licensed, or by sundry neigh∣bour Ministers, and whether are the publike prayers alwaies read, before such lecture, and sermons, in his surplesse, and hood, according to his Majesties instructions lately set forth? 39 Whether are there any within your Parish (under the de∣gree of Noblemen, and men qualified by Law) who doe keepe any private Chaplaines in their Houses? Touching Ecclesiasticall Courts. FIrst, whether the Chancellor, Commissaries, or any other using Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction in this Diocesse, their Re∣gisters, or Actuaries, Apparitors or Sumners, have at any time beene corrupt in their places, or taken any excessive fees, or win∣ked at, & suffred any Adulteries, Fornications, Incests, or o∣ther faults, or offences to passe, & remaine unpunished, and uncor∣rected, or have commuted any penance without speciall licence of the Bishop? 2 Whether doe you know that there hath beene any commu∣tation of penance, allowed of by the Ordinary in your Parish: and whether hath your Minister publikely signified it to his Congregation, what summes of money have therefore beene payd, and whether have the sayd summes of money, or part thereof beene distributed by your Minister, and Church-war∣dens to the poore, or otherwise imployed to some such godly, and charitable use, as was prescribed by the Ordinary? 3 Whether do you know any housholder, or other person
whatsoever, within your Parish or Chappelry that is deceased yt has made his last Will, and Testament, and the same not hi∣therto beene proved, nor administration taken from the Ordi∣nary or other Iudge competent? 4 Whether hath your Chancellor, Commissary, or other exercising Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, heard any matter of of∣fice privately in their Chamber, without their sworne Registers, or their Deputies presence, or in their absence, of such other per∣sons as the Law doth allow for an Actuary in such a case. Touching Schoole-masters. FIrst, whether have you in your Parish any Schoole-master, who teacheth either in publike Schoole or private House, whether is he reputed to be of sound Fayth, and Religion, doth he resort duely to Church, and receive the Communion, or doth he give any evill example of life, is he allowed by the Ordinary under his hand, and seale: or doth your Minister or Curate teach, and is he allowed in like manner? 2 Whether doth your Minister or Schoole-master, who tea∣cheth the Catechisme by Authority set forth, doth he when there is any Sermon or divine Service, bring his schollers to Church, & see them quietly, and reverently ordered, doth he examine them after their returne, what they have learned of the Sermon? 3 Whether doth he at other times teach them such sentences of Holy Scripture, as may induce them to all godlinesse, doth he teach the Grammar set forth by King Henry the eight, con∣tinued by King Edward the sixt, and Queene Elizabeth? 4 Whether hath your, Schoole-master an Vsher under him, are they both diligent, is your Vsher allowed by the Ordina∣ry doth your Schoole-master direct bis Vsher the forme, & man∣ner of teaching, and doth he weekely take account of him, and the Schollers under his charge, how they have profited, and what they have learned, and out of what Authors? 5 Whether hath eyther of them spoken, writ, or taught a∣gainst any thing whereunto he formerly subscribed, as the Kings Supremacy, the Articles of Religion, Booke of Common prayer, or any thing therein contained?
Touching the Parish-Clarke, and Sexton. FIrst, whether have you a Parish-Clarke appointed by ye Mi∣nister, sufficient for his place, of the age of twenty yeeres at the least, is he of honest conversation, can he read, write, and sing, is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to his Minister in the time of Divine Service, and otherwise? 2 Whether doth your Clarke not being in holy orders meddle with any thing above his office, as Churching of women, Bury∣ing the dead, Reading of prayers, or such like? 3 Whether doth your Clarke or Sexton keepe your Church cleane, the dores safe locked, is any thing (by his default) lost or spoyled in the Church, doth he suffer any untimely Ringing, or any prophane exercise to be committed in your Church? 4 Whether doth your Clarke or Sexton, when any is passing out of this life, neglect to toll a bell, having notice thereof: or ye party being dead, doth he suffer any more Ringing than one short peale, & before his buriall one, and after the same another. 5 Whether doth any of your Parish refuse to pay unto the pa∣rish Clarke or Sexton such wages as are unto them due, & have beene accustomably payd? Touching Parishioners. FIrst, whether hath any in your Parish spoken against, or any way impugned ye Kings Majesties supremacy in Causes Ec∣clesiasticall, the Truth, and Doctrine of the Church of England, the forme of Gods worship contained in the booke of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments? 2 Whether there be any person or persons knowne or vehe∣mently suspected to have written, printed, or by any meanes, pub∣lished, and dispersed, or otherwise to have, or to have had in his or their use or keeping, any Popish bookes or libels, or any of those slanderous or schismaticall, & seditious libels, or other books, that impeach the booke of common Prayer, or the Religion, & Eccle∣siasticall government, or any other part thereof, established by Law in this Realme, or doth impeach the credit or estate of any Ecclesiasticall person or governour within the same? 3 Whether hath any in your Parish spoken against or impug∣ned the Articles of Religion, agreede upon in Anno. Do. 1562. the rites, and ceremonies established in the Church, ye govern∣ment
by Arch-bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch-deacons, and o¦thers that beare office in the same? 4 Whether hath any in your Parish spoken against or impug∣ned the forme of making, and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, or have any separated themselves from the society of the Congregation, and combined in a new Brother-hood or de∣praved the Synods of the Church of England held by the Kings Authority? 5 Whether hath any in your Parish maintained or defended any such Ministers or Schoole-masters as refuse to subscribe to the order of the Church, have they affirmed that such Ministers, and adherents may make Rules, & Orders in causes Ecclesiasti∣call, without the Kings Authority? 6 Whether doth any in your Parish prophane, violate, or mis∣spend the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, or Holidaies appoynted in the Church of England, using any offensive con∣versation, or worldly labour in those dayes, or any of them: or is there any that wilfully refuse, or negligently hath absented himselfe from Divine Prayers on Sundayes or Holidayes? 7 Whether doth any in your Parish, in ye time of Divine Ser∣vice use to sit with his hat on his head: or is there any who hath not reverently kneeled when the generall Confession, Letany, and other prayers are read, & which have not stood up at the say∣ing of the Beleefe. 8 Whether hath any in your Parish disturbed the Service or Sermon, by walking talking, or any other way, or departed out of the Church during the Service, or Sermon, without some ur∣gent cause, or loytered about the Church or Church-porch? 9 Whether there be any in your Parish, man or woman, being about fifteene yeere of age, that hath not received the Holy Com∣munion, thrice at the least every yeere, & namely at Easter las or thereabouts for once: & whether any abandoning his or thr Parish Church, have received the Holy Communion in any ∣ther Parish Church or Chappell, or private place? 10 Whether hath any parent beene urged to be presented, or ad∣mitted to answere as Godfathers for his owne child, or hath any God father or Godmother made any other answer, or speech than is prescribed by the Booke, or have any bin admitted for God∣fathers
fathers or God-mothers, at Baptisme, who have not first recei∣ved the Communion? 11 Whether doe all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Mistresses, come, & cause their children, servants, and Apprentices to come duely to the Church, and according to the Ministers direction to be instructed, and catechized, or who be they that have not obeyed the Minister herein? 12 Whether have any persons married together within the Degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity prohibited, set forth in a Table, appoynted to be placed in every Church: or have any married or contracted themselves under the age of one, and twen∣ty yeeres, without the consent of their Parents, or Gover∣nours, if their parents be dead? 13 Whether have any persons, once lawfully married, forsaken each other, or doe live asunder otherwise than by law is per∣mitted: or doe any, being divorced or separated, marry againe the former Wife or Husband yet living? 14 Whether hath any of your Parish unreverently used your Minister, or have any layd violent Hands upon him, or disgraced his office, and calling, by word or deede? 15 Whether have you in your Parish any Popish Recusant or maintayner of popish doctrine, or suspected to keepe or disperse Schismaticall bookes, or to favour any Hereste or errour? 16 Whether have you any common resorters to your Church which are not of your Parish, abandoning their owne Parish Church, or doe any such receive the communion amongst you: what be their names, and of what parishes are they? 17 Whether hath any upon any Sunday or Holiday opened their shops, exercised their trade, or used any gaming, bin in any Tavern or Ale-house, or otherwise ill imploied in the time of Divine Service? Whether are there in your Parish any adulterers, fornica∣trs, incestuous persons, bawds, receivers of defamed persons, close favourers, conveyers away of such, or which suffer to de∣part any incontinent person unpunished, or are there in your Pa∣rish any blasphemers, common swearers, drunkards, ribawds, usurers, malicious slanderers, scolds or sowers of discord, or any defamed of the same crune?
19 Whether doe any in your Parish administer the goods of ye dead, without authority, or supresse their Will or Testament: have any Executors neglected to performe their Wils, especially in paying of Legacies given to the Church, to the poore, or to any other charitable or godly uses? 20 Whether doe any refuse to pay to the reparations, orna∣ments, & other things by Law required to be in your Church, as they are seased by Law: or are any dwelling out of your Pa∣rish, which hold land in your Parish, that refuse the like pay∣ment or seasement? 21 Whether have any not being of your Parish beene christned, churched, buried, or received the Communion, or beene married out of your Church, both parties dwelling in your Parish? 22 Whether have all women in your Parish delivered of child, come at convenient time after to Church, to give thanks, & have they beene Churched according to the forme of the Booke of common Prayer? 23 Whether hath ye Perambulation of the circuit of your Pa∣rish bin observed oncē every yeere, if not, by whose default is it? 24 Whether hath any in your Parish given the Church-war∣dens or Side-men or any of them evill words for doing their due∣ty according to their oath, and conscience, in making present∣ment for their default? 25 Whether there beany man or woman in your Parish, that useth witch-craft, sorcery, charmes, or unlawfull prayer or invo∣cations in Latine or English, or otherwise upon any Christian body or beast, or any that resorteth to the same for counsell, or helpe, and what be their names? 26 Whether there be any, that pretending themselves to be Physicians or Chirurgeons, do take upon them to practise Phy∣sicke, or Chirurgery, not being lawfully licensed thereunto, or which refuse to shew their sayd licence tō the Minister, or Cu∣rate, and Church-wardens of your Church or Chappell, when they shall be hereunto required? Touching Church-wardens, and Sworne-men. FIrst, whether doe any in your Parish take upon them to be Church-warden or Side-man, which is not lawfully chosen by ye Minister, & Parishioners, according to ye Canon, or do any
continue ye office longer than  yere,  chosen a¦gaine, or that it be a custome  war∣den to continue two yeers, a all such fficers yerely in Easter weeke? 2 Whether doe your Chu-wardens with  th at the most after their yeere  before the Minis Pari∣shioers, give up a iust acco of all such money &  they have received, & besed, have they  remai∣ning in their hands belong to their Church o ish, by Bill indented, to be delivere  the next Church 3 Whether have ye Church-rdens, with the  Mi∣nister, from time to time pded a sufficient quanti  white bread, & whoesome w for ye number of cocant. 4 Whether doe the Church-rdens, and Swornme before every visitation, and at oth times when there is  n meete and confer about th presentments, & the  ring of their Articles, & who hath (afer notice given him of th time and place) carelesly absented himselfe? 5 Whether the forfeitur  twelue pence, for  from Church, appoynted by St to ye use of the poore, , and levied by the Church-war, & imployed according  the said Statute: and whether i said forfeiture taken of all persons which stand wilfully suspnd or excommunicated? 6 Whether have any Church-wardens lost, sold, or detained any Goods, Ornaments, Bels, Rents, or Impets, of the Church? 7 Whether doe, you the Church wardenns, and S, about the middest of divine Service, usually walke out ye Church, and see who are abroad in any-Ale-house, or elsewhere about, or evilly imployed, and have u presented all such offnders to the Ordinary? 8 Whether doe you kno or have heard a fame of any offence committed, or duty omitt by any of your Parish before your time, & heretofore not preseared by the former Church-wardens to the Ordinary, or as yet not reformed, and have you presented the same? 9 Finally, doe you know of any matter or cause which is a breach of the lawes Ecclicall here not expressed, & have you presented the same? FINIS.
