11380.7 33143383 28433
The two faithfull Friends. The pleasant History of Alexander and Lodwicke, who were so like one ano¦ther, that none could know them asunder: wherein is declared how Lodwike married the Princesse of Hungaria in Alexanders name, and how each night he layd a naked sword betweene him and the Princesse, because he would not wrong his friend. To the tune of Flying Fame. THe Emperor of Germany, a turney did Proclaime: Where many Princes of renowne, resorted to the same, Amongst the rest Prince Lodowike came and Guido Prince of Spaine; Prince Alexander likewise came great honours to obtaine. The Emperors promise was to giue to him that won the day, His only daughter as his bride: the Story thus doth say; The Champions entered the field, with carriage stout and bold: Lodowike of France, most manfully whose Armour shin'd like gold. Prince Alexander was the next that entred in the field, And like a champion stout and bold; he did aduance his shield: The haughty Spaniard with the rest his valour there did show, But Alexander by his strength, gaue him the ouerthrow. The valiant Prince of Hungary braue Alexander hee, From all the champions in the field he won the victory: Thus he by valour did obtaine the Princesse from them all, But yet in Hungary she liu'd that had his heart in thrall. The Emperor his promise kept, and to the Conqueror gaue: His only daughter for his wife whom Lodwicke most did craue; For loue had so inflam'd his thoughts and set his heart on fire: That for to gaine the Princesse loue it was his chiefe desire. This Alexander was so like to Lodwick Prince of France, That he so lately had or throwne by Fate and fortunes chance: None could distinguish them aright or know one from the other. In shape stature and countenance; as if they had bin brothers. Which bread such loue betwixt them both as could not be diuorc't, Yet fortunes frowne, and fickle chance Asunder them in forc't: Prince Alexander gaue his friend the Emperours daughter free, Which he before had won in field: by manly Chiualry. The enuious Spaniard being vext and tortured in his mind, He and the devill deuised how to  these louers kind: He to the Emperor accus'd the Princesse of base Lust, And  with ord for to maintain: these accusations Iust.
The second part. To the same tune. PRince Lodwick being thus accus'd, by Guydo Prince of Spaine, His friend Prince Alexander then this combat did maintain: And sent his friend Prince Lodwick straight to Hungary with speed, There in his roome for to possesse the high Imperiall weed. Friend Lodwick, Alexander sayd, goe thou to Hungary, Against the Spaniard Ile maintaine thy cause most manfully: The King I vnderstand is dead▪ goe then and in my place, Possesse the Crowne and dignity, and all the Royall grace. That they will there bestow on thee, let it not be deny'd; His daughter likewise in my name Make her thy wedded bride: But by our friendship I intreat, this kindnesse in thy hands: That thou by no meanes vyolate true constancies chast bands. Although thou wedde her as thy wife, Yet know tis in my name, Let her remaine a virgin pure I doe request the same: Because my heart she has in hold, and loue her as my life: Away be gone thou knowst my mind leaue me to end this strife. Prince Lodwike now is on his way, and Alexander hee, By fortunes ayd the Spaniard slew, and set the Princes free: Lodwike in Alexanders name receiu'd in Hungary, The Crown, & likewise in the Church his wife receiued he. But euery night betweene them twain his naked sword he'd lay, Such constant friendship at that time his heart and thoughts did sway; Prince Alexander came himselfe then Lodwike tooke his leaue, Of Alexander his deare friend which did him not deceiue. The Queene in heart was vexed sore that she so long should lye, With him that was her husband deare and not Loues pastimes trye: Unto a Lord she made her mone, and they both did agree: To be reueng'd vpon the King and poysoned he should be. The poyson tooke not full effect but brake forth on his face, That he a leper did appeare and then in great disgrace: They kickt & spurnd him from the court, thus in most shamefull manner, He was compel'd to beg for food that lately liu'd in honor. To Lodwiks Court he did repaire thus like a leper poore; And for reliefe he did intreate at his friend Lodwiks doore▪ A Ring he sent vnto his friend, who well the same did know; And came in loue to greet his friend willing to ease his woe. Quoth Alexander vnto him, kind friend there is no way To ease my paine vnlesse that thou thy louing babes doe slay: What  but I will doe for thée, quoth Lodwike by and by, To ease my friend of this great paine, my pretty babes shall dye. For which hee to the cradle goes, where they were fast asleepe, And with a knife he lets them blood his promise for to keepe; And with their bloods he washt the sores from Alexanders face, Thus he like to a loyall friend the path of Loue did trace. Thus Alexander being clear'd, of all his torturing paine, Lodwike vnto his Queen made known how he his babes had slaine This newes did grieue her at the heart, but straight she runs to see: Whether that it was so or no it prou'd the contrary. For both the babes she found aliue, as God would haue it so, Which did reuiue her drooping heart, now ioyes excéedes all woe: King Alexander being well to Hungary he goes; And Lodwike his beloued friend to ouerthrow his foes. The victory they soone obtain'd, and tooke the Lord and Queene, And doom'd them to such cruell deaths as yet had not beene seene: King Alexander againe was Crown'd, by helpe of his good friend, Their griefes to ioyes conuerted were, their pleasures did transcend. London Printed for Henry Gosson.
