12197 99853188 18557
A true discourse of all the Sallyes which the Soldiers of the Citie of Graue haue made since the siedge: And in what manner the Admirant, with a great Hoast of Horse and Foote, with dyuers Waggons laden with Ladders, Pow∣der, Shot, and other necessaries of reliefe, came to relieue the Citye, the 22. of August, Stilo Nouo in the night: But was (by Gods Prouidence, and his Excellencyes valour) driuen backe, and forced (in the night) to fire his owne Tents, and to take a shamefull flight. Translated according to the Copie, Printed at Delfe, by Jacob Cornelison Uennl. LONDON. Printed for William Ferbrand, and are to be solde at his shop in Popes-head Alley, ouer against the Tauerne doore, neere the Royall Exchange. 1602.
A true discourse of all the Sallyes which the Soldiers of the City of Graue haue made since the Siedge: and in what manner the Admirant with a great Hoast of horse and foote, with diuers waggons laden with ladders, powder, shot, and o∣ther necessaries of reliefe, came to relieue the Citty, the 20. of August,   in the night: But was by Gods prouidence and his Excellencyes valour, dryuen backe, and forced in the night to fire his owne Tents, and to take a shamefull flight. AFter that his Excellency Prince Mau∣rice of Nassaw, had trayned his whole Army through Brabant, and lastly laide siedge to the stronge City of Graue: at his first arriuall, hee busied his Soldi∣ers, in continuall raysing of his Tren∣ches, as well for his defence against the sallyes which might be made out of the Citty, as also to preuent the incursion of the Arch-dukes Campe: the which hee knew was very stronge, & would very shortly attempt the Cityes rescue, which indéede so fell out, for that in a very short time, the Admirant of Aragon, with the Archdukes Army, was heard to be marching thether∣ward: yet by the carefull diligence of his Excellency, and his Commaunders, the whole Campe was so strongely fortifyed, and walled about with déep Tren∣ches, that the Admirant comming thether, and perceiu∣ing
that there was but small hope left, of making any breach through his excellencyes Trenches: Pitched his whole Army lesse then a halfe houres going from our Campe, lying within sight thereof, without any a∣parant signes of the least atmpt. His Princely Excellency with his whole Regiment, lyeth on the other side of the Mase, neere Kuycke: the Lord Count William, with his Forces lyeth on the side of the Heath: and Sir Frances Veare with his Eng∣lish Forces, lyeth on the higher side, on the side of the riuer Mase: the other Regiments are placed according∣ly, in such order, and maintained with so gallant Mar∣tiall gouernement, as it doth ones heart good that be∣holdes it: their Watches and Centinels so warily and carefully ordered, that they seeme a common wealth: Also, many valiant and resolute enterprises are per∣formed, euen vnder the Citty walles. The Cittizens perceiuing the Archdukes Campe to be néere hand, and trusting to be by their approach, better furthered and relieued, then afterwardes they found themselues, beganne to shewe themselues some∣what bolder then before, by diuers signes of brauerie, and some sallyes in the night vpon our Campe, howbe∣it to their losse, for that they still lost more (by far) then we did, which is contrary to common chaunce, where the allyes of Citties (which they neuer proffer but vp∣on espyed aduantage) happen for the most part to the dammage and losse of the besiedgers. Before the enemies approach, the Cittizens kept themselues very quiet, and now hoping of rescue, they made sundry fires in the Citty to the Campe: the which out of the Archdukes Campe were answered with the like signes, without that ought else haue ensued therof. In the enemies Campe there is great want of victu∣als, by reason whereof, many Italians come ouer into
his Excellencies Campe. The 18. of August there came aboue foure score Ita∣lians into our Campe, some of them were whole Cor∣poralships, with all their weapons and furniture: His Excellency vsing them very kindly, victuals them, and to euery man he giueth a Gilden in money, with a Pas∣port to returne into Italy: with them hee sendes a mes∣senger to aduise the States, that where they passe, they should be victualled, and so sent forwards. At the same time the Cittizens made a salley vpon our Trenches, but being preuented and not daring to come on any farther then their owne counterscarpe, it is not knowne whether they lost any men or no. The 19. of August, there came againe into his Ex∣cellencyes quarter, aboue 150. of the enemyes reuolted Soldiers, most of them Italians, some of them with their weapons and furniture, and othersome without: they were all well vsed and each man giuen a Gilden in mo∣ney, and so shipt away. The 20. of August, there came ouer to our Campe, a Horse-man with his horse, and al his whole furniture, with two Horse-men without their horses: also two Spaniards which would receiue no Pasport, but wold remaine in his Excellencies seruice. The 21 of August, there was a Jesuite or Semina∣ry Priest taken prisoner, and carred into his Excellen∣cyes quarter: also certaine reuolted Italians came to our Campe this day. At the same time there were brought nine prisoners which were taken in the skirmish néer vnto the Sconce which his Excellencie tooke from the enemy at his first comming before the Citty, being on the other side of the Mase. In this Sconce (whilst the enemy helde it) there was but a Corpes de Guarde, but it is now a stronge three square Sconce: howbeit, there is no Or∣dinance
thereon, but onely one great murderer, which casteth balles of fire-worke into the Citty: also, they shoote great péeces of blewe square stone, and other great stones out of it: of such bignes, that a man (with all his power & strength) is but able to lift one of them. These stones (making way wheresoeuer they fal) brea∣king through Churches and houses, the people doe cry very pittifully, when the said peece is shot off, which can easily be heard out of the said Sconce. The balles of fire which they shoote, are filled with Musket-shot, and doe lye still on the ground, about halfe a quarter of an houre before they worke: and then the flame is séene aboue al the houses of the Citty, insomuch (for as much as can be perceiued, and is most apparant and likely of truth) those of the Citty, doe more feare these fire balles and these great stones, which are shot out of the sayd Sconce, then all the rest of his Excellencies great Or∣dynance, which he hath in foure batteryes. Betwéene the 21. and 22. of August, the enemy at∣tempted to put about 2000. men into the Citty, together with 400. horse, furnishing them al with ladders, deale∣boords, shouels, pickaxes, and other instrumentes, to breake in vpon the Redus or Courts of Guarde that lay betweene the quarters of his Excellency & Count William, but hauing intelligence that his Excellency was irring vp and downe with 4000. Horse-men and many foote, they resyred back, leauing their waggons whereon their abouesaid Instrumentes were laden: some ladders were (that night) brought into his Excel∣lencyes Tent. The same night there was taken a horsemans boy, who was found swimming from the Citty, and was carryed before his Excellency, but they could gather nothing by him, because he shewed himselfe as if he had béen drunk or simple: and the selfe same night, the vtter∣most
Centinels at the ase side were at a bickering to∣together, wherein two f the townsmen were slaine. Our Soldiers doe dly get many faire horses and prisoners: als three horse-mens boyes got nine fayre horses of the . The 22 of August, those of the City issued out twice vpon their Counscarpes, but it cannot bee knowne whether any of them were slaine or not: for our part, (praise vnto God) we lost none. This day our Horse∣men tooke another Jesuite Prisoner. Betweene Thursday and Fryday in the night, be∣ing betweene the 22. and 23. of August, the enemy set fire on all his Tents and Cabbins, which did so flame, as if the whole Country had béen on fire, and ther with∣all, breaking vp his Campe, he went away very quiet∣ly without any noyse: next day were found many wag∣gons with weapons and furniture, besides many sicke men, the which his Excellencie caused to be carryed a∣way, vpon his owne costes and charges. The enemy tooke his way vpwards alongst the Mase: and his Ex∣cellency followed him with 1200. horse, and some foote: but being that the 23. day of August, there was a very thick mist, he lost the enemy, not knowing which way hee was gone. In the quarter of his Excellency the spéech was, that he was gone toward Rhynebercke. Af∣ter in the Mase were found many dead bodyes driuing with the streame, as also many armes and legges that were shotten off.
Extract of a Letter, written by a man of wor∣ship out of Nimingem, the fist of September, to his friend in London. WOrshipfull Sir, it was reported heere by some, that Sir Frances Ueare, being in a skirmish before the Graue (shot through the head) should haue dyed neere vn∣to Dorb: howbeit, in the Campe was no certainye threof, and was since said onely to be but hurt in the ck. Also, Captaine Meetkerek was deady wounded. The quar∣ter and Regiment belonging vnto Sir Frances Veare in this Siedge, is giuen vnto Prince Henry of Nassaw his Excellen∣cyes yongest brother. The enemy lyeth betweene Uerb & Ruremond, seeking by all meanes to assure those two towns with stronger Garrisons: but the townes would as fayne keepe them out, and enjoy a newtrall freedome: the ap∣proaches of the siedge goe daily forward; his Princely Ex∣cellency intending, not any more to put his Soldiers to the aduenture of any assaults, but endeuours to win the towne with Myning, (a costly and new winning of townes) for the towne is very stronge, and the shot doth but little harme vpon the walle. From this towne we can both heare the report, and see the smoake of the Artillery. In the Campe is good hope that it will be shortly recouered: I shal per∣aduenture take occasion to goe see the Campe, in compa∣ny of others, that from hence doe dayly resort thether, both men, women and children, for the Campe is wonderfully well stored of victuals and other necessaries: hauing been there, I will as then relate further vnto you the true estate of all, as neere as I shall be able to collect them. Vntill which time I commit you to God. By letters of the 29. of August, according to our compu∣tation, there is certaine newes, that Sir Frances Veare was yet liuing, & on the mending hand; howbeit his hurt was very sore and daungerous. Your louing friend E. D.
