1360 99836614 898
A NEEDEFVLL, new, and necessarie trea∣tise of Chyrurgerie, briefly com∣prehending the generall and particuler curation of Vlcers, drawen foorth of sundrie worthy wryters, but especially of Antonius Calmeteus Vergesatus, and Ioannes Tagaltius, by Iohn Banister Gent. practiser in Physicke and Chyrurgerie. Hereunto is annexed certaine experimentes of mine ovvne inuention, truely tried, and daily of me prac∣tised. Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe. Anno. 1575. Cum Priuilegio.
The Contentes. First a treatise of Chirurgerie, con∣teining the generall and parti∣culer curation of Vlcers. Certain experimentes of mine own inuention, truely tried, and dai∣ly practised. A generall diet, necessarie to be ob∣serued in the curatiō of Vlcers, taken out of Angerius Ferrerius. A certaine compendious and profi∣table description of the naturall temperatures, and diuers ope∣rations of simple medicines, dili∣gently collected, and truly pra∣ctised.
To the right worshipfull maister Thomas Stāhope Esquire, and highe sherife of Nottingham shyre, this present yeare of our Lorde 1575. Iohn Banister praieth prosperous life, cō∣tinual health and daily encrease of vvor∣shippe. IN those dayes (right wor∣shipful) when the world was vnfourmed, orders vnproui∣ded, and lawes not establi∣shed, but al sortes of men and ages, enioyed and embraced their own licen∣tious libertie: Before Princes tooke power, Magistrates authoritie, and Rulers gouer∣nement: At what time arte was vnknowen, miseries vnsearched, and studies neglected, the people of all Nations liued in beastly and brutish maner, folowing their own fancie as a God, and their wil as reason. But after it plea¦sed God (of his inestimable prouidence) to illumine the shadowed sight of the world, and of his diuine pleasure, to inspire and breathe into certaine of his Creatures, the prudent
knowledge of sapience skill, then wisedom be∣gat pollicie, pollicie diligence, and diligence a desire to knowe, so that the woorking of the one, founde out the nature of thinges, and the experience of the other, inuented artes for the vse and practise of the same, whereby Lawes after were confourmed, Iustice fea∣red, and rawe thinges ripened, Rules regar∣ded, Sciēces searched, and misteries vnfoul∣ded. At this time the worlde began to bud the blossomes of a delectable fruite, and sowe the seede of a happie haruest (if worldly de∣lightes may so lawefully be termed) for eue∣rie man nowe delighted to excell, all sortes embraced knowledge, and eche degree labou¦red to profite his countrie. Yea all men so al∣lowed labours, and contemned idlenes, that immediatly all the worlde flowed with libe∣rall artes and scientiall Artificers. As Phi∣loPhilo. first brought into Greece, the inuention of Letters. Polihimnia,Polihim∣nia. had the first vse of Rethoricke, OrpheusOrpheus. founde Musicke, Zo∣roastesZoroastes. Magicke, ErratoErrato. Geometrie. &c. And so farre they searched, that some foūd out Astronomie, some Astrologie, some Cos∣mographie, and suche like, some one thing, and some an other, so that in fewe yeares ther
seemed nothing left in nature vnsearched or vnknowen. Among whiche Physicke (whom it pleased God to predestinate a succour and aide to the vniuersall worlde (though not at first or presently, yet in space of time, among manie other thinges, as a princely pearle) was created, the Theorick part, wherof the most doe attribute to ApollosInuention of Phisick Appollo. speculatiō, and the practicke to AesculapiusAEsculapi{us} proofe, so that in short space it was so sought, searched, and ex∣perienced in euerie Nation, and so brightlye displaied her beames to eche Region, that as Princes could not ceasse to praise and studie it, neither could the common people leaue of to worshippe it, but extolled the Artistes as Gods, and embraced the fruites therof as in∣comparable. From time to time (right wor∣shipfull) as it hath encreased, so hath it bene esteemed vnto this day in great honour, wor∣thy fame and princely dignitie, and neuer va¦lued of so litle price, nor prised for so sm treasure as in this our age and pret daies, wherin al Natiōs are geue re to esteeme priuate gaine, then paque cōmoditie, and more to regarde esser profite, then fauour a further vtile. Such is the propertie of this mutable world, and in such wise is it alted
by the course of ages, that where as (in time past) all expert persones (whosoeuer excel∣led in any qualitie or propertie) was magni∣fied to the skies, erecting their pictures in Ci∣ties, Townes, and Temples, as ClaudiusClaudius. was in Rome, ArmodiusArmodius in Athēs, and Hanni∣ballHannibal in the Temple of Pallas, with an infinite number moe, whom the people thought not enough commended in woordes, but extolled their fames by Pictures and Epigrāmes, and they which with lesser skill, witte, or cūning, did their diligence, were laudably encoura∣ged, Contrariwyse, now a daies the best that write, reape skant commendation, but haue their woorkes skornefully skanned, and a silly fault founde, with curious Momes derided, and the yonger Studentes (who no lesse desier their Countries commoditie, then hate to walke in darkenes) are flouted for trifles as doultishe dreamers, and their woorkes dispi∣sd as errour holders. My meaning here is of suche,  haue and doe take paine daily (for their natural Nations sake) in pēning forth and openīg vnto ot the secret misterie of Physicke and Chyrurgeri euealing and pu∣blishing foorth to al people, tha Talēt which God hath lent to them, thinking nothing to
worthy whiche may profite others, nor that any thing ought to pleasure one priuately, which might benefite many openly: folowing the old and oft recited saying of Cicero:Cicero. Nō solum nobis nati sumus. &c. Why should we wallow thus in disdain? and why is amitie so furiously fettered? shall Heathens sur∣mount vs Christians? and shall Tyrauntes surpasse vs in enbracing the learned? Hyppo¦crateHyppocra¦tes. was so esteemed of the great king Ar∣taxerxes,Artaxer∣xes. that he coulde neuer procure him selfe to be merie without his companie. Phi∣lip of Macedonie,Phil. Ma∣cedo. so regarded Aristotle,Aristotle. that he called him selfe happie because his sonne Alexander the great was borne in his time. And AueroisAuerois. was so beloued of that Turkishe Emperour and terrible Tyraunt Bayazet,Bayazet. that (whē he had finished his blou∣die broiling warres, and rested at his own pa∣laice) he tooke pleasure in no companie, nor esteemed any mans councell like to his Phisi∣tion. A thousand moe examples could I in∣ferre, wherein the very Pagans seeme to ex∣cell vs Christians in lauding the learned, and encouraging all willing fauourers of learning and sciences. But affection (at this daye) so ruleth the roste, and disdain stir∣reth
such contempt (among the bleting ba∣bes of Momus charme) that a slender fault,Tritūest. Inuidia est serra ani∣mi, or slight escape, they deride without ceassing, and a learned woorke doth euen sawe their mindes asunder. For this cause right wor∣shipful) some perhappes would demaunde of me, how I dare put penne to paper to entreat of anie matter or parte of Physicke, conside∣ring the scrupelous state of time present, to¦gether with the barrennes of my witte, and want of learning, or laye in my dishe this say∣ing of Terence.Terence. Quid dici possit quod nō dictum sit prius? Wherto I aunswere, tha neither the curious crackes of the enuious can staie me, nor yet the bragging boultes of the vaine glorious, are of force to holde me backe, since I am moued hereto by three nota∣ble causes.The first cause. The first is, to pleasure my coū∣trie and friendes (amongest whom your wor∣ship is chiefe,) and therefore some fruite of my pooer painfull practise, are due vnto you, hoping also, (as other more learned do in the publishing of their bookes) that these fewe li∣nes (partly by the study of other good authors, partly also by mine own experiēce collected) may vnder your worships protection be defen∣ded against Sicophantes and faultfinders, of
you, whose witte, prudence, and authoritie (in this countrie to this respect) is of great force among vs. This litle labour therefore it may please your worshippe to accept, as the hartie present of a friend poore and faithfull, to you offred this present yeare, of your new Office, to be a monument to posteritie of that good will I beare towardes you in woordes, and would declare the same in deedes (if habili∣tie were correspondent to my will.)The secōd cause. Another cause is, for that I protest my selfe to haue set forwarde and finished this my present enter∣prise, deuoyde altogether (as knoweth God) of hautie minde or stout courage, but with so simple and zelous harte, that neither ill will with all his mischieuous dartes, vainglorie, with his pranked pikes, nor enuie, with his so∣dain shot, are once able to geue me repulse or touche.The third cause. And the last cause is, the remem∣braunce of AristotleAristole. his saying, Bonū quo communius tanto prestantius, So that to pleasure and profite, other men is best, and moste to be desiered, but seeing (as the pro∣uerbe monisheth,) Non datur cuique adire Corinthū, I shall thinke my penne and time well employed, if I may profite some men. One sorte of people there are (and that is the
learned) who are cōmonly geuen to disdaine the reading ouer of suche simple collections, chiefly of this part of Physicke, fulfilling the common saying, Aquila nōcapit muscas and such peraduenture will litle regarde, or lesse esteme it then the meaner sort (to whom this booke is chiefly left) who (I know) wil not disdaine or despise the perusing of this trea∣tise of Chirurgerie, as necessarie as the other (more exquisite) though some of late more precise then wise haue fondly affirmed, foo∣lishlye feined, and frantickelye faced that the Chyrurgian hathe not to deale in Phy∣sicke, small curtesie is it to breake faith∣ful friendshippe or attonement, but it is mad dotage, to parte that which can not be sepa∣rated. Howe can Phisicke be praised, and Chirurgerie discommended? can any man despise Chyrurgerie, and not defame Phy∣sicke? no sure, he that speaketh euill of the one, slaundereth both, and he that robbeth the one, spoileth the other. For although they be at this time made twoo distincte Artes, and the Artistes seuerally named, yet sure, the one can not woorke without some aide of the other, nor the other practise without the help of both. For further assuraunce whereof,
learne of Hyppocrates,Gal. li. de tum. pre∣ter naturā De mittē∣do sang. & De meth. medendi. who practised both together, and in reading Galenes bookes, you shall clearely see howe they embrace one an other with firme frendshippe and inseparable amitie. Without diet (I saie) and purgation, Vlcus sordidum, or Cacoaethes (with other like diseases) may not be healed. Herehence commeth it diuers times, that many men al∣moste in euerie countrie, decaie and perishe in the Arte of Chyrurgerie, by the ignoraunt dealinges of Chyrurgians, vnskilfull in Phy∣sicke. Hereby also it commeth, that so many Runnagates and Idle liuers, make such daily incursions, and ofte entringes into those wor∣thy and misterious sciences, who durst not route if they were at vnitie, but that can not be, so long as this errour is mainteined, that the one ought not to participate with the o∣ther, for so neither of them can be perfecte. Seing that thing is onely perfect, Cui ne mi∣nima pars quidem deest. Great ruthe and pitie it is, that so many idle Idiottes and Er∣ronious Asses, are permitted to practise this Arte of great difficultie, that requireth so many helpes and sūdrie knowledge of things, as the nature and names of diseases, Simples, Rootes, Plantes, partes of mans bodie, and a
thousand thinges moe, whereof the greatest sorte of them are vtterly ignoraunt, whereby they ruine the bodie with their blinde and desperate dealing, ofte to the vtter subuersiō of lie: for as the bodie hath neede of the go∣uernement of the minde, so hath the minde neede of the seruice and ministerie of the bo∣dy, which is the Tabernacle of the Soule, and lodge of the minde.. Pet. A man shall haue ill lod∣ging or rest in a ruinous dropping house, and the minde lesse quietnes in a sickely bodie, which may be through the occasion of locall Plaster, or Poulder, or Cerote, vnaptly ap∣plied. Therefore the Poete wysely wished (in his praier for a frende) Mentem sanam in corpore sano.Iuuenal. And Galene proueth that the discrasie of the one infecteth the other: for a solitarie sad minde maketh a Melancolie bodie; and a Melancolie bodie engendreth Melancolie passions of the minde. This Art therefore well manifesteth the needefulnes of diuers sciences and qualities, whose sub∣iect (Et materia circa quam) is mans bodie worthelie compared to a Citie or common wealth. For in a Citie there is but one gouer∣nour (if it be well ruled) and that in mans bodie is reason, the Prince is placed on high,
or perill of rebellion, as here reason inhabi∣eth the braine, the prince hath his watchers nd guarde, so hathe the bodie memorie as hief councellour with the other senses for is guarde, retaining wrath in his harte and oncupiscense in the Liuer, like Pensioners, o repulse all iniuries, and the minde riffe go∣ng betwene reason and these affectiōs, which oresee, and let all commotions or tumultes, ls the inferiour sauage mēbers, would sone cale the Tower and dislodge reason their Prince. But as that commō wealth, who hath ainefull and circumspecte gouernours, can aue no common vprore or seditious discen∣ion, so hath the bodie that is healthfull, like iligent artificers, to maintaine his quiet ate, as the stomacke to boyle the meate for ll the bodie,The body his office. the Liuer to straine and forge od bloud, the Milte to draine the Melan∣lie, the Bledar vrine, and the Gall Choler, the Veines conueighe bloud to all partes and places, the Arteries haue the transporting of the vitall spirites, and the sinewes, the ani∣al, whereof commeth all seeling and mo∣ng. Discords in a Citie, happeneth through ill and vnrulie rages, and in the bodie through vile and vitious humors, which vn∣ordinatly
flowe and ouerrunne their place and must be corrected and chastened diuers¦ly. For euen as your worship (and such like Authoritie) punisheth not all offences wit one kinde of paine, that is to saie, euerie of fence is not repaid by death, so euerie discra¦sie and griefe of the bodie, meriteth not ex¦treme dealing, nor the daungerous affectes slight respect, or slowe administration. An as offenders oft times are rebuked, and ye pardoned, in hope of amēdemēt, but again taken in like crime, without grace or repentaunce, are shortly executed, least their gra∣celes actes and pernitious counselles should entise others to like lewdnes of liuing. In lik manner doth the Arte of Chirurgerie (th Artist being expert) procure and purchas healthfull members to the bodie, abating th malice of euerie humor, so lōg as in due tim it is followed: but when suche aboundaunc of rebellous matter, hath so setled it selfe among the common or exteriour labour i partes, and so rooted in space of time, that n ther nature nor medicine can preuaile, th we chose rather to seperate it from the bod then to suffer it further to corrupt, since th olde prouerbe is that, To much pittie m∣reth
a citie, and vntimelie pittie diffe∣reth little from plain crueltie. This I speake of suche Vlcered members, as may not be both cured and also preserued. Notwith∣standing, that I haue knowen manie in my time, that haue moste ruinously lost their limmes by the desperate dealinges of wilfull wretches, whose ignoraūce hath spoiled that whiche might haue bene saued, whose blind∣nes hath marred that whiche the wise could haue made, and whose wilful arrogācie hath cut of, that which might safely haue growen and continued: such as in mēding one grief, make commonly twoo moe, and the best suc∣cesse they haue, is chaunce medley, the blind man so layeth holde on the hare, but no wise man will preferre happe before cunning, For∣tune before Arte, or chaunce before reason, which is the infallible foundation of all sciē∣ces. To whose iudgement (right worshipfull) I willingly committe these my labours, know∣ing that in reasons schoole, neither enuie re∣igneth, parcialitie ruleth, nor arrogāt fault∣finders haue accesse, but in their steedes, art, equalitie, and godly reformation are in grea∣test authoritie, fulfilling the lawe of Christe through charitie, which enuieth not, but fur∣thereth
al mē and hindreth none.1. Cor.13. They ther∣fore that are not able to swimme, may here with me wade till they haue gotte the cou∣rage to enterprise further. And notwithstan∣ding that Vlcers be taken for a base parte in Phisicke, yet (as QuintilianQuintili∣anus. writeth of Grammer) Plus recesu praestat quam fronte promittit. Euerie Art is necessarie, and eche part of Physicke is needeful: no age can be without them, no coūtrie misse them, neither will any nation despise the goodly creature of God (for so is Physicke in the booke of EcclesiasticusEccle. 39. named.) The same God therfore (who instituted this Arte for the health of mankinde, as also al other sciē∣ces for our succour) preserue guide, and go∣uerne your worship (and all other that loue and encourage the professours of good artes and godly misteries) the right waye to eter∣nall blisse and heauenly happines. Your vvorships alvvayes to cōmaunde, Iohn Banister.
The Authour in the commendation of Phy∣sicke and Chyrur∣gerie. IF things which haue ben much esteem in perfect plight remaine: And profitable practises, may commendations gaine. If things which famous mē haue found, doe most of all excell: And that which needfull is deserue, to winne and weare the bell. If vertue thou wilt truely scan, canst thou ought better haue: Then that which saues a perishing man, euen from the gredie graue. If thou wouldst seeke what moste of all, doth passing things attain: Then that regard which from the death, so many doth detain. And Phisicke sithe it yeeldeth such, as thou canst aptly craue:
A sightly seate aboue the rest, of force it needes must haue. For if thou wander searchingly, from East vnto the West: Thou shalt perceiue that euerie where, for Physicke there is rest. More profitable nothing is, (although the world abounde:) And nothing more that man can need, in all the worlde so rounde. For lands and liuings though thou haue, aboundaunt gold and fee: With such like plentie very huge, which seemeth good to thee. Yet if with sicknes thou be grieud, and eke to pain subiect: What will auaile thy plenty store, can it thy health direct? Lo Physicke can the so much geue, if thou vnto her lore Attentiue be, and crased corps before her doe deplore.
Hyppolitus it did reuiue, and eke his life restore: And (AEson) yonge it causd to seem, as he had bene before. It Phaon fairst of others made, and so he did endure: And Philip, Alexander great, it made from poyson pure. Who els no doubt had perished, by drinking in a Lake: Such horror great and anguishement, this art did vndertake. Examples many doe abound, whereby a man may see: If that no Physicke could be founde, great were our miserie. Who could the force of herbes attaine, or sicknes well discerne? Who could diseases with their names, that be so many learne? It would exceede all humaine wittes, no reason could it knowe: It would appeare vnpossible, to all that dwell on lowe.
Sith then such wonders it doth worke, of force we must maintaine: And loue the same exceedingly, as chiefest health and gaine. What men (alas) abiected are, by waning of this art: When as they may no salue obtaine, to cure their vrging smart. And but that it doth quickly helpe, it daily doth appeare: That many should in graue be closde, whome yet remaineth here. What number should here neuer liue, nor see the light of Sunne: But that this art doth succour them, er in the world they come. It doth also not only bring, the pained from the woe: But euen the healthfull sort it makes, their state not to forgoe. What health Chyrurgerie doth yeeld, also in euerie lande: In long discourse or prayse thereof, it needles is to stand.
Since that her vertues passing rare, in euery towne doth flowe: And warlike armies euery where, her benefites doe knowe. Howe could Machaon and his mate, Whome Podalirius hight: Haue spared bene in Troyan warres, and Greecians gristy fight. When thousands there they saude aliue, in Agamemnons band: Of worthy Greekes which els had died, and perished out of hand. What Ulcered partes also it doth, restore vnto their kinde: I leaue, the sooth let eche man saye, and prayse it as they finde. q. I. B. Finis.
To the worshipfull the Maister, Wardens, and gene∣nerall assistauntes of the fraternitie of Chyrurgians in London, Iohn Banister, (a member of the same) wisheth to them al, the true direction in the perfect way of knowledg to this misterious science, according to their profession. BEfore the gratious good∣nes of God, had created medicine on the earth, be∣fore (I saye) he vnfoulded ye misterie therof to world∣ly wightes, and mortall creatures, no mā knewe what plantes could preuayle, not one could shewe the nature of herbes, e∣uerie man was ignoraunt of the proper∣ties of simples, many mineralles were vnknowen, moste gummes vnfound, an all seedes vnsought. (To conclude) all natures benefites (that nowe so ofte pre∣serue and keepe mans healthful state fri¦hurt) lay hugely heaped in the boisterous
bowels of confused Chaos, distaunt from light, absent from knowledge, and farre from doing good. Whiche nowe (being brought to light by the same almightie his prouidence) not only ministreth helth to the sicke, ease to the painfull, pleasure to the sorrowfull, & health to the health∣full, but ofttimes as we dailie proue (euē by fine force) encountreth the merciles might of fell disseases, and preuenteth the dreadful dartes of death (whilest the skil∣full only haue her in vse. But as enuie that subtile Serpent hateth all vertue, contemneth all good thinges, and spiteth the prosperous successe of famous scien∣ces: so hath she of late procured and stir∣red vp suche a sort of beastlye abusers, or diuelishe dissemblers, as (studie onlye to deceiue the worlde) inuente willingly to embase the worthy arte, and seke shame∣fully to slaūder the godly studentes ther∣of. As it is not vnknowen vnto you (ther∣fore needeles for me to tell) howe Phy∣sicke and Chyrurgerie haue in time past bene renowmed throughout the worlde: No more is it to you ignoraunt, how litle it is in these dayes regarded, which if we
compare time present with that is past, we shall see and plainely perceiue it, ra∣ther despised (as needles) then regarded as necessarie, such slender iudgement and fond affection raigneth at this daye, and so is the worlde vpside down turned: that what so afore time hath ben best accōpted of, the same is now the basest, that which was principall, is (at this time) ye poorest, and the chiefest become lest estemed. In this case (therefore) as I must needes blame the fickle state of the worlde and moste of al accuse the fraile estate of mās nature (I meane the cōmon sorte of peo∣ple, who are always readie to turne with euerie blast of Eolus wauering wynde without stedfastnes or consideration of righteouscauses) So can I not altoge∣ther excuse thē, vnto whom authoritie is geuen, to establishe orders and reforme malefactours with the causes of offence, whose onely slacknes, and vntimely cle∣mencie is the greatest encouragement that offenders haue. I speake not this as seeming to cōtroll your worships (know∣ing you will rightly conceiue, it cōmeth of a zelous harte) but if the loue of oure coūtrie, & eminent desolatiō (which might
happē by want of this arte) doe not draw vs all hereunto, yet (at the least, if wee loue our selues) we are forste to crie out vpon abuses, deplore double dealing, and seke for spedie reformation. Uerie harde it were for suche a rowte of Rogishe li∣uers, so boldly to practise, and to fill all places with the slaunderous shauinges of their deuelishe practises, were they not permitted of some (in authoritie) & win∣ked at of suche as should them punishe. I doe not a litle marueile also, howe and by what meanes or merit, so many gette their authorities or licenses to practise, when as in examination they (not onlye) shewe them selues ignoraunt Asses, and in their workes bussardly beyardes, but also of them selues altogether disposed to incontinencie, and dayly dissimulation, without either feare of God, or obediēce to their Prince, I (my self) knowe them at this daie, the moste beastly deceiuers, and licentious liuers that euer profest a∣nie arte, (hauing neither knowledge, mo∣destie, nor honestie, and yet practise their accustomed deceites, vnder the colour of admittaunce frō our hal, being (in deede) farre fitter for the cart thē Chyrurgerie.
Smally shall it auaile ye learned to take paines, & lesse encourage the willing to spende their time in opening thinges ob∣scured, & reuealing misteries vnknowen, when euerie saucie Sicophant shall (not only by peuish permissiō) defame vs with their desperate doinges, & sucke our com∣moditie with their chattring charmes: but also wrest & construe our laboures at their poopishe pleasures, accompting the best basest, & the worst worthiest (like spi∣ting spiders, which turne good to badde, sweete to sower, and bonie to poyson. If therefore your worshippes woulde pre∣uent these proude practisers, & plucke vp these wicked weedes, which thus pollute the vineyard (as already you haue godly begonne) I doubte not but more cōmen∣dations wil growe of the arte in shorte space then ther was in the time that A∣polloApollo. first founde it, more estimation thē when AesculapiusAEscula∣pius. amplyfied it, & more feruently embraced then in the time of HippocratesHyppocr. who made it perfect. And you for discrete gouernaunce & politique orders shall (not onely) winne a greater fame perpetually, then either ye Romains for their hardines, or ye Lacedemonians
for their valiauut courages haue gained, but also so stimulate & pricke forward the hartes of mindeful studētes (such as God be praised, are of late frutefully sprōg vp amōgst vs) so as they shal rightly accōpt their trauailes worthely taken, & their la¦bours wel bestowed. At ye like stay stand I at this present time, offering these my loitered labours, to the skanning eies of the stately world, & abiding (as at a view) to see if courage wilbe moued (by ye than∣kefulnes of such godly patrōs as you be) to resorte to me againe, for recompence, which then (as I haue here debated of the curation of Ulcers, as the most necessary part of Chirurgerie at this daye) I will shortly (if God lende me life) enforce my penne to extend her trauaile to the cura∣tiō of Tumors against nature. In ye mean time (crauing your worships assistaūce in protecting these my firste enterprises (so much as you may) frō ye tēpesteous taūtes of such witles wisardes as alwayes loue to finde faultes in the best, & them selues not amending the simplest. I commende to you at all time, present health, and la∣sting ioye in the world to come. At my house in Nottingham, the.vi. of Iune. 1575.
Iohn Banister against euill and counterfait dea∣lers in the arte of Physicke and Chyrurgerie. EUen as it can not be, by reasons rule denied: That Physicke skill deseruedly, by trustie truthe is tried. To be the thing wherto, dame Fame is chiefly bound: Aboue all earthly artes belowe that are, or may be found. The Artistes which professe the same, likewyse are they: Whiche worthiest are to weare (I gesse) the wreathed twist of baie. Such men of honest life, as godly gaines frequent: Without deceit, debate, or strife, or forged fond intent. But fewe of those there are, (God knowes) the greater ruth:
Among a sort whose dealings farre, distaunced are from truthe. For Roisters nowe doe raunge, and ruffle euery where: And men to much delight in chaunge, without regarde or feare. Eche Iacke that wanteth grace, and dle life hath spent: And that to iet from place to place, hath fixed his intent. Such nought haue now to fein, their fond and foolishe trade: But that they helth can plant for pain, and sicknes fell inuade. Leaue of you Iuglers vain, let Phisicke liue in rest: Most worthely with them to raigne, that learne and loue her best. Fie fie you steine the arte, of worthy surgerie: More fitter farre to fill the cart, then vse Anathomie.
Your falsly feined grace, is but for certaine time: You runne & raunge frō place to place, and still augmente your crime. You promise helpe for pence, where as you doe but noye: O secret foes depart from hence, poore people you destroye. Our Auncientes oft haue scand, and tolde that some dissease: Cannot be curde, you take in hande, the dead (to life) to raise. Nothing may misse you sure, if pence be in the warde: O misers mad, confesse some cure, for healing to be hard. Be warned once by feare, and of your friende take heed: The price of bloud is passing deare, as we in scripture reed. {quod} I. B. Finis.
Ars Chyrurgica alloquitur Lectorem. YE learned dames that doe delite, in sciences deuine: Refuse not now to taste a while, this sacred sap of mine. Which I abundantly doe yeelde, to euery man eche where: Like Tellus with her fertile fruites, when Autumne doth appeare. Or Nilus when it ouerflowes, doth fatte and feede the soile: Whiche after that aboundant fruites, doth yeeld withouten toile. Who can depaint the passing ioye, that bird and beast doe taste: In newe returne of Ladie Ver, when Hiems fittes are past. Euen so doe I to mortall wight, more by a thousand part: Send swete reliefe in hard distresse, To appease the pinching smart. The wofull woundes and sundrie sores, that mortall men oppresse: And doe consume the crased corps, by me they haue redresse.
Let Cronos tell (that auncient dame) which beare all thinges in minde: Howe bountfull loe, I haue bene, alwayes to humaine kinde. And these our dayes can well declare, howe many men I saue: Were not for me which had bene shut, long since within the graue. My vertues they are knowen beyond, the farthest parte of Inde: I helpe, I heale, in euery coaste, I comfort all mankinde. Since that my fountaine flowes so farre, and serueth eche degree: Howe can you saye that any arte, is equall vnto me. Although there be a number nowe, for pleasure counted chief: Yet none to man I dare well saye, it bringeth suche reliefe. When Atroppos to line of life, his mortall aunce would laye: Then steppe I in with helping hand, and can set him to staye.
Among the sondrie skilfull artes, by handes that handled are: Disdaine me not though with the best, my selfe I doe compare. My genitour is high Iehoue, a parent without peere: My mother hight Experience, by tract of many a yeare. As Hyblaes hill of pearlesse praise, that swetest honie bringes: So was I wayed in all their time, with Emperours and with kinges. Howe famous was Phillirides, that first found out my skill: And taught me to Appollos Impe, and he the worlde did fill. With knowledge of my worthines, and what great fame he wan When that he called backe from death, Sir Virbius, twise a man. As Phisons floud aye full I flowe, what need you any more: I haue all thinges that may doe good. a salue for euery sore. q. Rich. Smith. Finis.
Tho. Lond. de natura & cura Vlceris & Vulneris. ASpicis in paruo medicamina multa libello, scripta Banisteriae dexteritate manus. Vlcera quot quot habet mala carnis machinae nostrae, En facili methodo cōtinet iste liber. Pro specie morbi, mutatur forma medendi, dicatur{que} malo propria cura suo. Vulnera continui diuortia dicimus esse: hinc tamen vt sanies fluxerit, Vlcus habes. Ergo mihi dices, distinguis ab Vlcere vulnus? Tempore, quādo alias vulnus & vlcus idē. Vulnera vi fiunt quae coctio vertit in Vlcus: sic quod vulnus erat, posteàid vlcus erit. Sic etiam virus faetens,dicitur, vix hoc à medicae tollitur artis ope. Nam{que} locū succus vitiat, succum{que} vicissim cancrosi sanies inficit ipsa loci. Non poteris molli curare malagmate cācros, et mag is hos reddes asperiore feros. Vlcus tale animipotes appellare Papismum, haec bene sunt multis assimulata modis. Vlcus olet, mūdum foris, at pus gignitur intus, multa it a dissimulans faeda Papista tegit.
Consimili ratione nequis curare Papistam: hunc bene simoneas, surdus vt Aspis eri. Corporeus medica cancer sanabitur arte, at mentis, solus tollere Christe potes. Ergo precemur eum, sit mens cū corpore sana. arnis homo medicus, pneumatis ipse deus. Thomas Newtonus. Nō minimū meruisse dec{us} laudē{que} videtur Grata Banisteri cura labor{que} mei. Vtile cuius opus cūctis, cunctis{que} salubre Qui sua ab vlcerib{us} corpora tuta velint. F. T. Huc cit{us} appropera, qui corpore cū{que} laboras, Plurima sunt isto pharmaca sana libro. Vlcera depingit, generalem artem{que} medēdi Vlcera, tu Lector perlege, viue, vale.
Against the Treche∣rous trade of paltrie Practisers. HOwe can that cōmon wealth endure, where gouernaunce doth lacke? The happie state will soone decaie, and all thinges goe to wracke. How should the shippes yt shreads ye seas, in darke and trembling tide, From perishing preserued be, without a skilfull guyde? And all thinges els vnder the Sunne, without good gouernement: Can not in steadie staie long stande, but fall to languishement. Then how should man which subiect is to all infirmitie: Without the helpe of Phisickes arte, in sicknes saued be? Who can of fountaines dried vp, swete waters iustly craue?
Who seekes of Codrus simple soule, a Princely gift to haue? And can a man in gryping griefe, haue ayde to ease his smart, Of such as haue no skill at all, in noble Phisickes arte? A retchles rowt of doltishe dorres, haue ouerspread our soile: Which doe bereaue the bees alas, of that wherefore they toyle. Oh noble schole of conning skill, that beares the braunche of Baie: In haste come with your helping hand, to driue these Drones awaye. They trotte about from place to place, as Frogges hoppe in the rayne: And thus this noble arte God wotte, they doe naught els but stayne. But most of all I doe lament, to see them blinde mens ees: In euerie coaste where they doe come, and giue them chalke for cheese.
Such successe haue those in the end, which practise without skill: Where one or twoo by happe they heale, a hundreth moe they kill. This is their trade to promise helpe, and helth to euery one: But whē thei once haue cropt their coine away they wilbe gone. This gar must needes al good mē greue and grate them on the gal: To see these caterpillers spoyle, the tree, the frute and all. Flee, flee (I say) this hurtfull kinde, much worse then furies fell: If they doe scape vnpunisht here, they wilbe hangd in hell. When yt the Lorde shall come t'inquire, for bloud shed in the lande: I feare the bloud of some wilbe, required at their hande. Leaue of this lewdnes & repent, for former fences made: And hēceforth looke to bend your selues to vse some other trade. R. S.
George Baker Chy∣rurgian, in prayse of the Authour. THe thing where any cunning lies, to speake in prayse were vaine: As that which can commend it selfe, without an others paine. And where no cunning is, to say, that cunning doth abounde: For winning credite to the thing, is but a sillie grounde. Euen so the credite of this booke, doth not consiste in speache: Woordes therein be but spent in vaine, it hath a further reache. The matter it intreateth of, is needefull both and good: And he that pende it for thy vse, no litle paynes it stode.
Firste reade it well and after iudge, vpon that you shall finde: That as it needes no forreine praise, praise should not be behinde. The booke both dares and doth it selfe, aduenture in your handes: The authour of it with his paines, At your good courtesie standes. G. B.
To the gentle Reader, Iohn Banister sendeth salutation, in the name of the highest. AS no man without di∣ligent trauaile, cā me∣rite cōmendation, nor any man by his idle li∣uing deserue to bee praised: No more doth it behoue suche lasie liuers, as suppe gaines without sorrowe, and enioy plea∣sure without toyle, to barke at other mens labours, to deride the diligent, scorne the skilfull, and disdaining those who neuer thinke their bodies busied in helping others, esteme their wittes wea∣kened to further manie, nor accompte their mēbers martyred (for any paines) to profite their coūtrie, but would God such (as be lulled with the sleepie songes of selfloue, and rocked in the lustles cra∣dle of securitie) would ether rise to light, and see their lothsome liues, or els wal∣lowe their fill in sloughtfull delightes,
and suffer the diligent to escape their dreaming partes, but since no writer e∣uer had that hap, nor any authour that fortune, since (I saye) that Grecian swete Mecaenas, and that eloquent Romaine oratour, could (in no wise) shunne their saucie charmes: Let my barbarous brain and wilfull penne, neuer hope of looke to purchase prayse of all men. If there∣fore (gentle Reader) thy modest mynde be any thing addicted to the commen∣dation of vertue, banishement of vice, augmenting of scientiall knowledge, or thy nature enclined to loue lighte, and hate darknes, or desier to knowe the se∣cret shapes of nature, then praise paine∣full practisers, commende cunning ar∣tificers, and welwillers to worthie pro∣fessions, ceasse neuer to encourage, and that the rather, because al writers doe ac∣compte them selues satisfied, if thou ac∣cept their labours with a chereful coun∣tenaunce and gratefull harte, rather cō∣mending then dispraising, amending then dispising, and encouraging rather then contrariwyse by thy ingratitude to force them flie suche vertuous enter∣prises,
as leade all men to the light of truthe according to the saying of Plato, Per argumenta multorū cernitur veritas, So might the worlde in short space, not only decaie and barbarisme, but also be∣come more brutishe then were the Athe∣nians before Draco taught them, more senseles then the Argiues, before the in∣structiō of Phoroneus, and more Awlesse then were the Lacedemonians before Li∣curgus lawes. My penne, labour and dili∣gence, therefore (louing Reader) shall I accompt worthely employed, if (accor∣ding to my expectation) thou thanke∣fully accept my trauaile. And as for suche ambitious Idiottes, as neither meane to doe good them selues, nor wil∣ingly would suffer others, let thē barke t their owne banes, and sinke in their wne sinnes (without heed of me) since I knowe the wise will waye my good will, and the honest my true meaning. And when thou hast perused this pam∣hlet comprehending the curation of Vlcers, partly extracte from worthie riters, and partly by mine owne expe∣ence collected, with a generall diet for
Vlcered bodies, and naturall properties of simple medicines) if (by proufe) thou therein finde commoditie, referre the same (with humble thankes) to thy ma∣ker the giuer of goodnes and no more but thinke well of him that herein did his diligence. Fare well.
VVilliam Clowes Chi∣rurgian in praise of the Auctour. SO farre as Pen and skill will guide, this simple verse I frame: Which may be sayde I roue to wide, and striue against the streame. ¶Yet frindshippe bides me still, Maister Banisters workes to praise: Which deserues therfore good will, That thus doth spend his daies. Although that Zoylus would him spot, Let him doe what he may: o spit his spite and stay it not, force ye not what such saye. ¶For they I knw will skoffe, as is their wonted guise: But such they are but chaffe, and knowen among the wise. I reade that one Thessalus a Tesaler of woll, despised Hippocrates, whose knowledge excelled: But Galen in coulours, so painted that foole, for his rude rashnes wherin he dealed.
Such witles heades which seekes the ouerthrow, of things vnknowne that passeth much their rea Doth plainly there, their pouertie but showe, whose skoole wants skil them better for to teach. What humor leades my verse astray I meane to praise the man: Whose worke right perfect is I say if you it rightly skan. Beholde therfore and reade this booke, peruse it to the ende: And marke what paynes he vndertooke, to showe the authours minde. He hath such sweet and sugred sap within this booke compiled: As greuous dollers will abate, and great woundes easlye healed. My simple skill wantes Tullies quill, to writ of this my friend: For barreine head my pen hath led, wherefore I here will end.
Iohn Griffin Chyrur∣gian, in commendation of this Booke. SYth healthfull bodie helpeth much, to make a healthfull minde: In lustie plight to passe the dayes, by God to man assignde. Great reason willeth thankfully, to celebrate the prayse: Of skilfull wightes: whose paynfull stile for mans auaile and ease. All times and tides refuseth not, such fruitfull seede to sowe: As may be to the benefite, of him and many moe. Among the rest Iohn Banister, of right may chalenge place: Whose trauaile hath at length brought foorth, this worke: with open face.
Of young and olde to be perusde, and learnde: if cause be such, That lothsme Ulcers should their limmes, infest and trouble much. Not only this, but sundrie sortes: of other practise here Is well set downe: and may do good, to all both farre and necre. Accept his paynes, afeerd good will, lyke well his Booke and him: And suffer not vncurteous speache, thy sence amisse to dimme. So thinketh he his paines to be requited: so likewise Shall he receiue encouragement, and greater workes deuise.
VLCERS IN generall. The definition of an Vl∣cer, and the difference betvveene an Vlcer and a wounde. AS my chiefest in∣tention is in this parte, to entreat of Ulcers, so do I purpose first to de∣fine what an Ulcer is,Vlc{us} quid sit. whiche after the minde of Auicen, is a solution of continuitie in the fleshe, conteining corruption and pu∣refaction. For by the name of an Ulcer, we vnderstande that separation of vnion, whiche is not simple as a wounde, but is lwaye founde annexed with other dispo∣itions and accidentes, hindring the cure hereof.Quid per nomē vlc. intelliga∣tur. Whereupon it commeth, that in Ulcer is to be vnderstanded as a com∣ound affection, or vnnaturall motion:
Notwithstanding, no man is so ignoran (bearing ye name of a Chirurgian) but he knoweth, that in woundes also is contay∣ned certaine dispositions necessarily chaū∣cing: as bignes, litlenes, streitnes, croo∣kednes, equalitie, inequalitie, depth and height, &c. Whiche make the differences in woundes.Discrimen inter vlcus & vulnus. To conclude therfore, that is to be called as Ulcer, where as there is corruption. And that a wounde, where (as yet) there is no putrefaction. Of the like opinion also is Corn, Celsus,Cor. Cel∣sus. and in man∣ner also Hippocrates,Hippoc. affirming ye to be a wounde which is yet new and bloudy, & an Ulcer, when it is become olde or inue∣terate. And thus farre as touching the definition of an Ulcer, and the difference betweene the Ulcer and the wounde: the differences general with the acccidentes, after followeth. The differences of Vlcers and vvher∣of they be taken. THe differences of Ulcers are diuersly taken, but especially of three causes, viz. from the causes prouoking them, frō the members, and from the accidentes or
dispositions ioyned with thē. Other take them onely of two, as from the causes and accidentes, and also from the natural dis∣positions them selues, to whiche they are enwrapped, and passe ouer those differen∣ces, whiche are taken of the members or labouringe partes, because they belong not to an vniuersall treatise. These there∣fore be the diuers sortes of Ulcers, & true differences taken of the causes, that is to wit, a virulent Ulcer, a corroding Ulcer, a filthy rotten or putrified Ulcer, a hol∣lowe & depe Ulcer, and Ulcer full of holes and a cancred Ulcer. And the differences which do come of the accidētes & natural dispositions, to which the woundes them selues be ioyned, are also diuers. Which of the Chirurgiās of later time are thus described. viz. an Ulcer wt intēperatnes, whiche ye Grecians call Discratū, a dolo∣rous Ulcer, an Ulcer with a swelling or tumor against nature (commonly called impostumation) a broken Ulcer, an Ul∣cer ouergrowen with superfluous fleshe, which ye Grecians call, a hard Ulcer, a cankred Ulcer, a hollowe vlcer, n Ulcer corrupt at the bone, an Ulcer
with diuers separatiōs, & an Ulcer called Cacoethes, which is a wicked, cruel, & ve∣ry hard Ulcer to be healed, and others of that sorte. But these many and diuers dif∣ferences of Ulcers, are not supposed of Galene to be true differences of Ulcers, but only agreeings of other effectes with the Ulcer, of which sorte are, the cankred Ulcer, the ouergrowen, putrefied and hol∣lowe Ulcers. And the Ulcer with some swelling, as the Ulcer called Phlegmo∣nodes, and Resipelatodes, or the cankred rottennes, the inflāmation of bloude, the canker, and residue of that sort, are of the kinde of effectes besides nature, corrup∣ting the actions whiche seuerally and by them selues may existe and bee. For that thing (saith Galen) which can consiste se∣uerally, shall neuer be the difference of an other. Let this therefore be as a precepte and rule, by whiche thou maiste discerne whe∣ther the difference of an effect be any other∣thing, or the enwrapping of an other na∣turall motion, but after an other sort. Al∣so the vexing and dolorous Ulcer, and the filthie vlcer, are called (as it were cer∣taine
differēces of vlcers whē as in deed they are not true & proper differēces, but the ioyning rather of an accident with an vlcer. &c. In like sorte the Ulcer called Vlcus cacochymon, is an Ulcer repleni∣shed with euill iuyce, or troubled with a rheumatick matter ther caused, being ioy¦ned with theffect. Many such therfore are vsurped of common Chirurgians & Phi∣sicians, for the differēces of Vlcers which are in deede no differences, but onely (as Galene saith) binding together other dis∣positions, or the effectes of that which is compounded. The proper and true diffe∣rences of a simple Ulcer are taken of the nature thereof. And that (saith Galen) is a simple Ulcer, which doth only exist, that is, wherto no other affect or accidēt is ioy∣ned.Vndepro∣priae vlc. differ. su∣mendae. It shall not therfore be a simple Ul∣cer if any other part be exulcerated, or be exed with a rheumatick matter, or euill uyce, or altogether without natural tem∣erature, full of hollownes. &c. Therefore the differences taken of the ature of the vlcers are moste proper,Different. vlcerum sunt magis propriae. & f the substaunce of the thing, and cōming utwarde. They are taken of the substāce
of the thing whiche are brought from the fourme & bignes or quātitie of ye diuisiō, & from ye measure of space.Forma vl∣cerum. Frō the forme, as the streight Ulcer, the Ulcer declined or bowed, the rounde or compassed vlcer, the wrythen and the crooked vlcer: from the bignes of the diuision or quantitie, as a great vlcer, a litle vlcer of the measures or spaces, as a long vlcer, a short vlcer, a broade vlcer, a narrowe vlcer, a highe vl∣cer, or an vlcer in the toppe or height of a∣ny parte, a depe vlcer, an equall vlcer, an vnequall vlcer. And the differēces of the vlcers cōming extrinsecall,Diffe. vlc. extrinsec. are taken of the time, of the waye of generation, as all the vlcer or scarce part thereof cannot be seen or be∣holden, the differences of the tyme, as a newe vlcer, or olde vlcer. Of the reason of the generation, as a cut vlcer, a brokē vl∣cer, an vlcer partly cut, partly broken. O the placing in thaffected part, as an vlcer euidently appearing or out of sight, an vl∣cer hidden within or not appearing. Also an vlcer in the beginning of the muscle, in the middest, or in the end of the muscle. The differences of vlcers taken of the af∣fected
place, though they are to be iud∣ged. vlcers, yet not (as Gal. saith) of their owne propre nature, as the aforesayd dif∣ferences are taken: for the places where∣in the vlcers doe consiste are similar, and organicall, therfore to shewe the differen∣ces of places wherein the vlcer is, the di∣uision must be after this sorte, from thaf∣fected place. An vlcer in the similar orga∣nick or instrumentall part, deuiding also the differences of vlcers in the similar parte after this sorte. viz. Ulcers in the veines, vlcers in the arteries, vlcers in ye skinne, and vlcers in the muscles, for the muscle and the similar part, is easie to be discerned by sense. And the differences of the affectes in the organicke parte, are of this sorte. The vlcer of the eare, the vlcer in the Iawes, the vlcer in the sharpe or rough arterie, vlcer of the lunges, vlcer of the brest, vlcer of the yarde, vlcer of the fundament and seate, and so forthe in lyke order discoursing the singuler partes of the body, whiche wee call instrumentall. And this is the complete and absolute di∣uision of a simple and only vlcer, and of an vlcer to whome no other affect is ioyned
in his differences taken of his propre na∣ture. Also if any affect or disposition doe consiste by it selfe, as Phlegmon, Gangr∣na, or putrefaction, there cannot the diffe∣rences of vlcers be taken thereby, or at least bee so called properly. But for be∣cause it is spokē of Galen at least in 600. places, let vs not holde any cōtention vp∣pon the names.Non esse de nomini¦bus contē∣dendum. For if any man should cal the putrefied vlcer, ye corrosiue vlcer, Gā∣grena, Erisipelas, the cancrous vlcer, the holed or cornered vlcer, the vlcer with pu∣trefaction at the bone, the vlcer called Ca∣coethes, the painfull vlcer, and all others of that sorte: If any man (I saye) should prescribe these as differēces of vlcers, we ought not to contende with him, so that he minister right curation to euery of thē. And they are called differences of vlcers taken of that wherto they are ioyned, that is to saye, the differences of the thinges conteined with the disease: the differen∣ces of the thinges conteined with the ac∣cidentes: and the differēces of the things conteyned with the causes and others (if any be) of like sort.
Of the causes of Vlcers. THe latter sect of Chirurgians haue in∣stituted two generall causes through∣out all vlcers,Causae vlceris. that is to saye, the Antece∣dent causes named of the Grekes, And the coniunctiue causes also cal¦led . The antecedent causes are these, viz. cutting, breaking, tearing, and suche like solution of continuitie, whiche cannot euen by & by stirre vp Sanies, Pus, or Sordicies, which are iudged necessarily to associate the vlcers, although it may be done in time, & that in remouing the ante∣cedent and corporall causes. Therefore the antecedent causes of vlcers is Caco∣chima, whiche is euill iuyce, and that is, when the humors haue onely defaulte in qualitie and not in quantitie: and also to muche aboundance of those peruerse hu∣mors being in the bodye, may at lengthe corrupt and putrifie the said partes of the same body. Furthermore, the wickednes of the said iuyce, is either engendred by a peruerse kynde of diet, or throughe the whole body, or els some particuler mem∣ber: as through default, which may be ei∣ther in the liuer or splene, as Galene in di∣uers
places hath sufficiently testified. The coniunctiue causes is said to be that intemperature,Causae cō∣iunct. whiche is called the ma∣lice of complexion in the wounded partes through the antecedēt causes, or through the woundes and hurtes them selues, or other tumors against nature, but especi∣ally through malignaunt vlcers, either broken, opened or stirred. For euē the cor∣roding vlcer is engendred Ex herpete & miliari, called of the Grekes Cenchrias, & also of Esthïomeno, whiche is an eating vlcer proceding of choller more grosse & thicke, so maye it also happen of the car∣buncle, chiefly if it be venemous, whiche maketh an escharous vlcer, ful of bankes, filthy, and full of depe hollowes.Tres modi aegrè sana biliu vlc. Where∣fore these three are accompted vlcers re∣bellious & hard to be cured. First because of intemperature, which commeth to the subiect fleshe. Secondly through defaulte of the bloud thereto resorting. And third∣ly through copie and quantitie of the mat¦ter flowing,Gal. lib. 4. meth. me∣dendi. as Galene credibly hath vs enfourmed. He also affirmeth that the sa∣me diuision may be made otherwyse, that is of curable, and also rebellious vlcers,
the one for intemperature of the vlcera∣ted fleshe, and the other in respecte of the humor flowing, and the same intempera∣ture also may be deuided twoo manner of wayes, viz. when the fleshe is subiecte to the onely qualitie of nature aboue mea∣sure, or otherwyse when there is present some accesse or certaine tumor. Now al∣so that flowing may be deuided into twoo partes, that is as well in the qualitie as also in the quātitie of the humor flowing. There shalbe therefore foure kyndes of vlcers,Quatuo gen. vlc. aegrè sana bilium. contumelious or hard to be cu∣red: that is to witte, the onely intempera∣ture of the subiect fleshe, whiche wee call Discrasia, intēperature with an accessiue tumor, the humor flowing, or vitious, or much, for the humor which floweth abun∣dantly into the greuous part of the vlcer, yea although it be not vitious, yet (for be∣cause it engendreth therein excrementes) it hindreth the healing with long detrac∣tion of tyme. Galen seemeth also to make and adde hereto a fift kinde in his Cōmē∣tarie vpō the Aphorisme of Hippocrates,Hippocra. which beginneth thus. Vlc. quaecun{que} an∣nua sunt. &c. whiche is the passion of the
corrupted bone in the vlcered place. For when the fleshe which couereth the bone hauing applied (according to art) exicca∣tiue medicines) receiueth cicatrice: by and by it semeth perfectly restored and amen∣ded, but shortly after some matter thither resorting from the corrupt bone, reduceth in the healed part a present inflāmation, so that after, there followeth not onely ge∣neration of matter, but also erosion of the aforesayd cicatrice & exulceration of flesh.Gal. lib. 4. Thera∣pēt. meth. And as we may plainly gather by Galen, among the aforesaide affectes and disposi∣tions, al others to be vnited and knit, and that many and diuers differences of vl∣cers doe spring of those aboue mencioned. Furthermore, there must be a methode of healing shewed and declared, not of al to∣gether, but euery one by him selfe, which shall followe after, beginning onely with the cure of simple thinges, that therby the waye and meane to heale the compounde affectes may the more easely be attained. Now, seing that as we entreat through∣ly of vlcers, these wordes Sanies, Pus, vi∣rus, Ichor, Sordes, and such like, are much in vse, I think it not much forth of ye way,
if in this place we shew what those words doe signifie among the Chyrurgians, and that in fewe wordes, how they agree and disagre. Sanies.Sanies quid.i. ichor, is properly yt thin humor, which the Grekes cal, suche as is in a wounde, neither newe nor olde, but betwene both, and some kinde of this Ichor is interpreted Sanies sanguinis, the matter of bloud. And of SaniesSanei spec. duae celso. saith Cel∣sus, be twoo kindes, the one named, and the other, being thin and halfe white, proceading of an euill vl∣cer, and chiefly where as a sine we being hurt, inflāmation is gathered. Meliceria is more grosse, glewie, and like to white honie, proceding also of euil vlcers, wher the sinewes about the ioyntes be hurt, in which places it greatly floweth. But nowe amongest the newe and la∣ter Physitiōs and Chyrurgiās, who not obseruing the true proprietie of voice, or agreeing vpon the nature of the thing, do wrongfullye vsurpe the name of Pus, in steede of Sanies,Sanies vul go pro pu∣re male v∣surpatur. sometime they make Sa∣nies a kinde of Sordes, Virus, Virulentū, and Purulentam colluuiem, called of the Grekes, and of the Latines Pus. For
the name of Sanies being truely defined, signifieth all humiditie altered aboue na∣ture. Wherefore if the humor be thinne whiche proceedeth from the vlcer, it is cal¦led VirusVirus. or virulentia. If it be thicker, Sordes.Sordes. And if it be in a meane betwixte both, it hath to name by proper appellatiō Sanies.Sanies. And it is saide to be found aboun∣dantly in vlcers, and but little in deepe woundes. Sanies therefore is properlye among the vulgar Phisitions and Chi∣rurgians, the same that Pus is among ye Latines, andamong the Grecians. Celsus calleth it the Genus, hauing vn∣der it twoo kindes conteined called of the Grekesand, the whiche ichor of the Latine interpretors is called and turned to Sanies and Meliceria called Pus,Puris ge∣neratio. hauing the beginning of contused flesh or bloud. But in the generatiō ther∣of, there is a doubtfull or halfe euil trans∣mutation or alteration.Gal. lib. 5. Simpli. For as Galene saith, there is in the bodies of liuing crea∣tures three alterations. One plaine and according to nature, yt is when the meate is digested in the bellie, bowelles, or ves∣selles, wherein the iuyces are engendred,
and from whence euery parte receiueth nourishmēt.Tres alte∣rationes. An other plainly against na∣ture. viz. in putrefying all thinges, & this (after a certaine manner) is contrarie to it selfe. The thirde is mixt or in a meane doing, partly according to nature, & part∣ly contrarie to nature. Therefore the transmutation or alte∣ration, whiche doth engender Pus, hath the middest place amōg the best transmu∣tation, which is the nourishement of the partes of liuing thinges, and that whiche is simply the worste, whiche is made stin∣king with putrefaction. For neither of onely heat against nature, neither of heat obtained according to nature is suppura∣tion or Pus engendred. But the heate of the inflāmation is (after a certaine man∣ner) mixte of them both, whiche whilest it gathereth to suppuration, moueth great paine, and by the heat aboue nature of the inflamed part, feuers oftentimes are rai∣sed, and that by extreeme heating yt harte. And these twoo doe chaunce (as it were of a certaine boyling or burning of ye bloud, which being throughly exusted or burnt, the remnaunt of it is made Pus, as by the
altering of wood into ashes by burning, as Galene hath left testified in his Com∣mentarie vppon Hippocrates, thus be∣ginning. Dum pus conficit. &c. By this nowe it is manifestly proued what pus is, howe it is engendred, and what is the effi∣cient cause and matter thereof. Nowe we will shewe in fewe woordes what Virus, Virulentia, and Sordes are amongest the Chirurgians. VirusVirus. or Virulentia, is a subtile superfluitie begotten of abundāce of watrie humors, which (saieth Guydo) is of twoo sortes, hote and colde, whea∣like or ruddie. But SordesSordes. is a certaine superfluitie more thicke, engendred of hu∣mors hauing a thicker substaunce, which truly is of three sortes, for some is thicke, vnequall, heaped, and white, & some black and like dregges mixt with ashes. Furthermore, that which they cal Vi∣rus, Galene calleth it in Greke, in la∣tine Sanies.Sanies seu virus quid. But to saye at one woorde Sa∣nies or Virus, is that thinne excrement in vlcers which cōtinually moistneth them, euen as Sordes thickneth thē, whiche pro∣cureth the vlcer named Rhyparon, that is Sordidum.Gal lib. 3. mh. For euen as (Galen saith)
the excrementes whether they bee thicke or thinne, doe followe euery mutation of the qualitie of the nourishement. So is there wont to be a double kinde of excre∣ment, and that chiefly in hollowe vlcers: that is to saye a thinner, called in Latine Sanies, in Greke, and a thicker also named Sordes. Of the thinne excrement, the vlcer is made moiste, and of the gros∣ser, filchie, whereof it commeth, that the sayde vlcer nedeth twoo sortes of medi∣cines, viz. to drie that which is moist, and to mundifie the filthie, but these thinges doe belonge to an other contemplation. But PusPus est me dium inter saniem & sordem. doth chose (as it were) a middle substaunce betweene thicke and thinne, e∣specially if it be that which is good. For that is best (saith Hippocrates) which is white,Boni ac mali puris notae. light, equall, and without noisome sauour. And that is euill (sayeth Celsus) whiche is thinne, watrishe (especially if it be so from the beginning) also if ye coloure be like whay, pale, yellowe, or like dregs, and besides that, if it smell euill. There is an other kynde of PusPus faieth the same Corn. Celsus, called in Greke, which is apparauntly founde in great vl∣cers
beginning to heale, which is thinne, half white, and as it were vnctuouse, not vnlike the white fattines of oile. That Sa∣nies is euill which is muche in quantitie,Malae sa∣niei notae. ouer thinne, yellow, pale, or black, glewy, or of euill sauour, or if it corrode in the same vlcer, or the skinne nere thereto, & is litle better, if it be somwhat more grosse, half red or whitishe. Therefore the better that the excrementes aforesaid appeareth in vlcers, the better hope is to be had in their curatiō: euen as that wound is like to be cured with expedition, whiche hathe good and freshe bloude flowing from it, wherefore the signes both good and euil, in euery of these, must of the Chirurgian be diligently wayed. So that he may ei∣ther reprehend, or pronounce what vlcers be vncurable, which be easie to be cured, and which be harde to be cured. Whiche thing is of no small weight, and the Chi∣rurgian thereby may laudably be won∣dred at and auoyde cauillouse slaunders. And this saide, shall suffice as touchinge Pus, Sanies, and Sordes. Nowe it resteth that we speake of the signes of vlcers, and likewyse of the iudgementes.
The signes to knovve the differences of vlcers taken of the defi∣nitions. EUerie vlcer hath his proper note or to¦ken, whereby he is diseried and knowē from an other, and they are taken of the definitions of euery of them. Wherefore I suppose it to be worthy the labour here to recite by the waye, the short definitiōs of the chiefe differences aboue mēcioned, wherein doing, wee woulde not haue the Reader to regarde so much the woordes as the thing it selfe. For we had rather vse the common definitiōs allowed long agoe of all professours, though they bee more rude and common, then with elo∣quence (though it were more pure stile) to ast a mist vpon that thing whiche is ob∣scure enough of it selfe. Notwithstanding haue eschewed, in euery place as muche s I might lanfully, that grosse and idle arbarousnes. Therfore to go to the pur∣pose, that is a virulent Ulcer wherein is oyson, which is a certaine thinne, and li∣uid excremēt, called properly of the La∣nes Sanies, abounding about erosion,
called also by an other name Saniosum. The vlcer whiche by the malignitie and malice thereof doth stirre vp euill and by∣ting iuyce, which eateth and gnaweth the affected part, & is made by the increase of humors more ample daily, is named Cor∣rosiuum, or Arrodens.Vlcus cor¦rossi. siue arrod. But if the malice thereof do so much encrease, that not on∣ly it vlcerateth the corrupt fleshe, but also wastfully consumeth the sound with day∣ly encreasing, it is thē called Depascens.Vlcus de∣pascens. All the Phisitions of Grece, (Galene also witnessing) doe call this affect,. be∣cause it was wonte to feede and carrie to the sound partes, the corruption of the af∣fected, and to the affected, that which was in the sounde. Whose species or kinde is Phagedena,Phagede∣na. which is an ambulatiue Ul∣cer, which creping here & there in yt ski and subiect fleshe, doth corrode and feed on the toppe or outward partes, but it ne∣uer perseth inwardly. Wherefore it hat to name also Vlcus, in sūmo residens, neuer Profundum. That Ulcer with Galene is caled Sordidum,Vlcus sor∣didum. whiche hat more grosse & viscous excrementes, which we call Sordem, but in Greke Rhyparon
but the later writers haue otherwyse de∣fined it, affirming that it hath certaine crustes thicke and grosse, or (as they saye) some fleshe softe, thicke and superfluous. The vlcer named Putridum,Lanfran∣cus sic de∣finit. Vlc. putrid. is that from whence some vaporouse & euill smelling fumes do procede like to dead carcases, or to that whiche putrefieth and corrupteth the fleshe, hauing euermore thereto an∣nexed Sorditiem, with outward heate, su∣perfluous humiditie, and ofttimes a fe∣uer, and differinge from the filthie vlcer by the malice thereof. They call that vl∣cer Cauernosum,Vlcus cu¦niculosum. whose orifice is strict & narrowe, but in the bottome larger, with∣out sense hidde, and hauing many corners, and like the Cunnie, rūning many ways, but without callositie or hardenes, but o∣thers call it cōtrarily Cuniculosum. The fistulous vlcer differeth litle from the hol∣lowe or cuniculouse vlcer,Vlcus fistu¦losum. but that the wynding and turning wayes thereof are callouse and harde. The cancrousVlcus can¦cerosum. vlcer is in sight horrible and stinking, hauing ed∣ges hard, thicke, swelled, and inuersed, the colour in the middest betwixt red and blacke, as one should say duskie or leadie,
and about the vlcered part certaine Ue∣nes appearing blacke, puft vp, swelled, thicke, and replet with blacke bloud. Vl∣cusVlcus. id est intē∣peratum. discraton, commōly called Discrasia∣tum, is that, wherein Quaedam discrasia (that is intēperature) reigneth, a certain euill qualitie ruling aboue nature, as im∣moderate heate, colde, moisture or drie∣nes, or many of them together, and suche are properly called among vs Vlcus in∣tēperatū. That is called Vlcus crucians,Vlcus cru∣cians. or Dolorosum, which in labouring, doth cruelly vexe or torment, or (as Guydoa Cauliaco sayth) wherein Sense of the cō∣trarie thing is felt. Which may be called in Greke. That (saith Ga∣len) is Vlcus rheumaticum,Vlc{us} rheu¦maticum. which by the Fluxe and resort of humours, refuse to be healed. And that is called VerminosumVlcus ve∣minosum. vlcus, which auoideth Wormes, called of the Grekes Scolesondes, whose generatiō is putrefct. And those Ulcers, bothe of Galene, as also of all the Physitions of Grece, are called Cacoethes,Vlcus ca∣coaethes. who hauing all thinges applied, and eche thing dili∣gentlye administred and ordered in all pointes according to art, and yet refuseth
vtterly to heale, for because that in the vlcered or affected parte, some maligne & pernitious matter, lieth hidde to vs vn∣knowen, and hindreth the healing of thē: Wee call those Ulcers maligne, rebel∣liouse, and hard to be cured. Vlcus vari∣cosum,Vlcus va∣ricosum. is that, which hath certaine Uei∣nes in partes aboue the Ulcer appearing swelled, and replet with thicke & grosse bloud, which swelling, is called Varices, which by flowing to the said Ulcers, doth prohibite and hinder the healing thereof. And the Apostumouse UlcerVlcus apo∣stemosum, is yt, whiche hath a tumor against nature, proceeding of some humour, suche as Phlegmon or Erisipelas. All other Ulcers are sufficiēt easie to be discried by these aforesaid. The Prognostications or Iudge∣mentes of Vlcers. VVHat Ulcers soeuer saith Hippo∣crates,Aphor. 45. lib. 6. doe continue the space of a yeare or longer, the Orifice must nedes be taken awaye, and the Cicatrice made hol∣lowe. What Ulcers soeuer (saythe Ga∣lene (in his Cōmentarie vpon this Apho∣risme)
are of long continuance,Vlcera a∣nua & diu¦turna, or hauing no Cicatrice by any meanes comming, or once receiued, breaketh againe, and yet no∣thing lefte in the curation that ought to bee taken awaye, it signifieth Cacoethes, whiche is a certaine malignitie, hard in receiue curatiō. And yt chaunceth through the Fluxe of vitious humours, or through euill disposition of humors of long tyme gathered, and conteined in the member, or els some affecte or corruption of the bone in that member. (Auicen saith) that what Ulcer soeuer, after it be filled with Fleshe and a Cicatrice enduced, if it so∣dainly breake fourth againe, it is in daun∣ger to degenerate into a Fistula,Vlcera du¦ra viridia aut nigra. and Ul∣cers that be hard, blacke, or greenishe, are euill: for in suche there is extinction of yt naturall heate in the Ulcered part.Vlc. frig. Colde Ulcers (saith Arabs) are knowen by soft∣nes and whytenes. But the hote Ulcers decline to a red∣nes,Vlc. cal. and are eased by cold Medicines, and are discerned by feeling. Therfore, euery one are knowen, partly by colour, partly by touching,Li. 4. The∣rap. and partly (saith Galene) by the sense of the pacient. Some saye they
feele a burning, others, a manifest cold in the part, and doe take pleasure in hoate or colde Medicines. &c. Drie and moiste Ul∣cers, also haue their propre Signes, and knowē chiefly by feeling. For feelīg doth discerne and iudge drie and moist things, and suche as followe those qualities, as hardnes and softnes, sharpenes and leni∣tie And if maligne Ulcers doe represent the colour of the reste of the Bodie. viz. white, purple,Vlc. totius corp. colo∣rem repre∣sentantia. duskish or citrine, it shew∣eth some defaulte worthy reproofe in the Lieuer, whereby the bloud there engen∣dred is corrupted. Ulcers succeeding other diseases, are harde to be healed.Aliud. Vlcera circumglabraVlc. circū∣glabra. praua sunt, that is to saye.Aliud. Apho. 4. lib. 6. When thou seest about the compasse of the affected place, the Heeres to fall away, or Scales to arise, Iudge that Ulcer to be peruerse and froward, for it signifieth euil humors, and maligne iuyce to flowe to the vlcered part, which doe vehemently erode. Ther∣fore suche maligne iuyce, doeth neither cleane abolishe the rootes of the Heeres, nor yet suffer the Ulcered place to receiue Cicatrice or Curation. But when those
Heeres had fallen before, do spring anew about ye Ulcer, it is a good tokē or signe. The Ulcer (sayth Hipocrates) whether it come before the disease,Aliud. Lib. i. pre∣dictionum Vlcus ante morbū vel in ipso morbo e∣nascens. or in the sicke∣nes, ought diligently to be looked vpon, for if the sicke shall die, the Ulcer will be drie, blacke, or very pale before death. Ulcers wherein (after long emission of Sanies, and Virulentia) perfect and lau∣dable pus beginneth to appeare, is a good signe, for it signifieth both strength of na∣ture, and obedience of the matter. What are the signes of good Pus, is before spo∣ken of. Ulcers in ye outward muscles of ye back, legges, or armes, are not without daun∣ger.Aliud. Vlc. in qui¦bus parti∣bus pericu¦losa. Uerie perillous are they deemed al∣so which occupie the inwarde members, or reache vnto them. In what Ulcers so euer incarnatiue medicines be applied,Vide Hip. apud Gal. li. 4. The. be¦fore they be well mundified: euill and su∣perfluous Fleshe will in them encrease. But contrarily, which soeuer be duely, & as they ought to be mundified and made, (as it were) drie before, the Fleshe in such (sayth Hippocrates) can neuer encrease superfluously, vnlesse contusion happen
therto. Ulcers rounde in compasse,Vlc. rot∣da. are wont to be the worste, and not to come to a Cicatrice, but difficultly and with much businesse, they bring childrē to vtter ruine: Therefore in such, the Chyrurgians coun∣sell ought to applye a Cauterie actuall, made after the quantitie and fashiō of the Ulcer compassed. In the outward mem∣bers,Artuum vlcera. that is to say, in the handes, feet. &c. Ulcers and Tumors against nature, as Phlegmon and suche like, doe ofte hap∣pen, and commonly in the Glandulouse partes, especially in those bodies that bee Plethoriques, that is, geuen to much re∣pletion, for these partes, for as muche as they be rare, are easie and (as it were) readie to receiue euery humor flowing. For so it commeth to passe, that through an Ulcer, either in the finger of the hand, or Foote, the Kernels about the armeholes or priuie partes, doe also swell or receiue inflammatiō, for when the bloud floweth, or other humours should haue recourse to the outward partes, straight by their losenes and raritie, part of the saide flow∣inges are in them reteined,Colli & capit. vlc. sometime also the glandulouse partes of the neck (either
by Ulcers of the head, or partes nighe to them, or els in them selues) do swel. And Galene calleth these glandulouse partes, which in that order doe swell, Bubones.Bubones. When medicines applied to Ulcers,Aliud. do profite, or (at least) doe no hurt or discom∣moditie:Si auxilia profuerint aut nocue int. it is a sure agrument, that such medicines were rightly administred. But if they cause any present hurt, or do make the Ulcer more drie, hote, or colde, it is a token that the things ministred are not fit for that present griefe, for that thinges more drie or more moiste (as the thing re∣quireth) should be applied. Also if (by the thinges applied) the Ul∣cer become more softe by & by, vse things more astringent.Si vlc. arro dtur. Neuerthelesse, if the Ul∣cer doe erode and become more depe, then beware diligently, for that springeth of sharpe and vicious iuyce together with malignitie of the Ulcer, els through the facultie of medicines applied, whiche doe more then sufficiently mundifie:Nota. for suche by arroding the vlcered part, do encrease muche Sanies, and make the Ulcer verie moist, whereby it happeneth that vnskil∣full Chyrurgians, are so ofte deceiued in
their purpose, for thinking the Ulcer to be Cacoethes, that is, that ye matter ther∣in cōteined to procede of malignitie, or (as they terme it) of virulent and superfluous humiditie, and whyle they earnestly mi∣nister thinges sharpelye to mundifie, and thereby maketh not onely the Ulcer more depe, and hollowe, but also more hote, & sometyme maketh it Phlegmonodes. Hereby the parties affected, doe feele ero∣sion and mordication. Furthermore, a∣mongest many thinges which hurt or hin∣der Ulcers, sayth Guy do de Cauliaco, ye South wynde is vnprofitable, and also a moist aire ioyned with heat.Vētus me∣ridonalis officit vlce¦ribus For they in∣duce putrefaction in Ulcers, euen as all things that putrefie, procede of heat and moisture. Hence cōmeth it (saith he) that Ulcers of the Legges, are harder & dif∣ficulter to be cured in ye South parts thē in the North, but in wounds of the head, it is contrarie. And euen as many tokens and iudgementes in woundes, are cōmon to Ulcers, so likewyse the iudgementes of Ulcers, whereof we nowe speake, may bee to woundes compared. Wherefor whatsoeuer is spoken before in the iudge∣mentes
of woundes conuenient, or agree∣ing to Ulcers, reuoke them in this place. Of the curing of Vlcers in generall. IN the curatiō of Ulcers,Duo spec∣tanda in curatione vlcerum. there are two thinges to bee considered and propoun∣ded vnto vs, that is, the contemplation of the Ulcer it selfe, by what meanes it is an Ulcer, with consideration of the cause of the Ulcer, of the Accidentes, and euery disposition therein cōteined, as also what parte here or there it occupieth. For euery Ulcer (as we haue saide before) either is alone and by him selfe (that is, hauing no other affect, neither conuersaunt with it, neither going afore, nor following it) or els is ioyned with one or moe, of whiche some haue not onely stirred vp the Ulcer frō the beginning, but also do now make it greater. Others be of yt sorte, without the which it can not obtaine the reason of the scope of curation. But euery Ulcer, in that it is an Ulcer, hath some common in∣dication of the cure (euē as Galene saith) the way of healing Ulcers,Vlceris sa natio me∣diocris sic∣catio est. is by a meane
drying: this indication also is common to woundes, if (at least they be woūdes) that is, receiued of some stripe. This onely is their difference, this nedeth lesse: and the other (through the great humiditie) re∣quireth greater desiccation: If the Ulcer be ioyned with any other affect, curation ought not to be applied to the Ulcer, but first to cure the affect, & lastly the Ulcer. For whether Phlegmon, Erisepelas, or ye tumor called Oedema, or blackenes, or Ecchimosis, do besiege the Ulcered part, the cure must be gentle. But if there be some strong intemperature (whiche is wont to bringe weakenes to the affected part) and be ioyned to the Ulcered fleshe, then, that is first to be cured. And when thou hast cured the intemperature, after∣warde thou shalt easely heale the affecte. So must we first helpe the tumors called Varices, whiche are ofte aboue the Ulce∣red place, and then to cure the Ulcer. But none of these curations (saieth Galene) is of the Ulcer it selfe, but of some other af∣fect, whiche either maketh the Ulcer or nourisheth it.In tollen∣dis disposi∣tionibus cum vlce∣re cōpli∣cat. duplex consilium esse. Gal. li. 4. Meth. med. Furthermore, Galene affir∣meth that in taking a way the dispositions
cōtained in Ulcers, there are two things to be considered: that is to saye, either vt∣terly to take awaye suche like affectes in the body, or els to destroye that which is therein vnprofitably conteined. But this he meaneth to be done where affect is lit∣tle and playne, for where it is great, it can not be brought to a Cicatrice before, till the other affectes haue remedie.Partic. in curandis vlceribus scopi. Of suche like Ulcers therfore as are ioyned with other affectes or dispositions, there bee foure particuler wayes of curation. 1 The first prescribeth a cōuenient diet fit for the curation of suche Ulcers. 2 The seconde is to diuerte the matter antecedent. 3 Thirdly, in correcting and remouing the accidentes and dispositiōs ioyned with the Ulcer. 4 Fourthly, those accidentes being cor∣rected, doth teache and instruct vs to cure them after the maner of hollowe woūds. But we doe follow the first and second intention, both by amending, emptying, diuerting and preuenting that same flow∣ing, wherewith the bodie of the affected, doth abounde, and flowe in the vlcered
part. Furthermore, the wayes whereby we may aptlye amende and diuert the a∣bundaunce of humors, & take away their corruption is thus. viz. by Phlebotomie, Purgation, Approued diet, Cauterie po∣tentiall, Uomiting & others of that sort. We preuent flowinges with hinding, wa∣shings, epithmes, ointments Exbolo ar∣meno, and other restrictiues. When as therefore the humour flowing in the Ul∣cered places, is neither more, nor yet much worse then cōuenient, sufficient re∣percussiues, & binding aboue the Ulcered place shall suffice, & whiche binding doth shut the pores wherby the matter should flowe into the Ulcer: it is meete therfore that the medicines applied to suche Ul∣cers, be more drie then they that serue for the simple Ulcer. But if it happen that this flowing can not be stayed or kept vn∣der, the cause thē must be searched foorth, and that must first be taken away, whiche if it come by weakenes of the parte that receiueth it, it must be strengthened with proper curation of the vlcered place. But if it come by abundaunce of bloud or euill humors, either in the whole Bodies, or in
any of the partes, they are first to be cured but the imbecillitie of the part, whereto by reason thereof more of humors then is conuenient doth resort, doth come altoge∣ther of intemperature, notwithstanding, not of euery intemperature. Whereupon it commeth to passe, that the vlcered flesh is ofttimes only temperate & not weake, and ofttimes both vntēperate & weake, for strong intēperature bringeth weake∣nes to the affected part. The thirde and last intention, which is in amending and taking awaye the acci∣dentes and dispositions, ioyned with the Ulcer, is brought to passe by due con∣sideration of the qualities of the humors and nature of the affected part.
The Seconde part. ¶The seconde discourse of Vlcers, vvith their particuler cures. HEretofore I haue expressed the causes, signes, differen∣ces, and vniuersall or gene∣rall cure for all kyndes of Ulcers, with their Prog∣nostications or Iudgementes. Now also will I prosecute the matter without cea∣sing, vntil I haue prescribed to euery Ul∣cer his particuler distinction, and seueral cure, gathered forth of diuers Authours, and especially out of Antonius Calme∣teus Vergesatus. Of an Vlcer vvith intemperature. VVHat kinde of intemperatureDe intem∣perie cuvlcere. soe∣uer it be, it may be abated by vni∣uersall remedies, as by diet & conuenient purgations,Calid. quo modo e∣mendetur. and (if it be ioyned with anye humor) by reuulsions of all sortes. Hote in temperature, whether it bee alone, or
ioyned with the Fluxe of humors, it may be amended with Vnguentūalb. or Rub. cum Camfora, or Vng. ex Pompholig. vel de Plumbo, vel de Cerusa, aut aqua Rosacea, & Succis Plantaginis, Solani, & Semperuiui. Colde intemperature may be amēded by fotibus,Frigid. vt curetur. only of wine, heated or boiling therein Wormwoode, Mintes, Isope, Penirial, Calamint, Organi. Rosemary, Stechados. &c. or Lee with Allom, or vn∣guē. Basilic. or vng. Citrin. vel Dealthea. The moist intemperature,Quomo∣do humid. intemp. ad natural. educitur. is brought to a natural (by exiccatiue vnguentes, as De Pōpholi, de Plūbo, de Cerusa, de Gratia Dei, Diacalcitis The humors respected for yt intēperature hapneth seldome with∣out a humor, neither must we passe ye na∣ture of thaffected part, which must either more or lesse, receiue drying medicines. The drie intemperature, may be resto∣red naturall (sayeth Galene) by fotions of water, or Vng. Basilicō, or vng.Sic Intem∣peratura ficca alte∣ratur. Galen. 4. Metho. de Pi∣ce, or Diachilon dissolued in oyle, to eue∣ry ounce whereof is added Pulueris Ro∣sarum. I dragme. Of an Vlcer vvith paine.
PAine in an Ulcer proceedeth moste cō∣monly of hote and sharpe intempera∣ture with corrosion.De dolore cū vlcere. Sic accidit dol. ex ca∣liditate. And then profiteth publique medicines, as Succus Plantagi∣nis, Solani, Sēperuiui, Hiosciami, or their stilled waters, mixt with Uineger, and Oile of Roses. It profiteth also to mini∣ster the white of an Egge, or the whole Egge, mixt with Oile of Roses, Bolo ar∣meno, and Terra sigillata, and Aceto. A Cataplasme also is commodious, made with Mallowes, Plantaine, and Branne, and boyled and mixt with oile of Roses. Or it shall not be incommodious to vse the white of an Egge, with Oile of Roses, & Litharges, diligently mixed in a Leadē mortar, & after boiled at a gētle fier in a pound of the iuyce of Housleeke, to the consumption of the sayde iuyce. Els the whole Egge mixt with Oile of Ro∣ses, and Terebētine, or vng. Popillionis, halfe an ounce, cum oleo. Vitelli ouorū one ounce. Or vng. Album Camforati, or vng de Lithargi. De minio. de Tutia. De Plumbo. vng Rub. cum Camfora. If the paine come of colde intempera∣ture,Si l it a. washe the place with wyne, wherin
hoote thinges is boyled, such as is spoken of before, and these or suche like also are profitable. viz. Basilicon, vnguentum Fuscum, & Citrinum. But when the paine springeth by dis∣solution of continuitie,Si per dis∣solutionē continui∣tatis. stupefactiues then are exceeding commodious. Notwith∣standing, those are much more profitable, which encrease the naturall heate,Anodina. hic confe∣unt, as the yolke of an Egge, Saffron, Terebentine, and Oile of Roses, together mixt and ap∣plied to the Ulcer. And about the circuit of the Ulcer, Ping. Gallinarum, Anseris, Anatis, Suis &c. Muccagi. sem. Lini. Fe∣nugreci, & Maluae, ae good and necessa∣rie. Also Oleo Rosa Amig. Chamomeli Aneti, Violacei. Vulpini. &c. Or els. Rec. Maluae. one handful and a half. Farmae. Sem Lini, ana. half an ounce. Fenugreci, & Hordei. Olei Camomeli, ana. vi. drag. & Lilij. Ol. Ros. iii. oūc. Muccag. sem. Al∣theae, one ounce and a halfe, Vitel∣los,
num. ii. mixe them and make ther∣of a Cataplasme. When the paine is great, and the pre∣cedent medicines preuaile not, then Ad Narcotica accedendum,Ad narco∣tic. accedē∣dum. and make a Ca∣taplasme with Far. Hordei, Oleo Ros. & Nimpheae, vel Mandrag. cum lacte vel passo coctis, or with bread crummes infu∣sed in water with Oile of Roses, ye yolkes of Egges, and Saffron, adding thereto Opij halfe a scruple. Or a Cataplasme made with the leaues of white Poppie, Mandrag, and Henbane, with the pouder of Camomill. So is it good to apply Phi∣lonium, or Theriaca, or OI. de Papauere, Mandrag. vel Hiosc. cū Opio. or Succus Hios. cū lact. mulie. cū Ouillo & Opio. And great commoditie hath bene founde ex Oleo Ranarum. Of an Vlcer vvith a tumor. IF with the Ulcer through paine,De vlc. cū tumore. a tu∣mor do chaūce, it must be asswaged, (ye cause of pain considered) whether it come thy dissolutiō of cōtinuitie or with biting, or intēperature. But if the swelling come
by the malice or aboundaunt Fluxe of hu∣mors to the place, then prescribe a diet thinne and colde. Mollisie or purge the belly (respecting the humors nature) vse Phlebotomie, restraine ye humor flowing, and resolue that which is already flowed which all must be considered in tumors a∣gainst nature. If the tumor proceede of hote humors,Si tumor ab hu. cal. it shall be expedient to boyle in tart wine a swete Orenge brused, or Quinces and sower Peares, boiled with the poulder of Mirtles, els Lintels de∣cocte with the poulder of the rindes of Pomegranettes, mixte with Roses and Terebintine. In the augmentatiō the like medicines adding to, Hordei Fabarū, Tritici, Fari∣nae & Camomel. In the state make a Ca∣taplasme ex decoct. Mal. & Absinth. in vino dulci cum Far. Sem Lini. Fenug. & furfure. But if Pu firste appeare, make a Cataplasme ex Mal. in aqua coctis Farina Sem. Lini, Fenugr. & axungisuilla, vel ex Farina Tritici, Oleo & Croco, boyled in water to the forme of pulteise. If the mūctory places (throug paine of y• Ulcer) be afflicted with tumor
the matter being hote, coquito Mal iii. ounces, cum Furfure in aqua,Respice materiae tempera∣ment. and apply it, whiche also preuayleth muche against the tumor in the Ulcer, but if the matter be colde. Rec. Mūmiae in vino ad crassitiem coctae, i. oūce. Oesipi. ii. oūc. Fari. Triti∣ci, half an ounce. Boyle these together, and make thereof a Cataplasme. Of the Contused Vlcer. AN Ulcer contused, requireth thinges moistening,De vlcere Contuse. and engendring Pus, as a pulteis ex Fari. triti. Oleo & aqua coct. aut Triticū aqua calida diutissime ma∣ceratum, which being boiled applie it. Or one made ex radi. altheae & caricis simul coctis ad mellis crassitiem, cū Fari. triti∣cea fiat Cataplas. and then resorte to the cure of woundes. Of Fleshe excreasing in Vlcers. THis being cōmonly called proud flesh, must be taken away,De carni in vlcere excrescent. either with cau∣terie
actuall, or corrosiue pouders, the weaker sorte be these, Alumen vst, her∣modact.Corrodēt imbecilla. & cū tartaro, Nuclei dactil, cō∣bustorum, aqua vitae cū Sulphure, vng. Aposto. Sem. vrticae, Serpētaria squāma aeris, es vstum, Radix asphodeli, Cinis Erinacei, Stupa minutim incisa: Some∣what more vehement be these, Pul.Paulo ve∣hement. Mer∣curij solus, vel admixtus alumine vsto ad partes equales, vng. Aegiptiacum vel Apostolorum cum aerugine rasili: vel a∣qua vitae. ij. ounces, Eruginis rasilis. ii. drag. misceantur, vel linimentum aqua sublimata ter aut quater imbutum & ex∣iccatum. The strongest be these. viz.Valentis∣sima. Calx viua, Calcitis, Calcanthum vstum sublimatū, Hydrargyrum, and like these in fourme following. Rec. Hydrargyri sublimat. ii. drag. Aluminis crudi. v. drag. Aqua Ros vel plantag. vi. ounc. Bulliant ad consumptionem quarte par∣tis. And this water is of maruelous ope∣ration.
Rec. Salis nitri. Vitrioli Romani. an. half an ounce. Aluminis. Hydrargyri sublim. half a drag. Aqua plantagi, vi. ounc. Aceti. ii. ounc. Bulliant vt dictum est. But when this is applied, haue in a re∣dines vng. de Bol. armeno, and applye it to the places round about, to preserue the partes nighe therto, duely considering the quantitie of superfluous fleshe. Of the discoloured Vlcer vvith hardenes of the edges. VUhen the Ulcer is discoloured, & the edges hardened, note if ye hardnes be but small, it may be cured by resolutiue medicines, whiche be these.De vlc. de colore cū labiorum duritie. Ping. Anser, Gal. Anatis, Vituli, Bouis, Vrsi, Leonis, & orum medullae, and of thē, those that be newest are beste, muche profitable also be these viz Ole. Lill. Amigdal. dul. Lū∣bric. Vulpinū, Oesipus, Muccag. Alth. Lini, Fenugr, omnia gummi genera, Ba∣filicon,
Diachilon, Emplastrum de muc∣cagine, Medulla cruris bouis, cum Muc∣cag, al thee, Dragagan. & Terebent. Ole. Omphacino & exigua cerae parte. If by gentle medicines the hardnes a∣mend not, then scarifie the edges, and lay on them Mercurie in poulder, then apply some of the aforesayde medicines, or vse a cauterie, or incision, els strong medicins, as is aboue mentioned, first knowing the Pacientes minde, and then the sense and situation of the member. Rec. Lithargyrij. an. ii. drag. Lapid hematitis. Vitrioli Ro. Hydrargyri sublimati. ii. dram. and a half. misce. Of the Vlcer vvith tumor in the the Veines. OF this we haue litle to entreate,De vlc. cū varicibus. whē (as touching this matter) wee haue spoken sufficiently in the Ulcer with tu∣mor. This only resleth, that the Ulcer can not be cured till the tumor in the veines be taken away with often bathinges, and
after a sorte nourishing, the which being taken away with the accidētes aforesaid, either it will cure it selfe, or els receiue the cure of a simple Ulcer. Of the Vlcer vvith putrefaction in the Boone. IF in an Ulcer the Boone be also putre∣fied,De vlc. cū ossis carie. the Boone is firste to bee bared by corrosiues, or other wyse as is aforsayd, & so much of the boone as is corrupted must be taken awaye, till the Boone appeare bloudye, and afterwarde applye this fol∣lowing. Rec. Radic. Aristolo. rotund. Ireos, Peucedani, Corticis panacis, an. ii. drag. Corticis Pini, Thuris, Aloes. Puluerizentur subtilissi. Which being mixed cum Melle, vng. Regis, vel Egip∣tiaco, apply to the place, & lay alofte Em∣plastrum Diacalcitis vel diuinū. When
the Boone putrified lieth so deepe that it cannot be come by with instrumente, pre∣pare this iniection following. Rec. Rad. Aristolo. vtrius{que} an. i. oūc. &. s. Iridis Florentiae. Cen taurea minor. Agarici, iii. drag. Simphitum. Hiperici, an. i. m. Pes Collumbini, Herb. Roberti. Cortic. Pini. ii. ounces. Ros. rub. an. P. sem. Anthos. Mel Ros. cola i quart. Infuse them all in wyne, and still them in Limbecke, and iniece into the Ulcer of the water thereof twise in one daye. Neuerthelesse if the Boone be greatly corrupted, nothing can be better therfore then Cauterie, for safely and speedely it drieth both the bottome and toppe.Rationem habe ad cauterij ca lidiratem. Not∣withstanding, so order the heate of the Iron, that it serue aptly, both for y• depth and quantitie of the Boone corrupted, for we haue seene that to hotte and vehement
cauteries, expelleth not so sone the Boone corrupted, but haue spoyled it with cor∣ruption. But if the corruption lye ye deepe, after thuse of your first cautery (to the ende it may be more easely auoyded) to make the Boone sounde and whole,Terebra erit multis foramini∣bus aperic̄da. it shalbe moste expedient to pearse it with many holes, vntill some bloud appeare, & in those holes to applie a cauterie, by meanes whereof, the Boone may be very well dried. Or els fill them with Aqua forti, so shall the Boone be dried, and by litle and litle, expell that is corrupted.Sub eaque natura car nem gene∣rabit, ne sa nū os aere externo i∣terum cor∣rumpatur. And vnder that shall nature incarnate fleshe, to preserue the sounde Boone from the corruption of outwarde aire. To con∣clude, the Boone corrupted shalbe exclu∣ded, and none, or very litle humor shall fo∣lowe it. After the Cauterie hath bene ap∣plied the three first dayes, and the Escar remoued, thē good it is to powre into the Ulcer Ol. Ros. cum Oui albumine, and the three dayes following, vse a digestiue made Ex Oui vitello & Rosaceo, deinde Butyrum cum Melle. The reste of the cure for the Boone corrupte, maye hap∣pely be wrought by this water followīg.
Rec. Aquae vitae ter distill. an. iii. ounces. Aquae Rosarū. Sublimati. i. drag. Bulliāt lento igni ad sublimati dissolu∣tionem, and keepe it to thy vse in pure Uial. And after the vse therof the sequele is profitable. Rec. Aristolo. rotun. iii. drag∣mes. Cort. Pini, sing. Radi Peucedani an. ii. drag∣mes. Arundinis, Agarici albi. an. i. dragme and a halfe Tartari. Euphorbij. i. dragme. Powder them together very small, and put thereof into the Ulcers orifice. Els mixe it with hony, or vng. Regis cū melle or vng Egiptiaco, and applie that to the Boone corrupted, after the vse of the wa∣ter, and laye on alofte, Emplastrum Dia∣calciteos, or diuinum, or this plaster fol∣lowing, whiche enduceth the Boone cor∣rupted, doth mundifie, and incarnate, by vse whereof I neuer fayled.
Rec. Corticis ouorum, Ossiū humanorū, an. ii. drag. Pann. cōbustorū, & in pul. redact. Radi. Peucedani. an. halfe an ounc. Lumbric. puluerizat. Emplastri de gratia Dei. an. ii. oun. Diachilon com. Picis naualis. Mixe them together, and make thereof a plaster, whiche applie after the vse of the water and poulder, or linamente as is a∣foresayde. And finally, if the Boone be corrupted through vs{que} ad medullam, the remedy is only to seperate the member, except it be capite coxendicis, vel spina dorsi, and thē it is best to flee the cure. Of the malignaunt Vlcer cal∣led Cacoethes. IN curing these kyndes of Ulcers,De vlc. ma¦lig. quae Cacoethe vocantur. the causes must first be diligently searched, to witte whether it be Plethora, Caco∣chymia, or Cachexia, els an vniuersall in∣temperature, or of some inward part, as
the Liuer, Splene, Uentricle, Ulcered part, swelling of the Ueines, hard edges, weakenes of the affected part brought to passe by euill humors therein heaped, or the causes aforesayde.Tolle caufam ante affectum. Therefore let vs take awaye the causes according to their natures then by diet, Phlebotomie, and purgation to suppresse the members in∣temperate, whatsoeuer it be, and in what part. As for intemperature, looke before in the chapter of the Ulcer with intempe∣rature. And commonly in these kinde of Ulcers, we haue prescribed to the pacient the vse of Guiacum,Guiacum his procest with happie successe, after the vse of common purgation, but in them whose humors and iuyce is profita∣ble, a diet is sufficient, but if the vlcer see∣me bathed in humors, it is tyme to re∣straine thē. For the tumors Varices, thou hast a proper chap. but for intēperature of the inner partes, take coūsell of the Phy∣sition. And as touching Ulcers maligne and harde to receiue Cicatrice,Vl emens xiatio est summa curatio. the sum or chief scope of curation is vehement ex∣iccation of the biting humors, whiche is brought to passe per repellentia, and dis∣cutientia. Hauing good respecte to re∣resseth
at whiche floweth, and to take a∣aye that which is infixed. And for this urpose these folowing are moste expe∣ient. Aristoloch. Corticis Radi. Caparis. Malicorium, Radix Pannacis, Sarcocol∣ae, Vitrum Combustum, Testae pisciū Vstae. All metalles burnte likewyse are profitable, as Cadmia, Calchitis vsta, & ota sub Canicula, & cum aceto trita, Antimonium, Diaphriges, Plumbum vstū lotū, Squamma aeris & ferri, Sco∣ia plumbi, Erugo rasilis vsta & lota, om nia Aluminis genera, Terra sigillata. But a further respecte must be had to the bodie, for that in some bodies the me∣talles and suche like aforenamed medi∣cines, must be washed before they be mi∣nistred, but in harder bodies, without daū∣ger, certaine of them may vnwashed bee applied, because in suche parties the mē∣bers sence is more dull.Habe ra∣tionem ad corporis habitum & sensummé brorum. Wherefore firste let the Ulcer be washed with an astringēt decoction made with Allome water, like as followeth. Rec. Succi Agrimoniae, an. halfe a pounde. Solani, Plantaginis,
Vinum album, iiii. ounces. Aluminis crudi, iii. ounc. s. Auripigmenti, half a scru. Albumina ouorū. vi. Stirre these together and distille them, let the Uler with the water thereof washed twyse in the daye, whiche wa also muche auayleth to conglutina woundes. Afterwarde. Rec. Olei. Rosar. vi. ounces. Cerusae. iii. ounces. Lithargyri auri. an. i. oun and a halfe Lap. Calaminaris. Tuthiae preparat. an. one ounce. Boli Armeni. Camforae dissolut. in aqua Ros ii. dragmes, Olei. de Papauere. ii ounces. Cerae albae. q. s. Make thereof an vnguente. Rec. Olei. Ros an. ii. ounces and a halfe. & Mirt. Succ. Solani. an. one ounce and a halfe. Plantag. Semperuiui.
Sepi Hircini, an. ii. ounc. & Vitulini. Ping suillae liquefact. iii. ounces. Calcis tertio in aqua extīct. vi. drag. & Lota, Malecorij. an. vii. drames. Balausti. Mirobal. citrini. Aerug. rasilis v. dragmes. Scoriae ferri. x. dragmes Sarcocollae. ii. dragmes. All whiche being brused, and mixt toge∣ther, infuse them one whole daye, & boyle them a litle, adding therto. Litarg. vtrius{que}. an. x dragmes. Cerusae. vi. dragmes. Plumbi vsti. v. dragmes. Antimonij. i. ounce. Camforae. i. scruple. Cerae. q. s. Mixe them well in a Marble mortar. Hereto also may be added Argent. viui, i. ounce, but it profiteth more, first to vse the
poulder of Mercurie, after the water a∣foresaide, and after the vnguent. Of the virulent corroding and feding Vlcer. THese kind of vlcers which differ ou Secundum maius & minus, must haue the Methode of their cure consiste three thinges onely.De vlcere  Firste in a diet col and drie, secondly by euacuation of the a ecedent matter, both by Phlebotomie it seme profitable as also by medicines iccatiue, as is sayde in Herpes and Eri pelas. Also particuler reuulsions are modious, as cupping, frication, and b∣ding the contrarie member, or vse of vn de Bolo, to beate backe the matter flo∣ing.Catartica Particula∣res reuul∣siones con¦erent. The thirde scope is referred to mecines colde and drie astringent and distient. Conuenient simples be these, Le∣tes, Arnoglos a Solanum, Sūmitates bi, Fol. Vlmi & Papaueris, Fol. & fruc Cydoniorum, Mirti, Balaustia, Cort Granatorum, Galla omphacitis, Accas Bolus armenus, Cortex thuris, Nucl Mirobal. Mastiche, Simphitum, Plum
vst. & lotum, and all metalles mentio∣ned in the aforesayde chapter. Of whiche both fotions, linimentes, vnguentes, ce∣rotes and emplasters, profitable for thy purpose may be made.Sit mali∣tia vlc. pri∣mo extin∣ct. And some vse to applie the poulder of Mercurie, first to take awaye the mallice of the Ulcer and corrosiō, and leaue it the space of a whole daye in the Ulcer, applying aloft vng. de Minium, vntil the malice of the Ulcer be quite extinct. Afterwarde washe the Ul∣cer and the partes nighe therto, with al∣lome water, as in the chapter a foresaid, or as foloweth. Rec. Succi. rub. Sumach. Virga pastoris. an i. quart. Plantaginis. Solani. Acetosae. Albumina ouorum. vi. Aluminis pulue. iiii. ounces. Distill them all in a leaden still, and vse it, or els these waters folowing, which is right profitable for Ulcers, filthie and corrosiue.
Rec. Cerusae. an. one ounce. Lithargyri. Plumbi. vsti. an. halfe an ounce. Lapid. Calaminaris. Boli armeni. i. ounce and a half. Sang. Draconis. an. one ounce. Terrae sigillatae. Aluminis combusti. half an oūc. Calicum glandium, Gallarum viridium. Baccarum mirti. an. i. m. Psidiae, Balaustiarum. Sumach. Coriandri. an. half an ounce. Sem. Plantaginis. Rosar. rub. ii. p. Boyle all these in sufficient quantitie of Smithes water, whiche done, in that water washe the Ulcer, which in wōder∣full manner will drie. All these may bee taken to the decoction, or some of them, wherof also if it be thought cōueniēt, you may adde more colde things, as Hēbane, mandrag, and Popie, if there bee muche hote intemperature ioyned with the Ul∣cer.
To the addition, further may be an∣nexed bonie, to mundifie if thou vse it to a filthie vlcer. Or. Rec. Aquae Rosarum, an. one quart. & Plantaginis, Aluminis, ii. ounces. Zacchari. one ounce. Boyle them altogether til the Allome and Sugar be melted, & there with washe the Ulcer. Whereto also if thou ad Mel∣lis, one ounce, It shall not be a litle pro∣fitable for all filthy Ulcers. Els. Rec. Aquae Plantag. vi. ounces. Hidrargyri sublim. i. dragme. Salisamonniaci. one drag. &. s. Salis commu. ii. dragmes. Aluminis. i. dragme. Boyle them together in a glasse vessel, to the consumption of the fourth part. And this water or the other, shalbe proued pro∣fitable. After the Ulcer be washed, applie ther∣to vng. de Minio, or de Plumbo, or vng.
rub. cum Camfora, or vng. Album Camforat. or vng. de Pompholigo. Or els. Rec. Vnguentū de Plumbo. ii. ounces. vng. Popul. ii. drag. Succi. Plantaginis. i. ounce. Albumi. oui. i. Mixe them diligently in a leaden mor∣tar, or if you will, this. Rec. Tuthiae preparat. half an ounce. Plumb. vst. an. i. ounce. & Loti. Cerusae lotae. Mixe them in a Leaden mortar, with water of Plantaine, and ad therto. Bol arm. an. ii. dragmes. Terrae sigil. Olej Rosarum q. s. Cerae albae. Fiat{que} vnguentum. Or. Rec. Lithargyri, iii. ounces. Olej Rosa. q. s. Aceti.
to be mixed, and if thou ad to a litle Ce∣ruse, it shall better preuaile for all Can∣crous dispositions, but it wilbe better if thou ad therto Leade macerated in white wine. Or by putting to Nucem cipressi, Tuthiam, Boracem, Aes vstum, & Anti∣monium, of it shalbe right excellent for Ulcers that be hard, to receiue cicatrice. Or. Rec. Olei Ros. an. ii. ounces. Mirt. Succi climenō depurat. ii. ounc. s. Succi Plantaginis, i. ounce. Sepi Hircini. i. ounce s. Aluminis vsti. i. dragme. Lithargyri auri an. one ounce. & argenti. Scoriae ferri. ii. dragmes. Puluerizen````````````````tur tenuissime ac simul co∣quantur tres horas, adding to. Cerae alb. one ounce. Terebentinae. vi. dragmes. Mercurij extinct. iii. dragmes. Camforae. i. scruple. Erugi. rasilis, one ounce. Make thereof an vnguent.
Rec. Ceruse, Lithargyri. Bole. armeni. an. i. ounce. Terrae sigillat. Lapid. Calamin. Sandal. alb. & rub. an. ii. drag. Baccarum mirti. Rosarum rub. Sem Papaueris, an. one dragme Hiosciami. Mandragora. Olei Rosarum an. iii. ounces. & Violarum. Cerae albae, tantundem,. Camforae. one dragme. Make thereof a cerote. Rec. Olei Rosar. an. tvvo ounces. & Mirtini. Succi. Clymenon. iiii. ounces. Succi. Plantaginis ii. ounces. Pinguedinis Vituli i. ounce. s. Foliū Caprifolii, an. i. m. & Climenon. Boile them together (the herbes being first brused) to the cōsumptiō of ye iuyces.
Then ad to. Lithargyri. ii. ounces. Minij. i. ounce. Camforae. i. dragme. Mastices. halfe an ounce. Cerusae. an. v. dragmes. Antimonij. Plumbi vsti. Cerae alb. q. s. Make thereof a Cerote. If the Ulcer bee not ouercome by these or suche like medicines, but exepeth more and more, then Cauterie is to be vsed, or this folowing. Rec. Hidrargyri sublimati. ii drag. s. Vng. Populionis. vel Dealtheae. (Whiche represseth the sharpenes of the sublimate) i. dragme, mixe them, or Sub∣limatum mixt with Vng. album. And after the escar be remoued, vse Vnguen∣tum de Calce & de Pompholigo, mixte by equall portions, or the aforesayde me∣dicines. Of the filthie and putrefied Vlcers.
TO this kinde of Ulcer,De sordi∣do acputri vlcere. diet, Phleboto∣mie, and purgation belongeth, and af∣ter purgation, the vse of Guiacū is right excellent, to drie & expell superfluous ex∣crementes together with sweat, whereby they shall not resorte to the affected place. Simples in this case preuailing are these viz. Farinae Hordei. Fabarū, Cicerum, O∣robi, Lupinorum, Aristol. Iris. Hiperi∣con. Centaureum minus, the iuyce wher∣of mixt with honie, is good against all fil∣thie Ulcers. Also Marrubiū, Gentiana, Absinthium, Apium, Mel, and all bitter thinges, salce, &c. Wherof make lotions, Imimentes, and vnguentes. Washe the filth with Hidromel, Oenomel, or sea wa¦ter, or ex Lixiuio iiii. ounc. cineris Cau∣lium, & Cortices Fabarum, cū aquae plu∣uiae. i. li. or iiii. ounces. Lixiuij mellis. i. ounce, Precipitat. ii. dragmes, or washe the Ulcer cum decoctione Rois, Balaust. Cortices Mirobalani Citrini, Rosarū & Mellis. Wherto also it may profite to ad Alumen. Notwithstanding, you must di∣ligētly marke least in filthy vlcers, thou vse medicines to muche astringent, seing suche thinges doth greatly harden the fil∣thines,
and make it after, more difficult to be remoued and mūdified. It doth profite els to wash it with Lie, in which is dissol∣ued Egiptiacum, and then to vse Egiptia∣cum alone, or mixt cum vng. regis, respec∣ting the great store of filthines. Els to vse this mundificatiue folowing which is ex∣cellent. Rec. Succi. Apij. an. iiii. ounces. & Mellis, Terebintinae. ii ounces. Puluis ireos exiccat. vi. dragmes. Farinae Hordei. iii. dragmes. Make an vnguent thereof. Or, Rec. Succi absinthij. an. ii. ounces. Apii, Plantaginis. Farinae Hordei. an. one ounce and a halfe. & Orobi. Terebintinae. i. ounce. Mellis. i. quart. s. Make thereof an vnguent, adding of Mirrhe. iii. drag. or in steede thereof the yolkes of Egges.
Els. Rec. Succi Centaureae mino. v. ounces. Succi apii. iiii. ounces Succi Plantaginis. ii. ounces Mel. halfe a pounde. Terebentinae. ii. ounces Farinae Hordei, & Orobi. an. tvvoo ounces. Pulueris iridis. halfe an ounce Let the iuyces boile with the honie, the adde Farinas, and being mixed and taken from the fier, ad thereto Terebentinae & iridem, And for this scope of cure, these also are profitable, Vnguentum de Resi∣na, or vnguentum Fuscum Nicolai, or vng. Apostolorum, or vng. de Gummi, or vng. Diapompholi. cum Mercurii pulu. for that doth verie well mundifie. So li∣kewyse auaileth Emplastrum Gratia dei Emplastrum diuinum, Emplastrū rub. Grec.Gal.ij. ad Glautonē bis coloratum, whiche as Galene affirmeth, doth aptly mundifie, and draw∣eth the filthy matter and corrupted bones from the botom to the outward parte of the Ulcer. Or els,
Rec. Galbani, Opopanacis, an. one ounce. Bdellij, Amonniaci. Cerae nouae, one pounde. Olei Ros. vel commu. ii. pounde. Resinae, iii. ounces. Lithargy. auri. i. pound. and. s. Olibani, Mirrhae, Aloes, an. one ounce and a half. Thuris, Masticis, Aristolo. rotū. Stiracis calamite. half an ounce. Succi Betonicae, Verbenae, Caprifolij, an. one ounce. Plantaginis, Pimpenel. Cynoglos. Lapid Hematitis. ii. dragmes. Eruginis rasilis. i. ounce. Dissolue the Gūmes in vineger, boile the Litarge with the Oile, Waxe, and Rosin, and in the ende put in Eruginem
Rasilem and the rest. But if the filthines growe to putre∣faction, then must the Ulcer bee washed with Oxicrate or Muria, and then to ap∣plie ex Carnibus piscium salsorum, Fa∣rinae Orobi. Aristolo. long. Scilla, & mel, Boiled in wyne, in fourme of an Empla∣ster, or vnguentum Egiptiacum, and in depe Ulcers, the decoccion aforesayde, or Aenomelle or Egiptiacum Lixiuio dissolut. is to be iniected. Or the excellēt medicine of Auicen,Medicamē¦tum Aui∣cennae. made in this fourme. Rec. Auripigmenti. one ounce. Calcis viuae. an. vi. dragmes. Aluminis, Corticis mali punici. Thuris. an. halfe an ounce. Gallarum. Cerae, an. q. s. & Olei. Make thereof an vnguent. But whilest wee goe about thus with vehement medicines to mundifie the Ul∣cer, it behoueth to vse Vnguentū de Bolo & Puluilli ex Stupis oxicrato, to auoyde
inflammation, which is conuersaunt with payne,Vitāda est inflāmatio qua dolor accersitur. which must needes be increased by such vehement medicines. Neuerthelesse, if this feeding or eating doe dayly more & more corrode the partes nighe therto, then medicines that belong to maligne Ulcers are here expediēt, and nowe and then to take awaye by incision, that whiche is putrefied and corrupted, whiche may also be done by hote Iron, or sharpe medicine, suche as Trochisis, As∣phodeli & Trochis de arsenico, or this fo∣lowing, which pearseth vehemētly with∣in the space of an houre, and causeth lesse paine then either Arsnick or sublimatū. Rec. Calcis viuae, tvvoo pounde. Cineris Ilicis, an. i. pound Caulium, Fabarum ac tartari. Soldae ex qua fit vitrū. half a poūd Axungij veteris. one quart. Let them all remaine mixed with Liee whereof Sope is made, the space of seuen dayes, afterwarde straine it, and boyle it to the hardenes of a stone, or to a sufficient
thickenes and drienes, ad to (if you will) Saponis moll. one ounce. And this not onely auayleth to take awaye fleshe, but also to consume Fistulous hardenes. I shalbe good also to vse Aqua sublimata, as is in the aforesaide Chapiter, whiche without great paine doth corrode & heale both the Ulcers of the mouth and other partes. Or vse this in liquid fourme fol∣lowing. Rec. Terebentinae lotae. halfe an ounce. Cerae albae. ii. dragmes. Melte them together, and adde therto Hidrargyri sublimati, one ounce. So stirre them together till they be cold. Or, Rec. Hidrargyri sublimati. i. ounce. Sanguis Draconis, ii. dragmes. Make it in poulder, and strewe it into the Ulcer, els rowle Bombast on thy in∣strumēt, & fasten it in the Ulcer or Ueine, where hence the bloude floweth. Which is is astringent and hath power to caute∣rize, and then to finishe, flye to the cure of Gangrena, or Sphacelus, and also for this purpose many thinges are to bee founde
profitable in the chapiter aforegoing. Of the deepe and Crooked Vlcer. THe methode in curing depe and croo∣ked Ulcers,De profū∣do ac simi so vlc. appertaineth to diet and other vniuersall order, according to the disposition of the bodie, and Ulcers, for∣seeing and preuenting all paine, intem∣perature. &c. associating the Ulcer, for alwaye the causes bothe efficient and fa∣uouring, must be resisted. The parte af∣fected must be so ordred, that the Ulcers orifice, may decline downward, whereby the matter may more easely auoyde, but if that can not bee done, incision is to bee made from the orifice to the bottom of the Ulcer, chiefly if the hollowenes be along or nere the skinne, els if the imminēt daū∣ger prohibite the same in the botome, at the least it ought to bee opened, and an∣nointed with a mundifying vnguent. The which if it cannot be fitly applied, then in to the hollowe and crooked corners, must iniections mundicatiue be ministred, for whiche purpose, these or suche like, are
profitable. viz. Oximel, Oenomel, of a∣stringent wyne, Aqua alluminosa cum melle, Lixiuium, Aqua marina, Egipt. ac pulueris Mercurii. Dissolued in hony & lye, as in the aforesayd chapter. Rec. Aquae Plantaginis, an. ii. ounc. Peculi rosar. Caprifolii. Vng. Egiptiacū. i. ounce and s. Make thereof iniection. Or, Rec. Aquae Plantaginis, an. foure ounces. Peculi Rosarum. Vini albi. ii ounces. Aluminis vsti. half an ounce. Baccarum mirti. an. one dragme. & Aloes. Make iniection. Or, Rec. Hordei integri, i. P. s. Ceterach. an. one handfull. Agrimoniae, Centaureae minor. an. halfe a handful. Absinthii. Coquantur in Mellicrato, and make thereof iniection.
And when the Ulcer is sufficiently wel clensed, then vse this folowing to regene∣rate the substaunce. Rec. Hordei. i. P. and a halfe. Radicis ireos. Foliorum oliuae. an. halfe a handfull. Plantaginis. Agrimoniae. Boyle them in water, & in half a pound of the strained liquor dissolue, Mel. Rosar. colata. ii. ounces. Mirrhae. ii. dragmes and a halfe. Thuris. an. one dragme. Masticis. Make thereof iniection. Or, Rec. Decoct. Hordei. one pounde. Mel. Rosar. col. iii. ounces. Sarcocollae. ii. dragmes. Mirrae. an. one dragme. Thuris. Vini. vi. ounces. Boile them to the consumption of the thirde parte, whereto may bee added if it seme requisite some Aloes.
Rec. Farinae Hordei. an. one ounce. & Lupinorum. Mel. iiii. ounces. Thuris. an. one dragme. Mastices. Mirtice. halfe an ounce. Terebentinae lotae. i. ounce. s. Olei hiperici. q. s. Make thereof an vnguent, and this or the aforesayde, shalbe auaileable. After∣warde applie this cerote folowing. Rec. Nitri tenuiss. pul. i. quart. Aquae Rosar. ii. ounces and a half. Boile them together at a gentle fier, to sufficient thickenes, euer stirring it, and after ad to it. Rec. Terebentinae. an. one quart. Olei veteris. Cerae. q. s. Boile them together againe, stirring them still, and make thereof a cerote. Fitte also to bee applied alofte is Em∣plastrum de Minio, vel Apostolo. Chi∣rurg. vel Diacalchiteos, wherto to increse exication and astriccion, we may mingle Nonnihil calchitidis, Corticis Granat. &
Gallarum Omphacitidū in pul. redact. In the meane season, let vs defende the nighe partes with medicines partlye re∣pellent, and partly discutient, or washe it with this decoction folowing. Rec. Calamithi, Origani, Saluiae, an. one hand∣full. Matricariae, Adsinthij, Rosmarini, Camomeli, an. one P. Stecados, Ros. rub. Nucis cupressi. x. Salis, ii. ounces. Aluminis, x. dragmes. Mellis. one pound. Boile them in Lee or sower wine to the third part, and make a fotiō, or take other astringentes, namely Sumach, Plantago, Balaust. Herb. Rosar. Mirt. And boile thē in wyne. Also it were profitable to applie a peece of Leade in the orifice, and to vse ligatures, so that the matter may auoide, or a sponge likewyse in the orifice, that by
the sucking and drawyng thereof, the Ul∣cer may be dried. Of the Fistula. DUe diet being prescribed,De fistula. and the bo∣die according to yt nature of humors, being prouidētly purged, the inner parts are next to be strengthened, and this de∣cocion folowing to bee geuen in drinke. Whiche hath bene proued and tried by sundrie Authours, exceeding cōmodious in this kinde of case. Rec. Osmunde regalis ana. parte (Filix mas, Diosc. dicitur) Scrophulariae. Agrimoniae. an tvvo partes. Centaurie minoris. Aristolo. an. halfe a parte. Gentianae. Radi. filicis. partem. Filipendulae. ii. partes. Boyle them in whyte wyne, adding to Zacchari, q. s. and let the party take of the decoction daily a prety quantitie. And good it were to ad to the same decoction,
Guiacum. And after Callus be remoued and taken awaye, the vse of Guiacum in wyne or water boyled, hauing respecte to the strengthe and humors, and how much or howe little drying is expedient. IniectiōsIniectio∣nes confe∣runt. here are also profitable, such as is afore in the chap. of the crooked Ul∣cer, or els make a decoction ex Radic. fi∣licis, Agrimoniae, & foliorum Oliuae, wherein dissolue Egiptiac. or Apostolo. as shalbe needefully required. Or, Rec. Lixiuij ex cineribus brassicae & cortic. Fabarum. iiii. ounces, whereto ad Mel. Rosar. one ounce and a halfe, Alu∣minis, halfe an ounce. Boile them a litle, then take the decoction. iii. ounces, wher∣to ad Pulueris Precipitati, halfe an oūce. Make thereof an iniection, or vse the de∣stilled water Stercoris humani. Els. Rec. Terebintinae. one ounce. Thuris. ii. ounces.
Mastic. Aloes, Gariofilorum, Galangiae, an one ounce. Cinamomi. Nucis muscatae Cubebarum, Croci. Gummi Hederae. vi. ounces. Infuse them in whyte wyne, and A∣qua vitae, and distille them, and vse this di∣stilled water for an iniectiō to the Fistula. And after the infection, applie one of the Emplastres aforesayde, as Emplastrum Diuinum, or Gratia Dei. Some appoint to fill the Fistula with Hellebory, and so to remaine three daies, Notwithstāding, I hauing proued the like once in a Fistula of the ridge of the backe, next the region of the harte, there chaunced to the pacient Lipothimia.Hellebo∣rus in ali∣qua parte thoracis tu¦tus non videtur. To conclude, I iudge it no∣thing profitable, chieflye if the Fistula be in any part of the brest. If the Fistula bee newe, it is cured with the aforesayde re∣medies, but if it be old, & the orifice streit, it must well be enlarged, either with Pe∣nicillo, or a tent of Gentian, or a Sponge
often prepared. Rec. Cerae. an. one ounce. Resinae. Hidrargyri sublimati. one drag. vel one dragme and a halfe. Melt the waxe with Rosin, and then ad to the sublimate, and in that mixture dip the Sponge, and straight take it foorthe least it be burned, and presse it diligently and so apply it to the orifice of y• Fistula, the which when it is large enough, must be rooted out, either with sharper medi∣cines, incision or cautery, els cut it in the botome, and applie thereto a cauterie. Medicines whiche take awaye the Fi∣stula are these. viz. Trochi. Asphedi Hel∣leborū. Auripig. rub. sublimatum, or the sublimated water aforesayd, Arsenicum, or Trochi. de Arsenico, but if thou mi∣nister Arsnick thre or foure times, mixed and dried with the iuyce Solani, & Man∣dragorae. ii. ounces, then vse thy defensi∣tiue round about, as Vng. de Bolo arme. &c. least perhaps by the paine, inflamma∣tion doe happen. When the Fistula is where it may not
safely be cutte, nor yet any cauterie fit to be applied, then make sharpe iniections, amongest whiche wee haue often proued this very profitable. Rec. Vng. Egipt. halfe an ounce. Sublimati. halfe a dragme. Arsenici. one scruple. Lixiuij. one ounce. Aquae Ros. ii. ounces. Aquae Plantaginis. iiii. ounces. Boile these to the halfe, and vse these for iniection three dayes together. The iniection being done, close vp the orifice of the Ulcer, with waxe, or bom∣bast, so that that within, maye moue and consume the Fistula, els vse Aqua forti, or the cauterie aboue written. After the vse of the cauterie and sharpe medicines, endeuour to take awaye the skar, and af∣ter to remoue Callus, and washe the Ul∣cer, cum mulso, or decoctione erui cum melle. Furthermore. Rec. Terebint. in aquae vitae lotae oū. Succi. Apij. an. vi. dragmes. Cinoglos.
Mel. Rosar. col. one ounce and a half. Make thereof a decoction, to the consum∣tion of halfe the iuyces, afterwarde ad to Rec. Aristolo rot. ii. dragmes. Farinae Lupinorū. half an ounce. Wherto if thou ad Radi peucedani, Ireos Mirrhe and Sarcocoll. It shalbe profita∣ble to regenerate flesh. Other order is to be vsed like as in the chapiter of the deepe Ulcer. When it seemeth not expedient to cut away Callus, neither to vse cauterie, nor sharpe medicines, it only resteth to a∣uoyde the cure. Yet purge often the fleg∣maticke humors, and melancolike, and with medicines meanly drying, and Em∣plastrum Diachilon Ireatum, or Dia∣calciteos. Of the Vlcered Canker. THe methode of curing the Cankred Ulcer,De cancro Vlcerato. by diet and purgation, shall be the same, prescribed in the tumor Canker. If it be in the outward part of the bodie, whiche may be safely taken awaye with the rootes, must bee cutte wholy, and the grosse bloud of the veines nighe thereto
pressed out, afterwardes the lippes of the Ulcer to be taken awaye, and finishe the cure in some with medicines cauterizing, in others to consume it with a cauterie, or after incision & expression of the veines, to applie the cauterie. And amōgest cau∣terizing medicines, Arsnick in this case is principall, or the cauterie aboue written, but then vse defensatiues to auoyde inflā∣mation. Then take away the eskar, and proceede as in other Ulcers. But if the Canker be great, and haue deepe rootes, or be neare some principall member, or inwarde parte, or the party cannot suffer excisiō, either through weakenes or feare, or that by the cure thereof, hee should in∣curre greater daunger, it is enough then to hinder the Canker to encrease, by diet, purgation of adusted or melancolike hu∣mors, and that gently with drying medi∣cines, without mordication or biting. And this potion is exceeding profitable to bee vsed nine dayes before excision, taking e∣uery daye twoo ounces thereof, whiche preuayleth also though the cure be despe∣rate.
Rec. Radi. tapsi barbati. an. tvvo ounces. & Scrophularie. Filipendulae, an. one hand∣full. Ceterach. Herb. Roberti. Agrimoniae. Turmentillae. Scabiosae. Gariofilati. Linariae. Sem. Vrticae. iii. drammes. Florum Sambuci. an. one. p. & Rosimarinae. Make thereof a decoction, wherin dis∣solue zacchari. q. s to make it pleasaunt, washe the place also with the one parte thereof, and applie Magma thereto in forme of a Cataplasme, which is thought much to delaye paine. And among simple medicines, these folowing, doe moste pro∣hibite the increase of the Cankar. The iuyce of Night shade, Sorel. &c. and their stilled waters, also Plumbum, Antimo∣nium, & other like colde & drying things, as Vnguentum Album, vng. Lithargy∣ri, vng. de Plumbo pulur. cum vino al∣bo aut Succo acetosae, vng. de Pōpholig.
or those mixt with the aforesaide herbes in decoction, or waters of Camfer. Or this water folowing cannot bee in vayne applied. Rec. Succi solani, Semperuiui, Acetosae, Scabiosae, Caprefolij, Tapsi barbati, an. half a poūd. Scrophulariae, Fili pendulae, Plantaginis, Linariae, Agrimoniae. Succi om hacij. one pounde. Carnis, Lma∣cum. an. halfe a poūd. Ranarum, Cancrorū fluuiatiliū. Albumina ouorum. vi. Aluminis. iii. ounces. Caphurae. one dragme. Destill them all in a Leaden still, and with the water washe the place, and laye vpō it a clothe, dipped in the same water,
whiche water is esteemed excellent. Rec. Vng. Pompholig. half a quart. Vnguentum albū. tvvoo ounces. Litargyri. an. halfe an ounce. Plūbi vsti & loti. Succi. Scabiosae. an. tvvoo ounces. Solani. Olei Omphacini, an. foure ounces. vel de ranis. Stirre them in a Leaden mortar toge∣ther to a whyte ointment. Or. Rec. Tuthiae preparat. Cerusaelotae, Plumbi, & an. one ounce and a halfe. Lithargyri loti. Coriandri prepar. Amili. Cerae albae. tvvoo ounces. Olei Rosar. vel de Ranis i. pound. Muccaginis sem Psilij cum succo. Scabiosae. Herb. Roberti. iii. oūces Linariae. Tapsi Barb. extracti. Mixe and make thereof an oyntment in
a Leaden mortar. Or, Rec. Cerusae vst & fiue times i. ounce washed in Rose water. Plumbi vsti. loti. Tuthiae preparatae. half an ounce. Lithargyri nutriti. iii. dragmes. Succi solani, an. one ounce. Semperuiui, Hiosciami, Lactis, Sem. Papaueris, cum aq Rosa extract. tvvo ounces. Lactis mulieris. i. ounce. Olei Rosar. iiii. ounces. Cerae albae. one ounce. Make thereof an oyntment according to arte. Or, Rec. Succi fol tapsi barbati. iiii. oun Mellis. halfe a pounde. Pul. spongiae bedegas. iii dra Pulueris Maecorij, an. tvvo dragmes. & Ossium Mirobal. Boile them to the consumption of t iuyces, and ad to the pouders. Some vse to washe the Ulcer dayl with wyne, wherin Tapsi barb. hath be
boiled. Others with water of Night∣shade, Plantaine, Roses, cum Corticae Mirobal. & modico Aluminis, somwhat boyled, then to stirre the iuyce of Night∣shade in a Leaden mortar, to the fourme of a liniment, and so applie it. Rec. Plumbi vsti lot. iii. dragmes. Antimonij pariter lot. ii. drag. Pomphol. iiii. scruples. Cerusae. i. drag. s. Camforae. i. dragme. Lapid. Hematitis an. tvvo scruples. vtrius{que} Corallij. Cineris cancrorū fluuiat. ii. drag. Succi plantaginis, an. tvvo ounces. & Solani. Olei Rosar. om∣phacini, q. s. vel de Ranis. Stirre them in a Leaden mortar, to the fourme of a liniment. Of the Vlcer containing vvormes. TO prohibite the generatiō of wormes in Ulcers,Devlcee Vermino∣so. it is requisite firste to take
awaye all moisture & putrefactiō wherof they may be engendred, wormes are de∣stroyed by the iuyces or decoctions, Ab∣sinthij, Eupatorij, Centaureae, and such bitter thinges, so doeth the iuyce of t leaues and flowers of Peaches, bein brused and applied. Or, Rec. Olei Absinthii. ii. ounces. Succi Absinthii. vi. ounces. Pulueris Cumini. an. ii. ounc Dictamni, Aloes, Cerae. q. s. Boile them to the fourme of an Empl∣ster, whiche thou maiest vse in any par where wormes be. Yarrowe also is com¦mended for the killing of wormes, both men and beastes, geuing one drāme the of for wormes in the bellie, & that in ch∣dren, and to bigger folkes greater qua∣titie, and an inection made thereof, kille wormes in the eares. Of burning. If it bee great,De Com∣bustione. i. problem. a thinne diet then, and ∣ders vniuersally must be prescribed, a¦cording to the dominion of humor sin
bodie. Aristotle estemeth it profitable, that the parte or member burned, may be holden somewhat to the fier, that thereby one heate maye drawe foorth another, and keepe it from blistering. Others with the same reason doe applie Onions with salce. But the cōmon remedies are these. viz. Aqua Solani, Rosar. vel Endiuiae, lōg beaten with the white of an Egge, but to mingle Uineger therwith, I allowe not, bicause of the sharpenes thereof, but vng. Album & rub. cum Camfora, Albumi∣ne Oui, & aqua Rosar. is very good and prohibit the generation of blisters. Or, Rec. Butiri recētis, vel Olei sepe loti. iii ounces. vng. Populionis, one oūce and a half, Oua. ii. Mixe them in four me of a liiment, els ex Succo Solani, & Semperuiui, oleo vio∣larum & Cera, make a liniment. Or take the water wherein a Lime∣stone hath bene quenched, & boyle it with the Oile of Nuttes, then stirre it till it be thicke, and anint the place therewith seuen daies, and it is a present remedy, the seuen dayes ended.
Rec. Olei Nucum coct. ii. ounces. Cerae halfe an ounce. Stirre thē together, which is not to be vsed before the generation of blitters, but after they be opened. Rec. Vng. Albū camforatū. an. tvvo ounce. Vng. Popu. Mucaginis sem. Cidoneorum in aqua Rosar. extract. one ounce. s. Make thereof an vnguent. If the burning seme very great, ad to Mucaginis, sem. Psilii, and Olei de Nim∣phea. There is another vnguent made of Lime, mencioned before, whiche wil∣lingly I vse not to the face, for that it to muche draweth a Cicatrice. Or, Rec. Calcis lot. one vnce. Cerae albae. half an ounce, Olei Rosar. iii. ounces. Stercoris colūbi vst. ii. dragmes. Aquae Rosar. one ounce. Albumen oui. one. If neede bee to mundifie vse this fol∣lowing.
Rec. Terebentinae lotae, in decoctione Hordei. ii. ounces. Siru. Rosar. iiii. ounces. Mirt. & ana. one dragme. Aoes. Hordei. q. s. To thicke it. And then to induce and excellēt Cicatrice. Rec. Diachilon commune. ii. ounces. Vnguentum Pop. an. three ounces. Ole Rosar. Muccag. sem. Cidoneorū in aqua Rosar, extract. iiii. ounces. Vitellos. Ouo. ii. Make the vnguent. The Cicatrice being made, anoint it daily with y• oile of the yolkes of Egges, and after the combustion for the repletion of the Ulcer, This folowing is laudable. Rec. Olei Rosar. viii. ounces. Olei Ouorum. ii. ounces. Vitri albiss, tenuis. pulueri. i. oūce Corticis medii sambuci. i. m. Ceraealbae. one ounce and a half. Boile them together, and make therof an vnguent.
Of the particuler cure of Vlcers. Vlcers of the head. THe curation of Ulcers of the head,De capitis Vlceribus. dif∣fer not from the aforesayde methode, viz. corroding Ulcers are cured by the me∣thode of corrosiues, and the putrefied Ul∣cer by like medicines, saue that the out∣warde skinne of the head of natural tem∣perature, requireth strong exiccatiues, & if Craneum be putrefied, howe it shalbe remoued, is afore mencioned. Of the mouthe. IN this disease is requisite a thinne diet,De Acho∣ribus seu tinea. and suche as may decay all Flegmatike and Melancolie humors, and besides that to haue euacuation of humors, partly by Phlebotomie, if strength and age do per∣mitte, and partly by purging medicines like as is prescribed in Oedema & Scirrho wherfore this folowing, also is profitable. Rec. Cassiae, an. halfe an ounce. Catholiconis.
Tripherae persicae. i. ounce Mirobal. Indorum & citrinorum confricat. an.2 dra. Olei Amigdalarū dulciū. Senae. iii. dragmes. Sirupi violarū. q. s. fiat opiata. Then approche to cōmon or simple me∣dicines, first therefore shaue or powle the head neare, and washe it sixe dayes toge∣ther, with the decoction ex Fumaria, Oxilapatho, Folijs Hederae, Oleastri, Sa∣licis, Sicae, Acetosae, Herbae Roberti, or Lixiuium excinerbus sarmentorum vi∣tis, Fraxini & braslicae conficito, wherein boile, Calamentum, an one hand∣full. Fol. Lauri, Camomel. an. ii. P. Melloti. Stichados. Therewith washe the head, fiue or sixe dayes. Afterwardes. Rec. Olei Laurini. an tvvo ounces. Olei sem. Lini. Pinguedinis suillae. vi. ounces. Terebentinae. ii. ounces.
Pul. Apij risarum. i. ounce. s. Elleborialbi,& an. tvvo dragmes. Aluminis vsti. Eruginis. Ra∣silis, an. i. dragme. Auripigmenti. Make thereof an vnguent. Notwith∣standing, those sharpe medicines are not to be applied to Ulcers. Or, Rec. Nuces communes, cum corticibus assas. xx. Aluminis, an. halfe an ounce. Vitrioli. Lithargyrij. ii. dragmes. Cinabrii, half an ounce. Olei luniperi,& an. tvvo ounces. Nucum. Resinae & Picis. q. s. Make thereof a liniment, wherewith anoint the head, being shauen before, and chaffed with a rough cloth till it bee very reed. Rec. Emplastri Oxicrocei. one ounce. Ceronei. ii. ounces. Ammoniaci vino dissoluti albo.
halfe an ounce. Make thereof a plaster, and applie it to the head. Wee haue often anoynted the head (being powled) with hony, and sprin∣cled aloft the poulder of Rosin, and after applying Placentam ex farina Triticea, in fourme and maner of a cappe, and after eight dayes more, taking the heare away, vse this ointmēt folowing, vntill the cure be finished. Rec. Aluminis vst. an. one dragme. Vitrioli. Aristologiae. an. half an ounce. Eruginis Rasilis. Picis naualis. ii. ounces. Axungiae equi. i. ounce Butiri veteris. one pounde. Make thereof an vnguent, wherewith anoint the head, after the vse as aforesaid, and this kinde of curation, is more safe & with lesse paine then others, whiche wee haue proued. To encrease heares. FIrst consider the cause of hear falling,Ad pllor generatio∣nem. viz. whether through raritie of the
skinne, or defecte of nourishement, I es through corruptiō of humors, as in Mor∣bo Gallico. If through raritie of ye skinne, then are they to bee thickened moderatly if through want of nutriment, then apply nourishementes plentifully, but if it pro∣ceade of corruption of humors, then pre∣scribe a conuenient diet for the same, and purge the bodie according to the nature of the humors, mundifie the skinne of the head, & vse after such medicins folowing. Rec. Cinerū capillorū Veneris. i. drag. Labdani puri. iii dragmes. Mirrhae. ii. dragmes. Pulueris abrotani vsti. half a drag. Olei Sesamini. an tvvo ounces. Olei Mirt. Vini rubi i ounce. Aceti. vi. dragmes. Adipis Vrsi, & an. half an ounce. Anseris. Cerae. q. s. Make thereof an vnguent, and applie to the places where heare wanteth. Or,
Rec. Stercois Muris, Cineris Apum, partes equales, cum Olei rosar. Make thereof an ointment. Or, Rec. Mellis, tvvoo pounde. Cineris abrotani. ii. ounces. Apum vstarum. i. ounce. Politrici, iiii handfull. Labdani. i ounce. s. Bruse altogether, and infuse thē nine dayes in red wyne, and then distil them in a double vessell. Of the Vlcers of the eyes. FOr the cure of these Ulcers, vse the ge∣nerall orders, both by diet, euacuation, and all other vniuersall remedies prescri∣bed in Cap. de Opthalmia, with a speciall respect to the nature of humors in the bo∣die.De oculo∣rum Vlce∣ribus. As for medicines meanly mundifying and ceasing dolor, and biting, vse the like as in woundes of the eies, viz. Sir rosar Mel Virgineum, Saccharum Candium, Aloe lota, Mirrha &c. To glutinate or ioyne: Rec. Tuthae. preparat. Collirium de plumbo, Colli∣rium
album, siue Apio, Whiche being fine grounde together, dissolue them in a∣quis rosar. Plantag. Caudae equinae, vel lact. Caprino, vel muliebri. Many mo fourmes of medicins, as wel simple as compounde, are diuersly in Au∣thours prescribed, neuerthelesse full litle commoditie haue I at any tyme by them founde. Of the Fistula in the corners of the eies. THe order aforesaid. viz.De Fistula lachrimari both diet, pugation, & other vniuersall medicines, is excellent good in the beginning, when the Fistula is not confirmed, filling the hollownes of the Ulcer, with a certaine light or woolly substaunce, founde about the roote of the reed, vntill it be cleane mundified. Also a Colliriū made ex Thu∣re, Sarcocollae. Sang. Draconis, Balaust. Antimon. Alumi. mixtis ad partes equa∣les, whereto ad quartam partem floris ae∣rise, and the Collirium cum aqua pluuia∣li. And I my selfe haue neuer founde more excellēt medicine thē this folowing.
Rec. Aquae vitae, seu viniopt. an. one drag. & Mel. rosar. col. Mirrhae, tvvo dragmes. Make therof a liniment, wherwith eue∣ning & morning anoint the place, Amo∣niacū also dissolued in A ceto cum erugi∣ne rasili, wasteth this Fistula. If the bone doe not putrifie, but onely tallous fleshe abounde, it may bee consu∣med with vng. Egipt. or the poulder of Mercurie, or Asphodel. Afterward being well mundified, seeke to regenerate the fleshe. But if there bee putrefaction at the boone,Si fuerit ossis caries vse cauterie actual, for in this case it excelleth the potentiall, the largenes of Caries wil shewe the fourme of the cau∣terie, so that the eie be safely regarded by laying vpon bombase in the white of an Egge, and couered with a siluer spoone. An olde Fistula in this place, is scarsly curable, for the great default of the bone, and if it be cured, the eie will water con∣tinually.
Vlcers of the Nose. IN curation of Ulcers of ye Nose,De Nasi Vlceribus. called Phagedenici, or Cācrosi, others call th Noli me tangere, some prescribe diet and other orders, as In curatione Cancri, and vse cauteries, Other caustiek medicines, as is written in the chapter De Polipo. Or a Sponge dipped in Aqua Arsenici adding Olei De Euphorbio, which sepa∣rateth the putrefied flesh, but some would haue those vsed onely in the beginning. And that wysely to be done, for ofttimes much vse of corrosies, maketh the Ulcer worse (as experience teacheth) but whe the Canker is cōfirmed, it is best to leau the cure, whiche if thou doe, to preseru the partie prescribed a conuenient die wherein all sharpe thinges, and whatsoe∣uer shall heate the bloud, must be forbid∣den, opening a veine in the spring time vsing purgations to auyde burnt or M∣lancolie humors, suche as be in the char De Cancro tumore. Letting this medi∣cine folowing be in vse twise in a moneth Rec. Catholic. one ounce. Cōfect. Hamech an halfe an ounce. Diasenae solut.
Elect. de Psilio, an. iii. drames. de Citro, & de succ. Rosar. Sirup. Viol. q. s. Fiat opiata. To be vsed of the partie twyse in a mo∣neth. The medicines likewyse expressed in Cap. Vlc. virulent. ac Cancricuratio∣ne, ac de tumore nasi, may hetherto be re∣ferred, and suche as foloweth. Rec. Aquae Rosar. an. ii. ounces. Plant. & Solani. Mirobal. cit. an. tvvo dragmes. & Balaust. Aluminis. half a dragme. Boile them all a litle, then streine thē and washe the Ulcer therewith. Further, Rec. Olei rosar. one pounde. Olei Mirt. an. ii. ounc. Vng. ros. mesue. Vng. Popul. Succi plantag. solani, an. ii. ounces. & Semperuiui. Boyle them to the consumption of the
iuyce, then ad to. Litharg. auri. v. ounces. Tuthiae. preparat. iii. dragmes. Cerusae lot. x. dragmes. Plumb. vst. lot. vi dragmes. Camforae. i. dragme. Cerae. q. s. Stirre them together in a Leade mortar, the space of one houre. Or, Rec. Olei rosati. v. ounces. Suc. Planta. an. one ounce. Solani, & Semperuiui. Mali punici contus. ii. ounces. Tuthiae preparatae. half an ounce. Plumb. vst. lot. Cerusae lot. an. three dragmes. Lithargy. Antimon. loti. Cerae. q. s. Stirre them diligentlye in a Lead mortar. Or, Rec. Olei Amigdal. dulc. recēt. an oūe s. Vng Succi vtrius{que} Granati, Succi solani.
Vnguentumdeplumbo. ii. ounces. Make thereof an vnguent in a Leaden mortar. Or, Rec. Butiri bubulini loti, an. partes equales. Suc. Semperuiui. Stirre them together in a Leaden mortar, to ye fourme of an vnguēt, whiche greatly asswageth paine & delaieth heat. If the edges of the Ulcer swell, then apply diligently Pul. Mercurii loti. Vlcers of the mouth. LEt vniuersall medicines be first vsed, (according to the nature of humors) then further prescribe.De oris v ceribus. Topica. Si ab hum. cal. & acri. And if the Ulcer be corroding, procea∣ding of hoote and sharpe humors, this fo∣lowing is profitable. Rec. Mel. rosat. col. one ounce. Suc. mali punici, vel Omphacij. ii. ounces. Aquarū Plantag. an. iii ounces. Rosa. seu Acetosae.
Make thereof a gargarisme. If the Ulcer come of Phlegmatike hu∣mors,Si abhum. pituiteo. washe the orifice cum vino albo, & modico Aluminis vsti. Applie also the Ulcer water sublimated. This gargarisme folowing,E, quocū{que} humoresit iuua haec decoctio. muche in this case auaileth, of what humor soeuer the Ulcer doe proceede, Calices Glandiū; Nuces Cipressi, Fol. Oliuae, Sumach, Plā∣taginem, Saluiam, Rosemarinam, Lent & Rosas. Make a decoction of these in good fourme with a litle Aluminis vsti, adding to Mellis vel Zacchari. q. s. an therewith washe the mouthe. Or, Oliuae fol. cū succo mali punici, & mell ad colluendum coquito, and if there e great putrefaction, ad therto Egiptiacū. But if the VuulaSi Vuula corrosa. be therwith pearced touche or rubbe the Ulcered place with Linte, rouled in A quaforti, and then v the afore sayde decoctions. Notwithstāding, if it proceed A mor∣bo venereo,Si a mor∣bo Vene∣reo. then firste beginne with du purgation, & prescribe the partie a thi diet, with the decoction of Guiacum, an vse ointmentes requisit for that disease strengthening the inner partes. Mundi
the Ulcer with the decoctiōs due, and pre∣pare it to a Cicatrice. Then restraine the fluxe of humors to come from the heade. Use twyse a daye sublimated water, as is afore written, to touche the Ulcer with Lint rouled therein. Or, Rec. Åqua Rosar. an. tvvo ounces. & Plantag. Sublimati. i. dragme. Boile them in a glasse bottell, till the sublimate be dissolued, after let him wash his mouth with these folowing. Rec. Aqua decoct. hord. quart. 3. an. iii. oūc. Aqua Plantag. Mel. rosar. col. Make thereof a gargarisme. Or, Rec. Hord. i. p. Lentium. p s. Cort. Granatorum. half an ounce. Fol. Oliuae, Sumach. Mirt. an. one handful. Lentisci. Balaust.
Make thereof a decoction, and take of the streined liquor twoo pounde, wherein dissolue, Syr. Aceto. Simpl. an. 2. oūces. Syr. rosar. & Diamoron. Succi mali punici. iii. ounces. Mel. rosar. colat. ii. ounces. Clarifie it, & make therof a gargarisme Or, Rec. Aquae Plantag. half a pounde. Mel. rosar. colati. iii. ounces. Mirtini, & an. one ounce. Cidoneorum. Suc mali punici ii. ounces. Dianucum. ii. ounces and a half Miuae Cidoneorum. one ounce. Mixe and make thereof a gargarisme or vse to washe it cum succo Pilosella vino & melle, whiche is excellent. In the beginning therefore mundi it, then with astringent medicines fro the weaker to the strongest, and lastly in∣duce the Cicatrice, for whiche vse as fo∣loweth.
Rec. Pul. rosar. an. ii. ounces. Balaust. Gallarum. Mirob. citrin. Ciperi. halfe a dragme. Mixe thē, and eyther blow it vp or ra∣ther being rouled vpon lint, applie it, for the blowing of poulders in the mouthe, doth minister daunger to Aspera arteria, sometime prouoking vehement coughe. And to staie defluxions frō the head, these following are auaileable. Rec. Ammonia. ana. one dragme. Galbani, Make it in fourme of a plaster, & applie it to the hinder part of the head. Rec. Auripigmenti, one dragme. Mirrhae, an. tvvo dragmes. Thuris, Mastices. Suffitus communis, ii. ounces. Make thereof trochis, to be applied to the temples of the head, the partie keping the chamber close. Rec. Boli armeni, tvvo dragmes.
Boli armeni, tvvo dragmes. Gummi Arabici, an. one drag. Tragagantae, Assatorum, Cortici thuris, halfe a scruple. And with Sirup. de ros. siccis, make thē in fourme of Lupines, whiche he shall in the night holde in his mouthe, and in the daye Saccharum Candium. If the Ulcer be in the palate, then bee more circumspect, bothe for raritie of the fleshe or corruption at the boone, whiche can hardely be taken away, but by caute∣rie, whiche as a hurt perpetuall, for that they can neuer after speak perfectly, least the hole whiche remaineth bee stopped, whiche may be done with waxe, or better with an instrument of siluer, made in hol∣lowe fourme. And further, with the bone of the palate, the bone of the Iawe also, may easely corrupte, and the teethe after fall fourth. Vlcers of the Eares. VLcers of the Eares,De ariū vlceribus are to be cured, (both by diet and medicine) as the tu∣mors
in those partes, if after purgation, flegmes aboūde in the brayne, which may be auoided by y• vlcer, vse these folowing. Rec. Theriacae vet. tvvo dragmes. Staphisagriae, ana. one scruple. Pirrethri, Mastic. halfe a dragme. Make thereof chewittes to be vsed in the morning before meate. Rec. Suc. anagal, Mercurialis, Sampsuci & Mellissae. q. s. Et naribus sepe attrahantur. And the de∣coction of Guiacū profiteth much. In this case (considering the nature of the partie) thinges greatly drying & mū∣difying, are moste necessarie (according to the nature of the parties) and droppe in Olei de vitellis ouorū, cum melle & tan∣tillo sarcocollae. Els when the paine is vehement, Olei de vitellis ouorum onely stirred in a Leadē mortar, till it be brown or blacke, then droppe it in the eare. Or, Rec. Aqua decocta Agrimoniae, & Ab∣Absinthij,
halfe a pounde. Vini alb. & ana. tvvo ounces. Mel. rosa. Droppe in thereof warme. Or, Rec. Succi mali punici dul. an. 2. oūc Succi Poligoni, & Virg. pastoris. Mel. rosar. one ounce and a halfe. Boile them, and distill thereof into the Eares, and if the Ulcer be new, that shal suffice. But in old and filthie Ulcers, we haue neede of strōger mundificatiues, in which case Egiptiacum dissolued, is necessarie. And after some detersion, ad to Mirrhe, you maye also dissolue in Uineger Tro∣chisc. Andronij, & droppe into the eares, the composition of the whiche Trochis. followeth. Rec. Balaustiae, tvvoo dragmes. Aluminis, one dragme. Atramenti Sutorij, ii. dragmes. Mirrhae, one dragme. Thuris, ana. tvvoo dragmes. Aristo. Gallarū
Salis Amoniaci. one dragme. Cūmellicrato. Make the Trochis. Scoriae ferri, fiue tymes quenched in sharpe wine, then dried and grounde with freshe butter, in fourme of a liniment. Rec. Vini austeri, one ounce. Aluminis. one dragme. When it is therein dissolued, wet ther∣in clothes, foure or fiue times, & drie thē, and of them make tentes, whiche beeing anoynted with the aforesayde liniment, applie them. Rec. Suc. Poligoni, & ana. one ounce. Hederae, Pompholig lot. in aqua rosarū & Plantag. q. s. Mixe them, and droppe thereof in the Eares. First, institute diet and other generall orders,De axilla∣rum & in∣guinū Vl∣ceribus. according to the disposition & na∣ture of the bodie, Ulcer, and humors, and for as muche as these Ulcers are commō∣ly deepe, and cornered, with hardnes of the edges, iniections that mundifie & drie, are to be vsed as afore, in like Ulcers.
Or, Rec. Lixiuij tonsoris, sixe ounces. Mel. one ounce. Pul. precipit. three dragmes. Mixe and make thereof inection, and let thereof remaine in the Ulcer twelfe houres Afterwarde, iniecte Lixiuium cū melle rosar. vel decoctum Hordei cum sacch. or Oenomel, els strong thinges to mundifie, as a mūdificatiue de Apio, and to strengthen the part, lay aloft Stupes dipped in sower wine. If the orifice bee narrowe,Si orificiū augustum. enlarge it with sponge prepared, as aforesayde, or Radice gentianae. If the lippes be indurated,Si labia dura. remoue the same, either with a hote Iron, or a caute∣rising medicine. Vlcers of the brest. VLcers of the brest are to be cured by died,De pecto∣ris vlceri∣bus. Phlebotomie, and purgation, ac∣cording to the nature of the bodie, and di∣sposition of the humors and part affected, wherin therfore let vs haue recours to y• curation of tumors.
Guido appointeth the decoction, Virg. pastois cum mel. Others to drinke daily a draught of Agrimonie water. And some geue Aqua consolidae cum Rubarbari, & Mummiae. an. half a drag. If the Ulcer pearce not to the inner part of the breest,Curnda sunt quae non pene∣ant tho∣racis inter nam. it is curable as is spoken in the vniuersall chapters. But those which haue perced the inner part (if they be nar∣rowe) must bee enlarged, either with sponge prepared, or the roote of Gentian, put into it fastened to a threed, lest it sippe into the bodie. Geuing good heede that y• matter may be outwardly auoyded, lest it fall into the hollowe partes of the breest. But where no ieopardie of the inner partes is eminent. Rec. Calcanthi, one ounce, Mel, rosar. ii. ounces. Mixe them and vse it with the sponge. If there be in∣flammation, vse Vng. rosar. Use iniections into the hollownes with Melicrato or Oenomilitae. Or Rec. Radic. Asari. Gentianae, ana. one ounce. Aristolo, Ireos
Fol. Agrimoniae, Pentaphilon, Pedis columb. ana. one hand∣full. Ceterac. Centauree mi. Hipericonis. Mirrhae, halfe a dragme. Make the decoction in equall partes of water and wyne, and in twoo pound of the streined liquor, dissolue Mel. ros. col. vi. ounces. Fiat iniectio. Rec. Succi Apij, iiii. ounces. Succi Agrimoniae, Absinthij, ana. tvvo ounces. Plantag. Crassulae, Succi Cinoglossi. one ounce. Far. Hordei, & ana. three ounces. Fabarum, Mel. iiii. ounces. Terebentinae lot. in aqua Pantag. tvvoo ounces. Pul. Thuris, half an ounce. Mirrhae, one ounce. Olei rosar. & Cerae alb. q. s. Make thereof an vnguent.
Rec. Rec. Vng. regis, iiii. ounces. Pulueris Ireos, Aristolo. ana. one dramme Mirrhae, & Aloes, Fiat vnguentū sarcoticū. Or, Rec. Pul. rad. Arund. ana one drammes. s. & Peucedani. Thuris, ana. tvvoo dragmes. Masticis, Mirrhae, Pulueris ireos ana one dragme. & Aristolo. Cortic. Pini, one dragme. s. Vnguenti comitis, iii. ounces. Mel. rosat. col. q. s. Make thereof a liniment. Vlcers of the Bellie. VLcers of the nether Belly,De vētris infer. vlc. whiche haue not pearsed the hollowe partes, are cured with the vniuersall methodes aforesayd, according to the nature & kind of the Ulcer. But those which pearse the partes cō∣teined
therein, the cure is rather to bee thought desperate then true, like the Ul∣cers which pearce the inner partes of the breast, for as muche as suche commonly growe to be Fistulas, which be either sel∣dome, or neuer cured. Vlcers of the priuie partes. THe Ulcers in these partes,De puden∣di vlceri∣bus. do requ both diet, Phlebotomie, and purgatie due, according to the nature of the bod and humors, especially if they be great. Ulcers in the outwarde partes of the yarde, are to be dried Cum aqua rosar. & Plantag. ana. ii. ounces, & Trochisc. alb Rasis. ii. dragmes, aut aqua aluminosa, vnguento alb. cum Camfora, or vnguetum de Plumbo, or Pul. Balaustiorū, Bedegaris: vel pul. Cucurb, sicc. & vst. If the Ulcers bee newe and virulen creeping, and corrosiue, administer miralles, burnt & washed, and Aloe & cor∣tex Pini. Or, Rec. Plumb. vst. & lot. iii. dragmes. Lithargy. half an ounce.
Lapid. Hemat. one dragme. Aloes. one dragme. s. Tuthiae prepar. ii. dragmes. Cortic. Pini sicci, iiii. scruples. Sem. Anethi combusti, an. tvvo scruples. Cucurb. sicci & vsti. Olei rosacei omfacini. iii. scruples. Cerae alb. q. s. Make thereof an vnguent. Or, Rec. Corticis Camomeli vsti, ii. drag. Gallarum, Balaust. ana. three dragmes. Malecorij, Acatiae. Erug. ras. half a dragme. Pompholig. Aloes, Thuris, an. ii. dragmes. Sarcocollae, Corallij rub. Make thereof a fine poulder, & cum Oleo ros. & Cera. Make thereof an vnguent. If the Ulcers bee putrefied and olde, strewe thereon Pul. Mercurij, and washe it with this water folowing.
Rec. Aquae Plantag. ii. ounces. Vini alb. i. ounce and a half. Tuthiae preparatae. ana. ii. drag. Eruginis rasilis vst. Boile them a litle, and therwith wash the Ulcer, then after sprinckle aloft this poulder folowing. Rec. Corticis Thuris, Aloes lot. Sarcocollae, an. half a drag. Mirrhae, Gūmi elemi. Anethi vst. one scruple. Cortic. Pini. ii. scruples. Tuthiae preparatae, Antimonij, ana. one dragme. Plumb. vst. Cerusae, Make it in fine poulder, ad therto San Draconis. ii. scruples, & with that poul∣der sprinckle the Ulcer. Or, Rec. Vitreoli, ana.  ounce Aluminis crudi, & vsti. Auripigmenti. ii. dragmes.
Aquae rosar. & ana. foure ounces. Plantag. Aceti alb. halfe a pounde. Boile them together, then ad to Erug. rasilis, iii. dragmes, therewith washe the Ulcer. Or, Rec. Vini albi, one pounde, Aquae plantag. ana. one quart. & rosar. Auripigmenti, ii. dragmes. Floris aeris, one dragme. Grinde them small, and boyle them a litle, and make thereof a collyrium, some in steede of Auripig. doe vse Alumen vst. whiche I iudge rather to bee done in Ul∣cers not putrefied. Oua. iiii. harde boyled, and grinde the yolkes diligently, & put therto Aquae vitae, twoo pounde, then after ad Alumi∣nis, half an ounce, Camforae, tvvo drag. Eruginis rasilis, halfe a dragme, whiche being streined, washe thy liniments ther∣with three or foure times euerye daye, and thou shalt wōder at the effect therof. Some doe washe the Ulcer firste with
Lixiuio & melle, afterwarde, cum Lixi∣uio & Alumine vsto, then cum Lixiuio & Ostraciorum pul. And lastly Aqua vi∣tae, cum pul Ostraciorum. After lotions (if the Ulcer be filthie or virulent) the poulder of Mercurie or E∣giptiacum, are commendable. But if the daunger of Gangrena be e∣minent,Si gangr. osculum emineat. then scarifie it deepely, and apply therto a cauterie, either actuall or poten∣tial, and defende the circuit of the Ulcer, cum vngento de Bolo ar. It fortuneth many times,St balanus preputio sit obtect{us} the yarde doth marueilouslye swell, and chiefly the skinne, called Preputiu, wher with som∣time the head of the yarde is so couered, that it can not be seene, and that the Ul∣cer betwixt the head and the skinne, may not bee mundified, and then make a cata∣plasme, ex decoct. Maluae, sem Lini, ding therto Butyrum & ouum integrū. Nowe if (by application of this cata∣plasme, it cease not to swell, neither may be vncouered, & in the meane season, the Ulcer doe more and more corrode (which is discerned by doloure) then the skinne longwyse is to be cut, wherby the Ulcer
may come to sight and be clensed. And if it be but small, peraduenture it shall suf∣fice to make iniection with the aforesayde collirie, or suche like, but if it be great, ap∣plie one day a collirie, cum Aloe & Mir∣tha, and an other daye, pul. Mercurij. Notwithstanding,Si ad mea∣tus corro∣dat. if the Ulcer so cor∣rode, that it be commen to the wayes and conduites of the vrine, administer the col∣lirie aforesayde, cum Mirrha & Aloe, & if it cease not therwith, or grow to amen∣dement, applie a cauterie. But if the pain thereof doe oppresse, vse therto Vnguen∣tum Pop. cum succo Solani, Plātaginis, Semperuiui, Fari. Hordei, & Olei Vio∣lacei, & oui albumine. And for Canke∣rous Ulcers of the yarde, & harde edges or lippes, the lotions aforesayd, are praise worthy. Or, Rec. Vini albi ciathum, Aquae plantag. & ana. ciath. s. Rosarum. Aluminis cocti, ii. dragmes. Mel. i. quart. Rosarum, one handfull. Boyle them together, and with the de∣coction
thereof washe the place, or vse it as iniection, then further applie vng. de. altheos & aureum, to mollifie the parte. And lastly the pouder of Mercurie, and ceratum de minio. Vlcers of the vvombe and priuie partes of vvomen. THese (as all others) doe require cura∣tion,De vuluae ac vteri vl ceribus. both by diet, and purgation, ac∣cording to the disposition of humors and natures of the bodye, the excrementes by the vrine, are not to be brought to that place, nor the belly vehemently to be mo∣ued, but vomites whiche may profite by way of reuulsion, Phlebotomie also som∣time is to be vsed, or the vse of Guiacum after purgation, and these Opiatae fol∣lowing, being vsed once in a weeke, an very profitable. Rec. Cassiae extrac nouiter. iiii. ounces Tamarindorū, ii. ounces. Pulpae prunorum, ana.i. ounce and a half. & Sebesten, Muccaginis one ounce. Sem psyllij,
Sene Orientalis, iii. ounces. Anisi, half an ounce. Liquiritiae rasae tenuissimè pul.ii. drag. cū syr. rosaceo sol. fiat opiata. Whereof let the partie take once a weeke, the quantitie of a nutte, with the decoction of Mercurie. To prepare the humors. Rec. Ligni sancti, iiii. ounces. Corticis eiusdem, one ounce. s. Infuse them in three pound of aqua Buglossi, Cichorij, & Absinthij. Boyle them at a soft fier to the halfe, & dissolue in the streined licour, Syrupe de Fumo terrae, one pound, and let the par∣tie take thereof morning and euening, sixe ounces vnto the ende. Furthermore. Rec. Polipodij quercini recent. half an ounce. Passularū mundatarū, ana. v. part. Prunorum, Sebesten, Tamarindorum, iii. dragmes, Senae Orientalis, half an ounce.
Fol. Mercurij, & ana. half an ounce. Boraginis, Florum triū cōmuniū. ana. p. s. Make thereof a decoction, and in one quart of the streined liquour, dissolue cō∣fectionis hamech, ii. dragmes, electuarii diacartami, one dragme, Syrupi rosati so∣lutiui, tvvo ounces. Whiche must bee taken after the aforesayde preparatiue. Rec. Conseruae radicū Buglossi i. oūce. Cōseruae corticis citri, half an oūc. Pul. Diamarg figidi, ana. ii. dragmes. & Diarrhodō abbatis, Pulueris de gemmis, one dragme. cum syrupo capil. eneris, fiat opiata. To be taken twise or thrise in the weke, drinke after it a little wyne. And to cōclude, those doe much auaile which we haue prescribed in the chapiter of Ulcers of ye yarde. For in those as also these thinges strongly drying without bi∣ting, are most auaileable. And in these vl∣cers we may vse incisions, suffiures, fo∣tions, lotions. &c. In the beginning washe the Ulcer, or
make iniection with whey and Sugar, or ex vino cū melle rosar. vel decoct. hord. cum syrup rosar. & melle rosa. vel Sac∣charo rosat. Or, Rec. Hord. integri parū torrefacti. ii. p. Corticis gaiaci. one ounce. s. Radicis ireos, one ounce. Passularum, one ounce. Mirobal. citrin. ii. dragmes. Make thereof a decoction, in aqua Fabrorum, and in two pound dissolue, Rec. Mel ros. col. & ana. iii. ounces. Syrup. iosati. Make iniection therwith in the begin∣ning, and also whilest the patiēt vseth the syrupe preparing humors. After this folowing. Rec. Hordei integri modicè assi. i. p. Ligni sancti ii. ounces. Pilosellae, ana. tvvoo handfull. Ceterac. Virgae, & ana. one handful. Bursae pastoris.
Plantag. & ana. half a handfull. Absynthii. Corticis malipunici. one ounce. Sumac, half an ounce. Rosar. rub. one p. Make a decoction in water, wherein Lead hath bene quenched, and in foure pounde of the decoction, dissolue, Rec. Mellis rosati colati, & an. 3. oūc. Sacchari rosati, vel Syrupi de rosis siccis. And make thereof an iniection after the vse afore sayde. Further, Rec. Vng. Pompholigos. iiii. ounces. Cerusae lotae, an. i. ounce. Plumbi vsti & loti, Antimonii. Aloës lotae, ana. halfe an ounce. Sang. draconis, Thuris, Mastiches, Olei rosati, iii. ounces. Cerae rubrae. ii. ounces. Make thereof a liniment, wherewith anoint the pessarie, or dissolue it in part of the aforesayd iniection, and vse it so, but if
this Ulcer doe spring ex lue venerea, ad to that liniment Hidrargyri, ii. ounces. But if they be virulent corrosiue, or Ca∣coethe, by and by in the beginning vse the poulder of Mercurie, or iniected with the decoction of Barley, with a litle Allome thereto added. Or if the Ulcer be filthie, dissolue vng. Egiptiacum, vel Apostolo. or other of the aforesayde mundificatiues. But where it seemeth sufficiently mūdi∣fied, vse the aforesayde iniections or lini∣ment, then encrease the dose of astringent medicines, or with poulders prescribed in the linimēt, sprinkle the Ulcer, to induce a Cicatrice. And for a more spedie waye of exiccation, vse this suffiture folowing, chiefly if these aforesayde, doe not auaile. Rec. Corticis thuris, ii. dragmes. Mastiches. Gummi hederae, & luniperi, ana. halfe an ounce. Labdani puri, & Hypocistidos. Auripig. rub. vel citrini. iii. drag. Cinabrii, one ounce. or halfe an ounce.
Excipiantur terebinthina, and make therof Trochises, which must be put vpō fier, and the fume receiued by a funnell. Rec. Olei mastichini. iii. ounces. Olei de absynthio ana one ounce. & Rosarum. Cerae parum. Make thereof a liniment, wherewith anoint the region of the wombe, and whi∣lest it is anointing, ad to a litle wine. When the Ulcers proceed through the Frenche pockes, a thinne diet must be v∣sed with the decoction of Guiacum, or vse vniuer sall vnctions, ex Hidrargyro.Cum vlc. sunt a lue venerea. If inflāmation abounde, washe it with the decoction of Barley, cum mucagine psilii, & cydon.Si inflāma¦tio saper∣nit. Iuiubarum, Sebesten, cūsucco plantag. Portulacae, Lacte bubulo, aqua rosacea, Oui albumine & Saccharo. Or, Rec. Hordei integri, ana. tvvo p. Lentium. Portulacae, an. ii. handfull. Plantag. Virg. pasto.
Capita tria papauris, ana. ii. p. Rosarum rubrarum, Make thereof a decoction in aequis part. aquae fabrorum, & rosar, and in two poūd thereof, dissolue syrup. de ros. siccis. iiii. ounces, Trochisc, albor. Rasis sine opio (if the heate and paine be vehement) halfe an ounce, Croci, ii. scruples, Passi three ounces. mixe them and make thereof an iniection, whereto may be added Vitellos tvvo, vel Muccag. sem. psyllii. Sharpe griefe is to be delaied with in∣cessions made of wyne, Camomil, Roses, and others. If the Ulcer be growen to a cancrous effect, the cure is to be vsed as despered & o be fled, and then auaileth (as in al other Ulcers of the wombe, decoction of taps. arb. and the aforesayd collirie. After pre∣pare vng. succi Solani, stirred in a leaden mortar & pestel, to the thickenes of hony. You may vse also other vnguentes to drie and delaye the sharpenes of humors, whereof we haue spoken in the chapiter of the Canker afore.
The Hemerhoides. THe reason of curing y• Hemerhoides,De hemor rhoidibus. requireth a diet sufficiently thinne, & of those wherof excellēt bloud was wont to be engendred, and greatly to be auoy∣ded, are all sower, Melancholie & grosse thinges: It shall be good sometime to o∣pen the liuer vaine, and vse purgation purging grosse, sharpe and melācolie hu∣mors. And as touching due purgatiō and diet, therefore peruse the curation of tu∣mors. Notwithstanding, those whiche were accustomed to flowe, and haue bene long stopped, are to be opened, either with a launce aptly applied, or els a horseleach put to the place, first anointed with bloud, whereby shee may the better take holde, or open them with a plaster made ex alo & felle bouis cum aceto, or make a suffi∣ture ex decoct calamenti, origani, maluae in vino factae: Then make a cataplasme ex Helleboro nigro, mixt cū succi cepae, aut lacteficus, aut ex stercoris colūbini, one ounce, & succi tithymali, one ounce and a halfe. And it shalbe farre better if thou ad therto Felbubulum, & pulueris Staphysagria, vel ciclaminis. Or it suffi∣seth
to vse Fol. fici trita. Rec. Fellis taurini, an. one ounce and a halfe. Stercoris columb. Sem. Staphis. iii. dragmes. Amigdalarū amararū. i. dragme. Colocynthidos. half a dragme. Succi Cyclaminis, ana. tvvo dragmes. & Cepe. Olei de Absynthio, & q. s. Amigdal. amararum. Make therof a fourme of anemplaster. But when these aperitiues doe some∣time induce vehement payne, and the sick partie not able to abide it, there is no o∣ther counsell, but with scissoures to cutte them that appeare, whereby the bloude may flowe. And in the meane time, to mi∣tigate the payne, it shall be profitable to vse a fotion, ex decocto Altheae, Maluae, Camomeli, Meliloti, seminis Lini. &c. Or, Rec. Maluae, Parietariae, Tapsi barbati, ana. m. s. Chamomeli, Meliloti. Sem. Lini. iii. ounces.
Make therof a decoction to washe ther∣with the fundamēt, after mixe Vitellum oui cum Oleo rosaceo, vng. Pop. Opij, gra. ii. & tantillo Croci. and put it into the fundament. Rec. Butyri recentis. one ounce. Olei de papauere. ii. dragmes. Succi Solani sensim mixti. vnc. s. Stirre them long in a leaden mortar, or Cepe aslum cum butyro misceto, aut oleum de sem. Lini, cum butyro & ouo aut oleum de vitellis ouorum, aut oleū de nucleis persicorum. Or, Rec. Olei de sem. Lini, ana. half an ounce. & Butiri recentis. Sagapeni. half a dragme. Succi tapsi barbati. ana. one ounce. & Mali punici. Scarabeos. vi. Boyle them to the consumption of the iuices, whiche being streined, vse it bothe outward and inwarde. Certaine Impe∣rickes applie Scrophularia, vel Scabiosa, affirming that those herbes doe profite wondrous well. Or,
Rec. Olei Lumbricorum, i. ounce. Ouum. one. Opij. one dragme. Mixe them, and minister them with bombast. Els, Rec. Radicū tapsi barbati, ana. tvvoo ounces. & Altheae. Chamaemeli. p. i. sem. Boyle them, and adde therto Vitellos ouorum elixatorum. tvvoo. Aloes. ana. one dragme. Mirrhae. Croci. Fari. sem. Lini. ana. fixe drammes. & Foenugraeci. Butyrum sine sale. q. s. Make thereof the fourme of a plaster, whiche shalbe muche better, if therto you ad Opij. one dragme. But if the Heme∣thoides lie hidden within, they must bee drawen furth by boxing, or with the vn∣guent applied with bomdast, els cum oleo Lumbricorum aforenamed, to delaye the ayne. When the Hemerhoides doe flowe im∣moderatly, the diet must bee appointed
with the vse of astringent and engrossing thinges. Medicines also to be vsed (accor∣ding to the nature of the humor) whiche (notwithstanding though they lose) may leaue with them a certain astriction, such as is Myrobal. tamarindi, Rhabarb. &c. The vse also of this electuarie folowing, shalbe much auailable. Rec. Mirobalanorum embelictiarū, In∣darum & bellericarum lotarum in aqua plantag. donec amarorē exuerint. ana. halfe an ounce. Radic. Tapsi barbati. iii. dragmes. Zinziberis, Cinamomi, Nucis muscati, an. one drag. Galangae, Olibani. Spicae nardi. ana. halfe a drag. Squinanthi. Ammeos. Scoriae ferri praeparatae & in acet: coctae. iii. dragmes. Conseruae rosarū veteris, succi de ribes & de berberis, ana. vnc. s. Zacchari. q. s.
make thereof an electuarie in morsels. As touching outward medicines, wash the fundamēt with water quenched with flint, els wherein Nuces cipressi, alumen vstum, and other astringentes haue bene boiled, and let the party receiue the fume thereof, or of the like things, make a bath or incession, but in wynter. Rec. Absynthii. one handful. Saluiae. half a handfull. Matricariae, a quarter of a hādful, contundātur in sartagine, frigan∣tur cumoleo rosa. And in fourme of a plaster applie it to the fundament, and inwardlye minister this vnguent folowing. Rec. Rosarum. an. half a drāme. Myrtillorum. Centinodiae. Thuris. one dragme. Sanguinis draco. ii. dragmes. Boli armeni, ana three dragmes. terrae sigilla. Tuthiae praepar. ana. one drag. s. Lithargiri vtriusque.
Farinae volatilis, ana. tvvoo dragmes. & fabarum. Succi tapsi barbati. Caudae equinae. ana. three dragmes. Plantaginis. Simphiti maioris. Albumina ouorum. ii. Mixe thē, and ad to thē de pilis Lepo∣rinis, cut very short. Or, Rec. Psidiae, Conchillae marinae adust. Balaustiorum, Puluer. pilo. leporis vst. an. i. drag. s. Thuris. Mastiches. Sanguis draconis. Telae araneae. Terrae sigillatae. Mixe them cum ichthiocolla & gluti∣ne fabrorum lignariorum dissolutis aqu pluuiali calibeata, make thereof an e plaster. Rec. Extremitatum rosar. ii. ounces. Albumina ouorum. ii. Lapidis haematitis. one dragme. Gypsi. halfe an ounce.
Make thereof a plaster. To conclude, whosoeuer will retaine or staye, the im∣moderate Fluxe of termes, & in like sort, the Hemerhoides must beside medicines vse all kinde of reulsions. Rasis to strengthen the Liuer, applied to the regions thereof Mastichen, Spicā, Cal. aromat. Ciperum, Squinanthū, Cro∣cum, & Mirrham. The Fistula of the funda∣ment. THe fistulous Ulcer of the foundament whiche is onely in the fleshe, is cured by the same meanes and methode, wher∣of we haue spoken in the chapiter of the Fistula,De ani fi∣stula. the diet being thinne and good, with other medicines and purgations, chiefly by the vpper partes, if it seeme ne∣cessarie, likewyse with Phlebotomie, and enlarging the Ulcers orifice, and the cal∣lous substaunce diminishing. But if it haue,Quādo in∣testinū pe∣netrat. pearced the intrelles, put the finger anointed with oile of Ro∣ses, into the foundament, & also Phaceo∣lus that chaunceth in the fistula, is in like
maner with the finger to be drawē furth, so that it may not erre, least perhappes by cutting the callouse substaunce, thou cut also the hemoroicall veines, yet incision seemeth better in my iudgement, then de∣traction of Callus done by ligature. After incision applie Albumē oui cum puluere restrictorio, and then a digestiue ex tere∣bentina & oleo. Notwithstanding, great heede is to be taken, that Callus pearce not aboue foure fingers in length into any intrell, for if it doe, the cure is desperate and to be eschewed. Nowe when it commeth, ad vesicam velos sacrū, passing beyond the part cal∣led Sphincter, so that the said part named Sphincter, must be cut away:then folow∣eth vnuoluntrie excretion of egesrion. And then washe it twyse euerie day, with the decoction of Tapsus barb. in wyne, & iniecte of the decoction inwardly. Fissures of the fundament and other partes. FIssuresDe fissuris a, alaū∣que partiū. in what parte soeuer they bee, must be anointed cum oleo de vitellis
ouorum, vel de sem. Lini, cum mellis tri∣ta tertia parte. Or, Rec. Mellis rosati col. ana. one ounce. Olei rosarum. Cerae citrinae. halfe an ounce. Mirrhae, & ana. tvvoo scruples. Zin ziberis. Lithar giri. iiii. scruples. Make therof an vnguent, which before it be ministred, moisten the fissures with the spetle of the sicke, it profiteth also for the Fissures, both of ye breastes & lippes, as experience hath taught me. Els washe them with the decoctiō ex radic. altheae & sem. Lini, in vino & aqua. Furthermore. Rec. Olei de sem Lini one ounce. Ouum. one. Lithargiri. ii. dragmes. Make thereof an vnguent to mitigate the paine, and soften the hardnesse of the Fissures. Rec. Olei amigd. dulc. ana. one ounce. Olei de papauere. vg alb. rasis cū camfora. one ounce. s.
Aloës, Mirrhae, ana. one ounce and a halfe. Cortic, thuris, Aluminis. Terrae sigillatae. tvvoo dragmes. Albumina ouorum. ii. Make thereof an vnguent, whiche is very commodious, both to the Fissures, as also to the Ulcers of the foundament. Or, Rec. Muccag seminis Lini, extractae in aqua maluarum. one ounce. Butyri recentis. ana. halfe an ounce. Sem. Lini. Cerae. q. s. Make thereof a cerote. Also Oleum Lini applied alone, or Oleū nucum, shalbe muche auaileable. Vlcers of the Thighes, Legges, and Feete. VLcers of those partes,De femo∣rum tibia∣rum & pe∣dum vle. of what sort or kyndes soeuer they be, are to be cured by methode vniuersall, with the institu∣tion of diet, Phlebotomie, and inwarde
medicines, according to the habite of the body, and qualitie of the humors, with the disposition and kinde of the Ulcer, as in the cures of certaine tumors hath bene diligently handled. And as touching outward remedies, the nature of the partes affected, must be aduisedly noted, & if the refuse of humors fall thereto, they are before all thinges to be stayde, both by vniuersall medicines, simple and locall. In Sommer they are to be washed cū aqua Plantag. wherein some Alume is dissolued, and to be anointed cum vnguē∣to de Minio, and if they bee rounde, applie therto a cauterie of some other fourme and shape, and ease the partes from time to time.
Certaine Additions of diuers medicines of mine ovvne inuention, and oft by mee experimented and practised in the curing of Vlcers, as fol∣lovveth par∣ticularly. FIrste an Oile whiche I vsed in hollowe & deepe Ulcers, whereby great commoditie ensued, ha∣uing not only vertue to mundifie without ero∣sion, but also aptly applied to hollowe ca∣ued Ulcers, within the space of foure and twenty houres, obteineth Pus perfecte of kinde, chiefly if the bodie be before prepa∣red, and the member voyde of accidentes and euill dispositions. The right making thereof must bee in the beginning of the yeare, when the force of herbes is in them fully conteined. This is the making ther∣of. viz. Rec. Olei communis, one pound. s.
Olei Liliacei. ii. ounces. Olei ex floribus Meliloti. i. oūce. Olei Ipericonis. iii. ounces. Olei Violacei. ii. ounces. s. Terebinthinae. Venetae. ii. oūc. Resinae purae, ana. ii. dragmes and a half. Resinae pini. Galbani. ii. ounces. Opopanacis. one ounce. Sarcocollae. iii. dragmes. Boracis. one ounce. Stiracis liquide. ii. dragmes. s. Olibani. ana. three dragmes. Mirrhae. Succorum Plantag. ana. tvvo ounces. & Saluiae. Vini albi. one pounde. Dissolue the gummes in as much good Maluesey as will couer them, and boyle them altogether (vntill the wine & iuyces be consumed) at a soft fier of Charcoale. Then streine it, and ad therto Flos aeris. tvvoo ounces, in fine poulder, and boyle it a whyle after it, and then put therto Mel. rosarum. iiii. ounces, & againe boyle it foure walmes, after that straine it, and stirre it till it be through colde, and re∣serue
it. It must be ministred warme in forme and maner of an iniection, a biding foure and twenty howres, till the next dressing. ¶The second oyle, vvhose making fol. lovveth, mollifieth, assvvageth paine, moueth Pus, and healeth safely, if the bodie be orderly go∣uerned and pre∣pared. Rec. Olei Rosar. halfe a pounde. Olei Lumbrici, iiii. ounces. Olei Liliacei. ii. ounces. Olei Nenufar. iii. ounces. Olei Aneti. one ounce. Olei communis. one pounde. Terebentinae Venetae. x. ounces. Resinae pini iii. dagmes. Sarcocollae. one ounce. Mirrhae. i. oūce and a half Galbani. half an ounce. Olibani. vi. dragmes. Masticis. halfe an ounce. Gūmi Amoniaci. ii. dragmes. s. Euforbij. i. dragme.
Sanguinis drac. half an ounce. Suc. Malua. Violarum. ana. ii. dragmes. Plantag. Semperuiui. Vinialbi. vi. ounces. Put altogether in a propre vessell, to infuse the space of one and thirty howres, with often stirring, then boyle them on a soft fier vntill the wine and iuyces be con∣sumed, your gummes before being resol∣ued in Maluesey, then in the ende put to Croci subtiliss. puluer. halfe an ounce. When the oyle is streined, then reserue it. Note that this oyle is good, as well for woundes as Ulcers, but before it bee ministred, geue good heede that the place affected, be wel mundified & made cleane with line or otherwyse. ¶An other oile foloweth of great force, vvhich is not only quickly made, but al∣so aptly mundifieth, and largely causeth the flesh to grovve in bodies of good con∣stitution. viz.
Rec. Olei Balsami. iiii. ounces. Olei. com. half a poūd and. ii. oūc. Terebentinae Venetae. iii. ounces. Galbani. ii. ounces. s. Opopanacis. one ounce. Sarcocollae. half an ounce. Virid. aeris. pul. i. ounce and a half. Dissolue the gummes in Uineger, and infuse them altogether twelue howres, then boyle them together on a soft fier, yt space of ten howres, and in the ende adde to Mel. Rosar. opt. tvvoo ounces, & boile it againe foure walmes, then streine it, & so occupie it as occasion serueth. A sparadrap to resolue, assvvage paine, and moderatly coole. Rec. Resinae. iii. dragmes. Cerae alb. one pounde. Sepi ceruiui. iiii. ounces. Butiri recent. iii. ounces. Terebentinae. iii. dragmes. s. Amoniaci. Gūmi dragaganti. an. halfe an ounce. Arabici.
Olei Anethi. ii. dragmes. Olei Nenuphar. i. ounce. Olei Rosar. iiii. ounces, s. Olei Lili. i. ounce and a half. Olei Violacei. one ounce. Ping. Caponis, iiii. dragmes. Vng. Rosar. one ounce. Ping. Anseris, & ana. three dragmes. Anatis. Olei Amigd. dulc. one ounce. s. Resolue the gummes in vineger, and melte them altogether according to art, and in the ende ad to Camforae pulueri∣zatae, tvvo dragmes, and thereof make a sparadrap in good fourme, which is of an excellent efficacie. ¶A blacke plaster to be applied vppon and about Vlcers, hauing the pro∣pertie of a defensatiue, and also moste easely endu∣ceth a Cicatrice. Rec. Olei Rosar. omphacini. ii. pounde Olei Nimph. one pounde. Olei Liliacei. half a pounde. Succi Solatri. tvvo dragmes.
Succi Plantag. half an ounce. Succi Semperuiui. one ounce. Succi Violarum, half an ounce. Terebintinae clarae, tvvoo ounces. Cerae albae, one pounde. Muccag. Altheae, tvvo ounces. Boyle these vpon a softe fier vntill the iuyces be consumed, then put to these fol∣lowing finely pouldred. Cerusae, iii. ounces. Plumb. alb. iii. ounces and a half. Lithargyri auri, ana. tvvo ounces. & argenti. Lap. Calamin. half an ounce. Boli Armeni, iii. dragmes. Corallij alb. ann. tvvo drammes. & rub. These poulders being put to the former thinges, boile them on a soft fier of char∣coale (least the flame take holde of the oyle) vnto the fourme of a plaster, forsee∣ing that it be continually stirred with an Iron spatter till it be colde, in which coo∣ling, ad to Camforae, one ounce, pulueri∣zat. Then make it vp in roules of what bignes you will, and (together with the vertues aforesaid, it cicatrizeth and hea∣leth
excellently all excoriations or fret∣tinges in the skinne, in any exterior part. ¶An other excellent plaster of small coste, and great effect for al plain Ulcers, when the bodie is purged. Rec. Resinae clarae, tvvo pounde. Sepi Ceruiui albis. halfe a pound. Vini albi, tvvo pounde. Boile them in the wine, till they be al melted, & wash thē in the wine, them melte thē again, & powre it into another pint of white wyne somewhat warmed, & stirre it till it be colde, then take it frō the wine, and mixe withall these pouders. viz. Masticis electi, halfe an ounce. Merc. precipit. one ounce. Cinabrij. iii. dragmes. All these being well mixt, make it vp in roules, and reserue it to your vse, and I referre the commendation that it deser∣ueth to the iudgement of the practizer. ¶An excellent vnguent for Vlcers that be mundified, which swiftly doth incarnate, and that without paine.
Rec. Cerae citrinae mundat ii. pounde. Terebintinae. i. pound and a half. Resinae clarae. one pounde. Butyri recentis, half a pounde. Mel ros. one pounde. Sepi ouini, vi. ounces. Vini Cretici. iii. ounces. Olei Rosacei, one pounde. Boyle these on a soft fier, till the wyne be consumed, then straine it into a faire ves∣sell, and stirre it with a wooden slyce til it be colde, and in the vse, thereof you shall finde it a treasure. ¶An other vnguent to mundifie old and hollowe Ulcers, the body being prepared with interiour medicines. Rec. Cerae citrinae, one pounde. Resinae purae. halfe a pounde. Terebintinae Venetae, one pound. Butyri recentis. iiii. ounces. Galbani. tvvo ounces and a half. Bdellij. one ounce. Olei communis. one pounde. Amoniaci. one ounce.
Mellis despumati. viij. ounces. Succi Saluiae. iij. ounces. Vini albi, tvvo ounces. Dissolue the gummes in vineger, and boyle them altogether till the wyne and iuyces bee consumed, then ad to Viridis aeris, one ounce and a halfe, subtilis pul. Then geuing in a walme or twoo, streyne it, and reserue it to your vse, applying it warme. ¶A digestiue marueilous profitable for old filthie Ulcers, of me oft proued. Rec. Terebintinae, i. pound and a half. Olei rosar. iiii. ounces. Olei Liliacei. tvvo ounces. Olei comm. iiii. oūces and a half. Melrosa. half a pounde. Vitelli ouorum. vi. Labour them well together, and put therto Mastices, halfe an ounce, Mercu∣rij praecipit. one ounce and a halfe, bene pul. Mixe them well together, and vse it when occasion serueth.
¶An iniection vvhiche being astrin∣gent, doth also mundifie, and must be vsed in depe and filthie Ulcers. Rec. Hord. excorticati, three handfull. Aque fontan. vi. pounde. Vini alb. ii. pounde. Passul. iii. ounces. Glicyrrizae. tvvo ounces. Plantag. one handful. Labrusci, id est fol. vitis rosarum. ii. dragmes. Saluiae. ana. halfe a handful. Chelidoniae. Gran Mirtillorū. half an ounce. Nucum cipressi. ii. dragmes. Aluminis, vi. ounces. Boile these to the half, then streine it, and ad therto Mel. rosar. halfe a pounde, after boile it foure walmes, and so vse it for an iniection to Ulcers deepe and bol∣lowe, and to a playne Ulcer with warme Stuphes. A fume to be vsed in Vlcers of the infe∣riour parts or feet in moist bodies, & such
as be subiect to putrefaction, by reason wherof, the Ulcers oft become rebel∣lious and hard to be cured, wherefore this fume) after the bodie is purged, & the Ulcer mundified) is very commo∣dious to be vsed. Rec. Styracis liquid, iii. ounces. Masticis. one ounce. Thuris, ii. ounces. Mirrhae, iii. dragmes. Gariofilorum, half an ounce. Terebintinae, half an ounce. Sandracae, one dragme. Baccis Lauri. halfe a dragme. Cinabrij, vi ounces. Puluerizentur puluerizanda. Then mixe & make it according to arte. The true vse thereof. Prepare a coffer for the purpose, made of Pine tree, bothe endes made to open & shutte closely, hauing in the middest a pro∣pre hole or place for the legge to lie in at, and in the inner part of the other side of ye coffer, a rest for the heele, then place in ei∣ether
ende of the cheste, a chaffingdishe of coales, laying vpon the coales some of the fume, and the feete being duely placed, boulster the same in close, that no smooke come foorth. So let the pacient cōtinue yt space of time, according to their strength. viz. one howre or more, forseeing that the bodie be soluble, and euery third daye, vse this so long as neede shall require, and great commoditie shalbe founde thereby. ¶An ointment vvhiche chaseth avvaye inflammatiōs about Ulcers, and hea∣leth the fretting of the skinne, whiche in grosse bodies oft commeth therby, and of me often practised. Rec. Axungiae porc. lot. in aqua plātag. half a pounde. Olei rosar. iiii. ounces. Olei Liliacei. tvvo ounces. Plumbi alb. iiii. ounces. Lithargyri auri, ana. three ounces. & Argenti. Lapi. Calamina. i. oūce and a half. Muccag. altheae. ii. ounces.
Succi Plantag. ana. half an ounce. Semperuiui. Albumina ouorum. ii. Encorporate them well in a mortar, & ad therto Aluminis vsti, puluer. i. ounce, and reserue it. ¶An other for tender bodies, vvhich asswageth paine, and mitigateth the raging heate. Rec. Vng. rosar. ana. iii. ounces. Olei rosar. Olei Nenuphar. ana. i. ounce and a halfe. Olei Liliacei. Olei Amigda. dulc. one oūce and a halfe. Plumbi albi. vi. ounces. Cerusae. tvvo ounces. Terrae sigillatae. one ounce. Carae albae. iii. dragmes. Muccag. an. 3. dra. Gummi dragaganti & Arabici. iiii. sem. Frigi. maior. an ii. drag. Camfora. halfe a dragme.
Aqua rosar. ana. iii. dragmes. Plantag. Alb. vnius oui. Poulder that which is to be pouldered, and mixe it in a leaden mortar, & reserue it to your vse. ¶A gentle corrosiue poulder, profitable for any Ulcer, not much painfull, but very good for euery ex∣pert man to haue ready. Rec. Mercurij precipit. tvvo ounces. Cinabrij. half an ounce. Masticis. iii dragmes. s. Vitrioli combusti. ii. dragmes. Corallij rub. half a dragme. Make them in fine poulder, and vse as occasion serueth for spongie fleshe. &c. An other more sharpe and cor∣rodeth more. Rec. Mercurij precipit. one ounce and a halfe. Masticis. tvvo dragmes. Vitrioli cōbust. i. drag. and a half.
Aluminis vsti. ii. dragmes. Corallij rub. one dragme. Poulder them finelye, and make it to your vse. ¶Trochisis corrosiue, very strong, but exceading commodious being vsed with good discre∣tion. Rec. Mercurii precipit. one dragme. s. Mercurii sublim. i. ounce. i. drag. Cinabrii. ii. drag. and a half. Masticis. one dragme. Vitrioli combusti. halfe an ounce. Corallii rub. tvvo dragmes. Amyli. iii. dragmes. Poulder these fine, and make thereof trochisis with Muscilage of gumme Dra∣gagant and Plantaine water, drie them not at the fier, but otherwyse, and to occu∣pie them make one in poulder, and ap∣plie it. ¶A resolutiue plaster to be vsed, vvhere any hardnes, swelling, or inflam∣mation, or paine, is about the Ulcer.
Rec. Muccag. altheae. iii. dragmes. Muccag. psilii. ii. ounces. s. Muccag. dragagāti. one ounce. s. Olei rosar. halfe a pounde. Olei meliloti. iii dragmes. Olie Chamomillae. half an ounce. Olei liliacei. iii. ounces. Olei nenupharis. ii. ounces. Olei violacei. one ounce and a halfe. Boile them together till the muscila∣ges be consumed, after ad to, Ammoniaci, one ounce. Bdellii. ana. halfe an ounce. Galbani. Gummi Arabici. iii. dragmes. Opopanacis. one ounce. ii. drag. Sagapeni. iii. dragmes. Ping. Anseris. ana. halfe an ounce. Anatis, Resinae purae. iiii. ounces. Terebintinae. ii. dragmes. Cerae albae. one pounde. Cerusae. vi ounces. Plumbi albi. vi. ounces. Dissolue the gūmes in vineger, poul∣der that whiche is to be pouldred, & make
it (according to art) in fourme of a pla∣ster, in roules, of what bignes you will, and so vse it. ¶A potion preparatiue for Vlcers. THis I vsed in the curing of grosse Ul∣cered persones, such as be engrossed & replete with much corrupt humors, for in suche bodies the Ulcers doe become re∣bellous and difficult to be cured, for that is one of the principal thinges, which ma∣keth Ulcers hard of curatiō. Neuerthe∣lesse, it must be vsed aduisedly, and with good discretion, that is to saye, to what bodie it is geuen, for as muche as that whiche helpeth a moist bodie, harmeth a drie, and that whiche succoureth a grosse bodie, offendeth the leane. &c. Rec. Ligni sancti. one pound and a halfe. Corticis eiusdem. vii. ounces. Salxza Parilia, ii. oūces and a half. Aquae fontanae, tvvelue pounde. Vini albi, foure pounde. Herbarum saluiae, ana. i. hādful and a half. Fumariae
Eupatorii. one handful, Scabiosae, ana. halfe a handful. Betonicae. Epithimi. Lapathi acuti. vii. ounces. Rubarbari. iii. dragmes. Agarici. ana. one ounce. Sem. Cartami. Senae Alexandrinae, vi. ounces. Zinziberis, half an ounce. Polipodii, iii. ounces. Galangae. one ounce. Sem. Anisi, half an ounce. Glicyrrizae rasae, ana. one. p. Florum cordial, Put all these into a narrowe mouthed pot, close stopped, that no aire goe foorth, then set it within an other vessel of water, and let it boyle ye space of fourty houres, then streine and clarifie it, and ad thereto Mellis rosarum, halfe a pounde, and let the patient take thereof morning and eue∣ning, the quantitie of foure or fiue ounces at a time, a litle warmed, ye terme of three dayes together, and on the fourth daye, geue the patient foure ounces of the de∣coction, adding therto Cōfection hamech
tvvo dragmes and a halfe, Syrupi Cicho∣rii cum Rubarbare, one ounce. Use it in this order to your patient, so long as you thinke conuenient. ¶An excellent and most profitable oint¦ment, which extinguisheth the heate of al Cholericke humors, flowing to any Ul∣cered part, and moste chieflye circa vlcera virgae, as if the heate be betweene Glans and pre∣putium, it yeeldeth a wonderous cō∣moditie. Rec. Axungiae porcinae purae, i. pound and a halfe. Pomorum dulcium scissorū, halfe a pounde. Pingued. caponis, ana. foure dragmes. & Cigni. Succi Limonis. iiii. ounces. Let them boile betweene twoo pewter ishes, on a chaffingdishe with coales, the space of foure houres, or vntill the iuyces be perfectly consumed, then let it runne through a linnen cloth into a fayre hasen,
and ad therto Muccaginis psilii (extracti cum aqua Plantag.) one oūce and a half, aquae rosaceae. iiii. ounces, aquae Semper∣uiui, tvvo ounces. Labour them altoge∣ther, so long vntill all bee encorporated & brought to one vniforme substaunce, and no water perceiued, then haue in readines these following, finely pouldred, viz. Bo∣racis one ounce and a halfe, Camforae, half an ounce, Plumbi albi, tvvo ounces, Aluminis vsti, halfe an ounce. Mixe all these together, and laboure them a whole houre, and reserue it, the goodnes whereof is sufficient to cōmend it selfe, as the learned (who ministreth aduisedly) shall plainly per∣ceiue.
VVhat meates are to be vsed as touching diet in Vlcered bodies. GALENE sayth, that in the curing of Ulcers,Lib. de par¦tibus artis medic. ca.1 Et lib. ex∣periment. cap. vltimo (whiche haue their be∣ginning of other mat∣ters or humors) there be thre principal wayes viz. Diet, aide of medicines, and operatiō of the hand.Apho. 1. & 1. de ratio∣ne victus in acut. morbis. And sithens diet is the moste noble, and excellent instrument among the rest (as Galene supposeth) I haue ac∣compted it worthy the labour, only in this treatise or part, to set foorth the onely or∣der of diet, to bee vsed in curation of Ul∣cers: but amongest those thinges wherof our bodies doe chaunce necessarily to bee altered, (as Galene saith) and wherein al∣so the whole way,Lib. 3. artis medicina∣lis. or consideration of diet doth consist is (especially) the aire whiche doeth enuiron and compasse vs about. Whereto also Galene adding sayth, that whiche doth compasse and enuiron vs,3. method. curat. ca. 8. is that without the which, neither ye disease
can be taken away, nor the health be kept and preserued,1. De tuē∣da sanitate further he saith also, that there is no small strength or force of pre∣seruing the healthe by chosing the good aire, and for this cause it is meete, first to shewe what aire the bodye corrupt with Ulcers, doth require. It is worthy to be noted howe the disease is driuen awaye by the chaunging of the ayre to the sicke bo∣die, and that is by chaunging to an other kinde of temperature in the aire, whiche the dissease (which is driuen awaye by his contrarie) doth aptly require, as if the dis∣ease be of nature colde, the ayre must bee hoate: and somewhat more, that is to witte, of a greater inequalitie of the tem∣perature of the ayre, to the propertie of ye disease, whereby it may the more easelye be driuen awaye (as for example.) If the disease be colde in twoo degrees & moist in one,Maior ine¦qualitas aris ad proprietat. nor. the ayre must be of greater heate then of twoo degrees, and of more drienes then one degree. But howe shall we be able to know, or discerne exquisite∣ly this proportion or excesse in degrees, si∣thens Galene hath saide, that the certaine quātitie of the thing, can neither be writ∣ten
with penne, nor pronounced with the tongue. The Chirurgian must therefore endeuour to finde it foorth by coniecture, for it suffiseth to the driuing awaye of the disease, if the propulsatiue cause of the dis∣ease doe obtaine a certaine proportion of a greater inequalitie then the disease or fore. Therefore, it is good for them that are vexed with vlcers, to inhabite y• hoate ayre, bothe because the naughtie humors are made ready thereby, to breath foorth by the pores of the skinne, & also because the sine we members, whiche suffer much dammage by Ulcers, do take strength by heate. As Hyppocrates and Galene affir∣meth.Aphor. 5. tepr. & cō∣ment. 18. Yet let not the heate be vnmodera∣ted, or to muche inequalitie, least the pu∣trefaction be thereby burned, and the dis∣ease made more sharpe and fearce, and al∣so least the bodie fall the more redely into distillation, comming by dissoluing of the strong heate, into the whiche distillation that bodie doth chieflye decline, from the whiche distillation also, inflammations maye easelye growe, and heape toge∣ther. Let the aire therefore conuenient to him, bee more drie, that the Ulcers su∣perfluities
and moist excrementes, maye the more easely be consumed, and let hym therfore eschewe the cold and moist tem∣perature of the aire, since the disease doth proceede of suche like vntemperature, as by Galene playnely appeareth The affec∣ted bodies therefore shall liue better in places where Hilles and Moūtaines are, (though not in the highest of them.)3. Artis me¦dicin. But worst of al,Gal. 5. me∣tho-cura∣tiuae. in lowe, fennie, or plain coun∣tries, in whiche places moisture doeth a∣bounde, but in the other drienes. Auoyde therefore suche places as be cloudie, mi∣stie. &c. by reason of pooles and marrishes whiche be there at hande, for that ayre is corrupt, and encreaseth superfluous moi∣sture, whereby the Ulcers are nourished and mainteined, whereby they ofte pur∣chase payne in the head, and encrease di∣stillations, which fall to the lower parts, whiche is most familiar to Ulcers. Ther∣fore where the profitable ayre can not na∣turally be had, let it be prepared by arte in the mansiō, or abiding place of the par∣tie, for if the place and aire be not onelye disagreeing to him, but also the constitu∣tion of the time, let him vse gentle perfu∣minges
with spices, because their head is also commonly replete with euill and vi∣tious humors, as saith Hypocrates,5. Aphor. 18. and if the affected bodie doe feele hurt by recei∣uing the fumes of swete spices, then let it suffice, that he beholde or haue them pre∣sent by him, for the breath or sauour of them, is a safegarde to all colde diseases. But when as in the wynter season,Galen. 5. Apho. cō∣ment. 18. the fier shalbe agreable to it, then burne ther∣in ye wood of Rosemarie, Iuniper, Lau∣rell, or of the wood called Terebinthus, or of the Larche tree, or ye Pineaple tree. Furthermore, let ye partie couer his head moderatly with hoate thinges, for an ex∣trinsicall heat is hurtfull vnto him, both of those thinges wherewith the head is defended and couered, as also of the aire whiche is about it, for superfluities doe issue foorth from it, to the members be∣lowe, by a certain dissolutiō, by the which Ulcers are not onely nourished, but also stirred and exiccated. The bread whiche doth litle nourishe, I suppose to be profi∣table for Ulcered bodyes, and not their meate to bee equall to their appetite, for the concoctiue facultie being weakened
in them by to muche repletion, many su∣perfluities are engendred, greatlye hurt∣full vnto them, let their bread bee suche as maketh the belly softe, whereby the in∣ner partes may be clensed, and deiection made of the naughtie humors. Therefore let the bread be muche brannie, the finest meale boulted foorth, which is proued fit∣test for suche,1. De po∣ten. alimē¦torū. cap. 2 as Galene witnesseth, fur∣ther, let not their bread be to muche leue∣ned, for the tartnes thereof is hurtfull to the brayne, and to the sinewes, which suf∣fer muche damage and anoiaunce of the Ulcers, and yet let not the bread be vtter∣ly without leauen, for Galene saith, in the same place rehersed, that that bread which is altogether without leauen, shall not be meete or fitte for any bodie. Of the vvine vvhich Vlcered bodies ought to frequent. OF this opinion is Galene,Lde snitatis tu∣la. that all ex∣cesse is to be eschewed especially, that whiche bringeth damage, both to the bo∣die and minde. Wherfore, since wine doth engender to smal damage to Ulcered bo∣dies:
I suppose it best, not onely to coun∣saile them to drinke but one draught, but vtterly to refrayne all sortes of wyne, for wyne hurteth the bodie, in so muche that it sendeth grosse vapours to the head, whiche being afterwarde expelled by the painfull trauaile of the brayne, doth rui∣nously fall into the lower partes, & much hinder and endamage the healing or cu∣ration of the Ulcered. And also for be∣cause the nature of the members is much delighting in wyne, and therfore do draw it couetously to them before it bee concoc∣ted, whiche then wonderfully doeth en∣crease superfluities in ye bodie, the whiche superfluous aboundance, nature (not be∣ing able to redresse or amende) expulseth them to the outward members so plente∣ously, that in shorte space they engender Ulcers of one kynde or other. I therfore vnfainedly doe suppose, that Hidromel ex decoctione Hisopi, & Betonicae, should be a meete and conuenient drinke for thē, the operation whereof is hoate and drie, diminishing cold, grosse, & moist humors, and aptlye strengthening the power of braine saith Galene, and whosoeuer rea∣deth
Galene in his first booke De tuenda sanitate,Li. 8. Sim∣plic. medi∣cament. and in his booke Exhortationis ad bonas artes, and in his thirde booke De temperaturis, shall plainely see the hurte that is receiued by drinking of wyne. But in Ulcered bodies, where doubt is also of dropsie, and in those, who (through vehe∣ment appetite and breache of custome by the Physitians counsell) doe waxe sicke for the taste of wyne, to such (I saye) we must be compelled to pardon them for the drinking of a litle, or as neede requireth. The wine that is whyte in colour, is least hurtfull for them, the fuming force therof being delayed, so saithe Galene,Gal. lib. 1. de tuenda sanita. Et li. 5. de loc. affect. ca. 5. for suche wyne doth not only litle send to the head, but also maketh the stomach strong and forcible, but strōg wyne or vndelaide, doth the contrarie. Of the fleshe meates vvhich they ought to eate. FLeshe meates whiche in continuaunce of time, doe get to them the nature of earthie foode, substaunce or nourishment, are very euill for those that bee troubled
with Ulcers,Galen. 3. De poten∣tijs alimen¦torum. because they engender a grosser bloud then is conuenient, so saith Galene, for that their nourishement is rebellious and stubborne, & not strēgthe∣ning the vertues in the body, as the fleshe of Beefe, Stagges, Rammes, and olde beastes that be gealte, neither is Swines flesh altogether cōuenient for such meates do grieue the stomack, engēdring a grosse nourishement sayth Galene,Gal. lib. 7. Meth. cu∣rat. cap. 6. and nothing assistaunt to nature in digestion. Those meates therefore are verie fitte which be hoate and drie in temperature, for in the firste beginning the causes of Ulcers, are iudged to proceede of colde and moisture, and if any sodaine heate chaunce thereto, it is thought to be through putrefaction lying aloft. As by Galene we are plainly taught.Gal. in lib. de curatio¦ne per san∣guin. mis∣sionem. Wherfore the Thrushe, Owsell, wood Plouers, and al that gette their li∣uing in drie places, are most of others cō∣uenient. Also domesticall birdes, as Ca∣pons, Hennes, and houshold Doues, are nothing vnmeete, but greatly alowable, and together with these ye Fesaunt, Par∣triche, Quailes, and such like, are much agreeing. The meate of foure footed
beastes whiche is alloweable to Ulcered bodies, are these and suche like. viz. Yong Conies, yonge Hares, which with their moiste nourishement doe cherishe & susteine the naturall heate, encreasing al∣so the strengthe of the whole bodie, which is a trewe meane to restore the healthe of the body, wherefore by this it followeth cōsequently,Vlceribus infest a∣quatiles minime prosunt. that all waterfoules by their moist temperature and hardnes of dige∣stion, are to bodies thus affected, moste hurtful & vnprofitable. viz. Gese, Ducks, &c. Neither is it doubtfull to any man, that the fleshe of Lambes is hurtfull to those, and that because they engender a substaunce to moiste, for so wee be taught by Galene.Galen. de cibis boni & mal. suc. Galen. 12. De temp. med. sec̄∣dum locos Let them also which be affec∣ted, beware of to muche pouldred meate, for Galene saith, that salt is noisome, espe∣cially to Ulcers in the head. ¶Of Fishe. BEcause Fysshe of theyr owne pro∣pre nature exceadeth in aboundaunce of moisture,Gal. 6. vs. part. cap. 9 which (saith Galene) is rebel∣lious to Ulcers, they are to be eschewed,
both because they augmēt the cause of the Ulcer, and also for that they bee harde of digestion, moste chiefly (saith the same au∣thour) those which are full of excrements,Gal. 3. De fac. alimēt, cap. 24. of the whiche sort are the fishe of Lakes, Marrishes, Muddie pooles, and stinking Pondes, for their meate is so excremētal, and so slimy, that thereby filling all the pores of the bodie, empaireth the strēgth of the members, and greueth or depriueth their functions, whereupon, payne, lothe∣somenes, rottennes, and corruption of hu∣mors are engendred. But those fishes, whiche are engendred in Lande floodes, and are nouryshed in harde stonie and grauellie waters, especially in quicke streames, are lesse hurtful, the meat ther∣fore of those fishes whiche swimme in the pure and cleane sea, is very litle hurtfull to them, chiefly being taken when the sea is at a full water, and tossed with a quicke wynde, as manifestly it is to be founde in Galene.3. De pot, aliment. cap. 24. For by so muche the fishe is the worse, by howe muche it is lesse exercised tossed, and troubled. Let them also be∣ware of pouldred fishes, as I saide euen nowe of pouldred fleshe. And we prohibite
generally al kind of fish, by what meanes soeuer they be taken or kept, for by their slimines they corrupt the humors, being very harde in passing, and difficult in di∣gestion, and the more slimie the worse. Of Egges. GAlene sayeth,Galen. li. 3 De potent. aliment. cap. 21. that the Egges of crea∣tures doe engendre good and perfecte bloud, as the Egges of Hennes. &c. For by the reason of the equalitie of their tē∣perature, they are iudged conuenient and agreable to all bodies, as well diseased as sounde, for they doe not onely engender good humors and commēdable iuyce, but also are of light digestion, & easie passage, greeuing very litle the naturall strength, as is euidēt in Galene.Lib. 3. De fac. alimēt. cap. 21. But let the egges be newe layde, or els they be rebellious to the nature of man, and be euill to digeste, engendring sundrie accidentes and euill dispositions. Let their Egges also be boi∣led in water, for the rosted are harder of nourishement. &c Furthermore, it shalbe best only to eate the yolke of the Egge, be∣cause the white is of colde and moiste tem∣perature.
Let the Egges also boyled, be rere, for they be of swift transiture, engē∣dring the best iuyce, and strēgthening the faculties of the bodie. But as GaleneGal. 3. De fac. alimēt. cap. 1. saith, the Egges whiche are fried, of all other are moste pernitious, and harde of digestion, wherfore all meates fried with Egges, are vtterly to be eschewed of bo∣dies affected with Ulcers. Of Milke. BOth Milke, and what meate soeuer is compounded or made of Milke, are ve∣ry rebellious to Ulcered bodies, for the uming to the head, whereby grosse hu∣mors are engēdred.5. Aph. 64. For Hypocrates saith that Milke to those affected with paine, causeth ache in the head, and is euill both to feuers and paine in the bellie. Also Ga∣leneGal. com∣ment. 60. sayth, that Milke well boyled, doth nourishe well, and engēdre good humors, t in affected persones doth touche the head, it is daūgerous, enducing the drop∣sey in Ulcered bodies, therefore all forces of meates made with Milke, must bee of suche persones eschewed.
Of Cheese. TO al that be affected with Ulcers, we forbydde the eating of Cheese, bothe for the aboundant slimines, which is ther∣by engendred in humors, as also for that it maketh them slowly to digest.Lib. 3. De fac. alimēt. cap. 16. Galene being witnes, whereby saith he, the mem∣bers (by the passage of those slimie hu∣mors) are altered,Lib. 2. artis medici. and maketh ofte solu∣tion of continuitie, causing paine in suche persones, and that so muche the more, by howe muche the chese is more salte, and older,Galen. 3. De poten∣tijs alimen torū. ca. 16. for therby it is tarter, and therfore harder to digest, and maketh worse nou∣rishment. And note that although Chese be of a diminishing facultie of grosse hu∣mors yet is it vnprofitable, for by y• naugh tines of the iuyce & boyling heate, it brin∣geth more inconuenience, then the atte∣nuation of grosse humors can profite. Since therfore there is a common faulte to all kindes of Cheese, let persones thus affected, ab staine from it. Of Fruites. OF Fruites (saith Galene) which men doe eate,Li 2. fac. aliment. cap. . whiche the auncient writers
call Horarios, for because they spring in the hower of the yeare, whiche hower of the yeare Galene calleth that time, in the middest whereof the starre (whereof the Caniculer dayes bee named) appeareth. Of the whiche some are called fruites of the earth, of whiche sorte are Gourdes, Pompions, Citrons, Mellons, Coucu∣mers &c. Whiche because they are of a moist nature, and endewed with large humiditie, they doe not onely engender a moiste nourishement, but a slender humi∣ditie, and that whiche is easely purged foorth of the bodie. Galene saith also,Lib. 2. De pot. alimē¦to. cap. 2. that that fruite both cōtaine a naughtie iuyce, encreasing the disease, and weakening the members, & almost depriuing their func∣tions, wherefore to be taken as an vsuall seruice in Ulcered bodies we must flatlye deme. And those fruites whiche Galene calleth arboreous,2. De pot. aliment. cap. 7. are those growing vp∣pon trees. viz. Figges, Peares, Apples, Peaches, Mulberies, together with the fruite whiche the Italians call Armelini, being a fruite accompted amōg the Pea∣ches, and Cheries, Plummes, &c. Whose substaunce is soft and moist, not onely en∣gendring
the like nourishment, but also by their wyndines doe attribute no small hurte and paine to the affected bodies, and therfore are altogether to be forbidden. But if the bodie affected do feruently de∣sier and earnestly (as it were) long after fruite, then may we permitte him to eate Figges that be well ripened, as thinges lesse hurtfull, lesse engendring euill hu∣mors thē the Autumne fruites, although they be not altogether voyde of faulte, for so they be not (saieth Galene) Notwith∣standing as is aforesaid,2. De pot. aliment. cap. 8. they be lesse hurt∣full then al the rest, yet nowe and then, an Apple roste vnder embres may bee par∣doned, for the fier diminisheth the moiste iuyce thereof, and abateth the wyndines. Whereby otherwyse it commeth to passe that the eaters of fruites, doe ofte suffer paines & tormēts in the belly, viz. such as Quinces, Orenges, Medlars, Sorbes, Nuts & such like, which are not only slow in passage, but also being grosse, & gluie, doe engendre astringent iuyces, retaining the naughtines of humors. Notwithstā∣ding, we accompt not sweete Almondes vnprofitable, sithe in them is conteined no
binding force, for y• they doe make cleane and extenuate, and therefore probably al∣lowed in Ulcered bodies.2. Fac. ali∣ment. cap. 29. And Galene al∣so affirmeth that Almondes do purge the bowels, wherby it cōmeth to passe that vi∣rious humors (being propulsed to ye skin, and forbidden to abide in the inner parts) are driuen out by the pores of the skinne, as it were by breathing, whereby paines of the belly and other exterior inconue∣niences are preuented: wherefore sweete Almondes are a conuenient & fitte meate for affected bodies. But Filberdes and Walnuttes, be∣cause of their binding strengthe, and the cause aforeshewed, are moste vnprofita∣ble, and verie vnholsome for Ulcered bo∣dies. ¶Of herbes to be vsed in brothes. &c. HErbes fitte for suche bodies, are those whiche be hoate and drie. viz. Hysope, Calamint, Watermint, Fenill, Sage, Betonie. &c. And when herbes that doe attenuate and make softe, bee with these
compounded, then doe they easely clense and expuise al grosse and slymie humors, and therfore must needes be graunted cō∣modious for suche persones, & the herbes of contrarie temperature. viz. colde and moist, are as muche hurtful, such as Let∣tuse, Endiue, Mallowes, Spinache, and suche like, whiche by their colde nature, doe compact and heape together naughty humors in thinner partes of the bodye, hindring their passage or expulsion, for whiche cause the depth of the bodie is not purged, but the disease more augmented and a great deale the more when the pa∣tient through fonde and gredie desire, shal haue eaten herbes colde and drie, with a∣stringent facultie, whiche to the pacients are moste obnoxious, of whiche sorte bee these. viz. Plantain, Sorrel, Nightshade and of like sorte. ¶Of Onions, Garlike, Mushe∣romes, or Toade stooles. &c. ONions, Garlyke, Scalians, & Lee∣kes, for their sharpe and byting tart∣nes together with the obscuritie of their
substaunce both more dāmage to the body thē their force of extenuating can pleasure agayne. Of the earth also proceadeth funges, or Todestoles, whiche any waye prepared, are to be eschewed, since they are not onely of euill iuyce, but their nu∣triment is colde and flegmatick, and to all accidentes and dispositions (proceding of Ulcers) moste hurtfull. Of that minde is Galene, saying further, for as muche as Toadestooles can not drie,2. De pot. aliment. cap. 60. li. de cibis bo¦ni & mali succi. it is a manifest token that in them is euill contained. And Auicen saith, that prefocation happeneth to them which vse to eate Toadstoles. ¶Of Pulse. SInce there is no Pulse endewed with good & perfect pleasure, but doe great∣ly fill the bodye, with wynde, by whiche meanes paines in the bodye, may arise to Ulcered bodies, therefore vnneedefull: I do not without cause accompt them vn∣profitable (Galene being author) of which sorte be these. viz.1. De po∣tent. alimē¦torum. Beanes, Fitches, Rise, and suche like, let vs streightly cōmaunde the Ulcered patientes, clearely to eschew
these kinde of graines in what order soe∣uer they be altred: but to an immoderate appetite, the broth of red Rice, may indif∣ferently be permitted, for that doeth atte∣nuate and clense grosse and clammie hu∣mors & open the obstructed wayes, which meanes are much assistaūt to the healing of Ulcers. ¶Of motion and reste. VNderstanding by Galene,De tuēda sanitate. that reaso∣nable motion is not onely helthfull to the bodie, but also maketh the sayde bodie of a good fourme, and habite, and kepeth it in healthfull plight. It shalbe moste ex∣pedient that the person affected, do mode∣ratly frequent the motion and exercise of his bodie. But yet (saith Galene) I would not haue him to vse it when he is full, for endamaging or hurting the head with vapours, whiche by muche motion maye arise from the meate newely taken, and vndigested. Exercise is good before meat, for thē it encreaseth the force and strēgthe of the bodie (saith Galene,) and thereby purgeth the pores of the bodie,6. De loc. affec. ca. 6. and expel∣leth
the excrementes. Galene therefore affirmed it profitable,2. De sani∣tat. tutela. to vse exercises be∣fore meate: yet it is conuenient also to vse exercises sometime after meate, not al∣waye, but (as Galene sayeth) when the meate is entred into the seconde digestiō,2. De tuē∣da sanit. and the time of eating is at hande againe. But if either before or after that time, the exercise be vsed, it either filleth the bodie with rawe superfluities, or els hastneth the comming of Melancolie. For (sayeth Galene) if the exercise after meate bee not gentle and easie,2. De tuē∣da sanitate it hasteneth downe the meate from the stomake before it be dige∣sted. Wherfore the exercises before meat, must be more hastie and quicke, to the end that the superfluities whiche lurketh in the hollowe places of the body, may more easely be expulsed, nature being assisted by exercise. ¶Of sleepe and vvatching. GAlene saith, that sleepe and watching, doth come on euery side,2. Aphor. cōment. 1. according to the motions of vnconstaunt heate, slepe to the inner partes, and watching to the out∣ward.
The naturall heate beeing moued forewarde, for the whiche cause, when as in muche sleepe the naturall heate (being called to the inner partes) a great quanti∣tie of vapours doeth rise vp to the head (whereby fluxions doe distill to the mem∣bers belowe, I thinke it expediēt that the Ulcered bodie refraine from much sleepe, least superfluities multiplied by reason of sleepe, should heape and gather to muche to the members, which lie and reste. Day sleepes must be altogether forbidden. For in watching, the breathinges may be mo∣ued from the harte to the outward parts, they doe attenuate and dissolue the grosse and clammie humors engendred in the members (natural heate being adioyned) For the whiche thing, it is expedient for ye partie to vse watching for ye longer distāce of time. And when daily sleepe would pos∣sesse an accustomed order, let it be shaken of and lost by litle and litle, according to the precept of Galene. ¶Of Ioye or Mirthe. GAlene saith,De sim∣, causis that mirth proceadeth by motion of the minde to the outwarde
partes of the body. For the breath being gathered at the hart at the going foorth, doth yeelde a comfortable heate to all the members, whereby all flegmatick super∣fluities in them hidde, is scattered and put foorth, therfore profitable to Ulcered bo∣dies. But by sadnes (by reason) cometh the contrarie, for that reuoketh al the spi∣rites and heate vnto the heart, so that the outward partes are vtterlye destitute of heate, therefore greatly mouing and aug∣menting the cause of Ulcers, wherefore vse myrthe, and auoyde sadnes. Of repletion and Inanition. REpletion, whether it be of meate, or of euill humors, filling the vessels of the body, it is euill, and straightly to bee re∣proued (as sayeth Galene). For when the vessels be filled aboue meane or measure with meates and drinkes,1. Aphor. coment. 3. the parties are in ieopardie of burstnes, obstruction of na∣turall heate. &c. I counsell therefore all those that be infected with Ulcers, to flee from vnmoderate filling of their bodies, (according to ye causes rehearsed) for that
thereby all paynes, anguishe, and pertur∣bations with euill disposition, accompa∣ning the Ulcers, may be incited. Let the patientes therefore vse a slender kinde of diet, and yet not an vnmoderate kinde and excessiue fourme, spare feeding, sithens suche may easely engēder the falling sick∣nes, whiche when the stomack shalbe inor∣dinatly emptied, hath rediest accesse, for so saith Galene.In lib. de ven. sec. cōtra Era∣sitrat. But a thinne diet (by mode∣rate vse obserued) resisteth ye same. Galene therfore hath this sentence, a meane & mo¦derate diet vsually kept,Li. de atte∣nuante vict. ratio∣ne. doth safely cure yong folkes of the falling sicknes newely begon, & doth metely assiste them, though they be olde, and the disease inueterated. De Coitu. FOr as muche as generally all Ulcers doe proceede of intemperature, with colde and weakenes of natural heate, and that nothing more augmenteth the mal∣lice of suche affectes, nor encreaseth their continuaunce, then exercises decaying na∣turall heate, & thuse of thinges that wea∣ken, coole and drie the bodie. And againe
since nature in such parties is sufficiently busied in strengtheninge and sending due nourishement to the affected partes, it must needs bee great damage to the pa∣tient, and hinderaunce of the curation, to vse Coiture, which (as Galene affirmeth) doth make the body more weake,Li. de san. tuenda. 3. slacke, cold and drie, whiche sure is needeles in Ulcered bodies, who are commōly giuen to be of that intemperature. And Paulus Aegineta,Li. 1. art. med. ca. 7. saith that Coiture hurteth bo∣dies sound, that be of colde and drie com∣plexion. Wherefore to affected bodies, which haue nothing in them na∣turall that may be wanted, we ought without pardō, to prohibite the vse of venerie.
A Table of Simples AND since I haue so nar∣rowely touched the curatiō of Ulcers in ye former trea∣tises, I thinke it more ex∣pedient then vnneedeful, and more worthie the labour, then out of the waye, to set foorth in order the natu∣rall temperatures, and diuers operatiōs of suche simple medicines, as my slender diligence at oportunitie of tyme, hathe collected and drawen out of diuers wor∣thie and approued writers: and for the more easie finding of them. I haue tradu∣red and brought them into the order of an alphabet, as followeth. Aqua, water, colde and moist, in the firste degree, repercussiue. Acetum, Uineger, colde in the first, drie in the thirde degree aperitiue. Aqua aluminosa, Alom water, drie in the fourth degree, abstersiue and repercus∣siue. Agresta nota, Ueriuse, colde in the second degree, in the thirde repercussiue. Acasia, the iuyce of Sloes, colde and drie in the thirde degree, repercussiue.
Acedula, litle Sorel, colde and drie in the seconde degree, repercussiue. Anthera, the yellowe of the Rose, colde & drie in the firste degree, repercussiue. Atriplex, Arage, colde and moist tempe∣ratly, maturatiue and lenitiue. Absinthium. Wormewood, hoate in the first degree, drie in the seconde degree, abstersiue. Apium, Smaledge, hote in the first, drie in the seconde degree maturatiue, and mundificatiue. Agrimonia, Egrimonie, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, abstersiue. Acusmuscate, vide pes Columbinus. Aristolochia, Aristologie, hoat and drie in the fourth degree, adustiue and attrac∣tiue. Allium, Garlike, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, adustiue and attractiue. Aloes, a Gumme, hoate in the seconde, drie in the firste degree, consolidatiue. Auena, Dates, hoate and moiste tempe∣ratly, maturatiue and abstersiue. Amilum, Starche, colde and drie in the first degree, lightly binding. Axungia, fatte or grease of a swyne, hoat
and moist in the first degree, mollifieth and ripeneth. Argentum viuum, Quicksiluer, the tem∣perature wherof is diuersly supposed and iudged of, for Auicen saith, it is colde and moist in the seconde degree. Dioscorides saith, it is hoate and moiste in the fourth degree. Paulus saith, it is hoate and drie in the fourth degree, & Montanus (whose iudgement I suppose moste allowable) saith it is colde and moist vehementlye, it is penetratiue. Anisum, Anysseede, hoat in the third, drie in the second degree, dissolueth and cor∣recteth windines. Anethum, Dill, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree, resolutiue. Asphodeli radices, Daffadil rootes, hoat & drie in the second degree, abstersiue, and corrosiue. Anacardus, A kinde of fruite, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, vlceratiue. Arsenicū, Arsnicke, hoate in ye third, drie in the seconde degree, mortificatiue. Auripigmentum, Orpiment; of the pro∣pertie of arsnicke. Alumen rochinum, Roche alome, hoate
and drie in the thirde degree, stipticke. Argilla, Claie, colde in the first, drie in the second degree, repercussiue. Antimoniū or Stibium, colde in the firste degree, drie in the seconde, mundifieth and purgeth with correctiues. Ammoniacū, a gumme, hoat in the third, drie in the first degree, mollifieth with attraction. Assa foetida, a Gūme, hoate in the third, drie in the firste degree, abstersiue and attractiue. Asphaltū, a fome hardened of a part of ye sea, named Mare mortuū, & it is hoate and drie, and consolidatiue. Acanthus, Bearfoote, hoate and drie in the first degree, maturatiue. Atramentum, a mineral, hot & drie in the third degree, corrosiue with stipticitie. Aconitum woulfes wort, it is deadly by reason of putrefaction. Acorus Gladin, hoate & drie in the thirde degree, resolutiue. Adiantum, vide capillus veneris. Aiuga, seu abiga, Ground pine, hoate in the seconde, drie in the thirde, astringēt. Aizoon, vide Semperuiuum.
Altea, Highe Mallowe drie without no∣table heate or colde, loseth and scatte∣reth humors. Alcibiadicū, wilde Buglosse, hoate with∣out manifest drines, expelleth venime. Alisma, Water plantaine, hoate, abster∣siue. Amaracum, Fetherfew, hote in the third, drie in the seconde, it mollifieth and de∣laieth inflammation. Amarantus, flower amour, hoate and drie aperitiue. Ambubeia, vide Endiuia. Ammi, Ameos, hoat and drie in the third degree, aperitiue. Anagallis, Thickweede, hoate and drie, conglutinatiue. Anagallis aquatica, Water pimpernell, hoate and drie, aperitiue. Androsemon, vide Ipericon. Anetum vaccinum, Oxe eye, hoate and drie, resolutiue. Angelica, Angelicke roote, hoate & drie in the thirde degree, dissolueth and o∣peneth. Angurium, vide Cucumer. Anisum, Anise, hoat and drie in the third
degree, digesteth and dissolueth. Annonis, Arkangel, hoate and drie in the firste degree, abstersiue and aperitiue. Anthemis, vide Camomilla. Apium agreste, Wilde smaledge, hoate & drie vehemently, vlceratiue. Apium hortense, Garden smaledge, hoat in the seconde, moiste in the thirde de∣gree, openeth and mundifieth. Arnoglosson. vide Plantago, Artemisia, Mugwort, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, aperitiue. Aron. wake Robin, hoate and drie in the thirde, it wipeth and maketh tender. Asarum or Asara bacca, Hoate and drie in the thirde degree, the leafe is astrin∣gent, and the roote is aperitiue. Asperagus, vide Speragus. Atractilis, vide Carduus benedictus. Auricula muris, Mouseare, colde & moist attractiue, and mundificatiue. Agaricus, Agaricke, hoate and drie in the firste degree, resolutiue. Amigdala, Almondes, hoate and moiste in the firste degree, prouoketh vrine. Ambra, Amber, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree, comforteth the braine.
Argentum & scoria eius, Siluer, and the drosse or filinges thereof, colde & drie, conglutinatiue. Aurū, Golde, tēperatly hoat, cōfortatiue. Alcakengi, Winter cherie, a kynde of nightshade, colde and drie in the secōde degree, aperitiue. B Basilicon, vide Ozimum. Blacte bizantia, a kinde of Cocles, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, mundifi∣catiue. Been, hoate and drie in the second degree, confortatiue. Bombax, Bombast or Cotton, hoate and drie, constringent. Balaustia, Pomegranet flowers, colde & drie in the second degree, repercussiue. Berberi, Berberies, colde and drie in the seconde degree, repercussiue. Brionia, Brionie, the roote hoate and drie in the second degree, abstersiue and ma∣turatiue. Bolus armenus, Bolarmoniacke, cold and drie in the second degree, repercussiue
restringent. Baucia, wilde persenep, hoate and moiste in the firste degree, maturatiue. Borago, Borage, hoate and moiste, tem∣peratly, clenseth the bloud. Buglossum, Bugosse, is of like tempera∣ture, but more drie, maturatiue. Balsamum, a Gumme of a tree so called, hoate and drie in the second degree, ab∣stersiue, attractiue, and confortatiue. Butyrū, Butter, hoate in the first degree, and more moiste, maturatiue. Bdellium, A gumme, hoate and moiste in the firste degree, mollificatiue. Bursa Pastoris, Shepeherdes purse, colde and drie, astringent. Borax, Borase, hoate and drie, temperat∣lie, consolidatiue. Bugiae, the Barberie barke, colde & drie, consolidatiue. Berbena, Ueruaine, hoate and drie, mean∣ly, consolidatiue. Betonica, Betonie, hoate and drie, in the first degree, mundificatiue. Bedegar, Eglantine, colde in the firste de∣gree, drie meanly. Ballote, vide Prassium faetidum.
Batrachium, vide Pes corui. Barba caprina, Goates bearde, hoate and drie, abstersiue, Beta, Betes, colde & moist, mundificatiue. Bellis, Litle Daisies, hoate and drie, con∣solidatiue, and abstersiue. Blitum, a kynd of Bete, rare in Englād, colde and moist in the seconde degree. Botris, Oke of Hierusalem, hoate & drie, resolutiue. Bulbus syluestris, wylde Onion, drie, astringent. C Camomilla, Camomill, hoate and drie in the firste degree. resol. mollif. Crassula, Orpin. Fuch. saith, it is hoate & drie in the thirde degree. Vigo & Gui∣do, colde in the thirde, moiste in the se∣conde, repercussiue. Corallus, Corall, colde in the firste, drie in the seconde, restrictiue. Cerusa, Ceruse, colde and drie in the se∣conde degree, consolidatiue. Caulis, Colewortes, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde degree, maturatiue, and abstersiue.
Centaurea, Centorie, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, consolidatiue. Cera, Waxe, temperate, maturatiue. Crocus, Saffron, hoate in the first, drie in the seconde, resolutiue and comforta. Costus, a roote, hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde. Cinamomum, Cinamon, hoate and drie in the third degree, confortatiue. Cepa, Onion, hoate in the fourth degree, abstersiue, aperitiue. Ciperus, the Cipresse roote, hoate and drie in the second degree, consolidatiue. Chelidonia, Salendine, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, abstersiue. Cuperosa, Coperise, hoate and drie in the beginning of ye fourth degree, stiptick, and corrosiue. Cupressus, Cipresse tree, hoat in the first, drie in the second, consolidatiue. Cauda equina, Mares tayles, colde in the first, drie in the seconde, consolidatiue. Calx viua, Lime vnquenched, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, adustiue. Curcuma, the lesse Salendine roote, drie, consolidatiue. Cantharides, Flies, hoate and drie in the
thirde degree, adustiue, vlceratiue. Castoreum, Beuer stoues, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, conforteth the si∣newes. Canabis, Hempseed, hoate and drie, ma∣turatiue. Capitellum, Lee, hoate adustiue. Cinis, Asshes, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, abstersiue. Cucumer asininus, wilde Cowumer, hoate and drie in the second degree, re∣solutiue. Cresones, vide Nasturtium aquaticum. Ciminū, Comin, hoate in the third, & drie in the seconde degree, carminatiue. Calamentum, Calaminte, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, resolutiue, attract. Caseus recens, newe Cheese, the newe is consolidatiue, but the olde is cōtrarie. Cichorea, vide rostrum porcinum. Caltha, Marigouldes, hoate and drie, a∣peritiue. Candelaria, Tassill, drie in the seconde de∣gree, abstersiue. Capillus veneris, Maidenhere, drie with∣out notable heate or colde, astringent. Caprifolium, Woodbind, hoate and drie
vehement, restringent. Cardopatium, Woulfes thistle, hoat and drie in the third degree. Carduus benedictus, Our Ladies thistle, hoate and drie, inflatiue, and moderat∣ly pearsing. Cartamum, garden Saffron, hoate in the second, drie in the firste degree, matura∣tiue and digestiue. Carui, Carawayes, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, aperitiue, abstersiue. Castrangula, Water Betonie, drie, mun∣dificatiue. Cataputia, Spourge, hoate in the thirde degree, moist in the seconde, purgeth grosse humors. Centumnodia, Knotgrasse, colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde, astringent. Centumcapita, Sea hollie, drie, and of a meane temperature. Camedris, vide quercula minor. Cherifolium, Cheruell, drie astringent. Cheiri, white Uiolet, hote, astringent. Cicer nigrum, Blacke fetches, hoate and drie in the first degree, flatuous. Cicuta, Hemlocke, colde immoderatlye, a poyson to man, and stupefactiue.
Cidonium malum, Quince, colde in the firste, drie in the secōd degree, astringēt. Citrulli, Citrons, cold and moist in the se∣conde degree, abstersiue, penetratiue. Coloquintida, Hote and drie in the third degree, mundificatiue. Consolida maior, the great Comfrey, hote and drie in the seconde degree, con∣glutinatiue. Consolida minor, litle Daises, hoate and drie, resolutiue, conglutinatiue. Coriandrum, Coriander, colde and drie, somewhat astringent. Cotum, vide Bombax. Cresio hortensis, vide Nasturtiū hortens. Cucumer, Cucumber, colde and moist in the second degree, mundificatiue. Cucurbita, Gourdes, colde and moist in the second degree, delayeth inflāmatiō. Cassutha, Doder, hoate in the first, drie in the seconde degree, mundificatiue, re∣stringent. Ciclamen, vide panis Porcinus. Cinoglosson, Houndes tongue, colde and drie in the seconde degree, restringent. Cassia fistula, of an equall temperature, and resolutiue.
Colophonia, Greeke pitche, hoate & drie in the thirde degree, conglutinatiue. Calamus aromaticus, hoat and drie in the seconde degree, aperitiue. Cardamomum, hoate and drie in the firste degree, resolutiue. Camipitheos, hoate and drie in the second degree, mundificatiue, resolutiue. Cubebes, hoate and drie, meanly mundifi∣catiue. Capparus, the roote, hoate in the first de∣gree, drie in the seconde, mundificatiue, comfortatiue. Cassia lignea, hoate and drie, mundifica∣tiue, and aperitiue. Calcanthum, A mineral constringent, adustiue. Camfora, Camphere, cold and drie in the thirde degree astringent. Cinabrium, Uermilion, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, stipticke. D Digitalis, Ladie finger, hoate and drie, mundificatiue, and aperitiue. Digiti citrini, Dogges stones, hoate and
drie in the seconde degree, helpeth the sinewes. Damasonium, waterplantaine, hoate, mundificatiue. Daphnoeides, vide Laureola. Daucus, Wilde perseneppe, hoate & drie, prouoketh vrine and Menstrua. Dragunculus, Dragos, hoate and drie, astringent. Dulcis radix, vide liquiritia. Dragagantum Gūme Dragagant, hoate and drie consolidatiue. Dactili, Dates, hoate and moist in the se∣conde degree, resolutiue. Diptanum. Ditanie, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, attractiue. Doronicum, Doronick rootes, hoate and drie in the third degree, resolutiue, at∣tractiue. Diagredium, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, resolutiue, mundificatiue. E Epatica Liuerworte, Guydo. colde and moist, repercussiue. Enula campana, Elecampane, hoate and drie in the second degree, comfortatiue
Ebulus, Walwoort, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, resolutiue. Euforbium, A gumme, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, abstersiue. Aeris flos, Uerdegrease, hoat & drie in the thirde degree, corrosiue, and stipticke. Ermodactilus, vide Asphodeli radices. Ematitis lapis, A stone, whiche vnquen∣ched is hoate in the first degree, & drie in the seconde, consolidatiue. Elleborus albus, white Glebor, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, prouoketh menstrua, and vomiting. Endiuia vera, trewe Endiue, colde & drie, astringent. Equina mentha. Horseminte, hoat in the third degree, drie in the second, astrin∣gent. Eruca. Rocket, the seede, hoate and drie, expelling venim and wormes. Esula, Woulfes milke, hoat in the fourth degree, drie vehemētly, mundificatiue. Euiscum, vide Althea. Eufrasia, Eie bright, hoate & drie, it quic∣keneth the sight and memorie. Eupatoriū adulterinū, coūterfaite Egri∣monie, hoate and drie in the seconde de∣gree.
Mundifieth and loseth. Epithymum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, purgeth melācholike humors. F Flammula, vide pes corui. Fabaria. wylde Mynte, hoate in the first degree, drie in ye beginning of the third mundificatiue. Fumus terrae. Fumitorie, cold in the first, drie in the seconde, mundificatiue. Feniculus, Fenill, the seede is hoate and drie in the seconde degree, resolutiue. Frumentum, Wheate, hoate and moist temperatly, maturatiue, and mundifi∣catiue. Furfur, Branne, hoate and drie in the first degree, resolutiue. Fabae, Beanes, colde and drie, resolutiue, and mundificatiue. Fex cerae, Dregges of the Waxe, hoate then the waxe, and more mollifying. Fex olei, Dregges of Oile, hoater & drier then the Oile. Ferrum, Iron, cold and drie in the second degree, constrictiue, and consolidatiue. Ferrugo, Rust, hoate and drie in the secōd
degree, restringent, and consolidatiue. Fenugrecum, Fenugreeke, hoate & drie in the first degree, maturatiue and reso∣lutiue. Ficus recentes, grene Figges, hoate and moiste, the drie be hoate and drie, matu∣ratiue, and mollificatiue. Fermentum, Leuen, hoate and moist with mixte operations. Fuligo, Soote, hoate and drie, maruei∣lously drying. Farina volatilis, Myldust, colde and drie, conglutinatiue. Fraxinus, Ashe tree, colde and drie in the seconde degree, repercussiue. Folia Oliuarum, Oliue leaues, colde and drie, stipticke. Filex, Fearne, hoate and drie in the second degree, mundificatiue, and resolutiue. Faba crassa, vide crassula. Faseoli, vide Dolichi. Ficaria, water Betonie, drie, mūdificatiue. Filago, vide Papyrus. Filipendula, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, diureticke. Flos amoris, Purple violet flower, hoate and drie, aperitiue.
Feniculus porcinus, Hogges fenel, hoat in the seconde, drie in the third degree, mundificatiue, incarnatiue, and cica∣trifatiue. Fortis herba Drie, astringent. Fuga Demonū, Saint Iohns herbe, hote and drie, mundificatiue, and aperitiue. Fungus, Funges, colde and moiste in the thirde degree, constringent. Fel, Gall, hoate and drie, more or lesse ac∣cording to the creature, mundificatiue, and abstersiue. G Galla, Galles, the grene are colde in the second degree, and drie in the thirde, stipticke. Glandes, Acornes, colde and drie in the se∣conde degree, consolidatiue. Gratia Dei, Pinkenedle, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, mundificatiue, and consolidatiue. Gariofili, Cloues, hoate & drie in the third degree, confortatiue. Gluten, Glewe, hoate and drie in the firste degree, conglutinatiue. Gentiana, Gentian, hoate and drie in the
thirde degree, abstersiue. Gallithricum, vide Speragus. Gummi Arabica, Colde, with a certayne drienes, and glewenes. Granum Tinctorum, Madder, drie, con∣solidatiue, and intarnatiue. Gipsum Lyme, vide Calx viua. Galbanum, hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree, attractiue. Genista, Brome, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree, diureticke. Guadum, Woad, drie astringent. Galanga, Galingall, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, confortatiue. H Hiosciamus, Henbane, colde in the thirde degree, stupefactiue. Herba diui Iohannis, vide Fuga demonū. Herba Stellae, vide pes corui. Hermodactilus, vide Ermodactilus. Hispanach, Spinage, colde and moist in the first degree, mollificatiue. Hordeum, Barley, colde and drie in the firste degree, mundificatiue. Humulus, Hoppes, hoate and drie, aperi∣tiue,
and mundificatiue. Hipericon, vide fuga Demonum. Hissopus. Hissope, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, mundificatiue, and ape∣ritiue. Harmel, Some cal it wylde Rewe, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, it cutteth and mundifieth grosse humors. I Isatis, vide Dragagantum. Iposistis, Toade stooles iuyce, colde and drie in the seconde degree, stipticke. Issopus, vide Hissopus. Iuniperus, Iuniper, hoate and drie, con∣solidatiue. Ipericon, vide fuga Demonum. Iarus. vide Aron. Ireos, Flowre deluce roote, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, resolueth, mundi∣fieth and incarnateth. Iacobi flos, hoate and drie astringent. Indicum, vide Gnadum. Iouis barba, vide Semperuiua, Iringus, vide centum capita. Iua muscata. Ground pine, hoate in the se∣cond, drie in the third degree astringēt.
Iusquiamus, vide Hiosciamus. Iuiubes, a fruite so called, hoate and drie in the first degree, resolutiue. K Keirim. white Uiolet, hoat, mūdificatiue. Kerna. vide Catapucia. Karaba. Amber, hoate in the thirde, drie meanly, astringent, confortatiue. L Lithargyrus. Letharge, drie, regenera∣tiue, and consolidatiue. Lupini. Lupines, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde degree, mundificatiue. Lilium. Lillies, the roote hoate & moiste in the second degree, maturatiue. Lini semen. Linseede, hoate and drie, ma∣turatiue. Lac. Milke, temperate, whose mitiga∣tiue is water, consolidatiue. Lapathum, Docke, colde and drie in the second degree, abstersiue. Liquiritia, Licorise, tēperate, with a cer∣taine humiditie, maturatiue. Licium. temperate and moist in the secōd degree, mitigatiue.
Labdanum, hoate and moist in the firste degree, mollificatiue. Lentes, Lintelles, temperate & stipticke. Lingua canis, vide Cinoglosson. Lixiuium, Lee, hoate & drie in the thirde degree, abstersiue. Lactuca, Letuse, colde & drie in the third degree, loseth and cooleth. Lactucella, Sowthiste, being greene it is colde, but dried, hath some heate and astriction. Lappa muersa, clot burre, hoate and drie, seperateth and mundifieth. Lappa maior, the great burre, drie, dige∣stiue, and astringent. Larga, the larche tree, astringent. Laureola, Ribwort, hoate and drie aperi∣tiue. Linaria, Toad staxe, hoate and drie, ape∣ritiue, mundificatiue. Lingua bouis, vide Buglossum. Lingua ceruina, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde degree, astringent. Luparia, vide Aconitum. Lapis spongiae, Sponge stones, drie, con∣glutmatiue. Lignum aloes, hoat and drie in the second
degree, comforteth the brayne. Laurus, Laurell, or Baie, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, abstersiue, & mun∣dificatiue. Lapis smaragdus The Smaragde stone, colde and drie, driueth away venim. Lapis Adamas, cold and drie in the fourth degree, abstersiue. Lapis hematitis, vide Ematitis lapis. Lapis lazulus, Asure, cold and moist, pur∣geth melancholie. Limon, the Lemon frute, colde and drie, confortatiue. M Margarita, Pearle, cold and drie, confor∣tatiue. Merda ferri, Iron drosse, colde and drie, consolidatiue. Malua, Mallowes, colde and moist, miti∣gatiue. Malmauiscus, vide Althea. Mandragora, Mandrage, colde and drie in the thirde degree, stupefactiue. Marubium, Hore hounde, hoate in the se∣conde, drie in the thirde degree, aperi∣tiue.
Mastix, Masticke, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree, mollificatiue. Melilotum, Melilot, hoat and drie in the first degree, resolutiue. Medulla, Marrey, hoate and moist, molli∣ficatiue. Mel, Home, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, mundificatiue. Mrha, Mirre, hoat and drie in the secōd degree, incarnatiue. Memitha, The lesse Salendine, drie in the first degree, restrictiue. Mespila, Medlars, constrictiue. Mummia. Mummie, hoat and drie in the seconde degree, constrictiue. Minimum, Read lead, cold & drie, cicatrix. Maiorana, Maioram, hoat and drie in the thirde degree, digesteth. Mater syluae, vide caprefolium. Matricaria, Mugwort, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, aperitiue. Malauinzana, Mad apples, cold & mo stupefactiue. Melissa, Balme, hoate in the seconde, drie in the first degree, abstersiue, congl Mentha, Minte, hoate in the thirde, dri in the second degree, astringent.
Mercurialis, the trewe Mercurie, hoate & drie in the firste degree, solutiue. Millium, Millet, colde in the first, drie in the thirde degree, aperitiue. Millefolium, Yarrowe, drie astringent. Millemorbia, vide Ficaria. Mora vaticana. Bramble, hoate and drie astringent. Morella. Lesse nightshade or Alkakengi, colde in the seconde degree, and meane betweene moist and drie, astringent. Morsus Diaboli. Diuels bitte, hoate and drie, dissolueth and ripeneth. Morsus Gallinae. Mouseare, colde and moist, mundificatiue. Morus Mulberie, Colde and moist, ab∣stersiue. Malum Granatum. Pomegranates, the sower be colde and drie, the sweete cold and moist, comforting the stomacke. Malum medicum. Orenge, colde and moiste in the firste degree, the rinde is hoate and drie, and comforteth the stomacke. Macis. Mace, drie in the thirde degree, without manifest heate, astringent.
Manna, hoate and drie in the seconde de∣gree, constringēt, sayth Paule Egineta. Mirobalani, Mirabolanes, colde in the firste degree, drie in the seconde, stip∣tickes. Malacidonea, vide cidon Malum. Marathrum, vide Foeniculum, Marcasita, hoate and drie, consolidatiue, and astringent. Malecoria, the rindes of Pomegranetes, colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde, restrictiue. N Nenuphar, Water Lilies, colde & moist in the second degree, delaying inflam∣mations. Nuces auellanae, Small nuttes, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, abstersiue. Nux Indica, hoate and moist in the firste degree, confortatiue. Nuces cupressi, Cipresse nuttes, hoat and drie, astringent. Nux vomica, the vomiting nutte, hoate & drie, prouoking strong vomite. Nux Muscata, Nutmigges, hoate & drie in the seconde degree, confortatiue.
Nepita, vide Calamentum. Nux iuglās, wal nuttes, the withered are hoat in the thirde degree, and drie in the beginning of the second, but the greene are not so hoate and drie, they lose the bellie. Nasturtium satiuum, Garden Cresses, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, ab∣stersiue. Nasturtium aquaticum, water Cresses, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, a∣peritiue. Nasturtium tectorū, wilde mustard seede, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, a∣peritiue. Nil, vide Guadum. Nigella Romana, A seede so called, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, clenseth the skinne. Nitrum, Salt peter, subtillatiue & mun∣dificatiue. O Opium, The iuyce of black Poppie dried, colde and drie in the fourth degree, stu∣pefactiue, and mortificatiue. Ordeum, Barley, colde and drie in the first degree, maturatiue and abstersiue.
Oleum oliuarum. Oile Oliue, tempe∣rate, and according to the qualities of simples altered. Oleum muscelinum. hoate, mollificatiue. Orobus. Fetches, hoate in the firste, drie in the second degree, apertitiue and ab∣stersiue. Oua. Egges, temperate, the whyte cold, the yolke hoate, mitigatiue. Opopanax, A gumme, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, remollitiue. Occularia, vide eufrasia. Oculus boui. Oxe eie, hoate & drie, reso∣lutiue. Oleander. hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree, abstersiue. Opthalmia, vide Eufrasia. Origanū. Penrial, hote & drie in ye 3. deg. Os mundi A fetch, hote & drie, astringēt Oriza. Rse, hote & drie in the first degree, astringent. Ocimum, ariofilatum Basill, hoate in the firste, drie in the second degree, mū∣dificatiue, and confortatiue. Olibanum. A gumme, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, consolidatiue. Ossa combusta. Burnt bones, drie, a∣stringent.
P Plantago. Plantaine, colde and drie, re∣percussiue, and consolidatiue. Portulaca. Purslaine, colde in the thirde, moist in the seconde, mitigatiue. Populus. The Poplar tree, colde & drie repercussiue. Psillim. Fleewort, the seede is colde in the seconde degree, and moiste in the firste. Psidia vide Malecoria. Polium. Wylde time, hoat in the second, drie in the thirde degree, resolutiue. Parietaria. Pellitorie, hoate and drie in ye thirde degree, resolutiue. Piper Pepper, hoate & drie in the fourth degree, attractiue, mundificatiue. Petroleum. A stone of a rocke, hoate and drie in the fourth degree. Pix. Common pitche, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, maturatiue, abster∣siue. Pinguedo. Fatte, hoate and moist, matu∣ratiue, mollficatiue. Palma The Date tree, colde and drie in ye seconde degree, astringent. Pentaphilon. Vide quinque folium.
Pimpenella, Pimpernell, hoate and drie, consolidatiue. Porrum, Leekes, hoate & drie in the third degree, attractiue. Pinus, The Pine tree, the Kirnels of the whiche be hoate & moist, but the barke is colde and drie, with much stipticitie. Plumbum, Lead, colde and drie in the se∣cond degree, resolutiue. Peonia, Pionie, hoate and drie, astringēt. Pagana lingua, great Laurell, hoate and drie, aperitiue. Palma Christi, Spourge, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, mundificatiue. Panis cuculus, Cocowes meate, colde and drie, conglutinatiue. Panis Porcinus, hoat and drie in the third degree, mundificatiue. Papauer satiuum, Garden Popie, cold in the fourth degree, stupefactiue. Pastinaca, Persnep, hoate in the seconde, drie in the first degree, aperitiue. Pastoris bursa, vide Bursa pastoris. Perforata, vide Fuga demonum. Persica, Peaches, cold and moist in the se∣cond degree astringent. Peruinca, vide Laureola.
Pes Anserinus, Goose foote, colde in the seconde degree, astringent. Pes Columbinus, Doues foote, drie, a∣stringent. Pes Coru, Crowe foote, hoate and drie, Uehement Ulceratiue. Pes Leonis, Lions foote, drie, astringent. Pes Vituli, vide Aron. Petroselinum, Perseley, hoate in the se∣conde, drie in the thirde degree, aperi∣tiue. Pilosella, vide auricula muris. Podagra lini, vide Cassutha. Polipodium, Oke fearne, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, mundificatiue, at∣tractiue. Pollitricon, vide capillus veneris. Potentilla, Wylde tansey, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, astringent. Prassium, Horehound, hoate in the second, drie in the thirde degree, aperitiue. Prassium fetidum, the stinking black ho∣rehounde, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Primula veris, Primrose, hoate and drie, conglutinatiue. Prunella, Burnette, hoate & drie, cōglut.
Prunu Damacens, colde & drie, meanly astringent. Pseudomelanthion. Coccle, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, abstersiue. Puegium, vide Origanum. Pirethrum syuestrae. Wilde Pellitorie, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, mundificatiue. Papirus. Paper, cold and drie, astringent. Panis. Bread, hoate and drie in the firste degree, resolutiue, attractiue. Passulae. Reasins, hoate & moist, resolut. Penidiae Penittes, hoat and moist in the first degree, conglutinatiue. Panicum. A graine like grommell, colde in the first, drie in the beginning of the seconde, astringent. Pira. Peares, the ripe are colde and moist in the first degree, the sower or greene, are colde and drie in the second degree, and the halfe ripe, are colde and drie in the first degree. Pruna. Prunes, colde and moist in the se∣cond degree, loseth the belly. Q Quercus the Oke, hoat & drie, astringēt. Quin{que} folium. Fiue leaued grasse, drie astringent.
Quercula minor. Germander, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, resolutiue, a∣peritiue. R Rosae flos. Rose flower, colde in the firste, drie in the second, lightly binding, this is the white, the read is more astringēt and lesse colde, the damaske is partaker of both in lighter substaunce. Rubus arbustus. Bramble, cold and drie, stipticke, and consolidatiue. Rubea tinctorū, vide granū tinctorū. Raphanu. Radishe, hoate and drie, incis∣siue, abstersiue. Rapa. Rapes, hoate in the second, moiste in the first degree, maturatiue. Realgar Roseager, hoate, mortificatiue. Rapiastrum. Charlocke, hoat and drie re∣solutiue, mundificatiue. Remora aratri, vide amonis. Rhabarbarū monachorum. Monkes Ru∣barbe, cold & drie in the seconde degree astringent. Ribes. Small reasins, cold and drie in the second degree, astringent. Rosmarinus. Rosemarie, hoate and drie, abstesiue, resolutiue.
Rosemarinus aculeatus, Gorse, drie a∣stringent. Rostrum Ciconiae, Pinkenedle, drie, a∣stringent. Rostrum Porcinum, Suckerie, cold and drie, astringent. Ruta, Rewe, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, Ulceratiue, aperitiue, digestiue. Resina, Rosin, hoate & drie, mūdificatiue. S Solatrum, great nightshade, colde & drie in the fourth degree, stupefactiue. Salix, Willowes, colde and drie in the se∣conde degree, stipticke meanely. Siligo, Rie, colde and drie, abstersiue. Sumach, colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree, stipticke. Semperuiua, Houseleeke, cold in the third drie in the first, repercussiue. Spica nardi, Spikenard, hoate in the first, drie in the seconde, confortatiue. Sal, Salt, hoate and drie in the seconde de∣gree, abstersiue. Sulphur, Brimstone, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, attractiue. Squinantum, Squinant, hoate and drie,
stipticke. Saluia, Sage, hoate and drie in the second degree, stipticke, Sandalus, Saunders, cold and drie in the seconde degree, repercussiue. Spodium, colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree, consolidatiue. Scroffularia, The lesse Salendine, drie, resolutiue. Serapinum, A gumme, hoate and drie in the second degree, mollificatiue. Squilia, Sea Onion, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, attractiue. Stercus, Donge, hoate and drie, according to the temperature of the creature. Sepium, Sewet, hoate and temperate ac∣cording to the temperature of the crea∣ture. Sarcocolla, Sarcocoll, hoate in the second drie in the first degree, incarnatiue. Sanguis Draconis, Drie in the second de∣gree, consolidatiue, constringent. Sanguis animalium, Creatures bloude, this hath temperature according to the nature of the creature. Scoria, Filinges, drie and muche consoli∣datiue.
Sapo, Sope, hoate adusliue. Guydo. Spongia maris, Sponges, hoate in the first, drie in the seconde degree, cōsump∣tiue, and desiccatiue. Spuma maris, Fome of the Sea, hoate in the firste, drie in the thirde degree, ab∣stersiue. Sinapis, Mustardseede, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, attractiue Staphisagria, Staues acre, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, attractiue. Scabiosa, Scabious, hoate and drie in the seconde degree regeneratiue. Stirax calamit. A gumme, hoate and drie, mollificatiue. Simissomis, Blessed thistle, colde, & ma∣turatiue. Sambucus, Eldar, hoate in the seconde, drie in the first degree, resolutiue. Sacerdotis virile, vide Aron. Salicaria, Lowstrif, drie astringent. Sanamunda, Bennet, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, consolidatiue and a∣stringent. Sancti spiritus radix. vide Angelica. Sanguisorba, A kinde of Pimpernell, drie astringent.
Sanicula, Sanicle, hoat and drie in the se∣conde degree, astringent. Sardiana glans, Chestenuttes, hoate and drie in the first degree, astringent. Satureia, Sauerie, hoate and drie in the third degree, abstersiue, aperitiue. Sabina, Sain, hoate and drie in the third degree, dissolueth and openeth. Saxifraga, Saxifrage, hoate and drie a∣stringent. Scariola, vide Endiuia. Scelerata, vide pescorui. Scolopendria, Hartes tongue, hoat in the firste, drie in the seconde degree, astrin∣gent. Sena, Snec, hoat in the second, drie in the first degree, abstrsiue, and aperitiue. Serratula, vide Quecula minor. Serpentaria, vide Aron. Serpillum, vide satureia. Serpillum Romanum, Time, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, aperitiue, dis∣soluing and separating. Seruilla, vide Pastinaca. Sirutum ibidem. Sigillum Salamonis, Salamons seale, of a meane temperature, astringent.
Siler montanum, Siler mountaine, hoate and drie in the second degree, aperitiue. Simionis herba, vide Althea. Sorbes, the Sorbe tree, colde and drie a∣stringent. Sorgi, an Italian graine, whiche is colde and drie, astringent. Sparagus, Sperage, abstersiue, without manifest heate or colde. Spatula foetida, A slagge bearing coddes with read beries, hoate and drie, ab∣stersiue. Stellae herba, vide pes corui. Sebesten, a fruite, temperate of cōplexion and lenitiue. Sal armoniacum, Salt armoniack, hoate and drie in the fourth degree, abster∣siue. Sal gemmae, an other kinde of Salte, hoat and drie, abstersiue, mundificatiue. Siseleos, a Seede, hoat and drie in the end of the seconde degree, prouoketh brine. Scamonia, vide Diagredium. T Thimus, vide Serpillum Romanum. Thus, Frankincense, hoate in the second,
drie in the first degree, incarnatiue, cō∣solidatiue. Terebentina. Terebentine, hoate & drie, consolidatiue. Thucia, lapis. A stone or minerall, colde in the firste, drie in the seconde degree, quickeneth the eie sight. Tartarum. Wine Lees, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, abstersiue. Tanacetum. Tansey, hoate and drie, con∣solidatiue. Tapsus barbatus. Mollen, drie, abstersiue. Turmentilla. Turmentil, hoate and drie, abstersiue. Tamarix. Brier, drie, astringent. Taraxacon. vide Rostrum porciuum. Testiculus canis. Dogges stones, hoate & moist, resolutiue. Tilia. A kinde of Birche, hoate and drie, astringent. Tinctorius flos. vide granum tinctorū. Trifolium. Three leaned grasse, hoat and drie in the thirde degree, aperitiue, ab∣stersiue. Trinitatis herba. Iupiters flower, hoate hoate and drie, abstersiue, and conglu∣tinatiue.
Triticum. Wheate, hoate in the first de∣gree, without manifest drienes or moi∣sture, attractiue, and digestiue. Turcium frumentum. Turkishe corne, hoate and drie meanly abstersiue. Tela aranea. Copweb, colde & drie, astrin∣gent, and consosidatiue. Tamarindi. Tamarindes, colde and drie in the thirde degree, mundifieth and se∣perateth. Titimalus. A kinde of spourge, hoate and drie in the fourth degrr, abstersiue. Terra sigillata. hoate and drie astringent. Tubera. round puffes like Musheromes, they engendre grosse humors. Turbita. Turbith, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, mundifieth and loseth the bellie. V Vinum, Wyne, hoate and drie, or moiste euen according to the age there of, ma∣turatiue, and consolidatiue. Vua passa, vide passulae. Viola. Uiolet, colde and moist in the first degree, ripeneth hoate impostumes, & coleth inflamations.
Vmbelicus veneris. Penigrasse, cold and moist in the second degree, delaieth in∣flammations. Veruena. vide Berbena. Vrtica. Nettle, hoate and drie, mordifica∣tiue. Virga pastoris. Wilde casill, colde in the thirde degree, drie temperate, consoli∣datiue, and astringent. Vrina. Urine, hoate and drie, abstersiue, adustiue. Vernix. Uernish, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree, incarnatiue, abstersiue. Vermes terrestres, Earth wormes, con∣glutinatiue, & conforting the sinewes. Vsnea quercina. The white mosse of the Oke, hoate and drie, confortatiue. Verdetum. vide aeris flos. Vitrium Glasse, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde degree, abstersiue. Vitriolum. Uitrioll, hoate and drie in the thirde degree, stipticke and corrosiue. Vzifur. vide Cinabrium. Valeriana. Ualerian, hoate and drie in the seconde degree, aperitiue, abstersiue. Veronica. Speedewel, hoat and drie, cō∣solidatiue, constringent.
Vinca peruinca. Perwinke, drie a∣stringent. Viscum. Miscledine, hoate, attractiue, re∣solutiue. Vitealis. Withwinde, hoate and drie, di∣gestiue. Viticella. vide Brionia. Vngula caballina. Horsehouse, colde and moist, mundificatiue. Volubilis maior. vide Caprefolium. Vrinaris heba. Toadstax, aperitiue, mū∣dificatiue. Vua Lupina. A kinde of nightshade, cold & drie in ye second degree, repercussiue. Vua vulpina vide Aconitum. Vuularia. great Laurell, hoate and drie, aperitiue. X Xilobalsamum. The wood of the tree Balsam, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Xilo aloes. vide lignum aloes. Xilon vide Bombax. Z Zinziber caninum. Indie pepper, hoate
and drie vehemētly, attractiue, and ab∣stersiue. Zea. A kinde of wheate, hoate and drie, meanely abstersiue, and consolidatiue. Zedoaria. A oote, hoate in the third, drie in the seconde degree, conforteth, and mundifieth, and scattreth humors. Zaccharum. Suger, hoate and moiste, meanly consolidatiue. Zinziber. Ginger, being green, it is hote in the thirde degree, and moiste in the firste, but being dried, it is drie in the first degree, it heateth the stomake, and scattreth moist humors.
Nowe that I haue fulfil∣led my promise, and so brieflye handled this short appendix of simples, I purpose next to tell the onely tempera∣tures of the medicines aforenamed, euery kynde by them selfes, (for the Reader his more easie finding of them) that is to say, whiche be hoate and moiste, colde and drie, cold and moist. &c. and first these which he hoat and drie, as foloweth in alphabet manner. viz. ABsinthium. Hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde degree. Apium. Hoate in the first, drie in the seconde. Agrimonia. Hoate and drie in the second degree. Abrotanum. Hoate in the first, drie in the seconde. Aristolochia. Hoat and drie in the fourth degree. Allium. Hote & drie in the fourth degree. Aloes. Hoate in the second, drie in the first degree.
Anisum. Hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree. Anetum. Hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Asphoden radices. Hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Anacardus. Hoate and drie in the fourth degree. Arsenicum. Hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde. Auripigmentum. Of like temperature. Alumen. Hoat & drie in the third degree. Ammoniacū. Hoate in the thirde, drie in the firste. Assa fetida. Hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Asphaltum. Hoate and drie. Acanthus. Hoat & drie in the first degree. Atramentū. Hoat & drie in ye third degree. Acorus. Hoate & drie in the third degree. Aiuga. Hoate in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Amaracum. Hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree. Amarantus. Hoate and drie. Ameos. Hoate & drie in the third degree. Anagallis. Hoate and drie.
Anagallis aquatica. Of lik tēperature. Androsemon. Hoate hote and drie. Anetum vaccinum. Hoate and drie. Angelica. Hoate and drie in the third de∣gree. Annonis. Hoate and drie in the third de∣gree. Anthemis. hoate & drie in ye firste degree. Apium agreste. Hoate & drie vehemently. Artemisia. Hoate and drie in the second. Aron. Hoate and drie in the third degree. Asarum. Hoate & drie in the third degree. Asperagus. Hoate and drie. Apios. Hoate and drie. Agaricus. Hoate & drie in the first degree. Ambra. Hoate & drie in the second degree. B BRionia. Hoate and drie in the second degree. Balsamus, Hoate & drie in the second deg. Borax. Hoate and drie. Ballote. Hoate & drie in the third degree. Batrachium. Hoate and drie. Barba caprina. Hoate and drie. Bellis. hoate and drie. Botris. Hoate and drie. Betonica. Hoate & drie in the first degree.
Basilicon. Hoate in the firste degree, drie in the seconde. Blacte Bisantia. Hoate & drie in the third degree. Been. Hoate & drie in the second degree. Bombax. Hoate and drie. C CAstoreum. Hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree. Cassia lignea. Hoate and drie. Capparis. Hoate in the first, drie in the se∣conde. Crassula. Hoate and drie in the thirde de∣gree. Fuchsius. Caulis. Hoate in the firste, drie in the se∣conde degree. Centaurea. Hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Costus. Hoate in the thirde, drie in the se∣conde degree. Cinamomum. Hoate and drie in the third degree. Ciperus. Hoate and drie in the second de∣gree. Chelidonia. Hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Cuperosa. Hoat and drie in the beginning
of the fourth degree. Cipressus. hoate in the first, drie in the se∣conde degree. Calx viua. hoate and drie in the fourthe degree. Cantarides. hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Castoreum. hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Canabis. hoate and drie. Cinis. hoat and drie in the fourth degree. Cucumer asininus. hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Cresones. hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Ciminum. hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree. Caltha. hoate and drie. Caprefolium. hoate and drie. Cubebes. hoate and drie. Camepitheos. hoat and drie in the second degree. Cardo patium. hoate and drie in the third degree. Cardus benedictus. hoate and drie. Cartamus. hoate in the second, drie in the first.
Carui, hoate and drie in the third degree. Camedris, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Cheiri, hoate and drie. Cicer, hoate and drie in the first degree. Coloquintida, hoate and drie in the third degree. Consolida maior, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree. Consolida minor, hoate and drie. Cassutha, hoate in the first, drie in the se∣conde degree. Ciclamen, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Crocus, hoate in the firste, drie in the se∣conde. Colophonia, hoate & drie in the seconde degree. Calamus, hoat & drie in the secōd degree. Cardamomum, hoate and drie in the firste degree. D DIgitalis, hoate and drie. Digiticitrini, hoat and drie in the se∣conde degree.
Diptanum, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Daphnoeides, hoate and drie. Daucus, hoate and drie. Dragunculus, hoate and drie. Dragagantum, hoate and drie. Doronicum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Diagredium, hoate and drie in the fourth degree. E ENula campana, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Ebulus, hoate & drie in the second degree. Euforbium, hoate and drie in the fourthe degree. Eris flos, hoate & drie in the third degree. Ermodactili, hoate and drie in the second degree. Elleborus albus, hoate & drie in the thirde degree. Equina mentha, hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde. Eruca, hoate and drie. Esula, hoate in the fourth degree, drie ve∣hemently. Euiscum, hoat and drie in the first degree.
Eufrasia, hoate and drie. Eupatorium, hoate and drie in the second degree. Epithimum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. F FLammula, hoate and drie in the fourth degree. Fabaria, hoate in the firste, drie in the be∣ginning of the thirde degree. Feniculus, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Furfur, hoate and drie in the first degree. Ferrugo, hoate and drie in the second deg. Fenugrecum, hoate and drie in the firste degree. Fuligo, hoate and drie. Filix, hoate and drie in the second degree. Faba crassa, hoate in the first, drie in the se∣conde degree. Filipendula, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Feniculus porcinus, hoate in the seconde, drie in the thirde. Fuga Demonum, hoate and drie. Fel, hoate & drie, according to the nature of the creature.
G GRatia Dei, hoate and drie in the second degree. Gariofili, hoate & drie in the third degree. Gluten, hoate and drie in the first degree. Gentiana, hoat & drie in the third degree. Gallitricum, hoate and drie. Gipsum, hoate and drie. Galbanum, hoate in the thirde degree, drie in the seconde. Genesta, hoate & drie in the second degree. Galanga, hoate & drie in the secōd degree. H HVmulus, hoate and drie. Hipericon, hoate and drie. Hissopus, hoat & drie in the third degree. I IVniperus, hoate and drie. Iarus, hoate & drie in the secōd degree. Ireos, hoate and drie in the third degree. Iacobi flos, hoate and drie. Iuamuscata, hoate in the seconde drie in the thirde degree. Iuiube, hoate and drie in the first degree. K KArabae, hoate and drie in the thirde degree.
L LVpini, hoate in the first, drie in the se∣conde degree. Lini semen, hoate and drie. Lixiuium, hoate & drie in ye third degree. Lappa inuersa, hoate and drie. Laureola, hoate and drie. Linaria, hoate and drie. Lingua ceruina, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde. Lignum Aloes, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree. Laurus, hoate and drie in the 3. degree. M MArubium, hoate in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Mastix, hoate & drie in the secōd degree. Melilotum, hoat and drie in the first deg. Mel, hoate & drie in the seconde degree. Mirrha, hoate & drie in the second degree. Mummia, hoat & drie in ye second degree. Maiorana, hoat & drie in the third degree. Matersilua, hoate and drie. Matricaria, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Melissa, hoate in the seconde, drie in the firste degree.
Mentha, hoate in the thirde, drie in the se∣conde degree. Mercurialis, hoate and drie in the firste degree. Millium, hoate and drie. Mora vaticana, hoate and drie. Morsus diaboli, hoate and drie. Mali medici cortex, hoate and drie. Marcasita, hoate and drie. Manna, hoate & drie in the second degree. N NVx iuglans, hoate in the thirde, drie in the beginning of the second deg. Nuces auellanae, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree. Nuces cipressi, hoate and drie. Nux Muscata, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree. Nux vomica, hoate and drie. Nigella, hoate & drie in the third degree. Nasturtium tectorum, hoate and drie in the fourth degreee. Nasturtium aquaticum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Nasturtium satiuum, hoat and drie in the fourth degreee.
Orobus, hoate in the firste, drie in the se∣conde degree. Opopanax, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Occullaria, hoate and drie. Oculus bouis, hoate and drie. Oleander, hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree. Origanum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Os mundi, hoate and drie. Oriza, hoate and drie in the first degree. Ocimum gariofilatum, hoate in the first, drie in the second degree. Olibanum, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. P POlium, hoate in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Parietaria, hoate and drie in the third deg. Piper, hoat and drie in the fourth degree. Petroleū, hoat & drie in the fourth degr. Pix, hoate & drie in the third degree. Pimpenella, hoate and drie. Porrum, hoate & drie in the third degree. Paeonia, hoate and drie. Pagana lingua, hoate and drie.
Palma Christi, hoate and drie in the third degree. Panis porcinus, hoate & drie in the thirde degree. Pastinaca, hoate in the second, drie in the firste. Perforata, hoate and drie. Peruinca, hoate and drie. Pes vitul, hoat & drie in the third degree. Petroselinum, hoate and drie in the third degree. Pillosella, hoate and drie. Podagra lini, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde. Polipodium, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Potentilla, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Prassium, hoate in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Prassium faetidum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Primula veris, hoate and drie. Prunella, hoate and drie. Pseudomelanthion, hoate and drie. Pulegium, hoate & drie in the 3. degree. Pirethrū sylu. hoat & drie in the 2. degree.
Panis, hoate and drie in the first degree. Q QVercus, hoate and drie. Quercula minor, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. R RVbea tinctorū, hoate and drie in the third degree. Raphanus, hoate and drie. Rapiastrum, hoate and drie. Rosemarinus, hoate and drie. Ruta, hoate and drie in the third degree. Resina, hoate and drie. S SPica nardi, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde. Sal, hoate and drie in the second degree. Sulphur, hoate and drie in the third deg. Squinantum, hoate and drie. Saluia, hoate and drie. Serapinum, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Squilla, hoate and drie in the second deg. Stercus, hoate and drie. Sarcocolla, hoate in the second, drie in the first degree. Sapo, hoate and drie.
Spongia maris, hoate in the firste, drie in the seconde degree. Spuma maris, hoate in the first, drie in the thirde. Sinapis, hoate and drie in the fourth deg. Staphisagria, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Scabiosa, hoat & drie in the second degree. Sambucus, hoate in the second, drie in the firste degree. Sacerdotis virile, hoate & drie in the third degree. Sana munda, hoate & drie in ye second deg. Sanicula, hoat & drie in the second degree. Sardiana glans, hoate and drie in the firste degree. Satureia, hoate & drie in the third degree. Sabina, hoate and drie in the third degree. Scelerata, hoat & drie in the fourth degree. Scolopendria, hoate in the first, drie in the seconde degree. Sena, hoate in the seconde, drie in the first degree. Serpillum Romanum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Siler montanum, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree.
Spatula fetida, hoate and drie. Sticados, hoate in the firste, drie in the se∣conde degree. Seseleo, hoate and drie in the ende of the seconde degree. Sal Armoniacum, hoate and drie in the fourth degree. Sal gemma, hoate and drie. T THus, hoate in the seconde, drie in the first degree. Terra sigillata, hoate and drie. Tithimalus, hoate and drie in the fourthe degree. Tanacetum, hoate and drie. Tartarū. hoat & drie in the third degree. Tillia, hoate and drie. Turmentilla, hoate and drie. Turbita, hoate & drie in the third degree. Trifoliū. hoate & drie in the third degree. Trinitatis herba, hoate and drie. Turtiū frumentū, hoate and drie. Terebentina, hoate and drie. V Vinum, hoate and drie. Verbena, hoate and drie. Vrtica, hoate and drie.
Vrina, hoate and drie. Vernix, hoate and drie in the second deg. Vinea quercina, hoate and drie. Verdetum, hoate and drie. Vitrium, hoate in the first, drie in the se∣conde degree. Vitriolum, hoate and drie in the thirde degree. Vzufur, hoat and drie in the second deg. Valeriana, hoate and drie in the seconde degree. Veronica, hoate and drie. Vitealis, hoate and drie. Vitecella, hoate and drie. Volubilis maior, hoate and drie. Vuularia, hoate and drie. X XIlobalsamum, hoate and drie in the se∣conde degree. Z ZInziber caninum, hoate and drie ve∣hemently. Zea, hoate and drie. Zedoaria, hoate in the thirde, drie in the seconde degree.
Simple Medicines hoate and moiste. AXungia, hoate and moist in the first degree. Apium hortense, hoate in the seconde, and moist in the third degree. Amigdala, hoate and moist in the first degree. Baacuia, hoat and moist in the first degree. Borago, hoate and moist, Buglossum, hoate and moist. Bdellium, hoat & moist in the first degree. Cataputia, hoate in the third, moist in the seconde degree. Cotifructus, hoate and moist. Dolichi, hoate & moist in the first degree. Dulcis radix, hoate and moist. Dactili, hoat & moist in the second degree. Ficus recentes, hoate and moist. Frumentum, hoate and moist. Lillij radices, hoate and moist in the se∣conde degree.
Labdanum, hoate and moist in the firste degree. Lingua canis, hoate and moist in the first Lingua bouis, hoate and moist in the first degree. Maluauiscus, hoate and moist in the se∣conde degree. Medulla, hoate and moist. Pinguedo, hoate and moist. Pini nucleus, hoate and moist. Passulae, hoate and moist. Penidiae, hoate & moist in the first degree. Rapa, hoate in the second, moist in the first Testiculus canis, hoate and moist. Vua passa, hoate and moist. Zaccharum, hoate and moist. Zinziber, hoate in the third, moiste in the firste degree.
Simples that be colde and drie in Alphabet maner as folovveth. ACetum, colde in the first, drie in the thirde degree. Agresta nota, cold in the secōd, drie in the thirde degree. Acasia, colde and drie in the third degree. Acedula, cold & drie in the second degree. Anthera, cold and drie in the first degree. Acusmuscate, colde and drie. Amilum, colde & drie in the first degree. Argilla, cold in the first, drie in the secōd, Antimonium, colde in the first, drie in the seconde degree. Aizoon, colde in the thirde degree, drie meanely. Ambubeia, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Arnoglosson, colde and drie in the second degree. Argentum & scoria, cold and drie. BAlaustia, colde and drie in the seconde degree.
Berberi, cold and drie in the third degree. Bolus armenus, colde and drie in the se∣conde degree. Bursa pastoris, colde and drie. Bugiae, colde and drie. Bedegar, colde in the first, drie meanly. COrallus, colde in the firste, drie in the seconde. Cerusa, colde & drie in the second degree. Cauda Equina, colde in the firste, drie in the seconde degree. Centumnodia, colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde. Cidoneum malum, colde in the first, drie in the seconde. Coriandrum, colde and drie. Cinoglossum, cold and drie in the second degree. Camfora, colde and drie in the third deg. EPatica, (Vigo) colde and drie in the firste degree. Endiuia, colde and drie. Fumus terrae, colde in the first, drie in the seconde degree. Fabae, colde and drie.
Ferrum, cold and drie in the secōd degree. Farinae volatilis, cold and drie. Fraxinus, colde and drie in the secōd deg. Folia Oliuarum, cold and drie. GAllae, colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Glandes, colde and drie in the secōd degr. Gummi Arab. cold, and somewhat drie. HOrdeum, colde and drie in the firste degree. IPocisthis, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Iouis barba, colde in the third, drie in the first degree. LImon, colde and drie. Lactis aqua, cold and drie. Lapathum, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Lactuca, colde and drie in the third degr. Lapis smaragdi, colde and drie. Lapis Adamas, cold and drie in the fourth degree. Lapis hematits, colde and drie.
MArgarita colde and drie. Merda ferri, colde and drie. Mandragora, colde and drie in the thirde degree. Minium, colde and drie. Millium, cold in the first, drie in the third degree. Malum Granatum, the sower in cold and drie. Mirobalani, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Mala citonea, colde and drie in the firste degree. Opium, colde & drie in the fourth degree. PLantago, colde and drie. Populus, colde and drie. Psidia, colde in the second, drie in the third degree. Palma, colde & drie in the second degree. Pini cortex, colde and drie. Plumbum, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Panis cuculus, colde and drie. Prunus, colde and drie. Panicum, colde in the first, drie in the be∣ginning
of the seconde. Pirae viridae, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Pirae semimature, colde and drie in the se∣conde degree. RVbus arbustus, colde and drie. Rhabarb. monach. colde and drie in the second degree. Ribes, colde and drie in the second degree. Rostrum porcinum, colde and drie. SOlatrum, colde and drie in the seconde degree. Salix, colde and drie in the second degree. Siligo, cold and drie. Sumach. colde in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Sandalus, colde and drie in the 2. degree. Spodium, cold in the seconde, drie in the thirde degree. Stirax, cold in the first, drie meanly. Sorgi, cold and drie. Sorbus, cold and drie. THucia, cold in the first, drie in ye 2. deg. Tamarindi, cold & drie in the 3. degr. Tela aranea, cold and drie. Vua lupina, colde & drie in the 2. degree.
Simples colde and moist ensue. viz. AQua, colde & moist in the first degree. Attriplex, cold and moist tem∣peratly. Argentum viuum, cold and moist. Angurium, cold & moist in the 2. degree. Auriculamuris, cold and moist. Beta, colde and moist. Blitum, cold and moist in the second deg. Crassula, colde in the thirde, moist in the seconde degree. Citrulli, colde & moist in the second deg. Cucumer, cold and moist in the secōd deg. Cucubita, cold & moist in the second deg. Epatica (Guydo) cold and moist. Fungus, cold & moist in the third degree. Hispanach, cold and moist in the first deg.
Lapis lazulus, colde and moist. Malua, colde and moist. Malazana, colde and moist. Morsus Gallinae, cold and moist. Morus, cold and moist. Malum Granat, dulcis, cold and moist. Malum medici carnis, colde and moist in the second degree. Nenuphar, cold and moist. Psillium, colde in the seconde, moist in the first degree. Persica, colde and moist in the second deg. Pirae maturae, cold and moist in the secōd degree. Pruna, cold & moist in the second degree. Viola, colde and moist in the first degree. Vngula caballina, cold and moist.
The properties of de∣grees, and what effect is conteined in euerie degree, with examples of sim∣ple medicines for eche degree. 1 The first degree, doth alter & chaūge sensibly. 2 The seconde, enduceth and inferreth some labour. 3 The thirde, woorketh with great effi∣cacie and muche labour. 4 The fourth degree, banisheth & put∣teth foorth ye sense by his exceeding temperature. Temperate medicines bee suche, as doe neither manifestly heate, coole, moi∣sten, nor drie. These be vntēperate medicines, which are plainely to be called hoate or colde, & chiefly suche as be of the first, second, third or fourth degree. ¶Medicines hoate in the first degree. These doe augmente an vnnaturall heat, yet not fierie, and therfore are fitte
for digestiues, maturatiues, and such like naturall actions. viz. Absynthium, Althea, Amigdala dulc. Aloe, Agaricum, Brassica, Buglossum, Camomelum, Eupatorium, Lini semen, Labdanum. ¶Simples hoate in the se∣conde degree. These doe rarefie, open, and ateunate the wayes, and beginneth to haue a fierie heate. viz. Apium, Anethum viride, Artemisia, Balsamum, Calamus odoratus, Crocus. Foenugrecum, Mastix. Nux Muscata, &c. ¶Simples hoate in the third degree. These doe drie, stirre thirst, attract and enflame, waste the bodie and melt. viz. Abrotanum, Ammi,
Asarum, Anisum, Aron, Cuminum, Cinamomum, Galanga, Nigella, Origanum. Mentha. &c. ¶Hoate in the fourth degree. These doe blister, heate, burne, mortifie, and extinguishe. viz. Allium, Cepa, Costus, Euforbium, Lepidium, Tithmali. Nasturtium, Pirethrum, Porum, Sapi, Rua sluestris Thus farre is sufficient for exāple sake of the hote intemperature of simples, frō the first to the fourth degree, and after as orderly as I can, shall ensue the colde, moist, and drie entemperatures, with like order of their naturall degrees, and firste of suche simple medicines as hee colde in the first degree. Colde in the first degree, diminisheth
naturall heate, and hindreth digestion, & maturation. viz. Attriplex, Pruna, Hordeum, Malua, Mirtus, Pira, Rosa, Viola, Cotonea, &c. ¶Cold in the second degree. These doe thicken and manifestly delaye the heate. viz. Acasia, Blitum, Cucurbita, Lactuca, Endiuia, Persica, Plantago, Psillium. Solanum. &c. ¶Colde in the third degree. These binde the inward passages, put∣ting foorth the naturall iuyce, hindring distribution, astonishing the sense, and en∣ducing leadie colour. viz. Camfora, Portulaca, Mandragora, Hiosciamus, Sandali, Semperuiuum.
¶Cold in the fourth degree. Suche doe congeale, extinguishe heate, & interfect with poyson. viz. Cicuta, Papauer. Opium. &c. Of the moist intemperature, there are also which doe exceede in like degrees re∣hearsed, as moist in the first degree, and they make the bodie gentle and slipperie. viz. Buglossum, Glycheriza, ndiuia, Malua, Zaccharum, Sesamium. ¶Moist in the second degree. They do away the sharpenes of humors, loseth, engrosseth and weakeneth the na∣turall motion of members. viz. Attriplex, Cucurbita, Lactuca, Pruna, Blitum. Portulaca. Violae. &c. ¶Moist in the third degree. Those make the bodie slowe and dull, a∣stonishing all the actions, prouoking vo∣mittes,
lothing, and the fluxe Lienteria. viz. Succus Cucumerū. Succus Cucurbitae Succus lactucae. &c. Moist in the fourth degree. Whiche are poyson cleane extinguy∣shing naturall heate, as water putteth outfier. Of the drie intēperature with the de∣grees exceeding. Of those therfore which e drie in the first degree. The first degree maketh y• body strong and lustie. viz. Brassica, Beta, Camomelum, Crocus, Hordeum, Foeniculum, Faba. &c. Drie in the second degree. They are manifestly astringent, and doe binde as the taste of sower thinges in eating. viz. Artemiia, Anethum viride, Balaustia, Cotonea, Plantago, Lentes, Mastix. &c.
Drie in the thirde degree. These make straite passages, preuenteth the course of humors, hindreth excretion, cōsumeth the bodies iuyce, and enduceth a consumption. viz. Asarum, Acasia, Anethum vst. Aloe, Acetum, Cuminum, Piper. Sal. Drie in the fourth degree. These doe suffocate and extinguishe life. viz. Allium, Ruta siluestris. Nasturtium, Sinapis. Here followeth the operations & wor∣kinges of the simples aforegoing, namely which doe consolidate, astringere, abster∣gere, mundificare, and so foorth, and first of those whiche doe repercute, and beate backe humors flowing, restraining them to resort to that place wherto they are ap∣plied, and are called by the name of re∣percussiues. viz. Aqua pura, Aqua Aluminosa.
Agresta nota, Acasia, Acedula, Anthera, Argilla. Balaustia, Berberi, Bolus amenus. Bursa pastoris, Crassula, Centumnodia. Coriander. Epatica, Fraxinus, Morella, Populus, Solatrum, Semperuiua. Sandalus, Sonchus. Vmbelicus veris, Astringentia. These binde the bodie, and forcibly re∣straine the fluxe of subtile humors. Amilum leuiter. Adianthum, Aiuga, Aizoon, Ambubeia, Arnoglosson, Asarum, Attractilis, Bursa pastoris, Bulbus siluestris, Centumnodia, Cherifolium, Cheiri, Cidoneum malū. Coriandrum, Camfora, Dragunculus, Endiuia, Equina mentha, Filago,
Fortis herba, Guadum, Iacobi flos, Iua muscata, Karabae, Lappa maior, Larga, Lingua ceruina, Lappa maior, Mentha, Milium, Millefolium, Mora vaticana, Morus, mediocri∣ter, Macis, Manna, Marcasita, Nuces cipressi, Os mundi, Osatis, Oriza, Ossa combusta, Palma, Peonia, Persica, Pes anserinus, Pes collumbinus, Pes Leonis, Podagra lini, Potentilla, Prunus, Papirus, Panicum, Quercula, Quin folium, Rubarbarū mona. Ribes, Rosmarinus accu Rostrum ciconiae, Rostrū porcinum. Salicaria, Sanamunda, Sangui sorba, Sanicula, Sardiana glans, Saxifraga. Scariola, Sigillū Salamonis, Simeonis herba, Sorbus, Sorgi, Tamarix, Taraxacon, Tilia,
Terra sigillata, Tela aranea, Virga pastoris. Vinca peruinca. Abstergentia. Abstersiues haue power to mundifie, and wype awaye grosse humors, and to clense the pores. viz. Absynthium, Agrimonia, Abrotanum, Acusmuscate, Auena, Asphodeli radices. Assa faetida, Alisma, Angurium, Anonis, Apium hortense, Asperagus, Auricula muris, Brionia, Balsamus, Ballote, Barba caprina, Bellis, Caulis, Cepa, Chelidonea, Cinis, Candelaria, Carui, Citrulli, Cresio hortensis, Castoreum, Euforbium, Esula, Fel animalium, Gentiana, Iarus, Lapathum, Lixiuium, Laurus, Lapis adamas, Melissa, Morus.
Nux, Nasturtiū satiuū, Ordeum, Orobus, Oleander, Pix, Podagra lini, Prassium faetidū, Psudo melanthiō. Rubea tinctorum. Raphanus, Remora aratri, Rosemarinus, Siligo, Spuma maris, Sacerdotis virile, Satureia, Sena, Serpentaria, Serpillum, Spatula faetida, Tartarum, Tapsus barbatus, Turmentilla, Trifolium, Trinitatis herba, Turciū frumentū Tithimalus, Vrina, Vernix, Vitrium, Valeriana. Volubilis maior. Zinziber. Zea. Mundificantia. Suche doe mundifie an clense grosse humors, but more weakely then abster∣siues, and stronger then lauatiues. Apium. Betonica. Beta, Basilicon. Blacte bisantia, Castrangula.
Cucumer. Cassutha. Cubebes. Cassia lignea. Capparis, Ciclamen. Coloquintida. Camepitheos. Digitalis. Damasonium. Diagredium. Eupatorium. Fabaria. Fumus terrae. Frumentum. Fabae. Ficaria. Faba crassa. Fel animalium. Hermodactilus. Hordeum. Humulus. Hipericon. Hissopus. Harmel. Keirim. Lupini. Lappa inuersa. Linaria. Laurus. Mel. Millemorbia. Morsus Gallinae. Nigella. Occularia. Psillium. Palma Christi. Panis porcinus. Peruinca. Polipodium. Pirethrū siluestre. Turbita. Tamarindi. Rapiastrum. Refina. Vrinaris. Xilobalsamum. Aperientia. Aperitiues doe open and pearce with
mundifying. viz. Acetum. Amaranthus. Ameos. Anagallus aquat. Androsemon. Angelica. Annonis. Apium hortense. Artemisia. Asari radix. Amigdala. Cresones. Caltha. Carui. Camedris. Ciclamen. Cubebes. Cassia lignea. Digitalis. Dolichi. Fuga Demonum. Herba diui Iohan. Humulus. Hissopus. Laureola. Linaria. Marubium. Matersilua. Millium solis. Nasturtiū tectorū. Nasturtiū aquat. Orobus. Pagana lingua. Pastinaca. Pe forata. Petroselinum, Prassuum. Querc, minor. Remora aratri. Ruta. Satureia. Sabina. Sena. Serratula. Serpillum. Siler montanum. Tinctorius flos. Valeriana. Vrinaris herba. Vuularia. Xilobalzamum.
Maturatiua. Maturatiues doe open and make ripe, with a heate equall to the member, not once altering his substaunce or proper∣tie, and yet chaungeth the matter and ri∣peneth the same, such as followe. Atriplex. Apium. Auena. Axungia. Acanthus. Brionia. Baucia. Bugloum. Butyrum. Caulis. Canabis. Fenugrecum. Ficus recentes. Lilium. Lini semen. Liquiritia. Lingua bouis. Maluauiscus. Morsus diaboli. Ordeum. Pix. Pinguedo. Rapa. Semissomis. Vinū, (secundum aetatem.) Viola, Stupefacientia. These doe stupefacte or astonishe the members by putting the substaūce of the spirite into a colde complexion, whereby the vertue animatiue loseth her force and power, which be these that followe. Cicuta. Hiosciamus.
Mandragora. Opium. Papauer satiuum. Portulaca. Psillium. Solatrum. Semperuiuum. Succus lactucae. Succus papaueris. Consolidatiua. By their stipticitie and drying they haue power to skinne and heale, equally incarnating fleshe and skinne, of whiche kinde bee also all abstersiues with these following. Aloes. Aspaltum. Borax. Bugiae. Beibena. Bellis. Balaustia. Cerusa. Centaurea. Ciperus. Cipressus. Cauda equina. Curcuma. Caseus recens. Dragagantum. Ematitis lapis. Ferrum. Glandes. Gratia Dei. Grana tinctorum. Isatis. Iuniperus. Lithargyrus. Lac. Merdaferri. Malecoria. Mirrha. Mercasita.
Olibanum. Plantago. Pimpenella. Plumb. vstum. Rubus arbustus, Sanguis Draconis Scoriae ferri. Sanamunda. Thus. Tanacetum. Telaaranea. Vinum. Zea. Zaccharum. Conglutinatiua. They haue a glewie propertie, and be∣ing ministred to woundes, haue power to conglutinate and ioyne the orifice toge∣ther. Suche be they that ensue, as. Argentū & scoria¦eius. Aspaltum. Anagallis. Balaustie vstum. Consolida ma. & mi. Cauda equina. Cerusa. Colophonia. Farina volatilis. Gluten. Gummi Arabici. Gipsum. Hordeum vstum. Lac acerbum. Lapis spongiae. Melissa. Mala citonia. Panis cuculus. Pilosella. Primula veris. Prunella. Nux cipressi. Sarcocolla. Trinitatis herba.
Constringentia. Suche doe restraine humors by stop∣ping and drying, as those. Amathites. Acetosa. Aloes. Bombax. Cauda equina. Calcanthum. Fungus. Gallae. Gummi pini. Lutum sigillatū. Lutū armenicum. Mori succus. Mespila. Nucum cortex. Oriza. Plumbum vstum. Papyrū vstum. Passularū par. lap. Pellis caprae cinis. Querci cortex. Sumach. Salix. Scoria ferri. Sanguis draconis. Thus. Telaaranea. Resoluentia. These doe resolue humors by chaun∣ging them intovapours, & drawing them from part to part, of what sort be these. Anethum. Acorus. Anthemis. Agaricus. Botris. Crocus. Cucumer asininus Capillus veneris.
Camedris. Consolida mi. Cassia fistula. Cardamomū. Camepitheos. Dactili. Doronicum. Ebulus. Diagredium. Foeniculus. Furfur. Fenugraecum. Filex. Hispanach. Hissopus. Ireos. Iuiubes. Labdanum. Lapis spongiae. Melilotum. Oculus bouis. Polium. Parietaria. Pollithricon. Panis. Quercula mi. Scroffularia. Sambucus. Sticados. Sisamae. Testiculus canis. Verbena. Viscum. Attrahentia. By their attractiue propertie, they do exhale and drawe foorthe matter and o∣ther accidentes vnto them, like as these vnder named. Aristolochia. Amoniacum. Allium. Assa faetida. Auricula muris. Allium.
Balsamus. Calamentum. Ciclamen. Centumnodia. Castoreum. Dip tanum. Doronicum. Fer mentum. Galbanum. Lapis spongiae. Leporis axungia. Mumia. Piper. Porrum. Polipodium. Pulegium. Panis. Sulphur. Squilla. Stercus colūbinū. Sinapis. Staphisagria. Stercus canis. Serapinum. Stercus lacerti. Triticum. Zinziber. Corrodentia. Corrosiues by their heate do consume moisture, and corrode and waste super∣fluous fleshe, suche as these. Asphodeli radic. Atramentum. Anacardus, Allium. Acetum. Cuperosa, Cepa. Aeris flos. Fel animalium. Hermodactili ra. Mercuri{us} precipi. Mercuri. sublima. Sinapis. Sal niter. Verdetum. Vitriolum.
Adustiua. These doe wast and consume by heate, the subtilitie of humors. Aristolochia. Allium. Anacardus. Calx viua. Cantarides. Capitellum. Calcanthum. Parietaria. Staphisagria. Spuma maris. Vlceratiua. The properties of vlceratiue medicins, is to breake & blister the skinne, in what places they are laide, as these beneathe. Anacardus. Apium agreste. Allium. Batrachium. Cepae. Cantarides. Fici. Herba stellae. Lac. Persicaria. Ruta. Squilla. Vrtica. FINIS.
