15429 S108409 99844068 8853
AN APPEAL To the PARLIAMENT; OR Sions Plea against the Prelacie. The summe whereoff is delivered in a DECADE of POSITIONS. Jn the handling vvhereoff, the Lord Bishops, and their appurtenances are manifestlie proved, both by di∣vine and humane Lawes, to be intruders vpon the Privi∣ledges of Christ, of the King, and of the Common-weal: And therefore vpon good evidence given, she hartelie desireth a Iudgement and execution. Lament. 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that passe by; behould and see, &c. LVC. 19.27. Those mine enemies, which would not that I should raigne over them, bring hether, and slay them before me. Origen. in Epist. ad Rom. Iudicandos se potius, quam judicaturos cogitent. Senec. in Thyest, Act. 3. Nec abnuendum, si det Imperium Deus. Printed the year & moneth wherein Rochell was lost.
Neutri cedet. woodcut of two swordsmen beside a giant candlestick Manet Ultio Se lerata manus Manet insuperabile verbium Omnibus intentant nervis extinguere verbi Lampada; succurrat ni pia vestra manus: Prevailing Prelats strive to quench our Light, Except your sacred power quash their might. August. in Ps. propert. 2.5.Quoties hominibus praeesse desidero, Toties Deo meo praeire contendo. Dum licet, iniusto subtrache colla jugo.
Spreta cado. woodcut of man falling from tower quo rninis Sic spreta Elanguent humani cuncta cerebri; Vt stabilis fugiant foedera firma Dei: The tottering Prelats, with their trumpry all, Shall moulder downe, like Elder from the wall. Si ad divinae traditionis caput,Cyprian ad pomp. Et originem revertamur, cessat Omnis error humanus.
TO The right Honourable & High Court of PARLIAMENT. Right Honorable and High Senators SƲch hath beene the care and indu∣strie of that Panacaean or cure-all Court of Parliament, that to give instructions to it vvere to teach an Eagle to flye, or a Dolphin to swimme,. yet such hath beene the gracious disposition of the golden head, & loving affection of that silver body representative, that they have bent their eares to the grievances of the lovvest members, especially if they vvere grieved vvith the grievances either of Church or commonvvealth. That greate Statesman Plato vvould have a Senate chearefully and lovingly to intertaine the motion of the meanest subiect, for the good of the commonvvealth.De legibus Dial. 6. A vvise generall of a feild despiseth not the advice of the meanest souldier in matters of greatest vvaight. The Graecians used to lay theire desperately diseased by the
high vvayside, that everie passenger might deliver vvhat he knevv or heard to be good for such a disease, sinne & judgment (the diseases of our state) are not hid but open to the eye of everie passenger. As the greate Physitian said of nature distempered, that it is all but one sicknes▪ so our disframed, & distempered state, from head to foote is all but one sore. In this case she complaineth as though there vvere none to succour her. Is it nothing to all you that passe by? Behold & see my sorrowes, &c. Not to mourne vvith and for our mother vvere unna∣turall, & all that vvee can doe is to mourne for her (yea vvould to God vve could doe that as vvee should, o state-medicines are meerely empyricall; but your Ho∣nours being the methodicall physicians of our state can make a right use of them. Wee reade that marvailous cures have beene done by Empyricall medicines, espe∣cially in desperate cures. To your Honours vvee present one, not of our ovvne invention, but of an ancient and soveraigne Probatum est: such a one as never yet fayled (as vvee conceive) it vvanteth nothing, but giving out of the physitians hand. That golden apothegme of our gracious Soveraigne, that all is in action, is the very best theame for your meditation and ground, and mo∣tive for your heroicke accomplishments. The Laconicke brevitie of Kings speeches,. as Homer said of Menelaus is very acute and full of matter, and so they vvould have themselves understood. For a vvord is enough from
the vvise & to the vvise: As God hath set you forth (right Honourable) for this great vvork of reformation; so your choyce and place requireth you to bee men of activitie, as the Spirit speaketh, that is invvardly and outvvardly compleate vvith prudence, provvesse, valour and di∣ligence. Gen. 47.6. Exod. 18.21. If Pharaoh vvould have such heardsmen; vvhat neede standeth our Abime∣lech of such sheepheardes for the sheepe of his people, & such sheapheard you must bee indeede. Your honours knovve that consultation, yea or humiliation can doe no good vvithout reall (and in some things eradicating reformation) Ioshua did vvell to pray, but hee must vp & doe. When Moses & Aaron are prayinge, Io∣shua must be smiting of Amalecke. What danger the state is in by sinne vvithin us, iudgement vpon vs, and over vs, evill men among vs, and the vvrath of God against vs, is better knovvne to your honours then vvee can expresse. But vvee may be bold to say of religion, & state, as Dauid said of himselfe, there is but a step betvveene them & death.1 Sam. 20.3. In this agonie of death vvith teares & groanes vvee cry to you right Honourable, save us, or wee perish. Let not the tall stature of the Anakims; nor the combination of the Edomites, nor the counsells of Ahitophells; nor the proude lookes & bigge vvordes of Amaziahs deterre you, or deteyne you. Let not the overtopping grovvth of the sonnes of Zerviah seeme too hard for you.Exo. 32.27 But let every man gird the
svvord of justice vpon this thigh, and doe execution acccording to desert. Feare not, have not I commanded you (saith our King) Be couragious & be valiant, yea the God of Israel hath bid you doe it. Make vvay then for religion and righteousnes, by removall of all vn∣godlynes & unrighteousnes, and God vvill be vvith you. Wee neede not tell you of the Romane Patriots, or the Athenian Kings; vvho vvere vvillinge to dye that the glorie of their nation might live.Gen. 43.14 Iacob vvill send his be∣loved sonne to Egipt in case of necessitie, and if hee be robbed, let him be robbed. So Hester vvill interpose her selfe for her Countrey, and if she perish she peri∣sheth:Vt contem nendus &c Tul. Lib. 4. ad Heren. As that man (saith the Oratour) is vvorthy all contempt that vvould rather save himself then the ship vvherein hee is, and all that are vvith him. So hee is an unvvorthy mā that preferreth his ovvn particular safe∣tie to the saveinge of the common vveale: But there is no such danger: Let the righteous be as bold as Lyons and the wicked will flye when none persueth them.Prov. 28.1 Fenny-Bitters in their hollovve canes make a terrible noyse to the amazement of those that are not acquainted vvith their spirits; but they dare not looke valour in the face; nor hold vp their head in the assembly of the juste Vice is ever a covvard vvhere vertue is in place: Only this vve intreate your honours. that you vvould not be like Ephraim,Hos. 13.13 of vvhom the Lord complayneth as of an
vnvvise sonne; because hee staied too long in the place of the birth; that is, hee vvas too long in resolveing vvithout reall performance. Bee you eyes, eares, and hands to our Soveraigne, as your place authorizeth; & hee by you shall scatter the vvicked, & bring the vvheele over them: The fire of Gods vvrath is alreadie broke in vpon us, and if the fuell of sinne, and especially our domineering nationall sinne be not removed; the vvrath of God vvill never ceasse till it hath consumed us from being a nation to himselfe. should not every one (unlesse hee be a viper) bring some vvater to quench this fire: Behold right Honourable vve bring one Buc∣kett full taken out of the Christalline sea and silver streames of divine and humane Lavves (as vvee con∣ceive) a medicinable & quenching vvater.. Water unap∣plyed cannot quench the fyre: Some vvaters increase the fire as oyly, sulphurious & pitchie vvaters.Plin. Lib. 2. 106. An unpropor¦tionable mixture maketh the fire the fiercer. Lastlie, it is no time to fling vvater vvhen all is consumed to ashes. Wee intreate leave therefore (right Honourable) to importune you againe and againe to ply the pure vva∣ters from the higher places; bar and abandon all the pitchie vvaters of the Babilonish Lake, vvhich are ignis fomentum, the very life and spirit of the fire.. There be many artificiall fireflingers, vvhose fire is more
ardent in the vvaters, consuming shipps, bridges, and all vpon the vvaters. Take heede of these; and fling vvater enough: and let not that proverbe of delay be verified in your honours, aquam infundere in cineres; to cast vvater vpon the ashes. Wee intreate your Honours, to represent to your selves by imagination, that fire vvere kindled at home in your hovvses, you lookinge on (vvhich fire could not but consume state, vvives and children, if it vvere not quenched, & that betime) hovv vvould you bestirre you? hovv much more should you hasten to save Syon from being consumed: For Zions sake vvee cannot hold our peace, vvee cannot but complaine as the chil∣dren doe to their Parents. Pharaohes servants are very homely vvith their Kinge, to sett Gods people free, vvhen they vvere all like to perish.Exod. 30.7 Knovvest thou not yet that Egipt is destroyed? hovv much more may vve your Honours servantes complaine to you of our desperate condition, better knovvne then thought on. Hence alsoo your Honours may be pleased to observe hovv faithfull and plaine you should be vvith his royall Majestie both in the discoverie, and the remedie of the eminent and imminent destruction. What may be found amisse in this poore frame; either for manner or matter, vve hum∣bly crave pardon; as for freedome of speech (vvherein vvee vvould not vvronge any) vvee hope your Honours vvill impute it to the present danger: For vvho vvill not cry (if hee can doe no more) vvhen his mother is like to be murthered before his eyes.
The Epistle to the Reader. WEll affectioned Reader: If ever soundnesse of minde, and sin∣cere uprightnesse of heart were to be manifested for the Lord; now is the time especially, because this is the adulterous,Marc. 8.38. & sinfull generation, that the Spirit speaketh off; which is come to such a hight of impiety, iniquity, and pro∣phanesse, that by sinne it stareth heaven in the face, & dasheth Gods people out of countenance, that they may be ashamed of the Gospell: we doe not reade of greater persecution, higher indignitie and indemnitie done upon Gods people, in any nation professing the gospell, than in this our Iland; especially since the death of Queene Elizabeth; witnesse, the silencing, fining, excommunicating, and casting out of the Ministerie; yea the pining of some of them, and sundry good people to death, whose blood we must know cryeth yet for revenge; for precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saincts: yea in some measure we have al∣ready payed for it; for how much Britan-blood hath the Lord sould for no price, within this ten yeares? and what for all our paines, meanes and losses, but the highest dishonour that could be thought on? yea who
knowes yet what a deep Aceldama, or field of blood, our Land may be, if that blood be not expiated; but who is the main Impulsive cause of these evills of sinne, and judgement? Even those men of bloods, the Prelacie, as we have proved, whose dignitie (as the late King hath it in the preface of his Basilicon) smelleth vildlie of Popelike pride; yea they are a main part of him; bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Against this Hierarchie we do not commence, but renew our suite, for the recovery of the Keyes of Christ, and the veyle of his spouse: In the prosecution whereoff we intreat the help of all that love the Lord: First agree with God, by reforming at home; and then looke upon them, as they are clearly convinced, to be enemies to God, and the State; and so hate them with a perfect hatred; be not ashamed of Christ and his Word; that is, of standing for the Priviledges of his King∣dome, no, not among an adulterous & sinfull generation; that is, when Christ enemies are in their ruff, left Christ be ashamed of you. As for their swelling pride, feare it not. There are more with vs, then against vs: yea it is enough, that the Lord of Hostes is against them. We may say truely of them, as an ancient said of the Prelates of his time: Omnibus terrori, amantur à nullo: they are a terror to all, and loved by none, ex∣cept by such as stand too nigh them in a contiguitie of profitt, Poperie, or Prophanes; these indeed cannot see; because they will not see.
As for their traditions, whereby they support them∣selves, they are branches of the same root, condemned by the Word, Councils, Fathers; by all ancient, and modern, Orthodox writers: yea, and by the Positions of the Papists. But it is enough, (as D. Whittaker ob∣serveth): quod à Christo damnantur:Controv. 1. q. 6. p. 48. that they are con∣demned by Christ. The matter is of no lesse weight then the Kingdome of Christ; in the suppressing, or advancing whereoff, standeth the ruine, or reviuing of our Kingdomes: and therefore we commend it to your serious consideration: we have endevoured to clear Christs title, and the trueth of the Positions from the Word especiallie; as for other testimonies, let them have their owne weight: by that Intire word, as the Psalmist speaketh, and for it, we doe contend, Ps. 19.8. For it hath in it self , Luc. 1.4. That infallible certaintie, which is , by divine inspiration, and onely of it self to be beleeved: Though in regard of our danger we have used freedome of speech, we neither hate their persons, nor envie their pomp, but we wish their consion, and safetie of the State. If in stead of entertaynment, or of a legall tryall they turne againe, to teare this treatise, and trouble the maintayners of it, let them take heed, for by this trueth heer maintayned, they shall one day be judged: if they should also go about, to incense the Kings Majestie with a prejudicate opinion of this juste APPEAL, we hope it
shall plead for it self (our infirmities excused.) That in uprightnesse of conscience we could not doe him better service: yea we are confident, if all that love the Lord (especiallie men of place) will do their part, we shall have our King, as an Angell of God in this par∣ticular: though Rome must fall by the sword, yet the word must both instruct Princes, that Babell cā no other¦wise be healed, & also in arm them for her ruine. We thought the volume should have been farre lesser then it is; and therefore me made no chapters, nor Index; but considering the subject, it required both longer time, and a greater volume; An other edition may come forth in better order. Censure not a part, before ye have perused the whole, because diverse parts of the same matter, have their diverse places in severall Positions. Part not with a good title, though it be in∣cumbered. Labour hard, by prayer, and practise, that God may have his honour; the King his right; and the Enemies of both their defert; and the Lord will dwell among vs. It is not our intent in this treatise, to dispute at large every particular pro∣pounded and proved; for the subject would not suffer it; the volume would have beene too large; and the trueth of diverse particulars, is alreadie vendicated by whole volumes, from all gainsayers: But if any lift to be contentions in contradicting any point asserted, and proved, either directlie, or by consequence; we shall be readie at all times by Gods assistance further to make it good.
A DECADE OF GRIEVANCES; Presented and proved to the right Honourable and High Court of PARLIAMENT. Against The Hierarchye, or Goverment of the Lord Bishopps and their dependent Offices, by a multitude of such as are sencible of the ruine of religion, the sinking of the state, and of the plotts and insultations of enemies against both. RIght Honourable and High Senators, you are not unacquainted, howe the aff∣righting and turmoyling troubles of the heart speake in the faces of all true hear∣ted subjects, expressed often by their sighes and groanes,Deut. 32.35. and also vented by their patheticall complaints; the moving cause whereof
is our Calamitie, partlie alreadye seized, & partlie making hast (as it is further threatned) to seize upon us. But to our shame and confusion of faces, wee must confesse, that of the provokinge cause of this calamity (namely sinne) wee are nothing so sensible as wee should be; Or if wee complaine of sinne, yet wee find not out that Ashtaroth or maine nationall sinne, which is the Conjunct or immediate working cause of all the evill that is upon us. When a bodye politique is runne all into one festered sore of sin & one benumming bruise of iudgment, then the universall and painefull distemper taketh awaye the discerning facultie of the Master sore that hath bred and fed all the rest, which indeede must eyther be sought out and removed,Rom. 1.18. (as the principall cause) or it will never prove a cure. Though the wrath of God be revealed against all vngodlines and vnrighteous∣nes, yet for some one capitall sinne, especially the Lord departeth from a state,Hos. 4.17.5.12. & turneth it upside downe. This might be instanced in Israell joyning himselfe vnto his Idolls, which made the Lord vnto him as a moth, and vnto the howse of Iuda as rottenesse. This principall Israel understood,Iudg. 20. when he fought againe & againe; & found out the cause why he fell before Benjamin. The same course tooke Ioshua in humbling himselfe, to find out Achan, and the excommunicate thing. He might have found out, and also removed manie other sinnes, yet if he had not found out the thing of the curse, he might have mourned his heart out, before he had prevayled with the Lord against the enemie. Howe to find out our Achan, or golden wedge and Babilonish garment, hoc opus, &c. For it is not obvious to every man. Yea this
Spirit is neyther found out nor cast out, but by fasting and prayer. Yet woefull experience, the common schoolmaster hath formerlie discovered to the Chariotts and Horsemen of Israell, & now doth discover this verye same to be the verye chiefe cause of our Calamitie that wee pitch upon. Wee doe not seclude our owne sinnes, nor others sinnes, for manie sinnes, and manie indite∣ments are against us; but this is the Master sinne (as wee conceive.) And that upon this ground, that the capitall sinne of a nation is not the highest sinne, abounding in the highest measure, (against which there is any lawe established;) but that is the maine & Master sinne, which is established by a law. And this is that frameing of mischiefe by a lawe, that the Prophet speaketh of, called in an other place, the Commandement of man establishing sinne:Ps. 94.20. Hos. 5.11. Now give us leave (right Ho:) to demād, what sin is esta∣blished by a law in this cōmon weale, but the Hierarchye & their acoutrements? And therefore we verilie beleeve by the grievances following, offer to demonstrate that the Hierarchie and their howshold stuffe, is the capitall sinne and maine cause why all this evill is come vpon vs. I. FIrst, may it please your Honours to take notice, that  the calling of the Hierarchye, their dependent Offices and Ceremonies, whereby they subsist are all unlawfull and Antichristian.
II. THe Hierarchicall government cannot consist in a nation with soundnes of doctrine, sinceritie of Gods worship, holines of life, the glorious power of Christs government, nor with the prosperitie and safetie of the common wealth. III. THe present hierarchie are not ashamed, to beare the multitude in hand, that their calling is jure divino. But they dare not but confesse, when they are put to it, that their calling is a part of the Kings prerogative. So that they put upon God what he abhorreth, and will hold of the King when they can doe no other. IV. THey abuse manie wayes that power from the King, by changing, adding & taking away at their plea∣sure, to the greivous vexation of the subiect, the disho∣nouring of his Majestie, and the making of the Lawes of none effect. V. THe priviledges of the Lawes and the Hierarchicall goverment cannot consist together.
VI. THe loyaltie of obedience to the Kings Majestie &  his lawes, cannot possiblie stand with the obe∣dience to the Hierarchie. VII. ALL the unparelelled changes, bloudye troubles, de∣vastations,  desolations, persecutions of the trueth, from forraines or domestickes, since the yeare of our Lord 600. Arising in this Kingdome; and all the good interrupted or hindred, hath had one or more of the Hierarchie, as principall causes of them. VIII. ALL the fearefull evills of sinne & judgement, for  the present raigning among us, and threatened against us, (to omitt the blacke desolation of our sister Churches) wee conceive to be the birth of the wombe and the nurslings of the breasts of the Hierarchie. IX. IF the Hierarchye be not removed, and the scepter of  Christs government, namely Discipline advanced to its place, there can be no healing of our sore, no taking up of our controversie with God. Yea our desolations, by his rarest judgments, are like to be the astonish∣ment of all nations.
X. LAstlie; right Honourable, if you strike at this roote of the Hierarchie, removing that Asteroth or grand Idoll, and erect the puritie of Christs ordinances, wee are confident that there shall be a ceassing from exor∣bitant sinnes, a removeall of judgment, a recoverye of Gods favour, a repayring of the breaches of the church and common wealth, a redeeming of the Honour of the state, a dashing of Babells bratts against the stones. Yea this shall remove the wicked from the Throne, strike a terror and astonishment to the hearts of all forreigne and domesticke foes. In a word, God will goe forth with us, and smite our enemies. Yea a glorious pros∣peritie shall rest upon Zion, King, state and common∣wealth. THus having laid downe a decade of evills, arising as so manie corroding vlcers out of the bodye of the Hierarchie, wee come to some proofe of the particu∣lers, as they lye in order; and that as punctually and brieflie as wee can. 1. Position proved. 1. ANd first, to the first, namelye, that the Hierarchie, their dependent offices and ceremonies are Anti∣christian. For making way for the proof of this point wee are to consider with the learned both auncient & moderne what state of goverment Christ hath appoin∣ted
in his Church, and what kind of governours hee hath chosen to governe the same. For the former they tell us from the word, that the Church in respect of her policie and outward government appointed her by Christ, is not a Monarchie like unto the Kingdomes and Dominions of temporall Princes, as that of the Assyrians, Persians, or the like, in and over which cer∣taine men as Princes have and exercise Soveraigne au∣thoritie, but in regard of the choice of governours,Viret. Dial. 20. 21. Danae. Lubertus. Iunius. Chamierus. Sutcliv. Whittak. by common consent it is a free commonaltie, and in res∣pect of the governours so chosen and governing accor∣ding to Gods appointment it is an Aristocracie, as Athens, Venice, or the like, as this is the judgment of the learned, so it is cleere from the prescript of Christ. Mat. 18.17, and from the continued practise of the government of Christs Church, till (as the learned true∣lie affirme) it came to bee oppressed with tyrannie. As for the latter viz. the governours, they were & should be such Bishops as God ordained together with ruling Elders, which Bishops (as the Scripture proclaimeth, & the Orthodox learned beleeve) are no other than Mi∣nisters or teaching Elders witnes 1 Tim. 3.1,In 1 Tim. 3 Tit. 1. Act. 20. com∣pared with Tit. 1.3, and 7. vers. which trueth is not one∣lie maintained by the Orthodox ancient, as Augustin, Hierom: & Ambros: but also by Papists, as Hug-Cardi∣nal-Anselm. Lumbard-Cusan Iohan:Lib. 4. Dist. 24. Parisiens. and others, who hould this distinction to bee but jure positivo, & that it is not of Gods appointment, both Ca∣non Law & civill Law do witnes.Gratian Dist. 95. Duaren. de sacris Ecc. Minist. c. 7. Sect. 9. Thence it was de∣creed and maintained by ancient councells from the Word. Act. 15, that all Ministers should have voices in
councell both deliverative & decisive Carthag. Can. 34, 35. alledging also Nice Calcedon and others.Gentilet. exam. Con∣cil. Trident. P. 216. Lastlie, our learnedest of later times have given full evidence to the pointe, witnes D. Raynolds in his letter to Sir Francis Knowls, wherein he proves sufficient∣lie that God never made, nor doth the scripture wit∣nes anie such distinction, but that Bishop and Minister were all one: taxing and disproving D. Banc. for hol∣ding the contrarie. The very same trueth was con∣cluded by D. Holland, the Kings Professor in Oxford. At the act Iuly the 9. 1608. Quod Episcopus non sit ordo distinctus à presbiteriatu, eoque superior jure divino. That a Bishop is no distinct order from a Minister, nor supe∣riour to him by divin institution. The self same did Cranmer & Latimer testify to H. the 8. It is true that some servile and shameles Papists to flatter the Pope,Bbs. Book. as some amongst us to flatter Prelats do averre the superiotie of Bishops, taxing the ancient that hold the contrarie of heresie,De sacror. hom. orig. Lib. 1. c. 5. with Aerius. Instant one Mi∣chael Medina cited by Bellarmin. But the whole cur∣rent of divine & humane testimonies are against them. Having layd this foundation to come punctuallie to the proof. It is sufficient proofe, of the unlawfulnes of their calling,Mat. 21.24.25. that it is not, from above, as the warrant of both ordinances and Ministrie must be. Otherwise the Lord threateneth to destroy them. Mat. 15.13. Where by the plant not of Gods planting, may be understood all per∣sons, callings & traditions not appointed and approved of by God (for so the ancient expound it.) The calling
of Aaron, a type of Christ, is not onely thus approved Hebr. 5.4. But also Christ himselfe putteth his calling upon this point of tryall; I come in my fathers name, and y receive me not; If another shall come in his owne name, him will ye receive. Which wordes,Ioh. 5.43. Aug. Ep. 80. sundrye of the Fa∣thers applye to the comming of Antichrist, for he and his, came indeede in their owne name. 2. Where the Spirit recounteth by name, all the sorts of Ministery, ordinary and extraordinarye of his owne appointement Eph. 4.11. there is not one word of such a Lording Ministry, which the Spirit would not have concealed, but undoubtedly sett them out with al their titles and prerogatives, if there had beene any such su∣perior offices of his appointment and approving. Is it a like thing that God who appointed the Temple & Tabernacle, should be so punctuall in everie particular of his service vnder the law, and that he would conceale his more especiall officers and their offices vnder the Gospell? would he re∣member the barrs of the Arcke and passe by the Fillers of his Church? would be appoint the least Pins of the house and forgett the Maister builders? would hee there mention the snuffers of the Lights, and here passe by the great Lights them∣selves? Or would hee there remember the besoms and ashpans, and here not once mention Bishopps and Archbishopps this were . To look to smal things and overlook the great things. Is it true that a silly ignorant woman tells us in the Gospell that when the Messia cometh hee would tell us all things?Io. 4.25.
And yet he speaketh never one word of his spe∣ciall offices, sure these can not agree. 3. From the same place of the Ephes. it will ap∣peare that such Bishops and their dependances are superfluous. Therfore they should haue no place in Gods house. The consequent is cleere because there is a necessarie use of everie thing that hath anie use in Gods house. Ambros. ad verell.Nihil tam necessarium quàm cognoscere quid sibi sit necessarium, There is nothing so necessarie (saith a father) as to know what is necessarie or of use. Now that there is no use of them it is cleared thus. Those officers without the which the Church of God is fully built up and brought to compleate per∣fection of unity, are not of anie use in Gods house. But without the function of Lord Bishops, Arch∣bishops &c. the Church of God is fully built up and brought to compleat perfection of vnity, witnes Ephe. 4, 11, 12, 13. Therefore L. Bishops, Archbishops &c. are of no use in Gods Church. The learned have used the same argument a∣gainst the Pope, the Church of God being builte up and perfited without him, therfore hee should not bee. The argument is everie way as good against these Bishops and everie such Officer in Gods house, with out the which his house is compleat, as against the Pope, for it cannot be said of those Bishops as our Lord said of the Asse:Mat. 21.3. The Lord hath need of them.
The same argument holds against the Ceremonies, yea as a knob, a wen, or any superfluous bonch of flesh, being no mēber doth not onely overburthen the body, but also disfigureth the feature, yea killeth the body at length except it be cut; so these Bishops be the knobs & wens and bunchie popish flesh which beareth down, deformeth & deadeth the bodie of the Church, that ther is no cure (as we conceive) but cutting off: If any object that there be necessarie Officers in Gods house, as Deacons and Elders, which are not named in that forequoted place of the Ephesians, it may be easilie an∣swered, that the Apostle there onelie intends to make a perfect enumeration of such as labour in the word, for the perfecting of his Church. Further if men may ad ministeries to those whom God hath appointed, then may they take away such mi∣nisteries as God hath appointed, for both of these be∣long to one and the self-same authoritie. But men may not take away such ministeries as God hath appointed. Therefore they must not adde such as he hath not appointed. As we have hitherto proved in general the calling of the Bishops to be unlawfull, so we come now to prove directlie their calling and their dependancies to be Antichristian. These Governours are justlie called Antichristian  who are assistant to the Pope in his universall gover∣ment. But Bishops, Archbishops, Chancelers, &c. are assi∣stants to the Pope in his universall government.
Therfore Bishops, Archbishops, Chancelers, &c. are justlie called Antichristian. Def. p. 13.The major Proposition is D. Downams, for the minor, let their practise speake. For after the same manner & by the same Ministers do they Lord it and tyrannize over Diocees and Provinces in his Majesties Dominions, as other Popish Prelates do in other do∣minions. By the same reason that one is over a Dio∣cesse, an other over a Province, the third may be over all. 2. They arrogate to themselves solie and whollie  the ordination of Ministers. In these two D. Willet putteth a maine differēce be∣twixt Protestants & Papists. First (saith he) that their Bishops are over Ministers as Princes of the Clergie. 2. They take the right of consecrating or giving of orders wholly and soly to themselves. Let all men speake if our Bishops do not this to an hair,Synop. cont. 43. and are they not by consequent Antichristian Bi∣shops? For the further proof of this point we could bring a full Iury of judicious learned and Godlie wit∣nesses. M. Wickliff a man well in seen the mystery of ini∣quitie,Artic. 10. reckoned Lord Bishops for one of the 12 Dis∣ciples of Antichrist. For the which Pighius writes a treatise against him, affirming this to be the main controversie betwixt the Waldenses, Wickliffe and him. The same doctrine was maintained by Iohn Husse & Hierom of Prage.
Luther called this Lordship, plaine tyrannie,Tom. 2. Pag. 322. averring further that Diocesan Bishops were constituted by the very authoritie of Sathan. M. Bullinger calls the superioritie of Bishops no better than tyrannie,Decad. 5. Sec. 47. affirming truelie that the Apostles them∣selves exercised no such tyrānie. To this may be joyned M. Hooper, M. Lambert, M. Branford, glorious martyrs. M. Bale in the Revel. speaking of the brood of Anti∣christ, counteth the Lord Bishops Antichristian usur∣pers, the Offices (saith he) of Diocesan Bishops are usurped offices, and not appointed by the Holy Ghost, nor once men∣tioned in the Scriptures. Now if anie Patron of the Prelacie Post of all these testimonies to the Prelacie in the time of Poperie.In Re. c. 1. c. 17. 3. 1. Let them know that overlording Prelacie, sitting in the Temple of God is Popish Prelacie. 2. The whole cur∣rent of forequoted testimonies striketh at all Dioce∣san Provinciall or Oecumenicall Prelacie, as an usurped office, because not appointed by the Holy Ghost. The extent of the challenge must be as large as the reason of the challenge. If they bee not from the Holy Ghost they are usurped Offices. But for the further clearing of this, let M. Gualter be heard, who taxing & dispro∣ving the usurped Offices of Lord Bishops in Poperie, he applyeth it to ours, who though they glory in the name of the Gospell, and would be counted reformers of the Church by thrusting out Popish Bishops & Monkes out of their usur∣ped possessions, yet do they not restore the Churches due, taken tyrannouslie from her, but at their pleasure administer the same things,In Act. 1. which in times past the Monkes and Bishops did. Cyprian holds the verie title of an Archbishop
or Superior Bishop, in whomsoever a presumptuous thing. Lastlie, the Papists bring in the maintainers of Pre∣lacie for a share, as supporters of their usurped prima∣cie.Ioh. 21.17. The Protestants (saith the Rhemists) otherwise de∣nying the preheminencie of Peter; yet to uphold the Arch∣bishops, they avouch it against the Puritanes. Hence ap∣peareth the trueth of that assertion, when the Prelacie disputeth against the Puritanes, they use the Popish ar∣guments, but when they dispute against the Pope, they use Puritanes arguments, & thus they use the trueth as Moses used the rod,Exod. 4.3. whilst it was a rod, Moses could hold it in his hand, but when it became a Serpent, he fled from it, so they cā use the rod out of Sion the word of trueth against the opē adversarie (though implicitlie they beat thēselves therwith) but whē the trueth begin∣neth to sting, they cannot endure it, & were it not that the cunning Iesuite loves not to touch this string too much (tho now & thē he doth) least by theevs reckoning upō this point true men shold come to their goods. We are perswaded they shold beat the prelates out of their trenches, & themselves out of the field, but they know that they both stand & fall upon the same ground, and a Kingdome divided against it selfe cannot stand. They ingrosse that name unto themselves which is due to all good Ministers; which as the learned ob∣serve is a perverting of the language of the Holy Ghost,Cal. in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1. v. 1. yea a point of prophane or heathenish boldnes from this (saith Beza) beganne the devill to lay the founda∣tion of tyrannye in the Church of God.In Philip. 1 v. 7▪ In the forehead
of this name beganne that mysterie of iniquitie to be ingraven, namely, that vnknowne name PAPA; The various etymologie whereof, wee will not nowe insist on. 4. They lord it over Gods heritage with an intollera∣ble  Tyrannie directly condemned by that unchang∣able Canon of our saviour Christ,1 Pet. 5.1. The Kings of the gentils exercise lordship over them &c. but ye shall not bee so: but let the greatest among you be as the least.Luk. 22.24 25.26. Mat. 20.25 In which words three things be condemned in ministers, su∣periority, lordly rule, and titles of Lordship. The Iesuites confesse that that affected supe∣riority is condemned in the disciples. Yea the very thoughts (say they) of superiority. Now all these things forbidden by our saviour concurre in making up that mishapen Monster of the Hierarchie. This interdiction of superiority is renued by the Apostle Peter (upon whom his Lord foreknew that that man of Sinne would build his forged and usurped superiority) neither as being Lords over Gods heritage &c.1 Pet. 5.3. In which place the former ambitious or tyrannous Lordship is not one∣ly forbidden (as the Prelates would have it) but all manner of superiority, as the scope of the spirit, context, and very wordes prove. In a word their evasions from the true meaning of these places are the very same with the forgeries of the Iesuites, wherin they crosse both themselves and the truth. As for that power given by Christ to the Church they have nothing to do with it,Mat. 18.18 as is cleare frō the text and by the exposition of both ancient and mo∣derne
writers: yea by some of their owne, as Bellarm. applyeth it to the Pope, so they to them∣selves but against all ground and reason. Iohn. 6.5. They will not with Christ putt their calling upon tryall of the word but by the contrary putt the Anathema upon such as dare presume to call their calling into question.Canon. 8. 6. They have the same, Titles, power, prehemi∣nence, offices and Courts that the papall prelacie had, (settinge onely the supremacie of the pope aside) Ergo Antichristian:25. Ejus∣dem. cap. 15 witnesse that act of Henry 8. assigning them all whatsoever they had of the Pope (the su∣premacie reserved to himselfe) for which our Pre∣lats have given the name of Pope and Papissa to our Princes.Bancroft. Spotswod. At vna via prohibitum, &c. That which is forbidden one way ought not to be admitted another way. 7. And lastly they arrogate to themselves, (we may well say blasphemously) these titles which are onely proper to Christe,Act. 1.4. Heb. 13.20 Act. 3.15. namely the chiefe shepheard or Archbishop, great sheapheard or Archleader? which ti∣tles the Apostles, durst not take vnto themselves, Ergo Antichristian. As for their defence from Conterfait Clement, or Paganish Archflamins, it is stuffe not worthy your Honours audience to conclude the proofe of this position,Iohn 1.20.25.26. let Iohn Baptist speake, where having denyed himself, to the Pharises to be either Christ, Elias, or that Prophet, hath this re∣ply, why Baptisest thou then? inferring that he must either confirme his calling, to be of God, or not to meddle with the ordinance, neither had the Argument beene good if Iohn Baptist might have
been of some other function then of Gods appointe∣ment, and therefore he confirmeth his extraordinary calling from the word, Thus it is cleare as the Sunne shines that their calling is Antichristian. For to the Kingdome of Christ, it belongeth not, as we have shewed, to the civill Kingdome it can not be∣long, for it will be counted Ecclesiasticall, to a strange Paganish or Machomitan government it cannot be re∣ferred, because it is begun and maintained among those that professe Christ, & under a colour of Christs gover∣ment it must sit in the Temple of God, and since it is not of God, to what body or Regiment doth it be∣long but to that goverment, whereof the Sunne of perdition is the head? let us then as hath beene sayd re∣ceive with the Gospell such governmēt as Christ hath appointed in his Gospell, then have we fully and com∣pleatly whatsoever belongeth to the Kingdome of the Gospell, without any L. Bishops & their Officers, which could not be true if the Hierarchie belongeth to the Kingdome of Christ.Prf. Com. book. Mr. Cart. Rep. to D. Whit. Rep. to D.D by M. Banes. Dioce. tryall Park. Polit. Buc and others. As for the ceremonies as none can deny them; so themselves do grant them to be Po∣pish, which it pleased them to retayne upon as good grounds as themselves do stand. Finally, this Position is impregnably proved by the learned. I have beene the more succinct in the proof of this evill, because the learned have bene so large in it, yet it is the ground of all the rest, and enough to cashier them. As for their arguments obiections & answeres, they are the very same with the Papists, & are the same way dissolved; onely we will discover one snare, wherein they take a multitude of deluded people. What (say
they) will you have no order in the Church; shall all be alike? Shall wee not have governours and some head-powers amongst Ministers to remove Schisme and to keepe peace in the Church? And for this they presse Hierome his words; Let some head be ordayned for removall of Schisme. For answer. 1. Shall man be wiser then God? or shall the way and device of foolish man bring more peace to Gods howse then the way of the all-wise God? 2. Graunt that this course would bring in a Laodicean peace to the Church (because the Devill wil be quiet when his Officers beare sway;) yet it is an execreable peace, and (as one sayth) worse then manie contentions that is without trueth. 3. If there be such necessitie of one Lord Bishop over a Diocesse, and one Matropolitane over a whole Province, for the keeping of peace and unity in the Church or Churches of one nation; is there not the like necessitie for keeping of peace and unitie & avoy∣ding of Schisme in the whole church, that there should be one Arch-B. over the Churches of Christendome? 4. And lastlie, to answer the point directlie; we plead quod nō sit verū: they make people beleeve a lye, that by this ecclesiasticall Monarchie of the Church, it is kept in order peace & unity; and that therby Schism is avoy∣ded; the cōtrary whereof is true. For this hath been the maine cause of discord and disunion of the Church, yea the Fountaine and welspring of most horrible schisme & damnable heresie, as is to be seene at lardge in the De∣cretalls,Decret. and is witnessed by manie of the learned Wor∣thyes, & fully proved by too much woefull experience both of times past, and of our present condition. Wee
will shutt up the point with that pregnant and perti∣nent testimony of Musculus. If Hierome (saith he) had seene as much as they that succeeded him, he would never have concluded that one amongst the Ministery should have been above the rest, because it was not brought in by God to take away Schisme as was pre∣tended, but brought in by Sathan to wast & to destroy the former Ministery that fed the flocke. With which wee may joyne that evidence of learned Whitakers;Loc. Com. C. de Mi∣nist. verb. Episcopacie (saith he) was invented by men as a remedye against sinne, which remedye manie wise & holy men have judged to be worse then the disease it selfe, and so it hath proved by woefull experience. But of this particular more afterward. 2. Position proved. SEcond Position, namely, that this Antichristian go∣vernment cannot consist with soundnes of Doctrine, &c. It is too too manifest from reason and experience; for, 1. Can that goverment which is opposite to the Gospell of Christ (as it hath beene proved) endure the sound Doctrine of the Gospell? No more then darkenes, can endure light, or sore eyes can endure the Sunne. As a polished glasse, and pure water, representeth the filth and deformitie of the face; so the puritie and power of the Word of God maketh the Monkish deformitie of the Hierarchy so to reflect upon it selfe, that she will needs breake the glasse, and trouble the Water that representeth her, and therfore she loves to fish in troubled Waters. A reve∣rend
worthie (as any lived in our time) being demanded an argument, ab utili to confirme the government of Christ in his Church; made answer, that this our Nation under the government of Antichrist for some 53 yeares, had abounded with heresies and schismes, to the eating out of he heart of the word, where our neighbour nation, governed by the scepter of Christ, for the space of 40 & odd yeares, was cleare of all schismes & heresies. Wee will deliver it in the Authors owne wordes: Epigramma pro presbiterio contra Episcopatum. SCotos lustra decem rexit sacer ordo senatus, Abs{que} nota haereseos, schismatis abs{que} nota. Et delaeta ferae exersit vestigia dirae, Cui nomen triplex senio dinumerat. Anglia praesulibus recta est septennia septem, Haeresibus{que} frequens, schismatibus{que} frequens, Atque impressa ferae servat vestigia dirae, Cui nomen triplex senio dinumerat. Et dubitamus adhuc sacrum auctorare senatum, Ex auctorato praesulis imperio. CHrists sacred scepter fiftye yeares had swayed The Scotts, without rent schisme or haeresie; No relict there of that fowle beast displayed, Whose numerall name is with three sixes made: But England governd fiftie yeares and three By Prelates, swarmes with haeresies and schismes; The great beasts relicts hatefull soloecismes
In Gods true worship by her are retaynd, The number of whose name, (as hath been said,) Three sixes make 666. is by them thus maintaynd, Why put wee not Imperious Prelates downe, And sett Christs sacred Senate in its roome? 2. As for Lawes and government, how can the go∣vernment of an usurping enemie consist with the Lawes and government of a lawfull, & native King. 3. For holynes of life, nothing so odious nor so much persecuted, as that by the Hierarchie, and that both by mockery, & reall persecution. So that he that abstai∣neth from the common course of the world, maketh his life a prey, and he that walketh with God is too precise. 4. By breaking the barre of Discipline, they st open the gate of impietie. As for their pretended Discipline, the remedie is worse than the disease, for by it the godly are vexed, & the wicked strengthened. 5. And lastly, for the safety of state, how should the state be safe, where Christ is iustled out of his government, and his enemies raigne in his stead? It is the true ob∣servation of a worthy Patriott ubi silent leges Christ &c. Where the Lawes of Christ beare not sway, the Lawes of the Land can do no good. A Kingdome devided against it selfe cannot stand. When Christ standeth at the dore and knocketh, and Antichrist beareth sway within, the Lord will turne his rejoycing to do them good, unto a re∣joycing to do them evill. May it please your Honours to take further notice that this government is against the safetie of the state in these particulars.
1. It supporteth the hopes, of the Pope of Rome for his reentry, for so long as his Officers and houshold fur∣niture remaineth, so long will he plead possession. And hence hath beene the treasons, and overturning plotts by the Popes against the royall persons of our Princes, and standing of our state for the space of 68 yeares. 2. This strengtheneth the hands, and warmeth the hearts of the Papists amongst us, ready upon all occa∣sions to take part with the Pope & his Ministers. 3. This being the storehowse of superstitious trinketts, as Ceremonies, Fasts, Feasts, and such like; these be meate & drinke to strengthen the Papists, and Cordialls to comfort them. 4. The Hierarchie do disgrace (to the Papists great joy) the sincere sorte of people, which are the Walls of the Land. As for the Papists and Hierarchie, they agree pretty well: for the former do councell, and the latter executeth such designes against Gods people, witnesse Dolmans Watchword. The quodlibets, Spalato his second manifesto, Doct. Caryes Apologie, and the Prelats practise. 5. They nullify the lawes which are the sove∣raigne safeguard of the common-weale, as shall be farther manifested. 6. And lastly, they beate the watchmen from the walls or vail them so upon the walls, that howe can the city be safe? IN the next place we come to prove the position by experience. And
1. For vnsoundnes of doctrine, our ordinary practise proclaimeth it, witnesse our schoole commence∣ments, sermons in Court, city, and country: abuseing the Word, and revileing his Majesties best subjects, also printed books by authority, and that from no small ones being the verie streames of Popery, Arminianisme and such Pelagian stuffe, with the particulars whereof (being so many and manifest) we neede not trouble your Honours. 2. As for the pollution of Gods worship, and profane∣nesse of life, they cry to the verie heavens, it is true that the doore of the ordinances (not being close shutte, but upon the hinges) Christ commeth in to manie, but what is this to the universall profanenes, which is a pattern to all other nations, and the shame of our owne, and although Christ stand yet at the doore, when he hath sealed his owne, he will be gone, as for the glorie of Christs government there is none at all. To conclude the point, of safety by an instance from the contrary; be pleased to take notice of the Nether Lands, which could never have been rid of the Spanish tyrannie, nor stood so long in prospe∣ritie safely, if they had not casheired the Bishops,Method. Hisi. as for Geneva let Bodine speake (no Puritane sure) yet he commendeth them much, not for wealth, and greatnes, but for vertue peace and Godlynes, which he ascribeth to the power of Discipline, whereunto they attayned by abandoning Bishops; shewing fur∣ther the divine rce of Discipline, in bridling the
lusts and countermanding the vices of men, which all the Lawes and judgments of men were not able to effect. And so we come to the third point to be proved. 3. Position proved. THey beare the Multitude in hand that they are jure divino, yet they are forced to confesse that their calling is a part of the Kings prerogative. It is truly affirmed in that supplication Anno 1609. That the Prelats have no warrant, either for the nature of their offices or qualitie of their proceedings from the Lord Iesus, neither was it maintained by any of their faction till they grew weary of houlding in capite, and then they turned their tenure into Soccage quitting them∣selves of Knights-service. In this plea D. Downam shewed himself more rash than wife to appeare. For he is not onelie cast over the barre by the booke of God, by the Iury of the learned, by the most judicious judges and lawes of the Land: but also by the verdict of his fellow Bishops and his owne confession. So that in scanning of this particular it shall evidently appeare, that their calling is opposite to Gods trueth, to our Soveraigne Lord the King,D. Bridg. Defenc. of Eccl. govern∣ment. Pag. 319. and 320. B. Whit. Def. in pref. & alibi. they crosse his wholesome lawes, with forreigne jurisdictions, and they are at contradictory opposition amongst themselves. 1. For the first, they oppose the trueth of God in affirming without shame or feare, that their calling is jure divino, when it is nothing lesse, since there is not one jote of all the word of God for it, as hath beene
proved) but asmuch against it as against anie one thing, which the cheifest of them cannot choose but confesse, and so in this, they have con∣fessed the truth untill of later times, yea theire Maister peece and many arguments evinceth this, which they take from the continuation of theire calling from 300. yeares after Christ, and not be∣fore which as they cannot prove, so the challenge proveth clearly that they are not of God: but opposite to his truth, yea a learned man, and a better B. thō anie now, tells us plainly, that from the year 607. the Church began to be ruled by Bishops which government (saith he) was especially devised and invented by the Monkes. Bale scrip. Brit. Cent. 1. 37. which indeed is true; for till this age, every particular Church was governed by the Bishops Elders and Deacons of the same; witnesse the authors of the Cent. Mag. Cent. 6. 7. Col. 591. & although some before this were titular bishops, yet their superiority the Church would not beare, witnesse our English Synod an. 674. Synod Harford. 2. They are opposite to the King and his Lawes, in affirming their calling to be jure divino, because by his Laws they are said to be a part of his prerogative, from whom all their power intensive and extensive is conveyed tot them (though this cannot warrant them) Witnesse the petition to the Queene, and judicious Beza in his Epist. to Grindoll Bishop of London, which is worthy the reading. But to the point the rescript of Edw. the 6. cited by Sāders run∣neth
on this manner Edward. Dei gratia &c. To Thomas Arch-B. of Cant. &c.De schism. Anglic. lib. 2 pag. 227. Since from the King all power and ju∣risdiction proceedeth &c. We give thee power within thy Diocesse, to give orders &c. by these presents to endure at our pleasure. So in the first yeare of the said Edward the sixt it is enacted, that they should exercise no juris∣diction in their Diocesse, nor send out writts but in the Kings name, and under the Kings seale, which statute was abrogated in the first yeare of Queene Mary, and reestablished by Qu. Eliz. & in the first of King Iames. So that by the continued transgression of this law, your Honours know that they and their Offices, are all over head and eares in a Proemunire; of which a Bi∣shop in Edward the sixt his time was convicted and submitted himself to the Kings mercy. 3. They are devided amongst themselves in this particular point:Def. of his Sermon. D. Downame not knowing how to shift the matter, pitched at last upon this, that it is jure Apostolico,Refut. p. 92. but not juris divini. M. Francis Mason, in his great book upon this subiect,Lib. 2. c. 7. p. 118. 119 820. &c. 12. ibid. dedicated to the Arch-bishop, and published by authoritie, affirmeth plainly and peremptorily, that they derive their Episco∣pall authoritie from the Pope. The same doth the suppli∣cants averre to the King p. 9. Whence your Hons. may be pleased to observe, how this establisheth forraigne power,Bilson de Gub. Eccl. cap. 15. Page 402. contrary to that act of Parliament 1. Eliz. 1. Doctor Bilson B. of Winchester affirmeth otherwise, terming it plainly principis-praerogativam, the Kings prerogative. In the maintenance whereof his very heart sqandereth,Page 403. If there be any fault saith he, let it be
laid upon the Magistrate, and not upon the Bs. Where we may observe, what a cup of could comfort they afford Kings for maintaining of them. For further testimonie of truth, we might cite a cloud of learned witnesses both in the divine and hu∣mane lawes, as Husse, Luther, Wickliffe, Zwinglius, La∣timer, Cranmer, Reformatio legum Eccl. tit. de divin. offic. D. Fulke & Whitaker in their answers to the Pa∣pists useing the same arguments for the Hierarchie. It is the scope of Sr. Ed. Cook in his report de jure Ecc. to prove that the functiō of the L. Bishops & their juris∣diction exercised is from the Kings prerogative, who may & doth grant to Lord Bishops that Ecclesiasticall power,Fol. 1. which they now exercise and also may take it from them at his pleasure. The self same truth both by ancient and later Prelats is avouched: witnes the judgment of the Clergie in the dayes of Hen. 8. ex∣pressed in a treatise intituled the institution of a Chri∣stian man. This was the judgment of the state in the time of K. Edward 6. and Elizab.Prefac. p. 2. Page 133. To this also gi∣veth witnesse Arch-Bishop Whitgift and B. Hooper, yea D. Downham himself could not deny it, being pressed by that statute of a Parliament held at Carlile 26. Edw. 1. Hence first the untruth of the said Doctors assertion may evidently appeare.Pag. 95. That Episcopall go∣vernment is perpetually necessarie, not onely for the wel-being, but also for the being of a visible Church. 2. It discovers their derogating from the King: their injurie to his lawes: and their Tyrannie against his subjects in committing men to prison for denying their autho∣ritie to be immediatlie from God.
To conclude; this very Question de jure divino was de∣bated in the Trent. Counsell,Pet. Suavis Histor. Concil. Tri∣dent. Lib. 7. Page 687. and 688. where they were like to go together by the eares for it. Lanetius (generall of the Iesuits) held every particular Prelate jure Canonico to be meerely from the Popes authoritie, by which he might remove them at his pleasure, in an other sence then M. Mason. The Bishop of Paris opposed this as a new devised tricke, and broached by Cajetan for a Cardinalls hatt, which to his shame the Sorbonists oppose, houlding it as true in the Hypothesi, namely, if they be true Officers of Christs Church, they must be jure divino. To conclude the point, you see (right Honourable) how they would rest on many pillers, but their maine Supporter is the Pope. If to this that hath been said, they answer that the summe of all these things hath been fully answered, we reply, if their imprisoning, persecuting and banishing of the Lords worthies had been of no more force than their answers, their cause had fallen long ago. Further, what answer hath M. Bucer, Bucanus, Parker the Damascen-Altar and others received? Lastlie, what Honour or rather disgrace have they gained by their answers and replyes, let the works of B. Whitgift, B. Downham, & B. Morton, B. Lindsey, & B. Spotswood speake. To close up all, we desire in all modesty, that they will bring their callings and evi∣dences to the standard of divine truth, and by com∣paring matter with matter, and reason with reason, let the truth cary it. And so much for proofe of the third Position.
4. Position proved. THeir manifold and manifest abusing of the Kings authority, by changing, adding, and taking away at their pleasure &c. Appeareth in theis particulars. 1. In the point of subscription urged. Canon. 36.37. It is to be seene what heavy things are pressed upon the Conscience of every one that entreth upon any ministeriall function, namely That nothing con∣teyned in the publique leiturgie, the booke of ordination, or the Articles of Religion in number. 39. Is contrary to the word of God. Yea that every thing contayned in every one of the aforesaid Articles, is agreeable to the word of God. And this he must doe, adding every expres∣sion that may avoyd ambiguitie. And in like manner they must subscribe to the two bookes of Homilies. Now what grosse, absurd (if wee say not) blasphe∣mous vntruthes all theis 5 bookes are stuffed with, wee neede not to demonstrate, since by a judicious and true inquiry they are made more then manifest. Especially the service booke; which they cannot deny to be raked out of three Romishe channells; Namely the Briviary out of which the common prayers are ta∣ken, out of the Rituall or booke of Rites the Admini∣stration of the Sacraments, buryall, matrimony, visita∣tion of the sicke are taken. And out of the Masse booke are the consecration of the Lords supper, Collects, Gospells and Epistles. As for the booke of Ordination of Arch-bishops, Bishops, Ministers &c. it is out of the Romane Pontificall.
Now from this prescript forme of Leiturgie, the Mi∣nister must not go a jote, nor use any other in the ap∣pointed service: Witnesse Canon. 38. which is not in∣deed according to the mynde of the Prince, nor mea∣ning of the Law. It is a wonder to see, what adding, changing, and taking away, is in that Leiturgie. To which English Masse (for so his late Majestie called it) it is not the intent of the law, that the Ministers should subscribe, witnes that statute. 1. Eli. Cap. 2. bynding them to use such prayers and order of administration of the Sacraments, as are contained in that booke, au∣thorised by Parliament in the 5. and 6. yeares of Ed∣ward. 6. with the alteration or addition of some les∣sons, and none other or otherwise. Againe the Law re∣quireth no subscription, but barely to the Articles of Religion; which onely concerne the confession of true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments, wit∣nesse the very words of the Satute 13. Eli. Cap. 12. which Statute is not yet abrogated nor contradicted. So that to the matter of Ceremony and of Church govern∣ment, subscription is not by the law required. Fur∣ther it is well knowne to judicious men now living, that it was not her Majs. mynd, nor the meaning of the law to presse these things upon the consciences of her truly professing subjs; But the intent was only to bring Papists and Popishly affected to a Church conformitie, condiscending to retayne some Popish passages, till re∣formation might be more fully made. Vpon which grounds the Honourable Court of Parliament would never have any bound to it, seeing the things not only controverted, but also reiected by whole reformed
Churches. But we see the Prelats require subscription to all the aforesaid books; Yea least vexation enough should be wanting to Gods people they have hatched out of their own brains, An hundred & fiftie laws, called the Canons, as we may thinke in apishe immitation of the Psalmes of David, whereunto though they exact not subscription, yet they tye men strictly, and afflict them greivously, both in purse & person for not obey∣ing of them: which is a malapert countermanding of his Majesties laws, and a haynous oppression of his sub∣jects,15. H. 8. Cap. 19. witnesse that Statute of Henry the 8. forbidding any man to make or exercise laws or Church orders, repugnant to the laws of the Realme. But many of those Canons and visitation Articles (to which they force men to sweare) are repugnant to the laws. By this your Honours do see and very well know that the laws are made of none effect (and that to the best of his Majesties subjects) which may yet be further in∣stanced by divers particulars. 1. It was the desire of sundry Mins. to subscribe secundū formā statuti, according to the form of the statute. 13. El. c. 12; But they were not admitted. 2. Of that good law of Appeale from the Prelacy to the Chancery (inacted by Henry 8;25. H. 8. 1. Eliz. or rather renewed and continued by all our professing Princes) the greived and wronged subiects (through the daunting pride of the Prelats) can have litle or no benefitte, witnesse 98. Canon. twharting the law of God, nature, & nations, & the law of the Land. 3. By vertue of the law no subiect shalbe put from his freehold, but by the verdict of 12 men: wit∣nesse the great Charter of England,Mag. Char. Cap. 29. which often and
again hath bene confirmed by divers other statutes as 42. Edward. 3. c. 3. and making void by strong inforcements all such Statutes as might crosse or contradict the same. But ministers are thrust from their benefices by the bare and peremptorie com∣mand of the Bishops. The iniquitie & crueltie of this their course was laid to heart by the States in Parli∣ament Anno. 1610. who inacted against it in effect as followeth; where the Canons would charge body goods and Lands of the subiect, that charge shall be of no force, except it were confirmed by act of Parliament. 4. Where by the law of the Land no free man should (but upon lawfull proceeding and just ground) be imprisoned: the Prelats against the laws and libertie of the State, and Priviledge of the Subject, erect prisons, and co∣mitt men thereto at their pleasure, if they will not breake the Laws. As for instance in taking of the oath ex officio, which is (as shall be shewed) against all laws of Heaven and Earth. This tricke of imprison∣ment (as Choppinus saith) was taken up by Pope Euge∣nius the second,De sacr. Po∣lit. lib. 2. Pag. 243. Anno 824. And as one saith well, it came out of the tayle of the Dragon. A punishment not beseeming a Minister of the Gospell to impose. This tyranny rather then law had its first originall in England (as the lawes record, and learned of the land witnesse) from that statute 2, Henry 4. Cap. 15. whereby authority was given to the prelates and their Ordinaries to imprison and fyne the subjects and to presse the lawlesse oath upon them. This statute was procured by the prelates for suppressing of the professors of the Gospell, witnesse the title
in the record, petitio cleri contra haereticos,Ex Rotul. Parliamenti Anno 2. Henr. 4. and was passed as is shewed without the consent of the com∣mons, witnesse the record of the statute, yea our learned in discovering the iniquity and bloudthirsty cruelty of this law tell us, that it wanted not onely the consent of the commons, but they wonder∣fully repined at it. But as evill means must ever est∣ablish an evil purchase, the King was forced by their importunity to lay the necks of his best subjects un∣der the feet of the blouddie beast, of which more hereafter. But the state at length laying to heart the abundance of christian blood that had been shed by this blooddie law (for so it is called) and observing the judgment of God that had ensued on this bloodshed upon the State, (as afterward shall be made plain) with vnanimous and full consent made voyd and revoked that statute of imprisoning and the oath ex officio, leaving not the least impression of any such power to the Ordinary, because it was a∣gainst the Law of God, the Honour of the King, the law of the Land, the nature of Ecclesiasticke jurisdi∣ction, and the right of the Subject. It is true that in the 1. and 2. of Philip and Marie, a statute was framed according to that formerly re∣voked statute of Henry. 4. But first it doth acknow∣ledge that the Church had no power of imprisoning but onely the power of the keyes. 2. They inacted this that by fiery and bloody courses they might supplant the Gospel, whereof the people being mindfull and exceeding sensible in that Parliament of the 1. Elizabeth requested the
state to repeale, and make voyd that statute of Henr. 4. concerning imprisoning, and the selfe-accusing oath, which the state did grant and established in expresse words before the annexing of the right of Ecclesia∣sticke jurisdiction to the Crowne, repealing, making utterlie void, and of none effect all and every branche, ar∣ticles, clauses and sentences in the said statute, from the last day of that Parliament. So that we see the imprisoning, fineing, and pressing of the oath by the high Com∣mission, hangeth not onely upon that bloudy act for defence of Popery, repealed by the statute laws of the Land, but is also directly against that very act of Parlia∣ment or statute from which their commission is foun∣ded, as shall be more clearely demonstrated in an other place. But this sufficiently sheweth how egregiouslie they abuse the Kings authoritie, and wrong the subject notwithstanding of all this. It is a wonder that B. Whitgift will side with Pighi∣us against Marcilius Patavinus (in fetching a ground from Peters killing of Ananias & Saphyra) for their imprisoning of men; might they not aswell warrant the killing of them, for they kill many of them: For that act of Peters was not done (as the learned answer well) by an ordinary power, but by that extraordinary power,1. Cor. 12.4.28. which the Apostle calleth , and other∣where a Rod, that is an extraordinary punitive power by the vertue of miracles. 5. And lastly, they inforce the Lawes of the Land that are for the subject, against the very best subjects, namely, such as gather themselves together, to humble their soules for the sinnes of the times, for the safetie
of Sion, and the deliverance of the common weale. Against such it is most true, there is no Law. But these men will either have one or make one against them, namely, they must be charged with Conventicles, where as they are neither such people as are meant in the sta∣tute; nor doth that law intend to them any molestation; but rather preservation, aswell as the preservation of the Prince and State from the dangerous conventions and riotous assemblyes of plotting Papists. If the inter∣pretation of the Law depend upon the mynde of the law∣giver (as indeed it doth) with what faces can men turne the law against the innocent for the guiltie? May not & doe not the Papists meete & plott mischeefe against the Church and State, without the Tenth part of this molestation? Yes it is too too true, but it is no new thing for them, and the Prelats to Lapp it up: Yet is it not a wonder, why they should hate and oppose so much that which is the preservation of the Church & State. Good reasons may be given why they doe so: But of them afterward. To have the Doves thus beaten and the Ravens & Pye-Maggotts to prey upon the State, what blessing can it bring from God, what Honour to the King, what credite to the Laws, what high esteeme to the Parliament, what comfort to the people? And so to the fifth greivance.
5. Position proved. THe priviledges of the Laws, and the Hierarchicall go∣vernment cannot consist together. In 19. Hen. 6. Fol. 62.The Laws of the Land (as hath been often sayd) are the inheritance of the subject. But these Prelats practises, and forged or inforced Laws are  or quite opposite to our Laws, as hath been formerly proved. How can the libertie of a loyall subject, and the un∣just restraint of the same consist together? How can the disclayming of Soveraigne power, and the imbra∣cing and obeying of it stand together? How can the subscription to the Articles of Religion (which onely concerne the true Christian Faith and Doctrine of the Sacraments) and the subscription to books, contayning many things contrary to the word of God (as a number of Popish Rites and mens devises) consist together? As unnaturall heate consumeth the inbred or naturall heate and radicall moisture of the bodie; So the un∣naturall Laws of the Prelats, eate up and consume the power of the Lawes of the Land. Yea their Laws are not onely worse then the Canon Laws (which are badd enough) but worse then the laws and constitu∣tions of the very worst times of our Nation under the high command of Popery, which will appeare by the comparing of the Canons of that Counsell of Oxford houlden by Stephen Langton Achb. of Cant. 280. yeares agoe. There it was decreed, that none should be ex∣communicate
where the fault is not apparant, Et non nisi Canonica monitione precedente, vnlesse they be Cano∣nically, that is thrice admonished. But the Prelats and their Officers accompt none apparence at the first to be a pregnant contempt,Pag. 23. witnesse the Oxford answer to the Petition: So that forthwith they excommunicate, yea some times they sett a day of Appearance, and ex∣communicate the partie before the day; And this we will avouch. There also it was decreed, ne presument judices esse & actores, That none should take upon them to be judges, actors, and accusers. But this they doe, when the judge dealeth ex officio. We could instance in many other of the like nature, but a tast is enough: yea doe they not exceede the height of Popery in this, that there, an Appeale was allowed to every man, to that su∣preame courte of the man of sinne. But they op∣pose and hinder the just Appeale of the Kings sub∣jects to a higher Courte, without exception. And so much for this point. 6. Position proved. VVE have now to prove, that the loyalty of obe∣dience to the Kings Majestie and his Laws, cannot possibly stand with the obedience to the Hierarchie. Can a man serve two Masters or obey two Lords of opposite commands? As the Heavens contayne no Sunnes but one; nor a Kingdom no Kings but one: So a people cannot obey any Laws, but such as are at one and unitie with themselves. If the Prelats practise,
and Injunctions extort or enjoyne one thing, and the laws of the Land, and the good of the King require another thing opposite to that, who can obey both? Yea who can obey the Prelats, but he maketh himself a Transgressor to the King and the Laws; As for in∣stance, it is straightly forbidden by the laws of the Land (especially by that oath of allegeance) whereunto all the Kings subjects are sworne; either implicitlie or ex∣plicitlie) That no forraigne power, authoritie or jurisdiction (and more particularly of the Pope of Rome) shall be esta∣blished,1. Eliz. 1. 1. Iacobi R. countenanced by word, contenance, preaching, pri∣viledge, or any other Deed, under the Payne of Proemunire. And if after conviction any person or persons thus a∣gaine offend, then he or they shall inicurre the paines, for∣feitures, judgments and executions, due to high treason. Now that they derive their authoritie from the Pope; carry themselves as Popelinges; have all the power (if not more then they had under the Pope;) exercise a full Popish power over subjects in their meanes, per∣sons and consciences; and plead for the derivation of their Episcop. authoritie in print from the Pope; It is as cleare as the light. As for the chāge of supremacie, it can not make a body that is naught in it selfe, and cōtinuing the same to be good. As for their writings and Sermons against the Pope and his usurped power, it may be answered, quid verba audiam, cum facta vi∣deam? Their words crosse their actions. Yea, it is to be feared, that the Popes supremacie, if it could be as gainefull, would please manie of their palats better then the Kings. Since then it is thus, it may invincibly be concluded, that a subject cannot both obey them and the Laws.
Further it is inacted (as we haue shewed by act of Parliament) That all the Prelates writts for exercise of their jurisdiction should runne (as hath bene shewed) not in their own names and with their own seales,8. Edw. 6. but in the Kings name and under the Kings seale. But they in their owne names, and with their owne seales signe cite, attach, and imprison, laying the burthen of their tirannie upon the King: if at anie time they seeme to be affected with the miseries of the par∣ties, whereof they are the onelie cause. It can∣not stand with the clemencie of a roiall heart to vexe or imprison his loiall subjects for serving of the same God whom he serveth, and for denying obedience to the verie things that are contrarie to Gods lawes, the soveraigne power of the King and laws of the land. As it is then against all law, reason and equitie, that the subjects are thus vexed and wronged; so the serving of such writts and warrants by pursuivants, and the assistance by constables and others, is injurie to the subject, violence to the lawes, and an effront to the King. For the clearing whereof, Simsons Case is upon record, who was cleared by the law, because the Constable under the prelates warrant, was adjudged by law to be out of his place but of this more hereafter. And thus the point is cleared, that yealding obedience to such writts or warrants consisteth not with obedience to the King and his lawes. It is further cleared by being flatlie opposite to the Kings prerogative,25. Henr. 8. that anie Courts should bee kept or jurisdiction exercised in his realm but in the
Kings name, and by an especiall grant. Instance the Iudges Commissions of Oier and Terminer, and so of the rest: but the Bishops and their officers hold their Courts and exercise their jurisdictions not in the Kings name, nor by anie speciall grant, but in their owne name intruding upon his Majesties prerogative roiall, inforcing Churchwardens and Sidemen to serve as instruments against the same. Further no subject can both obay the Kings laws: and the Prelats Courts: because they judge, or exercise jurisdiction by deputies as Chancellours Officials, Arcdeacons. This is first an intrenching upon the Kings prerogative: for none but the King can delegate or substitute a judge in his place especiallie if the place of judicature be of a high nature (as the Prelats is, if it were right) but these Prelats committ their counterfeit Keyes often to such Cerberean Porters: as shutt the gates upon Christs Freinds, and in∣tertaine his foes. 2. This deputation is against the nature of an office of confidence or trust (as the Lord Verulam speaks verie learnedlie to this point) as it is personally inherent, so it must be personally discharged, & not transported to an other, as he instanceth in the office of the Lord Chancell. of England, or any other judge: who never made nor can make a deputie, except they have some speciall clause, contained in their original graunt; and then also it is verie doubtfull (saith he) that this is so, it is cleare from the statute of Henr. 8.26. Hen. 8. cap. 14. by which it is pro∣vided that the Archbishop cannot take to himself a suf∣fragane or assistant Bishop (much lesse can he depute an
inferiour judge) but by the Kings especiall graunt. Now whether are not all that submitt themselves to the judicature of such courts (kept by the Prelats de∣puties) transgressors against the true nature of jurisdi∣ction, observed in all other courts of the Land, and al∣so against the Kings sole prerogative? Further who∣soever giveth his body to the Prelats imprisonment or yeelds his goods to their fineing (except it be upon ir∣resistable violence) whereby he becoms a meer passive. 1. He nullifyeth many wholesom laws,Statut. Arti∣cul. cleri. c. 1. Fitz. Hana∣tur. brev. Fol. 51. 52. 15. Edw. 3. c. 6. whereby it is decreed that Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction may not imprison or sett any fines vpon the Kings subjects, exept it be vpon change of penance. Yea they loose not onely their owne Priviledge, but they quitte the inheritance of all their fellow-subjects, so far as in them lyes, and keep still in force that cursed cruell statute, extorted from Henr. 4. against the people of God, which (as we have shewed) hath beene againe and againe repealed, as unjust and intollerable.1. King. 21. If Naboth would not yeeld his vineyard to his King, and that upon reasonable conditions, be∣cause, in so doing he should have broken a statute; or if the Kings subjects stood out in the matter of loane that they might obey the King in keeping of his laws intyre, (for they made it appeare to all that it was not want of love or unwillingnesse to part with their mo∣ny:) how far should subjects be from obeying such commands as countermand the laws, establishe an usurped jurisdiction, deprive the King of his loyall obedience, & the people of their right. As for the dan∣ger of resisting this usurped power there is none de ju∣re, howsoever these men of usurpation make it their
trade to afflict the Kings subjects de facto; but the laws which are the Priviledge of the subjects, the life of the Land, and true obedience to the King, should be more precious to a true harted subject, then liberty or life it self; and what a man would doe for the defence of his life, he should doe in the defence of these. For the lawfullnesse of this defence, we produce both the Laws of the Land, and the Counsell of the learned according to the Laws. For the former, if the lawes inacted & so often confirmed, do inhibitt all summons, assaults, attaching of the body, imprisoning or fineing but by due course of the law of the Land, then all the Prelats courses in the above-said particulars, may and must be resisted quoad posse (because they are not legall, but against the great Charter) but the former is true, ther∣fore the latter. For further proofe hereof, we commend unto your Honours to review these noble acts amōgst many other decreed by that high Court of Parliament Anno 1610. For this very particular as followeth. 1. Whereas the temporall sword was never in the Prelats power till the 2. of Henr. 4. and then usurped by them with∣out the consent of the commons (for say, they were truely Ecclesiasticall,) yet it is against the Lawes of God and of the Land, that they should meddle with civill jurisdiction, therefore is an act past against it, and the oath ex officio brought in at the same time. 2. That statute 1. Elizab. c. 1. giving power to the Queen to constitute and make a Commission in causes Ec∣clesiasticall is found inconvenient, because abusing that
power given to one or more they wronge the subject. 3. Whereas by vertue of the statute power, onely Eccle∣siasticall is graunted; yet by Letters-Patents from the King, unsoundly grounded on the words of the statute, they fine, im∣prison &c. which is a great grief, and a wrong to the subject. 4. Where upon deprivation by the ordinarie jurisdiction an appeale lyeth; the words of the commission exclude it. For here is no traverse, nor writt of error after judgment. 5. They bind men not onely to appeare from time to time, but also to perform what the Court shall appoint. 6. Whereas the Canons would charge body, goods, and Lands of the subiect, the howse inacted against it, except it should be confirmed by act of Parliament. These evills and greivances were seriously pondered by that Honourable assembly, and provided against by the foresaide acts, but the Remora-Prelats & Logs of their laying, so blocked up the way, that the said acts could not passe: and rather then they would suffer the plague-soare of their oppressing pride to be burst by the maturating cataplasmes of wholesom laws, they made a shift to break the King and state into peeces, as they did indeed, to the no small griefe of all good subjects, to the vexation (yea allmost killing) of the two wit∣nesses, the indemnifying & dishonouring of the state;Rev. 11.7. for since that time what hath prospered with us, or with those whom we have ayded.
These acts your Honours knowe to be law it self, though killed in the shell by the foot of pride, and ther∣fore we humbly intreat justice upon these Legicidas or Law-killers. Now come we to the latter peece of evidence in the behalf of this lawfull resistance, namely, the case avouched under the hand of learned counsell, as fol∣loweth in his owne words: THe case is, vvhether the high commission of the North, have povver to send a pursuivant to arrest the bodie of any man, and hovv farreforth the She∣riffe or other of his Majesties Officers be bound to as∣sist them, and vvhether each severall Bishop having a severall commission, may (calling to him 3. or moe commissioners) execute the commission. This learning is not to be rubd upon too boldlie, yet in my opinion the high commission hath not suf∣ficient vvarrant to send a pursuivant to arrest, because the statute of Magna Charta 5. 30. Nullus liber ho∣mo capiatur vel imprisonetur forbids (as I conceive) such arrests. It vvas Simsons case 42. Eliz. in vvhich arrest the Constable in assisting the pursuivant vvas slaine, and the offender had his clergie, vvhereas if
the arrest had beene lavvfull, it had beene murder vide 42. Ass. p. 5. and 24. Edvv. 3. Commissions Br. 3. Where a commission vvas granted to diverse to arrest the bodies of A. B. &c. vvho vvere slandred for felonie; it vvas ruled to be against the lavv: and by the common lavv the bodie of any man vvas free from imprisonment but onely at the suit of the King. 2. The Sheriffe is vvise enough to informe him∣self vvhat is fitt to doe. 3. I conceive if a commission be directed to 20. or 30. of them at the least, and they sue a duplicate or severall commissions 3. of them can∣not sitt in one place and 3. in another by ver∣tue of the commission, vvithout adjourning the com∣mission to time and place, as one commission and not to execute it as severall commissions. I. C.
You see how in clearing of this case the smell of a goat maketh this honest coūseller somwhat agueish, but such is his ingenuity, & truth is so stronge that the case in our conceit is well cleared. To proceede the people also (being inforced to wait upon them) become accessarie to their sinne of disobedience. If that clause of the statute be ob∣jected, where the King graunteth them authority in as ample manner as they had in the Popes time: it may be answered in the first place; that that proclaimeth to the world, their being to be Antichristian, and their power to be forreigne; for they remaine the same for matter and forme, that they did before; su∣premacie onely changed. 2. Besides that generall; nullum tempus occurrit Regi, it is a lawe case, that generall words cannot carry away any part of the right of the Crowne: and such are these words, without any spe∣ciall warrant to leade them. 3. The grant is onely to rule over their inferiour brethren (meaning the Mi∣nistrye.) Which rule (by the way) is directly against Gods statuts; howsoever with the laitie (as they call them) by this statute they have nothing to doe. It was truly averred by a Prime judge of the Land, that that, which binds all, should be assented to of all, or by the representative body of all, but what private men do the Prelats call to their convocation howse? or what voyce or assistance have they to or in the con∣sultations or Canons of the Prelats? The Prelacie, taking this to consideration, pro∣cured a statute 1. Edw. 6. enabling them (as they
conceive) to keep their Courts & exercise jurisdiction; But first, that was to be done in the Kings name, and not in their owne. Further, all such jurisdiction, is annexed to the Crowne 1. Eliz. 1. forbidding all exercise of spirituall power and jurisdiction, without a speciall warrant from the Crown, and all that doe the contrary, are declared to be intruders. The last instance (though we might abound) is from the oathes urged by the Prelats, especially that oath ex officio. By the law of the Land, they are forbidden to put any to their oath,Crompton. 182. Fitz. de natura brev. p. 141. Regist. Pag. 36. Rastal. Prob. 5. except in cases matrimoniall and testamentary, witnesse the learned and judicious law∣yers of the Land. As to the oath ex officio, whereby both Mi∣nisters and people are vexed and insnared, what can be said, that hath not been said against it? Heaven and Earth is against it; It is against the law of God; the law of the nature; the common law; the Canon law, Counsells, and imperiall statuts. Though the vile∣nesse of it, and the evills ensuing are sufficientlie knowne to your Honours, and to all of understanding; yet we make bold (under favour) to detect the evills of it, for our owne and others information. First then by that royall Law of God,Ier. 4.2. Iob. 29.16. it is quite cashei∣red; thou shalt sweare in judgment &c. that is, advisedly. And how should a man doe that, when he knoweth not what he sweareth? Neyther can he sweare in righteousnes, because he is forced to betray others; which rather then an honest man should doe (as a Father wit∣nesseth) he should loose his life.
Further, the matter is not of waight, nor of qualitie (for it should be Criminall;) not of necessitie (for it may be otherwise cleared;) nor maketh this oath the end of strife; and therefore it cannot be taken in judgmēt &c. A worthy gentlmā being pressed with an oath against himself in an other case, made answer by a pretty dilemma; if the thing supposed to be done, be a sinne, then must I not accuse my selfe; and if it be no sinne there is no ground of an oath. 2. It is against the law of nature registred in the Civill law, Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum; if a man must not betray another, much lesse himself. 3. The Canon law from the civill law taketh so much light, as to see and commend the equitie of the aforesaid maxime. Witnesse Gratian the Cannonist in the oath of Sixtus the 4. 4. As for the concourse of nations, they utterlie abhorre this oath and avoie it, onely such excepted, as live under the Beast, groaning under the burthen of this bloodie oath: neither doe most of the Po∣pish subject themselves to it, witnesse the State of Venice, and the rest of Italy and others. A blooddye oath the learned trulie call it. Apud. Plin. Lib. 10. Epist. 98.5. Without an accuser (saith Trajane) there is no place for an accusation: for that is an evill example (saith he) and not heard of in our age. 9. How injurious it is to the laws of the lande and libertie of the subjects, master Fuller hath fullie discovered in the defence of his clients. The be∣gining of it amongst us, was from a statute of Hen. 4. for vexing and punishing of the Lollards so called
being the true christians indeed, the urging whereof is by a Statute. of H. 8. justly marked in the forehead thus: An examination upon captious interrogatories &c.2. Henr. 4. cap. 15. Of the cōtinuance of the oath,25. Hen. 8. Cap. 14. the Lord Verulam late Chancellor of England did utterly dislike. It is contrary (saith he) to the laws of the Land, and custome of the King∣dome, that any man should be forced to accuse himself, espe∣cially being urged without the grounds of accusation, de∣clared in ipso causae initio,Lib. 4. Tit. 1. Leg. 3. in the very entrance of the cause, according to the Canon; non est à quaestionibus in∣choandum, they must not begin the plea with questions. This was the complaint of that holy Martyr M. Lam∣bert, he greived to see them call for a booke upon his first appearance; as though a man should no sooner speake then sweare. Further the aforesaid nobleman averreth, that by the laws of the Land, a man is not bound to accuse himself in cases of treason. Questions and torments (saith he) be put and inflicted upon some persons, rather for safeguard of the King or state, then discovery of the Crime▪ In the other capitall cases, no oath is offered to the delinquent, nor yet permitted to him: As for Criminall causes, not capitall, or in cases of conscience and equitie; de∣pending in the starre Chamber and Court of Chancery; there is an oath required, but how? by laying of a bill of com∣plaint, wherein a legall accusation is framed against the par∣tie, beyond the which the plaintif cannot goe, nor the defen∣dant shall be urged. But first to give an oath, and then to examine upon flying fame or secrett wittnesses, carryeth no shew of the civill law; and is flatlie repugnant to the com∣mon Law. And thus farre that noble man. In a parti∣cular inquisition (saith Canitius) articles should be given
to the defendant to be inquired of,In speciali inquisitione &c. Sum. Iur. Canon. Lib. 4. Titul. 19. and the names and evidences of the witnesses against him, permitting him to make replye for himself. 7. The imperiall statutes are cleare against it; no man is bound to give evidence against himselfe.Cod. lib. 4. Consil. Bracha. Cens. 2. Canon. 8. Ambr. 1. Cor. cap. 5 Iohn 8.8. For Counsells and Fathers, they are copious; Christ (saith a Father) dealt not so with Iudas; for, not being accused, he did not cast him out. And with that woman in the Gospell, Christ did take a legall course; where are thine accusers? yea a Heathen judge, tooke this legall course with Paul; when thine accusers are come I will heare thee.Acts 23. No example for it in scripture, but that of Caiphas,Math. 26.43. adjuring Christ in the name of the living God: upon which Beza sheweth us how tyrannous and unjust such an adjuration is. From all this, it is more then manifest, that the take∣ing of these oathes, and more particularlie of this oath ex officio, cannot possiblie stand with obedience to the Laws. Yea, though it be guilded and sugered with these daubing and deceiving termes, so farre as it is agre∣able to the law. For it is altogether (as hath beene shewed) repugnant to the Law, to offer it, or to take it. It hath so often been cast over the barre of the com∣mon law, that we thinke they should now be ashamed to offer it. To conclude, we may answer being pressed with it, as the Miniesters of Affrick did in the like case;Victor. de persequ. Vandal. num∣quid bruta irrationalia putetis nos &c. What doe you thinke us to be savage and unreasonable Creatures, that we should sweare to a paper, not knowing what it contayneth? And so much for this point.
7. Position proved. NOw we come to the 7. grievance, where we en∣deavour to prove, that of all the evills inflicted, and of all the good hindred, since Anno 600. one or more of the Hierarchie have been a principall cause. The proofe of this point must be by induction of particular instances, selected from the Histories of the Kingdome; wherein we may be the breifer, because we know your Honours, (by your owne industrie and ex∣perience) to be better acquainted with your owne Hi∣stories then we can make you. To begin with Austine, of whom the Papists boast, that he is the Father of our Religion, called by the Lova∣nists, our English Apostle. Of his Fatherhood or Reli∣gion we have litle cause to boast, nam haeret lateri lae∣thalis arundo; the splinters of his plantation, sticke yet in our sides. He may be called indeede with Gregory his M. Pater Ceremoniarum the Father of Ceremonies; which being sowne by him, like evill weedes they growe up with increase, and could never to this time be rooted up. Histories relate, how upon his arrivall he erected his Masters Coulers, namely, the banner of the Crosse, and having seated himself, would needes put his Popish rites upon the Britainnes and Scotts (for at that time they were free from Romish Ceremonies:) But not pre∣vayling with them, (though the busines were backed with a legion of fained miracles) he insinuates himself another way, by procuring a Sinode, wherein his Pope
like pride, being offensive to all, was checked and re∣jected of all, by which (his choller being raysed and inflamed with desire of revenge) he threatned them with the devouring sword of the Pagan, and he was as good as his word;Gulielm. Westmon. nam accersit ad caedem Athel∣fridum; he called that Pagan King of Northumberland, to the bloody massacre of Gods Ministers, and poore harmeles, & unarmed people. So it was not a Prophe∣sie as some would colour it, but a bloody project; sor∣ting very well with Romes new foundation in En∣gland.Gervasius Tilbiensis de otijs imperia∣lib. Sanguine sanctorum, dorobornensis ecclesia prima∣tiam obtinuit, the Church of Canterbury saith one ob∣tayned her primacy, by shedding of the blood of the Saincts, Rome is layd in blood, & must bath and swell in blood, till her owne blood be given her to drinke, yet for all this it may be said of him, with some restric∣tion as it was said of his Master, he was the best of that band that succeeded him, saue a very few, whose eyes God inlightened, and whose hearts God opened to see and hate the scarlett whoore, of whom some did seale their hatred with their blood. This will evidently appeare if we take but a viewe, as we meane to doe, of his suc∣cessors the very Firebrands of the State, what combi∣nations with forraigne powers, what vassalling of the State to forraigne jurisdiction, what treasons, what tossing and banding of Kings and Crownes have they been Authors of? what civill combustions? what bloody braules among themselves? what instigation of the subjects against their Princes? what alienation of Princes hearts from their subjects? what tiranny over Kings and people? what destruction of the State, what
vexing, pininge and bloody bouchering of the Saints? what letts and impediments of all good in Church and common wealth hath growne and yet doe growe from this bitter Roote? yea what of all these have not their rise from it? so that it is verified of them, which is said of the Egyptian Peach tree the branches are worse then the roote. For neither was his pompe so gor∣gious; his attendance so great, nor his furniture so glo∣rious, neither his servants such roarers, his traine so car∣ried, nor his lettany so stuffed both for matter and man∣ner with Popish devises, nor the ordinances of God so overlaide with the rubbish of Romish Ceremonies. So that verified is the Proverbe in an evill generation sel∣dom cōmeth the better: yea our owne times proclayme it that the last of the Hierarchie be the worst. But to goe on with our proofe, wherein we must be breife to shun tediousnes. Theodorus the seventh from Austin in nothing naturing his name, being gotten into the chayre, began to play the Rex, or (as one saith) all his reakes over his brethren, placing and displacing at his pleasure, in despight of the King, such as were placed by the King; here Romes right hand begun to worke against the Kings of England; By this Theodore was sett a foote, the latin Service, Masses, Ceremonies, Lettenies, with all the rest of the Romish trash. Lambright, alias Ianbright, the 13. from Austin fell foule of treason against Offa the King,Lambert Peamb. Pag. 133. upon which he translated the Sea of Canterbury, to Lichfeild, these be the prankes of the Prelates.
In the times of the 7. Kings of the Saxons, which be but the beginings of higher attempts: For when Egbert had made of all the foresaid kingdoms, one intire Monarchie, the Lord stirred up the Danes a firey, barbarous and cruell nation (after some attempts) to seaze upō the kingdom which they brought to such a slaverie, as the like was ne∣ver read off: and what was the cause why God gaue them up to such a fearfull judgment? the learned tell us for their idolatrie, and superstition, hatched and increased by the swelling prelates, whence issued all manner of profanesse, yet in both these they came short of ours, to shutte up this centurie: may your Honours be pleased to observe what a pickle this clergie had put the State into, by that oration of king Edgar whom Dunstane that notorious jugler and sorcerer by his lying dreames, and fained mi∣racles seduced mightily, to the hurt of him and his subjects. Now let us take a scantling of the last Centurie of Prelacy, from William the Conquerour to our times; wherein for further demonstration of our propounded greivance, we can shew them to bee the fewell, fire, and bellowes, of all our greatest evills. To begin with the Conquest. As the Idolatrie and Superstition (as hath bene shewed) of their prede∣cessors was the cause why God gave-up this nation to the Danish cruelty, so histories witnesse toge∣ther with that vision, of king Edward a litle before his death, how the idlenes, avarice, dissolute life, and overlording of the clergie (whence pro∣ceeded
all impietie, loosnesse, and iniquitie of the laity) were the verie cause why God gaue the nati∣on up to the intollerable tyrannie of the Normans, whereby lawes, liberties, houses of Nobility, and all states and conditions were either raced, or inslaved; and if a body may be known by the head, let the practise of Stigandus and the men of his Sea speak in the first place for all, who being exceeding rich, and extreamly greedy invaded (as it is written) the Sea of Canterburie by Simonie, being both B. of Win∣chester and Abbot of an other place: but from him to Langfrank that conquering Prelate, for as a learned Antiquarie saith wittily, and truly, He thought it all reason, that he should make a Conquest of the English clergy as his Master had made a conquest of the King∣dome. His successor Anselme, confirming that Doctrine of Devills, against Ministers mariage, affronted the King to his face, threatening to excommunicate him in his owne quarrell, yea for all the Kings witt and va∣lour, he made him seeke all the corners of his saddle and iustled him from his right, for which feates of activitie, the Pope honoured him highly, in giving him to sitt at his right foote, with this Encomie, In∣cludamus hunc in orbe nostro, tanquam alterius orbis Pa∣pam; Let us inclose this man within our owne spheare, as the Pope of an other World. What dissention, war, and bloodshed overflowed the Land in the time of King Stephen, who invaded the Crowne contrary to his oath, given to Maude the Empresse daughter to King Henr. 1. and his
owne Cousin, all this was from the advise of William Corveil, Archbishop of Canterbury, being backed by the Pope, the Father of such Children, this stickeling Prelate contrary to his faith given to the said Em∣presse, stole away the peoples hearts, from their Native Soveraigne, whence issued so much evill of sinne and judgment, as perjury, rapine, bloodshed, oppression, as made the Land a Map of misery. Did not Thurstane Archb. work the King a great deal of mischeife & trouble, getting the Pope to threaten the King with excommunication, if he were not ad∣mitted to the Sea of Yorke upon his owne termes. And so entered, maugre the Kings resolution. What a deale to doe made that proud Popeling Beckett to King Henry the second, and all the state; His cause (as his owne favorites affirme) being no better then patrocinie of murtherers, and other vile male∣factors of the Clergie, whom he would not suffer (contrary to his owne edict and oath) to be tryed by the Laws of the Land, having committed (as it is recorded) in one yeare a 100. severall murthers upon the Kings subiects. To such as were arraigned of them, he tooke upon him to be asylum, or sanctuary, but as he brought himself unto diserved destruction (though the form of his executiō is not to be approved) so his pride and rebellion was transubstantiated by the Pope, (who can make every thing of any thing) unto an Idolatrous and blasphemous saint-ship. This plagued the Land worse then all the rest, for as it is treason against a King to entertayne his rebell under the name of an Honourable and Lawfull subject, so it is high treason
against God, to make an Idoll of a Trayter, (as Beckett was) whose name of blasphemy so resounded every where, (as one saith well) that the name of Christ was quite forgotten. Come we now to William B. of Ely (the Popes Legate and Vicar, first Chancellour of England, and then Viceroy in King Richards absence) what port he kept, what tyranny he exercised over all the Kings subiects, not forbearing the Kings owne brethren, Hi∣stories make plain, in so much as one saith well, that the Laitie found him more then a King, and the Clergie more then a Pope. As he devoured all where he came with his great pompous traine (no fewer then a 1000. or 1600: horse) so he had undone the State, if he had not been taken off. Let Steven Langton take the next place, whom the Pope made choice of, ut virum strenuum (as one saith) such a one as would beard Kings, rob Churches, and keep the people in slaverie, whose entrance being resisted by King Iohn, both he and his realm were interdicted by the Pope, who enarmed the French King, with the pardon of all his sinnes, and the Crowne of England for his paines, if he would invade him in this strait. The rest of the Popes lymbes (like traytors as they were) sided with the French King; the Nobilitie shrunke, and the commons wavered, not knowing what to do, whereupon the King (notwithstanding his Princely and magnanimious parts) was so mated with
that miscreant and danted, partly with the feare of forraigne and domesticke foes, and partly with the jea∣lousie of his fainting adherents, that he was forced to vassal himself, and his Kingdom at the Popes foote, wherein though the King shewed his weakenes, yet his heavy and many burdens plead hard for his excuse. And as we cannot read the story without much pitty∣ing that worthy, (though unhappy Prince) so we can not but abhorre these treacherous Prelats, and blame exceedingly the inconstancie and disloyaltie of his subjects. Hence be pleased to observe (right Honou∣rable) what an evill thing it is for subjects through their pusillanimitie to leave their Soveraigne in the hands of wickednes, it maketh them often doe what they nei∣ther would nor should. This instance of this abused and murthered King is the rather to be thought on, by reason of the French Kings resolution against the State, who unadvisedly brought him in, he resolved to destroy all the nobilitie and their howses that had taken part with him against their native Soveraigne, besides the other tyrannyes, which the French would have practised, so that we should take notice how that one brand out of the Popes Chimney had not onely sett on fire, but had all∣most consumed the Kingdom to ashes, if the Lord had not by an extraordinary discovery from a French Vi∣count on his death bed, delivered the Nation. To come to Henry the thirds time, wherein that bloody Bishop (for so the story calleth him) Peter of Win∣chester, set himself, with one Peter Rivalis, the Kings
Minion, to plott the overthrowe of the best deserve∣ing states-men, yea of the King and state it self, in∣stance his practise against the life and honour of that well deserveing worthy Hubert, Earle of Kent, and Lord cheife Iustice of England, the very sword and safeguard of his Prince, (as one calleth him) both against for∣reigne and domesticke foes, yet because he could not indure the pride & treachery of the Prelats by false & forged criminations, they brought him under the Kings displeasure. By reason whereof he suffered many grei∣vous things, and was often in danger of his life, but the good hand of God was with him in extraordinary deliverances. And at last (being rid out of the way into Wales) that the Prelats might the more freely worke, they and others their Confederates, put the King upon such evill courses, as had almost undone himself, and the State of the Kingdome. Concerning the aforesaid Peter of Winchester, one Roger Bacon moved a pretty question to the King, What things doe Sea-men most feare? Stormes and quicke∣sands (said the King) or such like. No (saith Bacon) but Petrus de Rupibus, for they are the Rockes indeed that make Ship-wracke of the state. Edward the first also and his government, wanted not his share of hard measure from the Prelats, for (be∣sides that universall obedience which Robert Win∣chelsey Archb. of Cant. yealded to the Popes Edict, against contribution to the King in his Warres) he stood out with the King upon his owne termes of re∣conciliation, perswading absolute obedience to the
Pope, and not to the King. Also after much intolle∣rable tyranny exercised over the Kings people, and de∣nying to call the King his Lord, in his letters, he plot∣ted treason with sundry of the nobles, against the Kings person, intending to put him besides the Crowne, and to cast him in prison; whereof when he was accused from the Kings owne mouth, and could not deny it, he fell on his face with teares, begging pardon from the King. In Edward the seconds time; the favourites had most of the domineering power in their hands, yet we read that the Bishop of Coventry was a great favourer and abetter of Gaveston. As for Edward the third haveing great warres in hand, and standing in neede of ayde, he called a Par∣liament at Yorke, whereunto Iohn Stratford Archbishop of Canterburie, denied to come: neither would he suffer any of his Bishops, to make their appearance, & all for feare that he should not be suffered to erect his crosse; by which Popish peevish tricke and rebellious part, the King was frustrated of his ends, and the State therby endangered. It is true that this Edward was indeed (as he was called) Malleus Romanorum. Yet in his latter dayes that proud Courtney made litle ac∣count of him: and so disdainfully affronted his brother Duke of Lancaster, and the Earle of Northumberland (who took the defence of Iohn Wickliffe) that he en∣raged the madde people against the said noble men, so that they avenged themselves upon their houses and housholdstuffe. Thus your Honours may see in what account the
branches of the blood Royal are with bloodie & re∣bellious Prelats. Who will neither spare them (if they maintaine the Gospell) nor spare that good commo∣ditie, which should save our soules. Richard the 2. was no better served by the saucie Bishop of Norweidge in levying souldiers at the charge of the subjects to fight the Popes battles (contrarie to the Kings command) he was sent for by the King, but he refused to obay, affirming that going on & action were more necessarie, than to goe speake with the King, it might be to small purpose. To goe on with Henry the 4. supported & put on by these men to disthrone his master a brave Prince, but much abused. They laid hold on the occasion the rather, because he hearkened somwhat to Wickliffe and was not for Romes tooth. They first stirred up a rebel∣lion in Ireland which the King went in person to suppresse, but before his return they had stolne a∣way the hearts of his subjects, and set them upon his subject, the Earle of Darby, neither weighing the glorious memorie of the grandfather, nor the the unrepayable desert of the princely father; but thirsting for the blood of the saincts they advanced the said Earle to the crown: that by this they might both rid the King out of the way, and have a King for ever obliged to patronize their blooddie designs against Gods people. And this they did effect. For after the death of Richard they incited the King and prevailed with him to enact that blooddie inquisitiō oath, which became the very shambles & butchering house of Gods people.
Thus the supreame Magistrate (who should have been the breath of his people) was for the maintenance of an Earthlie Crowne, brought to bath in the blood of his best people. This he would never have done, were it not for pleasing of cruell Arundell Archb. of Cant. and his crew, who vowed & sware that he would not leave one slip of Professors in this Land. As some of the same discent (to their litle Land) have said litle lesse of the Puritanes (as they call them) th'aforesaid Arundel and his shavelings, the King feared more than God and his Word; And therefore it is an heavie yoke for Kings to be yoked with them. He saw no way in his carnal apprehension to make the Crowne sticke to him and his, but by sacrificieng the blood of Gods people to the persecutors of the saints. But for all this his owne makers thought to have marred him. For Richard Archbishop of Yorke waged warre against him, and thought to have taken both Crowne and life from him; but he mist of his purpose, and so left his head in pawne. From the time of Henr. the 4. the Prelats (thus fleshed in the butcherie of Gods people) went on to a greater height of tyrannie, adding drunkennes to thirst. They prevail'd with Henr. the 5. to make an un∣just and mischeivous statute under pretence of treason against the servants of the most High, whom they called Heretickes. That statute in regard of the frame may be called Monstrous, and blooddie in respect of the end.
The preface of the statute standeth onely upon trea∣son: the bodie of the statute runneth all on Heresie,2. Hen. 5. cap. 7. who list to look the statute may at the first view dis∣cerne the head or root discording with the bodie, and the branches of the bodie, opposing one an other (as ordinarily wicked decrees consist of non-sence and self-confusion) for so the wise God taketh the foolish in their owne Policie: To go no further;Anno 1603 witnesse our late Non-sence Canons (to say no more of them.) But to the said statute a little further, the purport and end whereof, was to insnare and calumniate the Professors of truth. For it is a common maxime amongst Ro∣mish forgers, to make the profession of the true Faith (which they call heresie) and treason to be convertible termes. That the Prelates were the prime movers, yea the instigaters and procurers of this statute, it is clear from the matter, manner, preface, and end of the said statute: for neither could they instance anie such apparance of treason, nor did the King feare anie such treason; but onely their hatred of Lolardy (as they called it) and feare of the truths prevailing was the ground of it; and the thing it selfe, a toade ingendred in the Bishops braines: witnesse that clause in the body of the statute, At the instance & request of the Ordinarie &c. but what commoditie or comfort had these two Kings from those suggest∣ed and inforced cruelties, by these firie Bishops? Surelie the evill overcame the supposed good, for they by these sinister means, indevouring to make the crown fast upon the heads of them and theirs, provoked the Lord in his blood-revenging-judg∣ment,
to take of their successors with Fishookes. As for themselves, it may well be said of them, (especiallie of Henrie the 4.) that the stormes of their troubles, and fires of feares, were hotter and greater in life and death then the fires and fryings of the saincts wherein they were consumed to ashes. This may be a good caveat to all christian Princes, not to fasten their crownes, nor to fixe their tents by the cords of the prelates counsells: for it is re∣markable and observed by sundrie, that never a King counselled nor State swayed by them, could stand or con∣tinue long in good temper or esteeme. Astronomers observe and experience proves, that when Orion setteth with the sunne, and the Hyades rise with him (though it be in the begining of May) such nipping frosts, sharp haile, and tempestuous storms arise, that the season seemes to be changed, and that because these starrs be of a tempestuous na∣ture, changing the ayre, and weakening the sweet & powerfull Influence of the Sunne, which till he be ridd of their opposition cannot manifest his vigour. Iust so the malignant and tempestuous power of the Prelacie, doth so impede and intercept the sweet in∣fluence of a Princely temperature and disposition, that doe what he can, all is like to be undone, till he leave Taurus or the house of the horned beast, which being forsaken, all distempers vanish & his gracious clemencie moves sweetly in the Gemini of the Church and common-wealth. Yea we can hardly number how many States and Kings, (besides our owne nation) they have brought either very lowe, or to utter ruine.
To go on then with Henr. 6. Left an infant, under the age of one yeare; upon whose harmelesse head God in his accustomary justice, laid the temporall judg∣ment of the parents guilt. His very infancye, that Skarlett Cardinall Bishop of Winchester, besprinkled with the blood of Christs Martyrs. Yea, the more blood they drunke, the more they thirsted, as appea∣reth by the hott and cruell persecution in that Henries raigne. But somewhat lay in their way, namely that good Duke of Glocester, the Kings uncle, the very sword and shield of the King and State, whom they must of necessity have removed. The Bishop of Winchester intended to have mur∣thered him in the citty of London, but that not taking effect, a Parliament was called at Bury, where they ai∣med at his head, and so thy had it; but what was the cause? Surely nothing, (for all Sr. Thomas Moores Cogging) but onely this, he was a just man and a good Patriott, hateing the Prelats haughtines, and deceiving villanies, loving the truth, and maintaining equity. Where first may it please your Honours to observe the mettle of the Prelats, in fetching off so quickly & so easily, not the head of a Catelin or Scianus of a Spencer or Gaviston, but of a high and nigh Prince of the blood such an one, as well might be called Pater Patriae, the Father of the Country. Secondly, all men may hence observe that piety & honestie, hath beene, is, and shallbe, matter enough for the Bishops to make the best fall, if they can find opor∣tunity. But to the point this worthy  being removed the Bishops went on with their fiery persecutions, till
the Lord sent the spirit of division upon the nation, stirring up these bloody intestine warrs betwixt the house of Yorke & Lancaster, wherof the like hath scarce been heard in any nation. To omitt the particulars (as how many Princes of the blood, Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen, fell in that quar∣rell) In one Battle at Ferry Brigges were slaine (as men say) 30000. besides men of note. Thus the Lord in his justice made them instruments of his revenge one upon another, and who but the persecuting Prelats brought all this evill upon the Land, namely the blood of Gods people, as the provoking cause; the butchering one of another; the ruine of the King, and his race, and the shakeing of the state in peeces? That the Prelats hands were farre in this Kings miscarriage, and bloodie broyles ensuing, it is manifest by their never ceassing-desire, till the good Duke of Glocester (the Kings pro∣tectour indeed) was cut of. For it is their genuine dis∣position, to endure no trustie freind to God, the King or the State. By this both King and State were open to those long enduring, and incomparable evills, tumul∣tuous rebellions, raised by Cade & others. In which troubles one thing is remarkable, as the very finger of God, that notwithstanding this intestine bloodshed in great abundance, gave fitt oportunity to forraigne invasion; yet that all-wise and just God restrained all forraignes from parting of them, till they had fully wrought the Lords revenge, in slaughte∣ring one another. Hence let a nation addicted to Idolatrie and other sinnes observe. That the Lord will
make one of them devoure an other, for a long time before he give them up to a forraigne enimie.Zacha. 11.6 And such a course the Lord seemeth to keep with us. But to hasten with the point from the beginning of that blooddie time, till the two houses of Yorke & Lancaster were united, there was half an houre silence in Heaven.Revell. 8.1. That is some small peace in the Church, partlie through the obscuritie of Professors, and partlie by the enimies working one upon an other. Notwithstan∣ding the Prelats were still doing as they found occa∣sion, instance the murthering of Peacocke Bishop of Chichester (as it is recorded) after his recantation. Now to Henrie the 7. in whose time the Lord had no sooner given rest to the State, than they began to make warre upon the Saints, making the King himself an instrument, to subvert the faith of a poore Priest, by his awfull presence, and mandatorie persuasions, with whom the learnedst of their Clergie could not pre∣vaile. Immediatlie upon this they carried the mise∣rably seduced man to the fire and burned him. Was not this a fearfull evill against God and the State, a∣gainst the soule of the King, against both the soule & bodie of the partie seduced? Was not this King (for all his great parts) much vassalled in the Honour of his Majestie, that he could not save (as we may thinke he promised) his supposed convert? With their firie and blooddie courses they went on, to the exceeding great trouble of the King and King∣dome, as Histories discover at large. And howsoever that King heaped up much treasure, yet quicklie after
his death it melted as snow against the Sunne. We goe on with Henr. 8. the former part, of whose time they made an Aceldama or field of blood. How he and all his subjects were abused and over∣runne by the Prelats, as Gardiner, Bonner, & Woolsey, it is so obvious to everie one, and so fully laid downe in a bill of complaint, called the beggers petition, that it is not necessarie to be insisted upon. There it is made plaine, that they were too strong against the King in Parliament, that no good lawes could passe against the wicked of the Land, nor no wicked law against the poore Gospellers could be stopped. Winchester gott the King to sitt at the arraignment of holy Lambert, which he onelie did to humour these blooddie beasts, and to serve his owne ends. To be breife, they made him exceedingly to trans∣gresse, serving themselves with him, disturbing his peace, inward and outward, causing him undeservedlie to cut off his best Freindes, and trustiest servants, in∣stance Cromwell, because they served God and him, a∣gainst the Prelats pride and tyrannie. As for Queene Mary, who set all in a flame, she had the fewe from them; that fed her distempered dispo∣sition against Gods people. What Honours and Pos∣session, she lost, and how troublesome her State and
burdensome her life was to her, it is more then evi∣dent. But what is all this to our Bishops may some say, these were Popish Bishopps? For answer: First, their doings have so farre proved the point. 2. Ours be no other for order (as we have proved) then Popish Bishops. They are garments cut out of the very same cloth; a paire of sheeres (as we say) went but betweene them; Onely divers hands have cut them out. And to say that our Lord Bishops with all their essentiall and integrall parts (whereof they consist) are not Popish Bs. is a contradiction in adiecto. They are installed after the same manner, created with the most of the same Ceremonies, they are trimed up in the same trappings, they have the like attendants, the like armes and observancy, they usurp the same power and jurisdiction, and exercise the like tyranny over Ministers and people. But for further proofe of the point concerning their particulars, be pleased (right Honourable) to take a view of their proceedings. To begin with Edward the sixt (a gracious plant, whereof our soyle was unworthy) who like an other Iosias setting himself with all his strength about refor∣mation, did abhorre and forbid, that any Masse should be permitted to his owne sister. Further, he was desirous, not to leave a hoofe of the Romish Beast in his King∣dome, as he was taught by some of the sincerer sort.
But as he wanted Instruments to effect this good, so he was mightilie opposed in all his good designes, es∣pecially by the Prelats, which caused him out of a godlie zeale in the very anguish of his heart, to poure out his soule in teares. Their suggestion of false feares to the King, and the seeking of their owne unlawfull standing, brought forth that revived spawne of the beast, kneeling in re∣ceiving of the Sacrament, for the greater reverence thereto whereby the Papists had contentment. And certainly for this, and such like courses, the Lord tooke him away in wrath to this nation, that he might make the furnace of his indignation seaven times hotter against it, whereby he opened the eyes of some good men, who with remorse of heart confessed that sin of theirs against God, against the King, against holy men (resisting Roomes Reliques) and against them∣selves. To come at last to Queene Elizabeth (of happie me∣morie) who having setled her estate, and subverted the profession of Popery, came in th'end to listen to a full reformation, whereunto she was moved (as we are credibly informed) by the Lord Protector of Scotland, called the good Regent. As she honoured him very much and held his words and actions to be of great waight (whatsoever the mungrell Papists affirme to the contrarie) so she
gave good respect to these particulars, which he laid downe to her for grounds: 1. The unvaluable benefit of a faithfull and free Ministry. 2. The excellencie of the puritie of Gods ordi∣nance, &c. 3. The hour and happines that would attend her Crown  State, upon the establishment of Christs government. 4. And lastly (though the least in esteeme, yet of no small moment to the good of her state) she might imploy the Prelates overfattening pastures to manie good and profitable uses, leaving the ministrie enough for their Honourable mainte∣nance. As for their glorious and lordly pomp which was pretended much to honour a nation, it did not so indeed; for it justled out Gods honour which should be dearer to Princes then their crowns and liues. And grant that it were some comple∣ment of true honour; yet the saveing of one soule by the preaching of a powerfull minister was of more worth then all the pomp & glory of the world. To this effect was his speach, which the Queene pondered well. But when the Prelates understood what an office he was about, they mur∣mured exceedingly, and in revenge of that moti∣on, he had unjust aspertions cast upon him, and hath to this day by some of their traine. At a Parliament holden anno 13. of her Majesties reigne, some Prelates and others were sent from the Convocation house to exhibit to her a subsidie,
according to the custom, her Majestie spake verie graciouslie concerning the good of Christs Church, affirming that she had heard of manie things in the Church needfull to be reformed, which if she could but come to understand, she would not give sleepe to her eies till she sett vpon reformation, and would never give over till she had done it indeed; and if they, being the eies, would not reveale the truth, let the blame and blood be upon them. But what was their answer to so worthie a motiō? even such as suited with their owne ends, seeking more than theire owne; and not that which is Christs: like false glasses they presented her Majestie with an Omnia bene. And thus they proved the bane of reformation frustrating the desires of a Prince wor∣thy of so great a work. After that, in processe of time, they caused a subtile insinuation of the disgrace of discipline to be suggested to the Queene, affirming, if discipline were sett on foot, that everie sillie fellow, or sit Iohn in a parish Church, might at his pleasure raile on the Queene, and also excommunicate her. Which (by the Bishops leave) is a verie calumnie, as if the government of Christ should not both knowe and use Kings better, than the government of Anti∣christ. But envie never spake well. In the meane time they neglected no oportunity to persecute such godly ministers as would not conforme, and from citing, vexing, suspending, and casting them out of their free-holds, they fell to pack with some atheistly Iudges; setting them so against the
good men, that they did not onely scoffe them, belye them and revile them, but also arraigne them and con∣demne them. Which when the Queene heard, it greived her soule; for she was so farre from having that high injurie put upon Gods Ministers, that she sig∣nified her mind in Parliament to the contrarie, namely hat she would not have them vexed for non-conformity. What ever was mentioned in Parliament for the kee∣ping of the first table, the Prelats ever crossed it. Wit∣nesse that motion for the sanctifying of the Sabbath in the 37. Eliz. the passing whereof they hindred. So they sett themselves against that course of Sabbath-keeping and reformation of abuses, undertaken by the Magistracie of the citie of London, till at length (to their blame be it spoken) partlie through their owne indisposition to the busines, and partlie through the violence of the Prelats opposing; So high, necessarie and acceptable a duetie, was quite given over. Since which time, we may observe that the Lord hath smit∣ten us in Citie and Countrey seaven times more in all conditions and affaires, so that things have prospered worse then ever they did before. The like necessity was laid upon the Citie in the raign of Richard the second, to take the punishment of filthines upon them, (being rather increased then curbed or restrai∣ned by the clergies courses,) at which reformation they al∣so grumbled. What shall we say of the attempts of some of them (whereof some are dead, and some were lately alive) against his late Majesties succession to this Crowne, upon conceived feares and jealousy of Church refor∣mation;
witnesse the invectives of some in Sermons, & other writings; the disgracefull speeches & affronting passages & opposing practises of others against his royall persō. In so much that whē they heard he was proclaimd K. of Engl. they tore their hayre, being unable to resist, and without all hope of pardon. Yet the King (out of his gracious clemencye with much adoe, and after much importunate mediation) was content to pardon it. Yea we make bould under your Honours favour to put this quaere. Whether any of the Prelats for the time being, did affect his succession? Let them speake in conscience. Come we further to consider the late Kings dispo∣sition at his first entry; for any thing we could perceive he was well affected to the Anti-episcopall government (with which he was trained up from his cradle, and which by word and writ he had maintained) and pro∣mised to preserve at his comming out of Scotland. His good thoughts also to such reverend men as these men scornfully called Disciplinarians, were lively ex∣pressed in his Basilicon Doron. Yea can it stand with na∣turall reason that a King should graciously pardon his professed foes; and not affect his dearest freinds, by whom (as by secondary meanes) he was kept and pre∣served from his very infancie? But for all this so soone as they had him here, and had calmed the stormy feares of Prelat-splitting, against the rock of his displeasure, they began to shew him all the glory of the World, and to forge false accusations a∣gainst the Brethren, as though they had been the trou∣blers of Israell, whereby (it might be) his mind was
somewhat exasperated: Yet not so, nor with such in∣tent that the Ministers should be oppressed as they were indeed without any judgement; Witnesse his owne course of reasoning, with the non-conforming Mini∣sters, seconded with commandement given, to deale with them by reason and dispute, and not with ri∣gour. But how the Prelats obeyed, let the evill and base usage, the suspending, silencing, thrusting out of their livings, so many hundred Ministers, beare witnesse to the world. It is worthy your Honours observation that in Anno 1604. and 1605. 400. Ministers were silenced suspended, or thrust out by vertue of those wicked Canons, which were not concluded by the con∣vocation (for D. Rud opposed them by an oration) but they were the Popish after-byrth of B. Bancroft then B. of London; Hatched as it is verily thought in the braines of his ghuests the Seminaries. This was not unlike that practise of Trent, in pressing of the Interim upon the Germane Ministers and other Protestants, for refusall whereof thy were removed, and many were banished.Sleydam Comment. Yet Harman B. of Colen would rather renounce his Bishops Sea, than be an Agent in it, who may stand up as a witnes against our Prelats. But what followed on this sylenceing of our Ministers even that Master-peece of Rome, the gunpowder plott brought to the very period of accomplishment. As God might in justice have punished the former evill with the latter (for our Kings and State have often smarted for the Prelats plaguegy courses:) so if you will be pleased to looke further into the conjunction of these evills, you may find them both to be poysonable
fruites of the same tree of death. Yea happily it may probably appeare upon good inquiry, that he that was the maine agent in the former had his finger in the later. 1. For the better clearing whereof; may your Ho∣nours be pleased to enquire, whether Bishop Bancroft, retained not Watson the Priest for his owne private plotts; whom he suffered to divulge dangerous books against the State and right of the Crowne? 2. Also whether the said Bishop had not intelligence with the Popes Nuncio in Venice and the Low Coun∣tries? And whether Blackwell the Arch-Priest before his apprehension was not by the said B. protected? 3. What was the cause he posted on the filenceing of so many Ministers, to the number of 400. (as hath been shewed) immediatlie before the discovery of the gunpowder treason? After which discovery he wrote to the other Bishops, that they should not hould that course of silenceing manie at once, but that they should be silenced by one and one. For it seemes if that grand busines of Hell had taken effect the blame should have been laid on the harmlesse hoast of Gods Mini∣sters, as though it had been done by Puritanes in revēge. 4. Let it be inquired whether one of the Popes speciall intelligencers, confessed to a seeming malecon∣tent, that if the powder-plott had taken effect, B. Banc. should have been Pope, & Father Bluet, Cardinal of all England▪
5. Whether B. Banc. & others his accomplices had not correspondencie with the King of Spaine? 6. It is not unworthy the inquirie what became of Bluet, after the discoverie of the powder-treason? It's certaine, that with B. Banckroft he was, but what be∣came of him no bodie knowes. 7. Whether B. Banc. his intimate confederates, were not speciall maintainers of the Prelacie, opposers of the Gospell, & good Ministers of God, yea & no good freinds to the State? 8. And lastlie, may your Honours be pleased to inquire, whether some of our present Prelats, use not Iesuites in the habite of gallants, as their familiars? and whether (looking for a change) some of them ayme not to be head, or at least to be as nigh the head as they can, that they may do their Mr. the more service? 1. For evidence of this, let their Popish Positions & practises, & maintaining of them in others (of which we can give too manie instances) speak in the first place. 2 Their cruel persecution of the Ministers doth evidence the same. 3. And lastlie, their breathing out of threatenings against conscionable (tho conforming Ministers) and these they meane to make good (because they cannot endure the Gospell) except the Lord make you to the same, a place of refuge & defence they mean to root it out. If they be left to the Prelats mercie, the woe∣full event will shew it to be no slaunder.
For 1. as hath beene shewed they cannot subsist with the continuance of a faithfull Ministrie. 2. They will provide for themselves in their kind. 3. They can do the Pope no greater service, and the Kingdome of Christ no greater injurie than in this particular. If their places disposed them not for the Pope, they would never disarme the Kingdome of the States best forces, and the Popes greatest adversaries. Its true that there be some Prelats Rampant and some Prelats Con∣chāt, but your Honours know they be all the Popes Pre∣lats. They have divers kinds of teeth, but all their teeth bite. In a word, as hath been shewed, the members must doe for the head, and in this they doe but their kinde. Therfore if you would save both them and us, alter the propertie from Lord Bishops to Ministers so shall you spoyle the Pope; preserve the State, and you shall have the Honour through the world that they are your converts. But to go on a litle further with this disease of the Prelats evill, especiallie against the Ministerie. Besides the injurye done to soules, it would make an heart of stone to relent to heare related the insolen∣cies, scofferies, outrages, revileings and barbarous cruel∣ties by them, and theirs put upon the faithfull Mini∣sters of God, and their poore families. Though many
sufferers in this busines be with God; yet there be some alive that can both relate, and witnesse the inju∣ries done to themselves and others, by breaking into their howses; by draging themselves, Wives and Families to prison (and that without any war∣rant at all) the casting of them, & theirs out of doores, giving them scarce a ragge of their owne Cloathes to cover their childrens nakednes. We humbly intreate your Honours, not to passe by those crying injuries, which you will the rather observe and be sencible of, if you take a view of the fearefull by-past sequells of those evills. At his late Majesties entry, the Lord (fore-knowing how little should be done for him, and how much against him) sent an admonitory persuing plague, for heat and continuance rarely matched, speaking to the eye of King and State, that there was some speciall plague to be removed; and what other and greater, and more worthy the care of a King and State, then Romish Idolls, in Gods worship, and Antichristian govern∣ment? which evills increasing, (though the Lord re∣moved the plague,) yet he hath smitten us seaven times more, in bodyes, states, and names, namely in the di∣stemper of the Elements, in the change of seasons, in the languishing, groaneing and dying of the Creatures, under the burthen of our sinnes. And above all temporall punishments, in taking away our Henry, that Paragon of Princes, who should have been, and would have been, (if our sinnes had not hindred) Malleus Episcoporum, which worke no
doubt with Romes ruine in England our Great Charles, will accomplish, if his army of Princes, namely you great Senatours act your part. Now to draw to an end of their by-past mischeifs, let the subiects take notice, what high indignity they of∣ferred to his late Maiesty, by whose perswasions, when some ministers had conformed, they used the said ministers (onely for preaching the Gospel) seaven times worse than before, notwithstanding the Kings command to the contrary. Not unlike for cru∣elty (for we parallell not all) to the burning of that priest perswaded by Henry the seaventh, for∣merly spoken of. Since this greivance then, is made good by un∣denyable proofs, give us leave (right honourable) by way of dutie, and by deserved retortion, to apo∣logie for our selves from the aspersion of the Pre∣lates and their children, in their venemous ser∣mons, railings, and writings; we are (say they) seditious, tumultuous, factious, disobedient, rebellious, in a word the troublers of Israel: and they would gladly we were cut off, because we trouble them. But give us leave in homely phrase to set the saddle on the right horse, and to tell them, they and their fathers house, are the troublers of Israel. Let them never tell us of ti∣rannizing over magistrates, by depriving them of their rights, by excommunication &c. Let them not object to us M. Vdall & M. Cartwright &c. as seditious fellowes, or traitours, if they had beene such, our late King would never have written his letters to Queen Elizabeth on their behalfe, as
he verily did. Let them direct their speeches to the Bishops of London, Ely, Winchester, interdictors of the King, and the whole realme. Anselme against Rufus; Beckett vexeing Henry the second; Langton casting away King and State; Arundell, unkinging Richard the second; In plaine termes, these men were the traytors, and yet no Presbyterian Brethren, but Lord Bishops, whose brethren and successours our Prelats are. The Bishop of Hereford, preaching at Oxford on the text: Oh my head! Oh my head aketh! (as the vulgar latin hath it, 2. Kings 4.19.) applyed it thus peremptorily against Ed. 2. That the Kings head must of necessity be ta∣ken of. He might better have collected, that that which made the head ake, should have been taken off, and then he had hitt himself. And so much for the proofe of this point, in the later part whereof we have been sparing of particular names in the passages of our proofes, because we love not to stigmatise any particular person, (dead or alive) since it is the evills of their callings, and not persons, which we oppose.
8. Position proved. ALL the fearefull evills of sinne and judgment, for the present raigning amongst us, and threatned a∣gainst us, &c. are from the Hierarchy, &c. Evills (as they devide themselves) are evills of sinne, or evills of judgment. Though all evills of sinne be a∣gainst God, (for it is the transgression of the Law,) yet sinne is either directly against God, or against man; against the first Table, or against the second. Now give us leave (right Honourable) for the proofe of our point, to touch upon the particular bran∣ches of sinnes against particular precepts; which sha demonstrate, whether they flowe not from the feas of Bishopps. The breaches of the first precept, we contrive into these heads, Ignorance, Infidelitie, Atheism, Heresie, Aposta∣cie, Internall Idolatrie, makeing a God of the Creature, ha∣tred of God, inward and outward pride, a base Love, servile or slavish feare of the Creature, carnall securitie, stupid benumednes, Hypocrysy, Dispaire, & Impenitencie, with others of this nature, opposite to the severall graces, & duties of the first Commandement. All these overflowe, and are like to drowne our Nation, neither have we time to enlarge ech of these, but the height of ech of them, cryeth the very hea∣vens. But whence are all these, and the growth of them, but from withhoulding the keyes of Christs Kingdome? by which they will neither enter themselves,
nor suffer others to enter,Luk. 11.52. Math. 23.11. doth not the palpaple ig∣norance of many Millions in this Land, arise from the wante of meanes, and removeall of Gods faithfull Mi∣nisters, placeing such over people, as are not worthy to be set with the Dogges of the Flocke, forbidding Gods mes∣sengers, to deliver his messuage. The fearefullnes of which sinne appeareth by the witnesse of the Holy Ghost; they commaund the Prophets, saying Prophesie not,Amos 2.12 Acts 4.18. & 5.28. which the Lord accounteth a very pressure to himself in the verse following: behould I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, which is a weary∣ing of God with sin, and God is wearied with no sin more then with this. To this purpose be the other places in the margine.1 Thes. 2.16. This forbidding to preach the Gospell, is said to be the very filling up of the sinnes of the Iewes. The horrour of this sinne of silenceing Ministers for not subscribing, & the fearfull evills ensueing on it, is set forth in a speach of the Lower house of Parl. Ao. 1610. wherein they call it and that truely a crying sinne provoking God, and most greivous to the subject. And ther∣fore an act past the House, that they should not sub∣scribe any otherwise then according to that statute of 13. of Elizab. for if otherwise they should be urged the law of the church (as they said) & commonweal should jarre. So we may instance in all the other sinnes, as Heresie, Schisme, instance Popery, Anabaptisme, Seperatisme, Ar∣minianisme, & Familisme. Their uphoulding of Popish grounds, lawes, rites & tyranny in the Churches of England, and over the Ministers and people, give the Papists more then hopes
of returning to their possessions, with the overtopping authoritie of the Pope, whose hornes keepe possession for him, keeping Christ at the doore, and pushing out the meanes, by which he should enter. For the same grounds and arguments that the former stand on, and use, are the very best armes, offensive & defensive, that the later have. Also the Anabaptists, seeing the grosse abuse and for∣ced interpretations of the scriptures, not onely delive∣red, but also pressed upon others, together with the unsound Doctrine and corruptions of Ministers, and the Dumbe Dogges, which be in manie places, they re∣ject the word & other ordinances, and fall upon their owne fantasticke revelations and damnable fooleries. They are also the Authors of the Seperatists scisme, which hath both the rise, & increase from the Prelacie, with whose superstitious corruptions the sincerer people at first denyed to joyne; and so being driven from their Homes & Countries, into forraigne parts, manie of them tooke up strange and unsound conclu∣sions, which to this day they hould of the Churches & best people thereof; and duties therein performed, which practise of their seperation butteth full upon the unreasonable & unsound reasoning of the Bishops in this manner: B. Whit. Tract 2. Cap. 1. Divis. 2. Pag. 81.If discipline be so necessarie, and also unchangable, it is lawfull to seperate from such Churches, as doe not use it (say the Prelats) but Discipline is unchangably necessarie (say the Seperatists,) Ergo it is lawfull to seperate from such
Churches as doe not use it. Your Honours see clearlie, how the B. Major, & the Seperatists Minor make up an intire silogisme of Sepera∣tisme. But in the meane time they both make a false con∣clusion, and therfore one of the premises must be false, not the minor, (for discipline is both necessarie & un∣changable,) Ergo the major, which is a snare to the se∣peratists of the Bishops owne making. B. Whitgift wrote the quoted treatise, wherein he frameth the ar∣gument, before seperatisme was hatched. Et utinam, &c. would to God (saith a learned man) he had never broached it. For being a false ground, it made a great rent in the Churches; For want of an integrall part of the whole;Sucliffe, Lows, & Bell. or of some essentiall part in it self (though not of the whole) is no sufficient ground for seperation. All the Prelats procters ply the Reformers (as they call them) with the aforesaid insnaring Proposition, as it were with warme Cloathes. Yet we see they scalde their owne hands, for they and Barrow (to whom they compare us) sort better together in the argument, then we & Bar∣row doe; and therfore to charge men with seperation, because they seperate from the corruptions, is but to as∣perse with calumnie. As for the foresaid argument, owne it who will, whether Seperatists or Prelatists, it is no better,Institut. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. yea the very same which Novatians and Donatists use in effect, against joyning with our Churches, as M. Calvin plainly affirmeth.
2. The seperatists stumble at the pride, rapine, and tyrannie of the Prelates, as also at the intolle∣rable servilitie and slaverie of ministers and people; at their ungodly courses, their illegall and cruell proceedings, by all which they are forced (for want of better take heede) upon the quicksands of seperati∣on: and that the rather, because the Prelates argu∣ments against them are either poperie or prison. To followe with Arminianisme or blanched Popery, Mountigue proclaimeth with open mouth: his en∣tertianment, testifieth, and a great number of the Prelates themselves professe; who be the fathers and abetters of it. This more plainly appeareth, that in both the last Parliaments, it being earnestly opposed by the most of the lower house and manie of the higher house, the Prelacie rather did befreind it (at least under hand) then oppose it, which since hath manifested it selfe by the aboundance of Pa∣trons and pleaders for it. Lastlie, for the Familists, they observe the swelling pride, averice, sweareing, forswearing and simonie of the Prelats. Also how they practise and pros∣per; by which the Familists do conceive, that the strict walking in the ordinances is not required in the word. They turne all the scripture to allegories, and so they have once the spirit, & the perfection of love, they may do or not doe all things, as the time enjoyne or permitt, and this is their owne brood; wherewith
some of their filthie tongues upbraid Gods people. We might say the like of profanesse & Atheisme, witnesse a Bishops cooke, who said all the noblemens houses that ever he had formerlie lived in, were ranke Pu∣ritanes to his Masters house. For apostasie, we will say no more but this: how are Papists, Arminians, & all manner of Sectaries increased of late? Yea to our shame be it spoken: professours are growne from heat to lukewarmnes, and from that to key-coldnes. To shut up this particular, with a touch of that be∣numming feare that runneth through the joyntes, and enervateth the spirits of mē, whence is it, but frō these Court-like Prelats, & Prelats-Courts?Ps. 10.18.  of whom we may say with the Psalmists, according to the originall, They dant with terror sorie man. Though more be said here (it may be) then the time & treatise can admit; yet lesse a great deale then the thing it selfe requireth. Now we com to the 2. Cōmandment both the parts whereof, namelie, the affirmative and negative, the Prelats especiallie, transgresse, and cause to be trans∣gressed: which shall appeare especially, by taking a short view of the sinnes forbidden, & duties commanded, wherein to be breife, all externall Idolatrie is here for∣bidden; all will worship, all rites & ceremonies of mans de∣vising in Gods worship, and further everie calling of Ministers or Elders that is not appointed & approved by God.
To begin with the last first (because in the esta∣blishing of good and lawfull officers consisteth the supreame and principall good of the Church) The calling of L. Bishops hath bene sufficiently demon∣strated to be Antichristian, and consequently con∣demned by this commandement. Catalog. Test. veritat. Beza.The learned make mention of three sorts of Bi∣shops, the first wherof they call a divine, or christian Bishop; because it hath its institution from God, be∣ing all one (as the ancient show,Hier. ad Evag. in Ier. c. 22. &c. at large, and them∣selves very well know) with a Minister or Elder. This ordinance of God and practise Apostolicall continued, as the foresaid authoritie observeth, for the space of 300. yeare and upward. After this followeth that Humane Episcopacie (as they term it) wherein the pride of man began to vēt it self in an affected title of superioritie, yet without any overlording power over their brethren and fel∣low-Ministers, as doth plainly appeare by the places and cariages of the ancient Fathers, who looked not so loftily upon their fellow-brethren, as some of our pontificall Parsons doe upon their neighbour Ministers; yea as great difference there is betwixt them and the present Lord Bishops, as is between a Venetian Duke and the great Duke of Muscovie, of which, the former hath but the bare title of Superio∣ritie, and is guided and directed by the Senat, and the later doth what he will against all Law and rea∣son. Had the Fathers (as hath been shewed from the
learned) observed the ensuing evill of this ambitious title, they would have hated it.Catol. iest. verit. This had the begin∣ning, as the learned affirm from Silvester the first, who baptised (as they sey) Constantine the Emperour. The last and worst is, that Antichristian or Satanicall Prelacie, (for so they term it,) having it's rise from Bo∣nifacius the 3. in Anno 607. the branches of this root are our Lord Bishops, (as hath been fully shewed,) who by their very callings make the prime and main breach in this commandment, and what blessing can men ex∣pect? or why should they intertain such Officers in a function of so high a nature, as countermandeth the commandment of God? In the next place we come to shew how their devi∣ses in Gods worship are just such as their calling, namely, directly against the tenure of this said com∣mandment; For that God (who will & should alone be worshipped) should by all reason onelie prescribe how he will be worshipped; whatsoever worship therefore is not of his prescription, is condemned under the name of Idolatry; and so it is indeed,In 1. Thes. 1.9. as Zanchye & other tell us; Quod per Idolum, &c. By an Idoll in generall (saith he) is meant; whatsoever in Religion, is brought in without the word of God; Iust with that of a phisitian in Luthers time,Paracel. tract. de Cer. who (though he had but a glimmering) could see and say so much: quicquid praeter mandatum est, Idolum est; whatsoever is beside the word in Gods worship, is an Idoll; Behould now (right Honourable) if it be so, how the Prelats have overlade the worship of God with will-worship and Idolatrous rites.
To begin with the Service-booke, whose Pedigree we have alreadie drawne, it is not onelie faultie, but a booke of faults, as we have partlie shewed, and could more fullie shew if time would give us leave. But that is done abondantly by others. If there were no more but the Popish frame or forme of it (as a learned man ob∣served) that were enough to remove it;Mr. Brough∣ton. but both for matter & manner, it pleaseth the Papists so well, that he desireth no better if there were enough of it, witnesse the pacification of the devonshire Papists in the time of Edward the 6. when as they understood it was no other but the verie Masse booke in English; witnesse also the assertion of D. Carryer, a dangerous seducing Papist.Confiderat. Pag. 45. Sect. 8.9. The common prayer-book (saith he) and the Ca∣techisme contayned in it, hould no point of Doctrine expreslie cōtrarie to antiquitie; that is (as he explaineth himself) the Romish service; onelie it hath not enough in it. And for the Doctrine of predestination, Sacraments, grace, free will, and sinne, &c. the new Catechisme, and Sermons of the paritant-preachers, runne, wholy in these against the cōmon prayerbook and Catechisme therein contayned, &c. And thereupon he comforteth himself upon hope of supplie of the rest.Motive Pre∣fac. to the Answ. To this effect speeketh Bristow & Harding: If these things be right, why not the rest? say they. It shall not be amisse to marke one accurrence in Q. Elizabeths time, who being interdicted by the Popes Bull, Secretarie Walsingham, tryed a trick of state Pollicie to reverse the same. He caused two of the Popes intel∣ligencers at the Popes appointmēt, to be brought (as it were in secret) into Engl. to whom he appointed a guide
(being a state-intelligencer) who should shew them in Canterbury & London, service solemnly song & said with all their pompe & procession, which order, the Popish intelligencers seing, & so much admireing, they won∣dered that their Master would be so unadvised, as to interdict a Prince or State, whose service and Ceremo∣nies so symbolized with his owne. So returning to the Pope, they shewed him his over-sight, affirming that they sawe no service, Ceremonies, or Church-orders in England, but they might verie well have been per∣formed in Rome, whereupon the Bull was presently called in. From the book of the Ceremonies, which are the burthens of the Church; the blemish of Gods ordinances, the scourge of good Preachers; the brood and hopes of Poperie; the rejoycing of the profane; the greivance of the good, and the verie seede of dissention. Time will not suffer to rip up the rotten Pedigree, the Authors, maintainers, evill ends & Pestiferous effects of them. Neither is it necessarie here to demonstrate by way of dispute, the unlawfull∣nesse of them; since whole volumes are extant against them, and everie particular of them, that can never be answered; It is enough (as we have shewed) that they are directlie against the second Commandment, being in verie deede The thresholds and posts of Idolaters,Ezech. 43.8 set up by the thresholds and posts of God. This is the main ground of all the enormities and deformities in Gods worship, that the most ministers do not or dare not teach, and the Prelates with the
superstitiouslie prophane people will not suffer to be taught the pandect of the second commandement in the full and due extent; everie one knoweth that is acquainted with the frame of the second commandement, that it condemneth all superstition, and especially superstitious ceremonies in Gods worship, upon this ground, the learned both ancient and moderne have condemned all ceremonies of mans invention in Gods worship both de jure & de facto, instance of the former from the oyle and holy water,Catalog. Test. Lib. 2. Oleum quò inunguuntur Episcopi & aqua lustralis cum fiant sine Dei mandato idolatrica & superstitiosa sunt, saith the learned, the oyle wherewith the Bishops are annointed and the holy water, being things with∣out the commandement of God, are idolatrous and superstitious: be not the ceremonies in our Liturgie by the same rule and reason superstitious and idolatrous? Learned Beza commenting up∣on that place to the Corinthians ye are bought with a price be not the servants of men,1. cor. 7.23. from the said com∣mandement condemneth those that presse superstiti∣ous rites upon the consciences of men: shewing further from the second of the Coloss. vers. 20. That mans corrupt nature is too prone to loose their li∣bertie, and to subject themselves to superstition, the verie heathen tell us, quod superstitio sit error insanu, that superstition is a mad errour,Seneca. and so it is indeed, for neither sound reason, nor divine authority, can rule it: but for convincing of the iniquity of such su∣perstitious rites. The said authour produceth an argument from that forequoted place of the Colos.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world why as though living in the world are ye subjecte to ordinances or traditions? Whence he reasoneth thus. Pugnat inquit Apostolus adversus superstitiosas traditiones argumentando à comparatis. The Apostle contending against superstitious traditions frameth an argument à majori thus, Cessantibus ipsis ritibus qui∣bus Deus ipse mundum erudivit, quaenam impudentia est humanas traditiones inculcare? If those rites did ceasse by which God himselfe did instruct the world: it is an impudēt part to presse others in their place. But the former is true. Ergo the later. For the later part of the evidence, namely, de facto there is proofe enough. In those purer times (saith that catalogue of witnes∣ses) they appoynted not ceremonies, but were content with that pure & simple forme, namely, that God had appointed. Petrus Parisiensis in his worke called Verbum abre∣viatum relateth, how one Arnulphus an ancient e∣nimie to Antichrist resisted the Pope and his Prelats in the Laterane Counsell, determining to make more new Ceremonies: potius veteres adimenda, nam onerant christianos &c. It were a better work (saith he) to take away those that are extant, because they overlade the people of God, to whom the onely word of Christ should be a rule, nam illud verum for that is verified (saith he) That they make the commandements of God of none effect by the traditions of men. We might bring a cloud of witnesses for this particular, but we will onely alledge M. Bucer for a closer in his censure of the English Liturgie.Pag. 458. Cō∣sentaneum est ut in externis omnibus rebus ut in cultu mi∣nistrorum &c.
It is fitt and convenient that in all outward things and actions of Gods worship as in Ministeriall garments, we should accommodate ourselves to the simplicitie of Christs appointmēt & Apostles practise, imo testari debe∣mus omnibus, nil nobis esse cōmune cum Romanensibus Anti∣christis. Yea we should witnes to all men, that we will have no cōmunion with the Relicks of the Romish An∣tichrist: but our teachers should teach, and we should heare, onely that which Christ hath commanded Math. 10. & Iohn. 10. To proceed for further satisfactiō, give us leave (right Honourable) to lay downe those Bases or grounds of arguments, which we intreat your Honours to take into consideration, offering ourselves (with all modestie) to maintaine the same against all gainesayers. 1. The Ceremonies are vvill vvorship. 2. They are fignificant and teaching Ceremonies of mans invention, stated in Gods vvorship. 3. They are an addition to the vvord, flatlie against the rule of the vvord. 4. They are all mens inventions, & have been filthie Popish Idolls, impossible to be clensed, but must be Idolls still in Gods vvorship.
5. Being mans invention, they make a conformity betvveen vs & Idolaters in Gods vvorship. 6. They are occasions of evill: appearances of evill. In a word: They are the very strange fire & garments, spotted with the flesh, by their owne interpretation of these Scripture Phrases:Lev. 10.1. Iude. 23. yea by the currant of all in∣terpreters, they cannot, or do not deny, but that by these places are condemned all devises of men, stated in Gods worship. But because this tax may seeme too generall, may it please your Honours, to give us leave to deale with the grand Ceremonie of the Crosse, whose vilenes being dis∣covered, may make us like the worse of all branches of the same roote. In our proceeding for our better information, we will observe this methode. 1. The place and esteeme of the Crosse among us. 2. The ground of it. 3. The evill effects of it. And 4. the arguments against it. For the first of these, namely, the place and esteeme. It may be said of us (in some sence) as Bellarmine saith of themselves:Lib. 1. de Eccl. cap. 13 Suaves odores etiam Cruci offerimus in Ecclesia, we offer too manie sweet odors to it, in that it hath any place in worship with us. Now thath it hath a high place and Honourable name in the Lords ordi∣nances,
the daylie use of it, the Canon for the use of it, and the testimony of our writers verify:Canen. 30. The Canon calleth it an Honourable Badge. Mr. Hooker calleth it a sacred, or holy signe, attributing great vertue to it, affirming no meanes to be more powerfull to preserve a man from deserved shame,De Polit. Lib. 5. cap. 65. Fol. 160. & to stir up devotion, thē by this sig∣ning of the forehead with the signe of the Crosse. Yea, he citeth Ciprian, that the Crosse doth purifie the forehead. But what can speake more emphatically for it then the very words, used in Baptisme, which giveth it the ver∣tue of a Sacrament. Crux crucisThe learned Mr. Parker, the Crucifyer of this Crosse, proveth it according the tenor of the words, not onely to be significative, but also effective. They make it a Sacrament in effect,Part. 1. Pa. 33. 91. 129. 160. as the Papists make con∣firmation. By Baptisme they bring the infant into their Church; and by confirmation make it a Soul∣dier of the Church. So we do the same with Bap∣tisme and the Crosse. Further by making it a signe to assure the Baptised of the strengthening grace of the spirit against the as∣saults of Sathan, especially against shame in persecution, do they not make it a Sacrament? 2. For the ground of it, though some with Valenti∣nus have been so shamelesse as to cite scripture for it, (as Esa. 49.22. Ier. 4.6. Ezech. 9.4. Ephe. 1.13. Apoc. 7.3.) yet the really learned of them dare not. For the Popish Canons tell us so much,Gratian. Decret. Part. 1. Dist. 11. cap. 15. Quae enim Scriptura salutifera crucis signaculo fideles docuit insigniri? What place of the saving word hath taught that the faith∣full
should be signed with the signe of the Crosse? If they appeale to the Fathers (as the 30. Canon doth, enjoy∣ning the use of it, as they used it;) surely it is a wonder they blush not, since they know very well that the Fa∣thers have not been fowler in any one particular then in this. As for a tast.Epist. ad De∣metr. Et ad Eustach. Hierom will have a man to guard his forehead with the signe of the Crosse in all his passages. Neither wanteth he now sundry among us,De Sacram. Lib. 3. cap. 2. Tract. 118. in Ioh. to defend this absurd opinion. So Ambrose calleth the signe of the Crosse the perfection of things. Austine houl∣deth nothing in either Sacrament to be rightly done without it. Mr. Perkins discourses largely of this.Problē. 184 The very trueth is, it had its first beginning from Valen∣tin the heretique,In Annot. in Luk 24. Lib. 1. c. 1. as learned Fulke collected from Ire∣neus, and so Epiphanius. Further D. Fulke sheweth, how the Devill did sow the seed of Idolatry by the Crosse in Valentinus;Motiv. 46. Argu. Brist. Pag. 124. Mon∣tanus nursed it, and got it credit in civill and religious uses. But Tertullian was the first of the Orthodox, who writt any thing of it,De Coron. Mil. c. 3. 4. who was fowly tainted with Montanisme. As for England; it had no crosse at all till Austine the Monke brought in his silver Crosse.Bed. in Hist. Lib. 1. c. 2. 3. For the evill effects of it. 1. It maketh the most account more of it, then of Baptisme it selfe. 2. Some refuse to be witnesses, unlesse it be used. 3. Some have left the Ministry or Parish, where it hath not been u∣sed. 4. Some have been rebaptised,Park. 1 part. Page 94. because they were baptised without it.
Now we come to the Arguments against it, where∣in we desire to be as breif as we can. And first from the ground spoken of. 1. That which had no good beginning, nor ever any good use in Gods worship should not be appoin∣ted for a signe of grace. But the Crosse in Baptisme had no good beginning, nor ever any good use in Gods worship (as hath been shewed:) Ergo it should not be appointed for a signe of grace in Gods worship. As the Minor of this argument is onely contro∣verted; So we desire the maintainers of the Crosse, to shew us some good beginning or good use of it, if they can. 2. Every signe or Seale of an evidence, without the Counsell of the Lord or Owner, and every military badge without the appointment of the grand Commander is counterfaite. But the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme, is such a signe or military badge. Ergo it is counterfaite. For the Major: Reason cleareth it. Neither can that Distinction of a signe significative & exhibitive make any evasion. For 1. the Distinction hath no ground from the word. 2. They give the Crosse no small part of exhibition, witnesse the words. 3. We must not add a signe significative or explicative in Gods worship (take what termes they will:) for this is Gods
prerogative. This Proposition is also proved very lear∣nedly by D. Fulke: That many speake (saith he) of the Signe of the Crosse,Rejoinder. Artic. 1. Pag. 144. it is true; but they speake besides the booke of God: And therefore their reasons are to be rejected. For men must not compare, or joyne the Crosse with the Kings stamp; for he appointed no such, whereby his servants might be knowne, but onely Baptisme.Nemo potest &c. de Sacr. Lib. 1. Cap. 21. Yea Bellarmine acknowledgeth as much. No man (saith he) can bring in, or determine any thing in a Law or Common-weale, but he that is the Author of the Law, and head of the Common-weale; which he instanceth in the legall Ceremonies. But did God (the author of his owne law, and appointer of his owne worship) bring in, or determine this signe? No sure. Which serveth also for proofe of the Minor; For they call it the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme; they make it a military badg; and lastly it wanteth Gods determination: and therfore as a counterfaite to be abandoned. The third Argument followeth. 3. Every Image or similitude for a religious use is forbidden by the 2. Commandment. But the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme, is a simili∣tude for religious use. Ergo, it is forbidden by the second Commande∣ment. With this Chardge D. Morton is so pusled, that he denyeth any likenes or Image to be forbidden by the second Commandment, but an outward resemblance of
the Godhead. Which divinity so learned, a man would never have vented, but that he was at a stand: For as the answer is against the Latitude of the Command∣ment,Bucer. Vi∣rel. Fulk An∣drews. &c. so it is against the current of the learned. Yea it establisheth a great part of Popish imagerie. For sun∣dry Papists hould it a foolish thing to make any images for representation of the Godhead.Durand. lib. 2. Dist. 9. Quest. 2. But to the point. All superstitious rites or mens intentions are for∣bidden by the 2. Commandment.Catech. 9. 95. Inst. Lib. 2. C. 8. Sect. 17. De Red. lib. 1. cap. 14. Witnesse Vr sinus, Calvin. Zanch. 4. That which is mans invention, and hath been an Idoll in Gods worship, must still be an Idoll in Gods worship, and therefore to be abolished. But the Crosse in Baptisme is mans invention, and hath been an Idoll in Gods worship. Ergo it must be an Idoll still in Gods worship, and by consequence to be abolished. We prove the Major by induction. Every Idoll in Heathenish worship, was still an Idoll in the worship of God;2. King. 16. Ezech. 8.3. As the Alter of Damascus. Was not the Idoll of Baal (called the Idoll of Iealousie in Gods howse) an Idoll still? & 43.8.The Posts and thresholds of Baall sett up by Gods thres∣holds and Posts, were still the very same. The Idolls among Iacobs family should still have been Idolls in Gods worship,Gen. 35.2. though it were true worship. And ther∣fore Iacob will have them utterly abolished. So groves were things very lawfull (instance Abrahams Gen. 21.33) yet becomming Idolatrous (as 2. Kings 17.10. Ierem. 17.2. Esa. 57.5. Hosea 4.13.) they are forbidden
Deut. 16.21. And so of all the rest Deut. 7.5. Yea, things appointed by God for a time, if they become Idolls, or polluted with Idolatrous worship, they must be done away. Witnesse the Brasen Serpent,2. King. 18. 4. Hosea 2.16.17 and the name Baali. Now let our opponents give an instance (besides the matter in hand) as the law of Logick requireth, and we will quit them all the rest. As for the Minor, namely, that the Crosse is Mans in∣vention, and hath been an Idoll, we thinke no Protestant will deny. Witnesse their ascribing of Divine vertue to it; yea they adore it. The venerable signe of the Crosse (saith Swares) is worthie to be adored,Venerabile signū crucis in 3: parte Aquin. Tom. 1. Dist. 56. Sect. 3. though in a transient matter or action; because the figure and signification is the same, though the matter be divers. Every figure or shape of the Crosse, whether permanent or transeunt, is to be adored (saith Vasques.) Yea this ae∣reall Crosse,De Ador. Lib. 3. disp. 2. cap. 2. quaecunque crucis figura &c. was the very mother of the materiall Crosses, to which they creep, offer incense, pray, adore, and so make it both mediator of intercession and re∣demption, contrary to their owne coyned distinction, as D. Reynolds well observeth from the words of their Breviary.De Lib. Apochr. Prolect, 241 And so much for this Argument.
The common answer to such Arguments as this, is from the 30. Canon; Papists (say they) abused it fowly but we use it better? For answer. 1. This is not to answer, for we have proved, that it is not to be used at all. It is a common excuse of corrupt practise (saith one of their owne) to use meanes abused by others in Gods worship, to a better end. Yea it is a resolution too plausible to wordly wisdome.D. Iackson. 2. For use, is there not in word as much attributed to it by us (if not more) as by the Papists? Are not, by the Prelats, the proper Offices of Baptisme ascribed to the Crosse,Gen. 12.17 Exo. 12.13 Luc. 22.19 August. de Doctr. Christian. Lib. 3. c. 15. Calvin. in Lev. 4. 22. Mart. in 1. K. in 8 Beza Epist. 8. Franc. Flanders. as teaching and strengthening? which be cheife parts of the nature of a Sacrament, as Scripture commenters, and the consent of Churches do te∣stify. To conclude the Argument in a word: The Pre∣lats Crosse is the same specie, or in figure. It is the same also for the especiall signification, namely, to be a signe of Christ, and the efficacie of his death. So that (as one saith) he retaineth entirely his old Idolls office. It made way (saith Beza) to that horrible sin of hyper∣dulia. The last Argument followeth well upon this, namely: It is the badge of the beast, which manifest 1. by the Papists challenging of it, to be the special marke and badge of their Idolatrous worship; witnesse Stapleton,Prompt. Ca∣tholic. Pag. 26. 27. De Sacra. Lib. 2. ca. 3. Part. 20. Epist. Apolo∣get. Sec. 7. Pag. 54. Bellarmine. An other calleth it the Character of their glory: The Crosse (saith one) is a notable signe
whereby to know a Catholique. How can we hould up hour heads (saith one) for shame of the beasts mark, which our eares heare by them thus extolled? or with what forehead? can we say that the Crosse is not the beasts mark? 2. That it is a mark of the beast, it is cleare from these places of the Revelation Cap. 13.17. & 14.9. and v. 11. & 15.2.Park. pag. 136. And that first by the exposition of the learned,In Synops. de Charact. Antich. Pag. 199. Prob. 31. in Revelat. 13▪ namely, D. Willett, M. Napier, Bullinger. Yea all our Orthodox writers confesse that our Ceremonies are a part of the mark of the Beast, of which Ceremo∣nies the Crosse is the speciall. As M. Fox, Io. de Vado. Dr. Abbot calls all the priests garments whereby they are distinguished from the rest of the Church a spe∣ciall part of the Character of the beast,Antichr. Demonstr. cap. 11. 26▪ and how much more the Crosse? 2. As this is the exposition of the learned: so this truth may be from the places demonstrated thus, to omit other particulars.) That mark which is put upon men by the second Beast, and is the mark of the number of his name, and is put upon all who use traffick or trade, is the mark of the Beast. But the Crosse in baptisme is put upon men by the second Beast, it is the mark of the number of his name,Rev. 13 18 and must be upon all that traffique or trade. Rev. 13.16, 17. Ergo the Crosse is the mark of the Beast. The argument is M. Napiers in effect; the last part of whose medium, namely,35 Page▪  the universalitie of the crosse, is well enough known to all that know anie thing; that all, everie where, at the begining
or ending of their meate, sleepe, or affaires, crosse themselves, Of which popish practise our English Arminius Mountigue verie well approveth. The omitting of their crosses incurred no lesse censure then the curse: neither were they permit∣ted without it to keepe house, or exercise any trade. witnes the Bull of Pope Martin. Dr. Willet speak∣eth expresly to the confirmation of this argument; The superstitious marks of the Crosse (saith he) arise out of the beasts Name (to wit) from the number of it thus expressed in the Greek Originall . Of the same minde is Master Brightman, expounding the mea∣ning of the beastes making all to receave the marke. Rev. 13.16This marke (saith he) doth conteyne summarily all those wayes, by which men are bound to obedience to the beast. Now wherein are they more slavishly bound then to the marke of the Crosse? 3. Vpon the same ground (namely, that it is the badge of the beast,) the learned write against it, (and the reformed Churches reject it;Tract. Theo∣log. vol. 2. Page 127. Loc. Com. Page 169. De Redempt. Page 648. In rev. page 56. against Sand. of Images, page 602.) witnesse Beza. Sigedimus. Zanchius. D. Fulke. Reynoldes. Alas than (saith one) what is our sin, who not onely re∣ceive the crosse our selves (one of Antichrists mar∣kes) but also put it and drawe it as it were with pinsers upon others? 4. Wee desire to know, what things in popery be the markes of the beast if these be not?
Wee have been the larger upon this, because it is a maine stumbling blocke to manie, having in readines particular treatises against the rest of the particulars, which shalbe at your honours ser∣vice. For the present we will conclude with this, that a great Court officer amongst the Hierarchie, hearing the vilenes of the Crosse layd open and proved in dispute, confessed in plaine termes, that it was a filthy Idoll, and he wisht it condemned to hell from whence it came, But to proceed. Who giveth life and breath to this and the rest of the Ceremonies? who ushers them into Gods wor∣ship? who are the nursing Fathers and Mothers of them? who be their Chirurgious & Phisicians, with druggs, salves, & Potious, to dawbe, cure, and Palliate them, where they cannot make a cure? who doe heale and Cica∣trize these festred wounds of the beast, but the Prelats & their apprentises? who daube with this untēpered mor∣ter? who maketh warre against the Saincts to keep the Dragons tayle of a due length? The Bishops onely and their dependants. In so much that we have more then cause to renew the just complaint of that learned & well disposed K. Freder. of Spaine Ao. 1300. Episcopi caeremonias, & omne id quod ad vanam gloriam celebriter promovent, quantum vero ad Regimen animarum in salu∣tem aeternam pestiferi sunt, &c. As for the Ceremonies (saith he) and such things as do serve to the advancing of the vain-glorie of the Prelacie, the Bs. take solem care for the promoteing of these; but of the government of soules, and their eternal salvation, they are the very plagues, &c. In a word, as No Ceremonie, no Bishop, so
No B. no Ceremonie. Yea they have brought us to an higher degree of Idolls, namely, the Masse in publique: which who would have thought? beside as manie private Masses as the Papists will. The keeping in of that strange fire, hath made good Gods threatenings upon us,Hos. 8.11. because Ephraim hath made manie Altars to sin, Altars shall be vnto him to sin, as if the Spirit should say: Since he will have Idolls, he shall not want enough of them. Againe, no man knoweth how farre this leprosie may spread: for Papists servants make great braggs, and offer monie out to that day, when publique Masses shall be done in their Masters chappels. Those Idolls in Gods worship beget and maintaine other Idolls, as appeareth plainly from that place fore∣quoted, and also from too much wofull experience. How doe our monstrously metamorphosed women maintaine the Idoll of their strange and abhominable apparrell, but from the Minister his anticke attiring of himself in the cast apparel of the whoore? Yea how do usurers, swearers, and others maintaine their monstrous sinnes, but by pressing on the reprovers of them, those Ceremonies, which once being obeyed, they make a mook of the word? Further, they doe not onely doe, and maintaine these things, but also they presse the practise of them upon the subjects, and that often maugre their consciences,
and that by threatning, punishing of their purse & im∣prisonment. Moreover they force the Ministers and young Schollers to subscribe to the aforesaid 5. Books, two of which, scarce one amongst manie have seene. The matter of their subscription, as hath been said be∣fore, is this, That nothing contained in the said Books, is contrarie to the word of God. Whence it must follow, that Ceremonies and other things in question, must be warranted by the word. For as they cannot denie that whatsoever is beside the word, is against the word: so whatsoever (especially in Gods worship) is not con∣trary to the word, is warranted by the word. By which deduction the pressours of these things and subscribers to hem, put them upon the second Commandment, for by it, they must either stand or fall. Now thus to put upon God the thing, that he never commanded, nor ever came into his heart to command, as himself speaketh,Ier. 7.31. how high a sin it is, and how neare to blasphemie, we leave it to be judged. Moreover, whereas all outward means of Gods wor∣ship by th'Affirmative of this commandment are esta∣blished, and the due performance thereof required, the Prelats persecute and thrust out the faithfull Ministers, which be the Messengers of the Word, the Ambassa∣dours of God, the Breakers of the bread of life; and with idle and Idoll sheapheards (the slayers of the people) they fill up their places: how manie such they thrust in and keep in, we cannot number. They are Fathers & Favourers of the soul-murthe∣ring sinnes of Non-residencie & pluralitie, condemned
by all the Laws that can be named: Neither can these consist with the office of a Pastor. We will give but a touch, because we have a whole treatise against those sinnes, which your Honours may command. Never Papist so shamelesse, as to plead or write for these sinnes (so farr as we know) yet some among us are not ashamed to doe both. But this is no better then to plead and write for bloud-guiltinesse, and to warrant it by a law. The maine non-residents be their Lords & Masters; by reason whereof they become Patrons, to impropriate patrons, whom they have taught to sin, & maintayne sin by president. Another sin against the Ordinances, is the Iustlinge out of the reading of the word of God, to the number of 196 chapters, or there about, yea & some whole Books of Scripture: in place whereof 134. chapters of the Apocrypha are thrust in, as of more use, edification and esteeme with them; witnesse, their making of Scripture, to give place to the Apocrypha, upon a speciall feast, though it fall on the Lords day. And this is done, or to be done by the Calender 20. several times in the year. Yet more sinne against the Ordinances: to passe by their Lenton superstitious fast, with the expectation of Popish Discipline in that particular, they keep out and hinder true fasting indeed, to the shame of this Nation, & the halling on of inevitable destructiō upō our heads witnes that of Isaie: In that day I called for weeping, &c.
but behold, &c. Surely that iniquitie shall not be purged from you till you dye, saith the Lord of hoasts:Isay. 22.13 14. this speech may make our eares tingle and hearts tremble. If a Fast at length be appointed, the Prelats will be sure to watch for spoyling of the pot with one Coloquintida or other of their owne invention. Wherfore we beseech your Honours, as you tender Gods Honour, and desire his presence to your procee∣dings, looke to your Fasts, that death be not in the pot; that instead of pacifying of an angrie God, ye provoke him not more. For it is not more naturall for Prelats to eat & drink, then from their hearts to hate a Fast in∣deed, to the Lord. Manie reasons we might give, but we desire this one to be thought on. If this dutie were kept up, and set on foote upon all the right Limmes, & duely plyed modo & forma, upon every just motive, they know it would finde them out to be nostri fundi calamitas, the very bane of our being: yea this would blow them up, and all our sinnes & enimies with them. In this their hatred and feare of the duetie appeareth: If anie gather themselves together (as the Lord commandeth) to stay (if it be possible) the comming forth of the decree, they are watched with Argus eyes, and dragged along by Briarius his hands, as it were in despitefull opposition to God and his service, against the Laws of the Land, against the Crowne & Dignitie of the King, against the temporall and eternall good of the State.
Yet this is not all, but if Gods people in their families upon the Lords day fall to chew the cud, by the repeti∣tion of a Sermon, helping some neighbours that have not such meanes; they are without regard of the day, Gods ordinance, or God himself, halled or hurried be∣fore a Prelate; some are kept in pursuivants hands, some bound over at no lesse cost then vjs. or a noble a peece, some having scarse so much more in the world, O tempora! O mores! To shut up the further prosecution of the breaches of this precept; Where is the key of Discipline? As Discipline, is the soule of warre; the spirit of Policie: so it is the Scepter of Christ, swaying his owne house, according to his hearts desire. And as a body without a soule; a Camp or State with∣out Policie are either dead carkasses, or bodies so be∣nummed, that they either do nothing, or that which is worse then nothing: so a Church without Discipline, is a Lethargicall, or Apoplecticall body, wanting that ani∣mal spirit, which should open and expell the drossie vapors of sin, and organise the said body. Discipline is the cheife commander in the Camp-Royall of God. It driveth the nayle into the temples of Rebellion it self. This is the onely best physitian, for the purging out of peccant and pertinacious humours, the onely Chirurgian for wounds and festered sores; and an exquisite bone-setter for fractures or luxations. This is Christs owne Key, that shutteth out enimies & entertaineth freinds; In a word, it is the best guarde & forte; muniment & munition; Notwithstanding of all
this excellencie, as the Synagoge of Rome, and all the Limbs of that confused Babell, like nothing worse then the Discipline of Christs camp, so the most of our nation may say with sorrow and greife in hearte, as the Disciples said to Paul of the Holie Ghost:Acts. 19.2. We have not so much as heard whether there be a Holie Ghost: so all this time we have scarcely heard whether there be any such thing as Discipline. And is not this grosse affected ignorance, yea a fearfull judgment inflicted on us? For as sure as Christ hath a house, so sure he hath keyes to that house, and that no moe, no fewer, nor other, then he hath appointed. These, men may not chop, change, or counterfaite at their pleasure (except they will turne Picklocks.Mat. 16.19 & 18.16. Ioh. 20.23. & 21.17.) Christs keyes are delivered in the word, namely, the power and use of the word and Discipline, guiding and guarding all other ordinances, the use and authoritie whereof, is also by practise manifested in the same. So that Discipline or Church-government is a maine Key of the Kingdome of Heaven. Can anie man think that Christ would leave his house destitute of some forme of governmt. (being faithfull in all his house as Moses) was?Heb. 3.2. or that anie better forme of government could be devised by man? (for every change should be to the better) yet the Prelats and their Champions beare the people in hand, that there is no certaine,Hook. Bilson de gubern. Pag. 167. B. Whitg. Answ. to the abstract. pag. 58. un∣changeable, compleate forme of Policie or government of Christs Church to be found in the Scriptures: which is flat against Scripture, practise, and reason, as hath been fully proved in a work unanswerable: for they may as well say, that Christ hath no howse; as to affirme it to
be changable which cannot be to the better, there∣fore not at all. It is true the prelates (enimies to Christs government) speake contumeliously of dis∣cipline, calling it a fancy or novelty, a meere humane devise, and they would beare the world in hand that Calvin was the first authour of it, as D. Downham, B. Bilson, Saravia; & B. King: but they doe just in this, as the Papists doe with our religion, who will haue Luther to be the authour of it. In this the Prelates opinion and practise, is much like that of the Lacedemonians, defended by Plato, namely to haue no walls about their Cities, but the citizens valour:Lib. 7. de Opt. Rep. but as their unsound opinion, and Plato his defence are refuted by Aristotle, as very presump∣tuous, dangerous and blooddy to a common weale; so the want of the walls of discipline, layeth a Church o∣pen to all manner of mischiefe, and danger, both from forrein and domestick foes: but in this they differ from the Lacedemonians; they stood upon the worth and valour of theis citizens; but the Pre∣lates doe not onely unmantle the walls, but also cashiere the verie best forces, as though they meant to destroy and raze the foundation of the Citie of God. The utilitie and necessity of dicipline cannot enough be expressed. It is a speciall note of the Church, though not constituting a Church, yet flowing properly from the essence of a Church. It is most necessarie for the externall subsistance, or well being of the Church: It is also a verie necessa∣rie meanes for the obteining of the greatest good of the Church.
They themselves confesse that some forme of government is necessarie (as B. Whitgift, Bancroft, Bilson, Downham) for they hold it as Keckerman speaketh a Cyclopicall, or confused multitude , where none governe and none obey. what government is then like to the government of Christ? This is the guard that keepeth out errours of doctrine, and corruptions of manners: this is the sithe that cutteth downe sin, this maketh the tallest rebell in sin to stoope; this strengtheneth the hands and comforteth the hearts of Gods people; this maketh a sweete harmonie and concinne order in the Church and common wealth, as appeareth by that cōmon-weal of Geneva formerly instanced, admired by all nations that looke vpon it with a single eie. By the contrary, where this is altoge∣ther wanting, or a bare empty cask or mere shew and shadow of it remaineth, there is nothing but the Cha∣os of cōfusiō, or (to speak with the spirit) there is no∣thing but wretchednes, that is, Ignorāce of our own miserie, beggarlines, blindnes & nakednes.Rev. 3.17. But we will not know it, nay our Prelates will not haue us to know it: This golden scepter they cannot endure, for it crosseth the Popes leaden scepter, by which they rule all and do∣miniere over all, we meane Antichristian discipline, which the greatest Champions of Rome both high∣ly commend,Triplicat. Arti Whita. cap. 19. Hierarch. Anachrys. Lib. 2. Page 45. and in it exceedingly insult over the Puritans (as they call them) & all the reformed Chur∣ches. witnesse Stapleton & Scultingius: This forty yeares (say they) the Englysh Bishops have retained the Discipline of the Catholiques, maugre the Puritans hearts.
What impietie, injustice and tyrannie is this, to wast the vineyard of the Lord to silence, suspend, depose & imprison the keepers and dressers of the same? to break downe the walles and the hedges of it? to reare up an Antichristian Fort in it, and to plant Popish Ca∣nons upon it? Is this to defend Sion? or is it not to mixe the En∣glish Sea with fire,Revel. 3.2. to consume Sion? Is this to make glad the hearts, and to strengthen the weak-knees of Gods people? Or is it not rather to fill the bosomes of the Philistims with triumphant joye? and to fill with shame (so farre as they can) the faces of all reformed Chur∣ches? By this all men may know, whose servants these Great Lords be. Before we shut up the discourse of the sinning against this commandment, it shall not be amisse to lay the fin∣ger upon an old sore of theirs, newly festered, name∣lie, the barring the printing of all books from the presse, which might inlighten the people with love of the truth of Christs government, and the puritie of his ordinances, and might make them hate their Antichristian calling and impure devises in Gods wor∣ship. In this they deale with us, as the Rectors of the Ie∣suites do in their Societies, who straitlie interdict both young and old the reading or having of Protestant Books, which made their convert Spalato to say, or ra∣ther to dissemble, that this was the prime and princi∣pall
cause of his suspecting of the Popish religion.Consil. profes. The Prelats doe not onely oppose such Books, as oppose their tyrannie and trumperie, interdicting and menacing people from the reading of them, but they also imprison, banish, yea and kill the Authors of them. If any thing by God his good hand passe the presse, either at home or abroad, which crosseth their tenour, or speaketh home for the tenour of Christ, it must either go through purgatory, or through the fire, such is their expurgatory tryall. Instance D. Whittakers worke, otherwise published after his death than in his life. Also Mr. Sprints Cassander, Spalato his summe of his 9. Booke, concerning Ministers mainte∣nance. Not to be tedious, be pleased to view Bucanus his institutions, translated into English, and printed in London Anno 1616. the yeare after that they were printed in Geneva, in this they make him speake, (not through the fault of the translater,) but by a coyning and clipping authoritie, the things he never spake indeed. They invert the order, they take away both que∣stions and answers, they turne affirmatives into nega∣tives, and negatives into affirmatives, a number of in∣stances we can give, but let a taste suffice. The question of the marriage of the innocent partie divorsed, is quite left out. De conjugo quest. 13. So a great part of the question of the orders of Ministers, quest. 25. Also the question of the signe of the
Crosse in Baptisme, quest. de Baptis. quest. 19. and manie others. What the leaving out of the most part of the answer to the question of Naboths denying Ahab his vineyard meaneth,Quest. 75. we leave it to your Honours judg∣ment: but now they are growen to a further height, for as they would never suffer the wall of discipline to be built, so now they are like to ruine the citie of the word it self, by reserving of the presses, for the set∣ting forth, and trimming up their owne projects and Arminianisme, the verie gatehouse of Poperie, but as for counterpleas or preservatives against such poison∣able drugges, they will suffer none to passe, yea though there be no matter of controversie, yet it is contro∣versie to them if it be the trueth. And so much for this Commandment, against which we desire your Honours to observe, what a world of sinnes arise from the Prelacie. As for the third Commandment; to passe by their owne ordinary oaths (which they account but pettie ones) and also the bloody oaths of their swaggering servants and the roaring speeches of their, Ioviall Chap∣lins, being a wondrous evill president to all about them; how doth their prophane cariage, the ruffian-like revelling behaviour of their Chaplins (moc∣king of Ministers reproving swearing, & others sinnes) set an edge upon the sinne of swearing, when swea∣rers know how such reprovers shall be dealth with? Againe, how is the name of God prophaned by that illegall extorted oath ex officio? by the battologies and
tautologies, lenton curses, and adjurations of the ser∣vice-booke and Letanie? besides the fearfull roaring, racking, and torturing of the word in their Cathedrall Churches? To the 4. Commandment, (besides their exemplarie prophaning of the Lords day, by themselves and fami∣lies) it is a lamentable case to heare & see how in their Commēcements by Schoole disputes, in their Sermons and Discourses, the moralitie of the Sabbath is brought in question, and to the great dishonour of God, and greife of his people, they maintaine the Non-morali∣tie of it. And not onely so, but they oppose them∣selves to the reformation and keeping of it; witnesse their hand against the Magistracie of the Citie of London in that busines. And for that flying Rooke of toleration, for prophaning of the Sabbath, the desire of the monstrously prophane, and the procurement of some Prelate, concurred to the begetting of it, and brin∣ging it to be authorised. Lastly, they take off the leaders of Gods families in the sanctifying of the Sabbath. And so much (as breif∣ly as we could) for the sinnes of the first table, takeing footing and butting upon the Prelats. Now to come to the sinnes of the second Table: First, they sinne with a high hand against the K. Majest. & that first in respect of his soules good; they speak evill to him of the trueth of God, and of the servants of the trueth, whereby a Kings heart may be let loose from the feare of his God, & givē over to supine negligence, deluding pleasures, & an evill conceite of the pretious truth, & of his best & lovingst frends & subjects. Iust ac∣cording to
that speech of the Prophet: They make the King glad with their wickednes,Hos. 7.3. and the Princes with their lyes. Of which place the foregoing words explane the meaning (according to the scope of the Spirit, and the current of Interpreters,) namelie, by their corrupt lives & false suggestions, they corrupt the King, forestalling his judgment against the good, and goodnes. Peccata Prae∣latorum. Steph. in locum.Hence one well observeth, that the sinnes of Prelats corrupting Princes, hindereth the good of the subjects. So that we force not the text. For the further proofe of this, with what false sug∣gestions did the Prelats abuse their ingenuous & royall Queene Elizabeth against the true Offices and Officers of the Court of Heaven upon Earth? How was the late King pressed as a cart under sheaves, to blanch and abandon the ordinances; to dis∣grace and discountenance his Chariots and Horsemen, in which lay more strength then in all his Counsels & forces? How was he pressed to the putting downe of lectures. To give an instance of these evill Offices, we have heard that the King upon occasion given, inquired of the Venetian extraordinarie Ambassadours, what meanes the people in their territories and other Isles of Italie had for their soules; They made answer to this effect, that their leiturgie and Booke of Homelies (pro∣portioned in number to the Sabbaths of the yeare) were read in their Churches. Alas! (said the King) that is poore stuffe. To the which a Prelate (being by) replyed: That it should be better for his Majesties
State, and the State of his Kingdomes, if there were me Homilies, and lesse preaching: For there was more love (said he) among subjects themselves, more loyaltie to their Prince, more prosperitie to the State, when it was so, then since the time that nothing would serve but preaching. At which speech the King looked hard upon him, and said no more. If the learned Iudges, and learned Counsellers at law, and all understanding Statesmen doe hould and professe it a principle of State, that Suggestours & Insti∣gatours of a King, to cutt the coards of his owne laws, are worthie of condigne punishment in the highest de∣gree; what are these men worthie that incite the King to neglect or reject the Commandments of his God? To that purpose another of them, as we are informed, told the same King: That all the Church should never be at rest, till such two worthie Ministers (whose names we spare) were hanged up, one in the South, another in the North. Secondly, they are against the Honour of the King. For as it was a staine to the good Kings of Iuda (notwithstanding all their carefull re∣formation and maintenance of true religion,1. King. 22 43. 2. Kin. 14.4 18.14.23.25.) that they tooke not away the high places (instance Amazia & Iehoshaphat) which high places Hezechia & Iosia re∣moved, to the great Honour of their names; so these men wonderfully eclipse (if not deface) the Honour of our Soveraigne, not onely in stateing the Aultar of Damascus, that is their owne or Popish Ceremonies,
with the Altar of Gods ordinances, but in suffering Baal-peor, to shew his face openly; which must of ne∣cessitie make the wrath of God break in upon us. Prou. 25.2.It is the Kings Honour, (saith Salomon) to search out a matter from the bottom (as the word signifieth) which is to be understood in things concerning Gods glorie, his owne Honour, and the good of the State: but they vaile our Soveraigne in the first of these; which indeed should be the perspective to the rest, to bring them home in their due quantities; how then should his ho∣nour truely flourish? Thirdly, they transgresse highly against his Royall Crowne and Dignitie (as hath beene shewed) in the maintenance of forraigne jurisdiction. Fourthly, they are against his prerogative Royall, not onely maintaining their calling to be jure divino, but also in keeping Courts in their owne name. Fiftly, they weaken the strength of the Kings state: For as the hovering of the Israelites mindes after Sauls house, weakned the pillars of the house of David (though annointed and established by the Lord) so the hovering of our English Romanists, after Romes Prima∣cie, doth distract & enervate dangerously the strength of his Majesties state. And who be the main poles of the tent of their hope, but the Prelacie? encouraging them further by suppressing and disgracing Romes cheifest adversaries under the name of the Puritans.
So that which is the weakening of his freinds; is the strengthening of his foes. And that thus they doe, let their Canons, Advertisements, visitation Articles, their open clamours and calumnies from pulpits (comparing them with Iesuits,) and lastly, their dayly proceeding against them in their Courts beare witnesse. Sixtly, they devour the Kings wealth, for as the wealth of the subject, is the wealth of the King, so the impoverishing and spoyling of the subject, is the im∣poverishing and spoyling of the King. For exacting from the subject: let first a Quaere be made, whether they rake not out of the Ministers vijs & modis compu∣tatis computandis an 100000 per Annum. And asmuch more out of the peoples purses for visitation sees, pleas, and jangling matters, besides the great summes they raise for probats of wills; what a rable of Officers, as Chancellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and others, keepe they for the emptying of the peoples purses, and filling of the land full of all manner of sinne, as swearing, drunkennes, whoredome, pride, Idlenesse, &c. witnesse their filthie and rotten speeches, in disgrace of Gods people, which we loathe to name, as also their patronising of sinne, and pla∣gueing of Professours in their Courts; what a number∣lesse number of Mothes, drones, and Caterpillers, they keepe in their Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches, we are not able to expresse. Some have summed them up to the number of 22000. or there about, what a huge deal of meanes will so many Sharks devoure.
7. And lastlie, they are against the safetie of his Majesties person, maintaining the hopes of Popish traytors, who upon all occasions are readie to attempt, and commit treason against him and the State; wit∣nesse the manie plotts and deepe treasons, contrived against our Kings and State this 68. yeares; As they sin against the King, so they sinne against all his sub∣jects; As first against his Ministers, from whom and whose families (against the Laws of God and the land) they have taken both liveliehood and life; for some have finished their lives in prison; and some at this day be∣ing poore and aged, have much adoe to gett bread to eat, but worse then all this, they stoppe their Ministrie, which is dearer to them then life and libertie. How bitterlie and baselie have they abused them in their Courts and palaces; what numbers have they at seve∣rall times silenced? It is extant in record that in anno 1604. about 2 Ministers were questioned, for not subscribing or no conforming, of which number about 70. were de∣prived of their livings, about 113. not suffered to preach; and about 94. under admonition; All which cruelties are done upon them and theirs, for not subscribing to a booke, whereunto to subscribe, is fl against the law, as hath been discovered. But in verie deed their quarrell is against the prea∣ching of the Gospell; which cannot stand (as we have shewed) with the standing of the Hierarchy. For it is cleare both against the statute, and the late Kings minde in his Conference at Hampton Court, that
men once admitted, should be ejected or cast out for not-sub∣scribing. Citing that of the Poet: Turpius ejecitur quam non admittitur hospes. 2. They sin exceedinglie against the good estate and sanctimonie of the Kings houshold government, whereof the Ministers ordinarilie are men of their moulding, looking more for preferment then caring for the soules; they feede them with some froathie Stuffe (as noble Prince Henrie well observed) where∣by not onelie much loosenes, but also perplexitie (for want of means) assault them. For as profuse giving ex∣hausteth the fountaine; so except the fountaine of Princelie liberalitie be ever sending some refreshing streams, to moisten the drinesse of their hott liverd ser∣vants, they fall quicklie either unto a consumption; or else into a dropsie of indirect courses, which cannot but reflect upon their King and Mr. Now since his Majestie by reason of his maine imployments, cannot helpe them as he would (out of his owne meanes) with some of the Prelats needlesse & hurtfull aboun∣dance, he may supplie his servants wants, and doe much good with the rest. But to go on, they sinne also against all his Majesties subjects; And that first in tyrannising over their soules and bodies, in the courses of their unjust Courts. Which (as a noble man observeth) are opposite to all the Courts of the Kingdome, by reason of the exercise of
sole authoritie. The Bishop citeth alone, accuseth alone, censureth and excommunicateth alone; But (saith he) Kings and Monarches have their Counsells. All temporall Courts have more wherein their authoritie doth rest; as the high Court of Parliament, Kings Bench, common Pleas, Chancery, Starchamber, and all the rest. And so it is in forraigne Kingdomes, witnesse the Parliaments in France: But the Prelate doth all himself, and that in matters of higher nature then the highest temporall affaires: which is a thing (saith he) past all example, and for which they can render no reason. That Popish tyranny indeed where∣by they exalt themselves above all that is called God, is the very ground of it, and best reason they can render. Out of their presumption, they dare crosse by their Courts, the highest Court of the Kingdome; namely the Parliament; for which sawsy courses, our Kings have secluded them the Court of Parliament. Instance Edward the first,Anno 1295 who called a Parliament of his Nobi∣litie and commons, secluding the Clergie both from Parliament and protection. 2. They sinne against the subjects, in bereaving them of their faithful sheepheards; in removing the Dogges that should keepe, & the watchmen that should watch the Flockes: so they are left a prey to the Wolves & Foxes, of which losse, implying danger; if the people were sensible, they would make more adoe then Michah made for his Idolatrous Levite. But they are now as men forgotten, and their cause is so litle in request, that all the Ministers all most give way, yet with bowing downe betweene two burthens; what
a pressure of servitude they put upon honest and faith∣full Ministers; their silent sorrowes and abrupt com∣plaints (for service put upon them fore against their hearts) doe testify. As for such in the Ministrie as are their devoted servants; they rejoyce in the flesh, by making the peoples burthens heavier. The Prelats sett some as the Egyptian taske-Masters over the people, to see them doe their worke, wherein if the people faile, never so litle, with the Taskemasters they are punished. Our Ministers are used as the Romans used the Vestall Virgins; they are beaten if they keepe not in the Romish holy fire. As for the peoples Zeale, sinceritie, holines, and labour of love. The smoke out of the bottomlesse pitt hath bla∣sted them exceedinglie: For as the strict keeping of the first table, bindeth on the dueties of the second table, so remissenes or mixture in the first; maketh us loose in the dueties of the second. And if they yeild not to all, or be somewhat more strict in life and due∣ties, what a hurrying to their Courts, what a poleing of their purses, and what a poudering with their execra∣tions, doe they keepe against them? which according to the Scripturs, Councells, and Fathers should onely be inflicted for Criminall causes. As the Apostle speaketh concerning an hereticke:Tit. 3.10. After once or twice admonition, reject him: Ob Criminales tantum causas & valde graves; For great and waightie,Concil. Aug. cap. 23. yea hainous offences (saith the Counsell) they shall be onelie excommunicate.
They abuse also egregiouslie the writt de excommu∣nicato capiendo; which should runne onelie upon cri∣minall causes, as heresie, denying to com at church, inconti∣nencie, usurie, simonie, perjurie, Idolatrie. But for any of those, they neither cite nor censure Gods people (be∣cause they have no grounds) and therefore they are not liable to this writt. Yet what case Gods people are in, by reason of this unjust proceeding, it is not un∣knowne to your honours. To make up the full cup of affliction; by warrants and commitments from the high commission, people be cast into a blacke melancholike Golgatha or filthie prison, erected in the midle of the Citie, against the li∣bertie of the same. This is like the Lions denne, out of which verie few are delivered with their lives, except it be upon verie ill termes; witnesse the yet Crying blood of two honest men, within or about these three yeares, and a third had his deadlie wound, besides the death of others in the other prisons. Instance these two wor∣thie and famous men, sacrificed to the prison of the gatehouse, together with sundry worthies of the Scottish natiō, whose blood by their means was dryed up, and drayned out in the prison. This cruell course is absolutlie against his Majesties laws, and the Priviledge of a subject: For the statute for the Prelates imprisoning and lawlesse oath, tooke place in the height of Poperie, as hath been shewed in the time of Henrie the 4. whereto the commons (as it is witnessed) never consented.
For the further discovery of the evill of the Prelats prisons, and their imprisoning, give us leave to com∣mend to your view from the learned, the unhappie (yea hellish) beginning of it, when the Mysterie of Ini∣quitie was drawen to a head, then began the scarlet whore to put out the black flag of imprisonment a∣gainst the people of God, that would not receive the Mark of the Beast;Catolog. test. veri. Page 656. witnesse the collections of the lear∣ned. Eugenius primus post vacationem Romanae sedis, &c. Eugenius the 1. after the vacancie of the Sea of Rome, for the space of 4. monthes, was made Pope, who not regarding Ecclesiasticall affairs, or the furtherance of the Gospell, gave in charge about the yeare of our Lord 656, that Bishops should have their prisons bereaving (say they) the Magi∣strate of the Sword, not for the punishing of Idolaters, Adul∣terers, &c. of which there were great aboundance, but to punish and pine Hereticks (as they called them) who would not heare and adore the throne of the Beast. Gregorie the first (saith the Author) hath left a written testimonie, what the judgment of the ancient Canons is, of such Bishops as well have men to fear them for their prisons, their fatherhood should know (saith he) that they should be Pastores non percussores, feeders not strikers, nova predica∣tio qu verbecibus exigit fidem. It is a new kinde of teaching, to make men beleeve with blowes but Eugenius & his Successours (saith the Author) scorned and contemned this divinitie. Have not our Prelats cunned their Fathers lecture prettie well? Yes sure, for who feel the smart of their prisons? not the Idolater or vile person, yea not the professed Athist, the canker fretting Arminian, or state-betraying
Iesuite, for with all of these they are haile fellow well mette; But the grand transgressours the puritans shall be sure of the veryest dog-hole in all the Bishops denne, though the Iesuites had wont to haue the rougher words, with these their prisons they so terrifie Gods people, that they often say, & sweare, and doe they know not what. These are their Herculean arguments wherewith they con∣clude all in Bocardo,2. Henr. 4. Chap. 15. Fox. that dare deny the dung of their Augean stable to be good gould for the altar of God: but the law is cleare, we neede not informe your Honours that none should be imprisoned, nisi per legale judicium parium, aut per legem terrae. That is, Vpon a juditious processe,Magna Cart. c. 29. Edw. 4. c. 2. Edw. 3. c. 3. by a legall tryall, or by the law of the land. Neither doth that act, from whence they would ground their commission, give any power, but rather a restraint to their imprisoning and fyne∣ing, for if it did, it should crosse the law of the land: yea the power of the Commission, so expoun∣ded,Filz. nature. Br. p. 51. 52 Edw. 3.15. Cap. 6. crosseth the statute it selfe, as by judicious law∣yers hath been learnedly observed. Besides, there is a statute flatly against it. Further if they had such power, to what se ser∣veth that writte de Excommunicato capiendo? So that it is more than evident, their fyning and imprison∣ing, are altogether against the lawes of the land, the tenour of the power by which they hold, and the course of their owne proceedings.
4. They sin highly against the Nobility & gen∣trie, for besides their sining against their soules, in keeping out a powerfull ministrie, they intrude vpon secular offices due to the nobility and gentry, and that against the law of God, the nature of cal∣lings, the Cannon law, and the law of nations. Hubert was Archb. of Cant. Lord Chancellour of Eng. and Lord cheife justice all at once. Instances there be too manie, and that of our owne times; contrarie to the Act of the Counsell at Oxford, holden by Steven Langton; ne clerici jurisdictiones exerceant secu∣lares; that is: no Clergie men should exercise anie tempo∣rall function. Math. Parisiensis maketh mention of the Popes injunction here in England, to take the great seale from a Bishop, being Lord-keeper for the time. It is observed by one, that it never went well with that State, where the Clergie hath borne Temporall Offices, or where they are Counsellours of State. It is a disgracefull affront to the Nobility, judges & gentry, as though they were not worthy or fitt for the places. The like may be said of Ministers, being Iustices of peace. That this their temporall jurisdiction is opposite to the law of God, it is manifest from these words: The Kings of the gentiles exercise Lordship over them, &c. but ye shall not doe so. Luke 22.25.26. Math. 20.25. by the which places the Prelacy is so confounded, that they fall in with the Rhemists, by wrangling to wrest the
meaning of the Spirit. The places (say the Prelats and Rhemists) forbid Tyrannous Lordship and Government, but not a just and upright government. In which cavill your Honours may justly wonder that men will be so shamelesse. For first we must con∣sider, that our Saviour answereth his Disciples to their question, according to their desire. Now could they be so impudent, as to desire to play the Tyrants? No sure. It is Tyranny so to expound the place. But their desire was of a lawfull preheminence in idoneo subjecto, in a subject capable of it, and tells them plainly, they must have no such Office. It is most true (as it is noted) that he barreth in his answer, all ambitious Prelacy, being the greatest tyranny: which the Disciples desired not, but further he denyes to them all temporall preheminence lawfull in it selfe, but not for them, as he cleareth by the instance of the Dominion of wordly rulers; and the more to diswade them from it, he presseth his owne example, Luke 22.27. And thus he answers the question. All Orthodox expositors both ancient and moderne accord in this trueth. Indicitur ministratio, interdicitur dominatio: Bernard, de Consid. Lib. 2. The Ministry commanded, but Do∣minion forbidden. We should be free (saith Hierome) from secular affaires, that we may please Christ, It is not for a minister (saith Ambrose) to have two Offices. Father Latimer asketh the Prelats if it were their offices to be Courting it, Sermon 5. to Edw. 6. In 1. Cor. 6.4. Non utrum{que} gladium Petro,
saith Beza, he gave not both the swords to Peter or any other Apostle, In annot. 1. Cor. 6. Bellarmine the Cardinall is expresly for this trueth, commenting on our Saviours words Luke 12.14. who made me a judge, &c. Admonet Episcopum ut nec index litium, nec arbiter facultatum sit, he warneth a Bishop, neyther to be judge in terrene controversies, nor a determiner of mens right, de Pontifi. Lib. 5. Cap. 10. To the same effect, upon the same place, Franciscus Turrianus speaketh prettily and pithily: Quid dicturi sunt Episcopi ad illud Christi,Lib. 8. con∣stit. Apost. C. 46. quis constituit me judi∣cem? &c. When Bishops take secular power upon them, what will they answer to that of Christ, who made me a judge or devider amongst you. In doing so saith he: Seipsos ex summis minimos faciunt, they make themselves to become the least. Not unlike to that of the Corinth:1 Cor. 6.4. sett them to Iudge, who are least esteemed in the Church: Neither hence can it be collected as the Papist would force it, that the Spiritualty (as they call it) or the Ministery is in place above the Magistracie, but that onely the ob∣ject of their calling is higher and therfore their taking upon them, a temporall judicature is an abasing of the Ministery. To the same purpose, the foresaid Author applyeth the Parable of the Trees, choosing a King: The trees went forth on a time to anoynt a King over them, and they said vnto the Olive-tree: Raigne thou over us, &c. In Episco∣pos plane convenit. It hitteth the Bishops right, (saith he) for they leave the sweet inlightening, inlivening word, and betake themselves to raigne in the judgment Seats of secular affaires, and so they become not Olives, Fig-trees, and Vines,
but very brābles for why as the Apostle; should they leave the word to serve at Tables,Acts 6.2. and if (as the Spirit speaketh) no man that warreth intangleth himself with the affaires of this life, that he may please him, who hath chosen him to be a Souldier:2 Tim. 2.4. Ergo Episcopi qui lites, sive res secu∣lares, &c. A Bishop therfore that taketh upon him the judg∣ment of secular things, sheweth plainly that he warreth not for God, and so he cannot please him. The Canon Law condemnes expresly . Secular cares in the Ministers. For this trueth also Counsells are current, ne officiū habeant, &c. Let not any Ministers have the office of a secular go∣vernour, Consil. Tollet. As for the laws of nations: as the callings are of a di∣stinct nature, so all nations have ordinarily had a care to keepe them distinct. Fabius Maximus is commended for opposing the choosing of Aemilius Regulus to be Consull, because he was a Quirinall Priest. But it is objected that good Princes doe put that dignity upon them.Etfi pij: non pie fecerunt de Pontif. Lib. 5. e. 4. note. 12.13 Iunius answereth: Though they were good, they did not well. Secondly, the greatest Monarch cannot put things together that God hath distinguished. 3. As good Princes out of good affection, without judgment (as the foresaid judicious man observes) put this authoritie upon them; so other good Princes for the Tyranny pride and oppression,Niceph. Lib. 14. cap. 39. that thereupon ensued tooke it quite away from them; upon the evill ground
and sinfull effects of civill jurisdiction in the Prelacy. Petrus Ferrariencis is bould to call the misplacers of this power Stultos Caesares, Foolish Emperours.Catolog. test. verit. Page 856. 2. Some may further object the antiquity of this mixed government, or third State, as they call it. For answer. 1. Custome aggravates sinne. 2. This tem∣porall dignitie of theirs from our Kings to be Barons, and to have place in Parliament,Willett. Sy∣nop. contr. 5. Pag. 242. Page 216. &c. is as the learned witnesseth, not much above 400. yeares standing. The author of the abstract, is of that mind that Henry the 2. was the first that putt this dignity upon the Prelats, to sit in Parliament, and the starr Cham∣ber, taking his ground from Math. Paris. Sicut caeteri Barones debent interesse,Edit. Tiguri. anno 1589. Page 97. &c. Bishops and Archbishops as they have their possessions, so shall they have their Baron∣nyes from the King, and sitt in Courts of judgment, as other Barons, till it come to matter of life or member. There is no recitall here of former graunts, as apparantly there would have beene, if there had beene any such. A certaine writer of the Ecclesiasticall History shews sundry instances of Parliamentary Laws without ei∣ther presence or consent of the Prelats.Pag. 167. Et sequent, Yea King Edward the first, as we have shewed, Excluso clero, as one saith (thrusting out the Prelats) enacted laws with his Barons & Commons. In the Raigne of Philip de Vallois, the French King, it was enacted, that no Priest or Ecclesiasticall person should be deputed to assist at the Parliament, or where the af∣faires of State should be determined or treated.
The reason is penned also. Because they should wait upon their Spirituall functions. By all this (wherein we could have been much larger) your Honours may con∣sider what wrōg this Amphibian brood doth to the Of∣fice of the Ministry, what indignity to your selves, what hurt to the Church, King, & State. The words of a glorious martyr, are like to be too truly verifyed of us:Tindall in his treatise of obedience, of a Christian man, p. 152. Woe to that Kingdome where they are either of the Counsellor of the Parliament. Yea their counsell saith he, is as profitable to King or State, as the Fox to the Geese, or the Wolves to the Sheep. 2. Further, they possesse too much of that whereof the Nobility hath too little; For nobility without meanes, is as Colours without armes, for which cause Henry the 5. determined in Parliament to have taken some part of the Prelats meanes, and given to the no∣bility. But cunning Arundell found a tricke to turne him off, setting his martiall spirits upon the warrs of France; whereunto the Clergie contributed very largly, to keepe their coates undivided. To draw to an end of ripping up this endlesse sin∣ning, they sin more particularly against their Officers and Instruments, by whom they are served and up∣holden; as Chancellours, Archdeacons, Officials, Churchwardens, & Parish-Clerks; of all those, or of any one of them, is there any ground from Gods word, or insti∣tution from Christ? yea are they not all the Chips of that
ould block Antichrist? Were it not a saucie part for any subject whomsoever, to thrust out the Offi∣cers of the Kings house, or State, established by the an∣ciēt laws of the land, without cōsulting with the King, or without any order from him? Yes sure, for com∣mon sence would condemne it; how much more im∣pudent bouldnesse is it, to thrust out the Officers of Gods house, appointed expresly in his word, and to foyst in such as serve for nothing, but to maintaine the Kingdome of Antichrist, and to bring sinne and Iudgment upon a nation? For further clearing of the evill condition of their Offices, give us leave to present you with a short view of the particulars. 1. For Chancellours, Archdeacons, & Officials, let us speake to them under the name of Officials; For they are all subordinate in evill offices to the Prelats: If the Officials place and case be naught, so must the superiour places and cases of such be, to whom, and which, they are deputed: now for the wofull condition of Officials, let them heare what Petrus Blecenses, a learned and devout man, (about the yeare 1150.) speaketh. In an Epistle to a certain Officiall, whom he desired to pull (as a brand out of the fire.) He writeth thus: Exeas Babilon, & vr Chaldeorum; Get thee out (saith he) out of Babilon, or Vr of the Chaldeans, meaning his place. Ministerium enim est damnatissimae villicationis; It is an Office (saith he) of a most damnable stewardship. Ver∣bum non est à nomine officii, sed à verbo officio; The
word (saith he) is not from the nown Officium, or a place of some usefull charge, but from Officio to hurt or of∣fend. And hence he maketh such verses as the time would afford, yea they may well serve; for the place is worse then the verses. Nam genus est hominum, quod dicitur offici-perda Officio est verbum crudele nimis, & acerbum Dictio plena malis, hinc dicitur officialis. A kinde of Inofficious men there be, Derived from a sharp and cruell stem Officio to hurt, so hence we see. The word Official is a wicked name. Vice Episcopi eves tondet, emungit & excoriat, sic Epis∣copi long a manubona aliena dirimunt, &c. Dissimulant pec∣cata; Ergo relinque officiale officium Ministerium damna∣tionis. Being Vice-Bishops (sayth he) they sheer and squeez, yea and pull the skin off the people. Give over there∣fore that Officiall office, being a service rejected of God. Yea lett all Bishops,In Policrate suo Lib. 5. cap. 16. Archdeacons and Officials heare what Iohannes Sarisburiensis (of the same time) saith of them, and their places: Peccata populi commedunt & vestiuntur. They eate & are cloathed with the sins of the people. As for Chancellours they are the after-birth of the Prelats Lordship, wherein they have overtopt all other Earls and Barons, for none but Kings, Princes and Vni∣versities have their Chancellours. Further for Churchwardens, they sinne most against them, and cause them to sinne most of any of the
people, they make them the instrumēts of much sin. If they be wicked men thē it is their meat & drinke, to in∣snare a faithfull Minister, & to afflict Gods people; but if they be good men, they must either shift their dwel∣lings, to shun that unlawfull and harmefull office to the undoing (it may be) of their calling and family; or they mustly in prison; or which is worst of all, under∣go the office with a reluctancie in conscience, being in∣slaved to Antichristian governours (howsoever they do no more hurt to Gods people.) We speake what we know; some of Gods people have felt heavie pangs of conscience for it upon their deathbeds. If the calling were of God, good men would hould it (being law∣fully called) rather an honour, then a burthen to their conscience, nam res bona neminem bonum scandaliz at, a good thing gives offence to no good men, but by the office they become in very deed the Counterfaits of Gods Officers, and the Popes promoters. They sweare and doe, they know not what, yea they infringe the laws of the Land, being made instruments to afflict Gods people: By serving of forraigne jurisdiction, they sin against the Kings Majesty. All these be more then manifest by their serving of the sinfull courses of the Prelacy, in all which they are instruments and ac∣cessoryes. The greatnesse of their sin will appeare by a view of the particulars wherein they ferve, being directly a∣gainst the same laws, which the Prelats transgresse. Moreover, they sinne against the Parish Clerks, who are the right eye of their spitefull Courts, for their office what are they? (be it with reverence spokē) a very crew
of Holy water-dishclouts. There be (no doubt) honest men amongst them, and the more pittie they should serve sinne, but for the greater part, they are thorns in the eyes & prickes in the sides of Gods Ministers & good people: these be the Knights of the Crosse, the keepers of the Popes Wardrobe, the Lords of Misrule, and in a word, the great Maisters of the Revells, as for Pursuivants and Summoners, they make them nothing, but the servants of sinne. These Prelats sinne also against all the wicked of the Land, of whose wickednesse and profanesse they are the very Tent & Tabernacle, and by opposing all good meanes, they strengthen the hands of the wicked. Lastly, they sinne against themselves, their owne soules & consciences especially. First, for wordly pompe and wealth, they enter upon an unlawfull call. 2. They cause others to sinne. 3. They bring the blood of many good men, and their families upon their heads. 4. They hazard (if not loose) all comfort in time of their greatest neede, when they come to give up their accompts? Some dying like Naball (their hearts being dead, be∣fore they are dead.) Some never casting about for any comfort; Some crying out, they have made a bad exchange.
One in terror of conscience told his wife, that he would not endure one of these pangs (which he had suffred for that wofull calling) for a world; And ther∣fore charged her, not to reserve any thing of the reve∣nue of the Bishoppricke, but to give it to the Poore. For if she put any of it into her stocke, it would bring a curse upon it, and consume it. We could further relate what horrible plights they have putt good men into, upon their death beds, by forcing them to conforme, crying out that to save their means in their service, they had tipt their tōgus, or bittē Gods people, for which they smarted. Others with in few dayes after their subscription, upon more serious conference with their owne consciences, discove∣ring their errour have languished to the death. Humble supplicat. P. 41. Yea we doubt not (saith the same Au∣thor) that when it shall please the Lord to Honour his Churches with the free libertie of his ordinances, that the subscribers and conformers will then cry out with the Bishops of Asia:Evagr. hist. Lib. 3. c. 9. Nos non nostra voluntate sed necessitate aducti subscripsimus, non animo, sed verbis tantum consensimus. We subscribed not willingly, but upō cōstraint, not with heart, but with hand, then that coyned distinctiō will not hold, to subscribe against the mind, but not against the conscience. But so much may suffice to have said of our sinnes, whereof we have shewed at large, them to be the speciall cause. Now we come to our judgments, whereof we af∣firme also them to be the cause, according to that rule: whatsoever is the cause of a cause, is also the cause of the ef∣fect proceeding from that cause.
Iudgments are either spirituall or temporall, spiri∣tuall, as departing of Gods presence, and that insensiblie, we not lamenting after him as we should. 2. A breaking of the staffe or power of the meanes: for all the plenty we enjoy, yet the right arme and right eye, that is the convincing & controleing power of the Vision is cutt off. 3. A decay of Graces. 4. A benummed, sencelesse and groundlesse securitie from the Spirit of Slumber, which is upon us. 5. Fearfull Cowardise, and hardnes of heart, so that we cannot mourne. 6. Self-love in every one seeking his owne, and none that which is the Lord Iesus Christs. 7. A withdrawing of the right hand of fellowship. And lastly, a bold contempt of Gods Iudgments. Whence are all these but from the Prelats, keeping Christ at the dore? They abandon him, and will not suffer him to dwell with us. They vassall us so at their pleasure, that God taketh no pleasure in us. They will have what they will, and we must give God no more then they will. The Ministers are in bonds, and the word in bonds, there are none to cutt the cordes of their Tyranny, and to sett Christ at liberty. How should the men or meanes be powerfull among us? How should we thrive in grace, when the enimyes of grace and Gods glory com∣mand us? How should we be inlarged in our hearts, when they keepe us streight in our bowells towards Christ? How should we be stout in our owne cause, when we dare not be seene in Christs cause? And how
should we love God, and one another, when we hate not with a perfect hatred them that be his greatest ene∣myes? Many more great and fearfull spirituall judgments overflowing this Land, we might relate, if time would give us leave. As punishing sinne with sinne, which in∣deed is the greatest punishment that ever God inflicted on his people. Thine owne wickednes shall correct thee,Ierem. 2.19 and thy turning back shall reprove the, know therefore and see, that it is an evill thing and bitter, that thou hast for∣saken the Lord, and surely it must be so, because this sinne of the Hierarchie is the onely sinne of the Land, maintained by a Law; whose authoritie is prest upon people, who either without conscience, or against con∣science, imbrace it; And therefore just it is with God to punish this high and capitall sinne, with others sinns of a high nature. Now we come to temporall judgments, whereof (to our shame) we are more sensible then of the spirituall. And yet in very deed lesse sensible, then we should be. It is too true of us, that evill men understand not judgmēt.Prov. 28.5. That is to say, in in the true nature of it, in the sting of it, and in the causes of it. The reason is well implyed in the same place, because we seeke not the Lord in it. We attend not what he speaketh in judgment, and what he would have us to doe by it. For if we sought the Lord, (as it is there) we should, understand. But to passe the scoffers of Gods judgments, even we who professe our selves to be more sensible, make a deceiving sense our judge in this inquirie, if the smart be not on our selves im∣mediatly; we understand not the judgmēt as we ought.
Wise David was of another mould: All thy judg∣ments (saith he) were before me.2. Sam. 22.23. It is an astonishment to thinke on our stupiditie, the Lord may cry to the Heavens and Earth to heare, for we will not heare nor understand. The Earth shaketh and trembleth. The foundations of the Heavens move and shake above our heads, and all because of the wrath of the Lord. The very Heathen Centurion, and they that watched Christ, when they heard the Crye, and sawe the Earth∣quake, were terrified at the judgments of God, Math. 27.54. The Prophet Habakuck telleth us, when he heard the voyce (namely of Gods judgments,Haba. 3.16) Rottenes entred into his bones, and he trembled in himself, that he might be safe in the day of the Lord. The mightie God hath spoken, yea and roared to the eare, and discovered to the eye, all the judgments written in his booke. Yea all these have beene or are in some measure upon us. Iudgments on our Persons, States, Names, Fa∣milyes, callings, and what not? Psal. 11.13  Are not the Foundations (as the Prophet speaketh) cast downe? where the word signifieth: The grounds of Laws, Ecclesiasticall or Temporall, of Counsell of warre, of State government, of making and managing warre defen∣sive or offensive, of trading and trafficking. In a word, the foundations of all our frames & attempts, (for all these the word carrieth) are shaken in peeces at home and abroade. It is true that this truth from the pulpitts and towers of State is dayly discovered. But who in his place laboureth
as he should to understand it and avert it? Now who be the great Enginieres in undermyning of our foundations? Directly the Prelats, and our sinnes wrought out of the Saltpeeter & Sulphur of these fye∣rie mineralls, are the mynes and gunpowder to blow us all up. No tongue of man can expresse what hurt that blast from the Tower would have done, if God in mercy had not prevented it. Yet the blo∣wing up of all the Towers and Castles in the Land, could not so shake and ruine the foundations of Church and State, as they have done. For the for∣mer, how great and fearfull soever it were, could be but an evill of punishment, but the later is both an evill of sinne and punishment, and therefore must be more hurtfull. That had beene immediatly from his owne hand; but they have partly brought us, and are like further to bring us into the hands of Gods Scorpion scourges: For if we have not Christ to raigne over us, the rodd of his wrath must rule us. But breifely to the proofe of the Assertion, lett us take a short survey of our particular judgments. whence are the strange Consuming sicknesses, and bodi∣ly inhabilities to performe and hold out in services? The Atrophies, or waxing lesse of the members;Lev. 26.16 The pineing away of our lives and spirits insensibly? But either from the keeping backe of the food of the soule, or from their mixing it with the soule-kil∣ling poyson of their owne precepts and Ceremonies?
Whence is the sicknes of the head (of which we cry out so much:2. Kings 4.19. Oh! my head! my head!) but from the ma∣lignant and contagious spirits of the rotten and naughty heart of the Prelacy. And from the noysome and cor∣rupting vapours of such bad stomacks, as overcharge the head? How cometh the breath of our State to be infected, but by the tainting breath of Antichrist? So that we cannot runne, yea nor walke with God freely, as we ought to doe? How commeth the fruit of our bodyes to proue so evill? but from the Prelats vassalling of them (to our shame and sinne be it spoken that are Parents) to the Marke of the Beast, as Crosse and confirmation, &c. against which the Lord threatned fearfull Iudgments in his Booke of the Revelation, Chap. 14.9.10.11. which places we desire might be well considered, and our proofe thence against the Crosse: If the parents of Moy∣ses would rather expose the infant to the immediate providence of God (without any mediate meanes, able to preserve life) and themselves to the hazard of Pharaohs wrath, then to admitt or committ the least sinne, in committing their Child to the wrath of a Ty∣rant (which was to the Child but a temporall danger) what should we not doe, rather then to expose our Children to a spirituall danger. Further, if our Children proue Schollers, at the first entry to the Vniversity, they must be matriculated
with an unlawfull oath,Lev. 26.16. Deut. 28.33. and be nusled in Popish practises, or no proceeding for them? Why doe we sow, and the ennimies reape? Why eate they what we labour for? but because that the Prelats make the Land to labour of sinne, and our labours in Gods service are so slight, so vaine, supersti∣tious and fruitlesse to God, and so pleasing to the man of sinne, that it is just, our labours should be so fruit∣lesse to our selves, and so profitable to our enimies. Why breaketh out the fearfull wrath of God and plaguye sores among us, but because of Baal-Peor his ushering Ceremonies, and our gangreens of Heresies? all having life and breath from the Prelacy. Why hath our earth beene as Iron, and the heavens as brasse, but from the brasen statutes, and brasen Ser∣pents of the Prelacy? Why have strange fires (as from unknowne causes) broke out, and consumed us? And waters overflowed us, but because of that strange fire in Gods worship a∣mong us, and the waters of Nilus, mixed with the pure wine of Gods ordinances, let in, and kept in by the Popish profane crue that depend upon them? Whence hath beene the groning of the brute and sencelesse creatures amongst us, under murreings and wastings, but from our sinnes, arising from the Beast?
Why under aboundance of fire & food, is there such extreame death and want of the one, and no proportio∣nable price upon the other? but because the warming and actuating heat of Gods Ordinances (notwithstan∣ding of the plenty) is so weakned and quenched, and the staffe of that bread so broken, or bruised by the Pre∣lats, that we eate and are not fed, we have much fire, yet we are not warmed. Why be our attempts against our enimies so fruit∣lesse and ridiculous? Why is our peace, our warre? & our warre our shame? Why fall we, and flye we with such high dishonour before our Enimies? Why are our formerlie feared Seamen, and manly Marchantes taken by the Dogges of Dunkirke, and used worse then Dogges, (which to thinke on, we thinke our English hearts should bleede with pittie and in∣dignation,) even from our Vassalage at home, to these Enimies and adversaries of Christ? Ps. 109.6. Lam. 5.8. Deut. 28.43.Why is the curse of Iudas made good upon us, namelie, servants sett over us? Sub dignitate Domiri minus turpis est conditio servi. It is the lesse shame to be servant to a worthie Master? Why are the strangers within us gott up above us (as the spirit speaketh) (namelie besides others) a sort of
rude, Barbarous, needlesse, and uselesse souldiers (with∣out Example in a free nation?) who commanded and devoured in mens howses, as if all were their owne, abusing their families, reviling themselves, and now and then killing his Majesties subjects. Is not this a fearfull and heavie Iudgment in a free State? and yet just it is with God, because we will not have Christ to raigne over us, but we are content to march under An∣tichristian leaders, who have quartered our Colours with the Colours of Rome: The Lord therefore plagueth us with a sort of Romish Iesuited Irish bratts, whose inso∣lent outrages, together with the hellish roaring car∣ryage of those of our owne nation was the very finger of God. Why are we become the taile of contempt, and scorne of nations, where we were once the head of Ho∣nour, & glorie of the nations, but because the taile of the Dragon hath laid us so lowe? Lastlie, to finish the point: why doth the Lords soule so loath us,Lev. 26.30.31. that he will not smell the smell of our ser∣vices ordinarie or extraordinarie, but because we burne incense to him of the Prelats making, which is an abomination: as a linsie woolsie garment was not to be used, nor plowing with an Oxe, and an Asse, so the Lord cannot endure a mixture in his service. But some will object, the Prelacie did beare sway, when none of these plagues or judgments overwhel∣med us, but we had peace and plentie at home with
successe and triumph abroad. For answer: 1. By way of concession, the verie same objection in effect maketh that Godlesse people to Paul in the E∣pistle to the Romans.Cap. 2.4. For Pauls answer implieth by anticipation, or prevention so much, as if they should say thus: we have prospered, and doe prosper. What tell you us of sinne, or of Iudgment despisest thou (saith Paul) the riches of his goodnes, not knowing that the goodnes of God leadeth to repentance. As if he should say, it is true, the bountie of God in all outward blessings, his patience in bearing with your sinne, his longanimitie in defferring to punish, is exceeding large and wonderfull; For, by three emphaticall words the Apostle expresseth this concession.. But is this the best use you make of it? should it not rather worke remorse in you? Dan. 11.36To applie this, though we practised & prospered, as was said of Antachus, yet doth it argue that God is not dis∣pleased with us in this particular? No; No more then the Iewes prospering when they baked Cakes to the Queene of Heaven.Ier. 44.17. 2. That old proverbe is verified in them, nemo repente fit malus, nothing evill of it selfe comes to be monstrous evill but by degrees, so it is with them, Sathan at the first, laying of the foundation of his An∣tichristian Kingdome, began to creepe in by bare An∣tichristian titles of superioritie, the evill whereof, nor the ensuing mischeife, good men did not observe, yea
Sathan watched a long time for his opportunitie of setting on of this Hydraes head; For till the time of Pope Silvester, about the yeare 320. Rome it self was without any Lordship at all, upon which Lordship fol∣lowed that blasphemous Arianisme, which afterward made all the Church of God to groane under it: with those Antichristian titles were joyned wordlie promotions, which with the swelling pride of supe∣riotie, brought the Hierarchie to a full height, not on∣lie in Romes Dominions, but also here in Britannie, of which that foresaid Monke Austine was the first beginner. This misterie of iniquitie that the Apostle speakes off, had its beginning in Diotrephes,2 Thes. 2.7 called by the Spirit , a love of primacie,3. Ioh. 9. in whose person (saith Beza) the Apostle condemns avarice & ambitious supe∣rioritie, the verie worst plagues of the Ministerie,Avaritiam & ambitio∣nem, &c. this sprung up in L. Bishops & Archbishops and Patriarks, till that Monster the Pope was fully formed, who as he had his rise from those wicked Offices; so still he is upheld by them, and maintained in his Kingdome of darkenesse. As for Cardinals, they are but a new invented toy after Romes quite departure from Christ, maintai∣ning rather the pompe of Antichrist then his power; the Pope and Prelacie could not build Rome on the first day, but everie one tooke his turne, as appeares in Gregorie 1. and his Predecessours.
But Rome by his Successours being made a Babilon, and receptacle of Devills, made the Hierarchie their servants, more vile and cruell, (if it were possible) then their Masters, witnesse their related practises in this na∣tion. Now to apply this to the answer of the question. At the beginning of Reformation, our Bishops did not see the evill of the things. Manie of them were painfull in labours, rich in works of mercie, and in the end some of these sealed their Repentance with their blood: yea further in the beginning, the Lord was content to beare with some beginnings of Reforma∣tion. In Queene Elizabeths time; howsoever they beat the servants of Christ, and interrupted the course of the Gospell by the Antichristian power, yet her Majestie and the State would not beare, that they should be stic∣klinge with the State; that by packing with Iesuits and Papists, they should countenance and maintaine either old or new Poperie; that they should affront the Nobilitie; and least of all, that ever they should see the grand Idoll of their Mase established: But upon everie Informa∣tion made, she curbed their tyrannie, and rebuked their vilenesse; Also some well effected States-men of the Nobilitie & others, were now and then knocking them over the shinnes, so that they could not exercise the full power of their head, but (as a learned man prophesied) so soone as the Queene was removed by death, wickeder men, more infected with Poperie, would creep into their places, who being more livelie mem∣bers of the head then the former, would desire and indeauour more powerfully to be joyned to the head,
either by bringing the Church, over which they tyran∣nise, frō the obedience of Christ, to the tyrannie of An∣tichrist; or by murthering and pining to death, such as would not yeald to their Slavish Ordinances; the trueth of this predication speakes in their practises against the trueth, and true Professours; even just as they did in the time of K. Edward and Q. Mary, so now these looke for their time, that if Idolatrie, come to be more publick, they would adhere to their head, and bring both the Kings Crowne, & the Crowne of Christ in sub∣jection to the Popes Miter; so that whosoever were King (the Lord preserve our King) he should be but Vice-roy, as it were to our Iesuited Prelates. The reason is, the members will never hould themselves fully inlivened and activated, till they be joyned to their head, nor their functions well dis∣charged till they have done the very service, where∣unto by their head they are appointed. If it be objected, that some of them be quiet harm∣lesse men: give them ease & bellie-timber, and they will doe no hurt; yea some of them be of the better side, and stand with the State, and for the Priviledge of the subject, yea some of them suffer, as it is thought for the State. To the first of these, let Iohannes Sarisburiensis answer: Nocent saepius, & in eo daemones imitantur quod tunc prodesse putantur cum nocere desistunt, they hurt for the most part, but in this they gain the commenda∣tion of devills; they are thought to doe good when they cease to do evill. In Polycrat. Lib. C. 24.
Simia semper erit simia, a Monkey will ever be a Mon∣key. Noysome Beasts, cruell men, and Offices of enmitie to the offices of Christ, upon every occasion they are readie to expresse their disposition, though it be not alwayes in actu exercito, in the actuall extent. For the second, you know that maxime, aliud est esse & aliud apparere; It is one thing to seem, and another thing to be. If Sanballat & Tobiah put in for building of the wall, they will daub with intempered morter, and it will prove a rotten peece of work: it were farre better (as Nehemias saith) that they should have no portion in the businesse, they who can not endure the walls of Sion to be built up (but are as many wayes op∣posite as ever Tobiah & Sanballat were to the reedi∣fying of Ierusalem,) shall never do good to the walls of the commō wealth: they who can not suffer Christ to have his right, will never help the subjects to their right. As for the suffering of some (as it may be thought) for choosing the better part, may it not rather be, because some would give more for the place, or because they might be more serviceable in the place in some Popish or Arminian Policie? Non saevis semper inter se convenit vrsis, though Sam∣sons Foxes be tyed taile to taile, yet they joyntly sett on fire, and burne up the barly field. We speak not thus, as though we envyed or would extenuate any good that might be in any of them (for
we heartily wish, that they were both freinds to Christ and to the state indeed,) but we intimate the trueth of that sacred position: a man cannot gather grapes of thorns, and Figs of Thistles, of Thorns & Thistles indeed they might prove Cedars & Palmes, if they were transplan∣ted, but so long as they remain in that cursed feild, as a reverend man said well: the best proves but a bramble. In our later and worser times we see few or none but brambles planted in that feild. If there be a man of mischeife, a mad railer on the State, a maintainer of Pope∣rie, and Arminianisme with some new frontispice, af∣fronting by his insolent cariage the great tribunall of the Kingdome; this man shall be a Lord Bishop, and good enough too, for it is matter of lamentation, (howsoever many thinke otherwise,) that a good man should be spoyled by the place. Henrie the 8. most admired the life of that subject, who never was so low as to be a Constable, nor never so high as to be a Iustice of peace, so we may say that he is the happiest Church-man, caeteris paribus, that never was so low, as to be a Parish-Clerk, nor came never so high as to be a Lord Bishop. It is just with God that evill men should dwell in the Palaces of Babell, partly that they may the more be∣wray their enmitie against the Kingdome of Christ; & partly that men may see, and hate the evill of their places; For when they see plainly nothing but thorns and thistles to grow in the ground, they will proclaime it openly to be a cursed ground.
Let us not then deceave our selves with that Popish and Foppish argument of thriving, but let us rather be humbled for so long despising of his mercie: nam tar∣ditatem judicij gravitate supplicij compensat, he payeth home for all together when he punisheth. Lastlie, the more perspicuous discoverie of a sinne, joyned with a longe continuance of the same, bringeth the more heavier and fearfull judgments in the end. And so much for this point, wherein we have not taken all this paines (presuming of your Honours pa∣tience) to charge all sinne and judgment upon the Pre∣lates, to discharge our selves, as guiltlesse, but ingenuous∣ly we charge our selves not onelie with our owne sinnes, but to be also accessarie to theirs, in obeying of them. We acknowledge that God hath a speciall Contro∣versie with his people,Hose. 4.2. (which if it were taken up, he mould quicklie dispatch his Enimies.) But our point was to prove our sinnes and judgments to have their rise from the Hierarchie, and them to be the Capitall sinne: so in some measure we hope we have done: As for judgments threatened a litle of them, in handling the next point.
9. Position proved. IF the Hierarchie be not removed, and the Scepter of Christs Kingdome, namelie his owne Discipline, advanced to this place, there can be no healing of our sore, &c. If there were no more to prove this, but the former point well proved, it were enough; For if their calling & standing be the cause of all the evill of our sinne & judgment (as hath been proved) then no removall of them, no removall of sinne and judgment, but rather an increase of both. For it is the maine Nationall sinne that keepeth up and maintaineth the controversie with God, and if that ceasse not, God cannot in Iustice ceasse from punishing, till he have made an end. The point then is made good from the former Po∣sition, which still must be our medium or meane, for the proofe of this. Your Honours may be verie acute and sedulous in taking up & redressing of state greivan∣ces, in repayring wronges, in censuring misdemeanours, in preventing the plotts of the Enimies, in searching out, and punishing our domesticke underminers, in pro∣viding forces against the Enimie, for our selves and our Allies, in taking course with the mothes hornetts & Ca∣terpillars of the state. All these are to be done, but the former is not to be left undone; For if all our owne greivances could be re∣medied, and that which is Gods greatest greivance should not be done away, what good should be gott by
it? but making a way to a heavier judgment. For so God might go back to fetch a greater blowe. It is houlden dangerous of some Physitians to give Physick when the Sunne is in any ruminant or horned signe, as they call it, instance Aries or Taurus: howsoever all the State-medicines can doe no good, so lōg as the state movs in the horned signe of the Hierarchy: And the reason is, because the humor being moved & not removed rageth more fiercelie. As God hath not blest any Parliamentary indeavours, because as we take it (under correction) they went not this way to worke, so it is likelie, he will not be with you now, if you go not this way to worke; For God is more tender of his owne Honour, then of all the States and Churches in the World. Yea he will abhorre (as he saith) his owne ex∣cellencie,Amos. 6.8. and hate his Palaces, if the thing displeasing to his Majestie be not removed. If you strike not at this roote, (give us leave right Honourable to speake freely in Gods cause;) The Lord may answer your desires of peace, and indeavours of reformation, as Iehu answered Ioram, asking him, if he came in peace, what peace (saith he) so long as the whore∣domes of thy Mother Iesabel,2. Kings 9.22. and her witchcrafts be so manie? So what peace can we looke for, so long as the Sonnes of the woman Iesabel remaine; Their Mothers name, they nature indeed, for they are the woe to the howse, (as the word is commonly taken.) Or after a more proper signification, they are the Scatterers of
Gods people: it may well be said of that Ambitious brood, as Euripides said of the lying, and vain-glorious Astrologians of his time,Traged. Iphigenia. , all that kinde is an Ambitious evill of vain-glory. It is true, that with the most, namely, Atheists, Papists, Arminians, openlie pro∣phane, Ignorants, and Protestants at large, this trueth will hardly finde acceptance, yea if grace, mercie, and peace, and all should forsake us, they will not beleeve it, because they are Enimies to Christ and his Kingdome, but all men of inlightened Iudgment, and impartiall affection, both see this trueth, and feare, foreseeing the sequell. It is further true; that if all the Ministers in Eng∣land would averre the trueth of this, the Prelatts would thrust downe everie man from their places, and doe them a worse turne if they could, because their Kingdome lyes upon it. Bishop Cooper maketh the abolishing of Lord Bishops the very overthrowe of the Church.M.C. adm. pag. 28.29. It is true in∣deed of the Romish Church: But shall the lye of wretch∣ed man make the trueth of God of none effect (God forbid)?
We know (right noble Senatours) that you beleeve this Hierarchie to be the roote of all our evill, then it will necessarie follow that it must be rooted out, or it will roote us out. It is remarkeable what God spake by the mouth of that Honourable Protomartyr Mr. Rogers, that when the Gospell should be reestablished in England, if the Kingdome of Antichrist were not utterlie cashiered, & totall reformation made in Gods worship, that our per∣secutions should be greater, and our triall hotter, then in the dayes when he and others suffered; he spake to this effect, and so it is like to fall out, except God pre∣vent it; For if we remove not the Canaanits: It is just with God, that the Canaanits should remove us; That thrice noble Essex, who died in Ireland, on his death∣bed foresaw, and proclaimed a fearfull wo to England, because they turned all their Religion into Policie. It is too true, for this hath beene and is the Master peece of our wordly wisdome, as appeareth by our Acts: to make Policie ride Religion, and to make Religion serve Policie on foote. But this is just to sett the asse upon Christ, and not Christ upon the asse. That Counsell of Daniel to Nabuchadnezer may wel here be applied:Dan. 4.27.  Breake of thy sinne with righteousnes. For the words are so in the originall, where we must un∣derstand especially, his bosome sinnes, pride, tyrannie, and oppression, so this is the Kinglie sinne, which must be broken of, or else no peace to be obtained.
If Iacob go up to Bethell,Gen. 35. to build an Altar for Gods worship, if he will be free from the feare of his Enimies, he will first remove all the Idolls out of his howse. So will Iosua have the people doe, for he telleth them plainlie, they could not serve that Iealous God, nor prosper in any thing, except they put away their Idolls. Israel was in a wofull case through subjection to the Philistines, and want of Gods presence in the Arke of his ordinances. In this case it is said, they lamented after the Lord;1. Sam. 7. But Samuel told them, that would not serve their turne, except they put not onelie away their Idolls,1. Sam. 7.23. but also Ashtaroth, their beloved Idoll. Where by the way, it is to be wondred, that this people, given by God into the hands of the Philistins, should have the Enimies, Speciall Idoll for their Minion Idoll. Now that it was the Philistins speciall Idoll, it is cleare, 1. Sam. 30.10. Where it is said, they put Sauls armour in the howse of Ashteroth. What is to be said in this case? except the Lord smite the hearte, no affliction giveth understanding. But to compare our selves with them, is it no matter of wonder in us, who have layen so long under Romes slaverie (in whose blood she hath gone so deepe, who like the red Dragon standeth yet gaping under great hopes to devoure the distressed man child the glo∣rious Gospell, who meaneth rather to massacre us,Revel. 12.5. then to be at any more cost with burning of us) Is it no wonder we say, that we should retaine their Idolls, and Masters of their Ceremonies? Let us
then both for shame and feare, put away this Ashteroth of the Hierarchie; It may very well be called Ashteroth Carnaim, a two horned Idoll, pushing both the Church & Common-wealth. What King or State found ever any good successe, by toyling themselves with reforming of the Popes im∣piety and tyranny, till they made utter extirpation of his Idolatrie, and unlawfull authoritie? So no reforma∣tion of the evills of the Prelacie, but by a totall or abso∣lute removall of their unlawfull authoritie; As we have great cause with Israell, to lament after the Lord (for his glorie is daseled,) and we desire to doe it hear∣tilie. So this Idoll of the Hierarchy must be done away, or no discomfiting of the Philistins. The Lord of Hostes, since your last meeting, hath made that great Goliah to fall unexpectedly: And surely we may say (with reverence reserved to the Phrase) it is wonderfull in our eyes; As the Sea is called Mors omnium undarum, so he was the death of all our springs: He was the Gamahu (as Paracelsians call it) in whom, & from whome, all our malignant starrs have their strength and motion. He was our Shebna that the Spi∣rit speaketh off; who was not onely Treasurer and Steward of the howse, to take in all, and dispose of all, but he was the great Pandora: all Offices in him, all suites by him, and all the means to him and for him. Indeed the word translated Treasurer, is taken in the originall by the learned, to signify one that nourisheth or cherisheth; whereby they would intimate that wic∣ked mans entertayning of secret plotting with the
Assyrians, & Aegyptians, to betray the Church and State? Intending in the mean time, to make a great hand for himself, and by the danger, & destruction of the State to provide, for himself, against all danger: It is mani∣fest, that our Shebna went beyond him in this, for he made Rome of England, setting all things to sale, and sould the fee-simple of England to Rome, that he might have the tenent right. As in Athaliah were observed, Ambition of raig∣ning, love of her Idolls, and desire of revenge; so the intollerable pride of that vnparalelled evill; did evi∣dently demonstrate with other passages, that he aymed at the garland. As for his devotion to Babell, and the bitter fruits thereof, together with his desire, to re∣quite your Animadversions upon his life, your Honours and the whole State should have felt it, if he had not fallen. Sejanus was never so ungratefull, nor perfidious to his Master, as he was, nor never did the State that in dignitie and indemnitie, that he hath done to us, nor never trucked with forraignes, to betray so many states as he hath done. when one of the Ancients of Rome saw the governours grow carelesse of the publick good, and following of their private gain, he said, Rome wan∣ted nothing to vndooe it, but a chapman to buy it: What a dangerous case then were we in? who have Rome, the Emperour, Spaine, and Austria, yea and all the Ba∣bilonish crew in France, Italy, and Germanie, as so many Cowpsmen, laying their pates & purses together, to make purchase of us; especially having such a Coopsmate,
as he with so many Iesuited Factors, and broakers, as would afford thē a rich penniworth. For all his graving of his habitation for himself, in the top of a rock, the Lord hath brought him downe, and covered him. Humanists relate how the Ancients had wont to hang a Wolves head upon the gates, to avoyd and ex∣pell the inchantment, or be witching of their Cities from contagious vapours, stirred up by inchanters. The truth of the evill, or remedie, we will not argue, but surely, the sprinkling of the blood of the Wolf, (if we can follow the Lord in it,) may be a means to save our King, and us, from these fearfull and imminent judgments, that he (for our sinnes) might have haste∣ned, and halled upon us by his Iesuited tricks; as Masses, Murthers, Poysons, Treasons, Venerie, & Venifices. The Lord smote but in time, for surely some great Monster of that Aegyptian Nilus was come to the place of the birth; for God never taketh off such an high and Arch-enimie to his name, but upon the very pinacle of some high exploit; Instance Shebna, Haman, Guise, Demain, Dancre, and Francis the 2. of France. we leave others to rake in his ashes, it is not our work: as his name rotteth, we wish his sinne might dye with him; But give us leave (right Honourable) to signify what we cōceive; we fear the body of the Retort be too too sound, and the materialls too too safe; the Iesuits & their Cosin-Prelats, with all the Dukified crew, will make a shrewd shift to lure the Limbeck with some new head, & then the work is not marred, but hindered for a time.
To our matter then in hand, the Bishops are the bottom of the businesse, and that bottom is our bane. They tell us indeed, that the high Commission hath no bottom; but as a Counseller answered, surely it had a bottom till they beat it out. There is no way (according to our Position) to make good the work begun, but to beat the bottom out of the Prelacy, and then Romes work, and Spaines Market is quite undone. To speake (under correction) if Parliaments had taken them in (as Elisha said to the Elders) & handled them roundly, name∣ly cashiered their places, and rid Gods Church of their tyrannie, the wicked had never come to that height, nor it may be to such a desperate and vnhappie end. It was often agitated in the Counsell of Spaine, whether they should bēd all their forces first against the Low Countries, & thē against England, or first against Engl. & thē against the L. Count. since they were not able to deal with both at once: It was caried and concluded that the later was the better, & that upon this ground; that if they would take the River, they must first make themselvs Masters of the Sea that flowes into the River; that is, if they would regain the Low Countries, they must first make these forces and means their owne, that maintaineth and upholdeth the Low Countries. So to applyl (for we may borrow wit of our enimies) if you will deliver the King and State of corrupt, and corrupting men, such as be abusers of the Kings favour; prophane Bellie-Gods; time-servers, enimies to the
Gospell, whether professed Papists, neutrals; or mun∣grils, yea if you mean to make Dagon fall in Court or Country; Or to cleare the ayre of those Croking plaguy frogs, & undermining locusts, the Iesuits; then strike neither at great nor small, but at the Hierarchie; For it is the trou∣bler of Israell, the Censer of all strange fire, the Fort of Gods enimies, the strenght of sinne, and the Megazin of all mischeife. If you had by your representative power taken off that Hydra his head, it had been an Heroick part, and worthie of so high a judicature; For so should the King have been delivered from the snare, and his state from an unsupportable burthen; yea sundry evill events, both at home and abroad might have been prevented: but frequent experience maketh good this position, if Baruck stand upon terms with his Office, he looseth the Honour of the day: If you had re∣moved this Evill-one from the throne (as your Predeces∣sours have done divers, though not so bad as he,) and suffered this bitter root of the Hierarchie to stand, and pread; out of it, as out of a Gorgons head more monsters should arise, and the last should be the worst. He was their Creature at first, and became their Creator at last: that it must be so, so long as they subsist, take pregnant instance, from the removeall of his Prede∣cessour-Idoll, whose sinnes yet cry to the Heavens, being managed out with the high hands of two pandering Prelats. But as he was but a subcellanean, and a verie Page in comparison of the man of the
chair. So of his favoriteship there was quickly a nullitie: And what a jollitie were the most in, that he was cast over the barre, and we should have a new favorite? but as corruptio unius est gene∣ratio alterius, sic generatio vnius est corruptio totius, as the corruption of one is the generation of an other; So out of the ashes of that former evill a∣rose an other evill, that was like to consume us all to ashes. Litle knew we what the Lord meant us in it; He justly plagued us with one, whose litle finger was heavier then all the others body: It may very well be applied to us that Cedrenus writeth of a re∣ligious Man, in the raigne of Phocas the wicked Em∣perour, the Man did expostulate the matter with God, by way of complaint, why he would sett such a wicked Tyrant over his Christian people; It is said that he was answered by a voyce, (not seeing any thing,) alium deteriorem inveniri posse nullum, at hunc meruisse Constantinopolitanorum vitia; a wor∣ser then he was not to be found, and him they had, because by their sinnes they had deserved him; But lett us know that if the fountaine of these bit∣ter waters be not shut up, the Lord hath a worse then he, (if worse may be) in store for us.
Lett us suppose, that by the vertue of your power you had taken him off, because either he or the State must fall, and you and yours lay all at stake for it; yet if you smite not at the roote of this Tree, you and yours, and all we are like to perish for it. It may well befall us that befell Henrie the 3. of France, who having cutt off the Duke of Guize, who intended to Cloister the King, and to take the Crown to himself: His Mother asked him what was be∣come of Ianvill, and whether or no he had made him sure? he answered that he was escaped and gone; then replyed the Queen; your life is gone; so notwithstan∣ding, if their Patrons fall, yet if their places subsist, they will be our ruine; and the rather for this, that ye let∣ting them alone (he being removed) will proclaime to all the freinds of God, that you seeke onely your owne safety, suffering the Lords Honour to ly in the duste. Without all controversy these be the hornes that scatter Israell. But you (right Honourable) must, or should be the Carpenters, to saw off these hornes, and to sett up the horne of Discipline, the Lords owne Ordi∣nance. Since God himself hath begun the work, and hath chalked out the way by removall of him that letted; It were great dishonour for you, not to follow the Lord in his worke: The Lord looketh, and is there none to help? He may justly wonder that there is none to uphold.Esa. 63.5. Two things we desire to commend to your Honours, worthy your observation, the former is this:
When the Lord is compelled by the Magistrates neglect to take the matter of the execution of his eni∣mies, into his owne hand; in the midst of that mercie of easing him, and his people, of some of his adversa∣ries, he setteth a Copie of his judgment, if Magistrats in their place follow not their Copie, the verie for∣bearance of the Lords enimies, thorow fear, or favour, or desire of ease, or hope of gain, becommeth the bane of the forbearers, for the just God ofttimes by som of those that they spare, and whom they should have pluckt up, plucketh them or theirs up without any pittie: for instances we need to go no further then the age wherein we live: Have not some of our No∣bilitie & Gentrie, yea some say, our late King perished by such, as they should not have spared, the Lord made this good in former times against his owne people. The Lord telleth them in the 2. of the Iudges, that he would not break covenant with them, but they must alsoo looke to keep covenant with him in this very particular, that we have in hand, you shall make no league with the inhabitants of the Land; you shall throw downe their Altars, but ye have not obeyed, why have ye done this? Wherefore I also said: I will not drive them out from be∣fore you, but they shall be as thorns in your sides,V. 2.3.4. and their Gods shall be a snare unto you. The gunpowder-plotters were cōsumed by a fire of their own making, intimating to us, that we should have ferrited out, and fiered out (namely by due course of law) the rest of that fiery crew, and all their strange fire; that we should have broken all their Altars & Ima∣ges into chalk stones, that we should have pluckt up root
and branch; destroyed head, and taile; swept all away and made a clean howse: but we did not, nor have not yet obeyed, and will not the Lord say to us: why have ye done this? Yes, he hath us in question, and hath made good the threatening upon us; For now they are so farre from being driven out, that they are like to drive us and ours out; yea they and their agents, the Arminians so gall our sides, and greive our soules, that we know not how to bestow our selves; yea we have all cause with that people forenamed to lift up our voyce, and weep, till we can weep no more. Another instance may be taken from that deadly blowe, givē by Gods owne hand, to Balaams Priest, and his Idolatrous auditorie, in the Black-Friers of London; where he caused the ruins of an howse, to cover and revenge that Idolatrie in blood, and rubbish, which polluted the Sabbath, outstared the Heavens holy due∣ties, yea affronted God himself, without controulment of any man; As this was the verie extraordinarie fin∣ger of God, laying his enimies in the dust: so it poin∣ted out the duetie of Ministers & Magistrats, that they should have followed the blowe, doing execution with the word, and with the sword: But as the execution of this Iudgment wrought nothing on the Papists, but fretting, desire, & threatening of revēge on Gods people; with a peremptorie resolution, to manage out Idola∣trie with a higher hand; so it wrought nothing on us, but a gazing stupiditie for the time; for what man of place hath conceived, what the Lord said to him in that execution; or hath followed home the Lord in
his work, by putting to his hand, to shake any Piller of Popery? yea have not for the ruine of one howsefull many howsefulls (yea townfulls) risen up since that time? whom God in judgment may suffer to shake our Churches & howses, because we would not learn (when God was readie to guide our hand) to write by a President. It is further worth the noteing, that as the French alloted them an howse to that dismall work, contrarie to the Law of God & Nations, & was never called to an accōpt for the dishonour done to God, the undoing of souls, & the losse of the Kings subjects; So the French hath plagued & pestered us since worse then before, & that both in our states & religion; For by that unequall match (which we lay not to heart as we should) they have set up Baalpeor in publick amōgst us, by the which especially,Psal. 106.29. we provoking God to anger the plague of the Lord brake in upon us; which though it be removed, yet if we remove not that plague of the Masse, the wrath of the Lord will never leave us, till it hath quite con∣sumed us. Let the last instance be from the Prelacy, being the main subject of our treatise. It is cleared that all our evills of sinne and judgment are from them, and butte full upon them; and therefore the Lord hath mett with many of thē in remarkable judgment, shewing them & their places to be the gangreen of the Land; yet for all this, what man of note or place hath lent the Lord an hand, to the casting downe of their strong houlds?
and notwithstanding that men now with half an eye can see, and say, that their standing (meaning their places) must be the ruine of the nation, yet the prophane favour them, and the Professor feareth them; so that there is not a man of any place to come forth, and say; Come and see how zealous I will be for the Kingdome of Christ, against those his enemies, that will not have him to raigne over them; which is a shrewd evidence, if we gett no better heart to the businesse, that they shall plague us and ours seaven times more. To conclude the point, it is a great fault in men of place, both Ministers and Magistrats, that they would have God to doe all the hard worke by himself, and they would come, and gather up the spoyle: but they who will raigne with God, even in the glory of any good work, must do for him, and suffer with him in the doing of the Work. The later main remarkeable thing is this: That all the things that we have looked for, effected, and relyed upon, hath proved to us as broken reeds. For the better clearing of this observation we will first give some instances of it, and then shew the grounds, and lastly the use of it. To begin with our expectation and issue: after the death of Queen Elizabeth, all the good, had great hopes of a conformitie of Church-government to the rule of Christ; a great many Ministers and people sett
themselves to maintaine, and sollicite the cause of Christ. But the subtile Tempter, namely the Hierarchy, did so winde it self, like the ivie about the vine, that they drained out all his spirit of reformation, (if he brought any with him,) yea they suggested to the eye of his apprehension, such a bewitching Phantasm of pleasure, profit, honour, applause, admiration, absolute government, & absolute libertie, to do what he list; to a∣rise from the maintenance of an Honourable Clergie; that he conceived them to be the bravest Ornaments, and fittest Instruments for King craft, that were in the world. Again, they filled his eares with forged reproches of the government of Christ, taking opportunitie, to strike upon that Iarring string of his sometimes exas∣perated conceit. They further buzzed into his eares the danger of ex∣asperating Papists, if he should comply with refor∣mation. Lastly, they so plyed his deluded disposition with evill Instruments, and mercenarie men, that he must hear nothing, nor bear nothing, but the wilde grapes of Episcopall conformitie; Whereupon they grew so inso∣lent, that they added violence to their malice, abusing the King; in that (besides his pleasure and command) they tooke away the sheepheards, & scattered the flocks, and so to our great greife we were disappointed of this point of our expectation.
An other ground of our hope was that magnani∣mious Henrie (whom we do not name to minorate the parts of our present Soveraigne) whose Heroick parts and Princely cariage, were not only a terror & admira∣tion to forrains, but they were also both feared and en∣vyed by Papists, & Prelats, whom he could never en∣dure. But our sinnes, and our enimies malice, caused the Summer sett upon our faire Rose before we were a∣ware, and so that Anchor came home. A third thing we looked for, was the removall of the former Favorite, which the Lord effected: But in stead of a Thistle he fitt us with a bramble, because we were no better worthie. A fourth thing that we much importuned God for, was the breaking of the Spanish match, and our Princes safe returne from Spaine: God in mercie graunted both, but we were so unthankfull for both these in a right manner, and brake up our watching over him for a better helper, that God suffered him, to our heavie woe, to match with the Daughter of Heth, though he mist an Aegyptian. 5. When all things were so farre out of frame, that we are becom the prey of our enimies, the mockerie of our freinds, a shame to our selves, and the fotestoole of a favourite: then nothing but a Parliament, Oh! a Parliament would mend all; But Parliament we had after Parliament, and what was amended? Your Ho∣nours can best tell who departed the howse (at the pro∣rogation) in so heavie a moode, as though ye had been led captive by some conquerour of the state; For that
overswaying evill (on whom all reformation tren∣ched) caried all opposition with so strong a hand, that he & his (the basest of whom durst brave the Parlia∣ment) were thought too hard for the state: But him also hath God cutt off, and what would we have more? Surely, we may looke for good, but evill shall come out from the presence of the Lord, till we hit the right vein, as our services are like cloudes, without raine, so the Lords favours will prove to us as the morning dew. But what is the ground of all this failing of our Hopes? Even the suffering of this cursed ground of the Hierar∣chie, to bring forth so many brambles: (under favour,) if ye had begun at this ground, your work in all reason had gone better with you. Therefore to the use, which is the last particular of this point: arise now, and do it: The right way to the work of reformation, is to begin with the Sanctuarie, as Ezechia & Iosia did: the inner Court of Christs Temple is first to be measured, before the outward Court of Policy. Give us leave to inforce the duety from some motives, besides the reasons, rising from the Positions, we will contrive the reasons as breifely as may be. The first reason may be taken from the evill, which you are to deal with; namely, such a burthen as the Lord can not any longer bear, but you must either ease him of it, or he will ease the Land of such as are in place, and will do nothing for him. If any object that Bs. be not so evill; there be many good men amongst them: we answer, (as hath been said,) that we take not upon us to determine of their persons; for many are willing to de∣ceive themselves with this sophisme: he is a good man.
Ergo a good Lord Bishop, as though goodnesse and Bishop being both in one subject were convertible terms, where it should rather follow, he is a Lord Bishop, Ergo no good man; because it is verie hard to be a good man in a bad calling, instance in a player, or the like. But for their good we will say no more; but let their com∣mon practise speake in these two particulars; namelie their hatred and crueltie against Gods Ministers and people, and their blasphemous scoffing at the Language of Canaan, or Scripture Phrase; as if a man shall name the Seal of his Ministrie; glorifying of God; sancti∣fying the Lords day; or walking with God, they will houpe and hout at a man, as though he were a Barba∣rian to them. 2. The second reason is from your authoritie and place.Smith. de Reip. Angl. Parliamentum habet in se potestatem totius Regni, imò capitis & corporis: The Parliament hath in it the power of the whole Kingdome, yea both of the head and of the body: Then power must be put in use, or it looseth the power. You are the Elders of Israell; you are an armie of Generals; that supream Court, that may call any place, or person to an account, whether they be for the glorie of God, the good of the King and State, or no; you are the Physitians of State; up and doe your cure; In a word, it were happie for our King and us, if you knew your power practi∣callie. They are the devise of man, contrarie to Gods commandment, and man must remove them.
3. A third reason is from that precious pledge, that they keep (as it were) incarcerated to their will (name∣ly the Kings Majestie,) for where they beare sway, there the King (as Woolsey wrote) is their King. We have shewed, how they have vexed Kings to the verie death. But is not the King , the Father of Magistrats, and private men? Or to use Scripture Phrase, the breath of our Nostrils, or as the people said of David, worth 10000. of us. Consider then what a pittie it is to all, and an inde∣leble dishonour it will be to you, the state representa∣tive, that so ingenuous & tractable a King should be so monstrously abused by the bane of Princes, to the un∣doing of himself, & his subjects. It was truely said of a wise Polititian:Si capite plectatur. Erasm. de Instit. Princip. If he forfeit his head, (saith he,) or be worthie of manie punishments, that clippeth or corrupted the Kings coyne, or poysoneth a common conduict; how much more punishment are they worthie, that corrupte a King with evill Counsell, to the vndoing of himself, and all vnder him. Austine in that treatise of the Correction of the Donatists, the cheife enimies of the Church, hath a prettie observation, concerning Absolon, not impertinent to our purpose. Si aliter non potuit Domus David pacem habere nisi Absolon, &c. If the howse of David could have no peace, but by the removall of Absolon, (notwithstanding of Davids command, out of his state-indangering in∣dulgencie to the contrarie:) so no peace, prosperitie, nor standing to the Church, but by the removall of the Prelacie, for the danger and enmitie of the Dona∣tists
to the Church, were not of so high a nature as the danger & enmitie from the Prelats are. Then take away the drosse from the Silver,Prov. 25.4.5. and there shall come forth a Vessell for the finer, take away the wicked frō before the King and his Throne shall be established in his righteousnesse. But we mean to presse this particular a litle further, when we come to speake of the means. 4. A fourth reason is, from Gods offering of himself, to guide you by the hand, (as we have shewed;) who by giving of the first blow hath in mercie removed the greatest nayl in all their tent, and will not you follow home? 5. The fift reason is from our not-profiting by any mercie, privative, or positive, that God hath afforded us: we doe not thrive or gaine by any thing, and where lyes the fault? even in this, as we have shewed, in that we lay not the axe to the root of the right tree: We do not undermine that which undermineth us: We fight not against that which fighteth against Christ. There∣fore to use the word of the Psalmist, be wise at length great Senatours, and in the feare of the Lord break the bands of these that are like to break us in peeces. What good shall we gett by removall of that pocks of the state, if the radicated humor in the evill liver of Rome be not followed with the power of eradicating Minerals. To move the humor, and not to remove it, is to double the strength of the disease. As we have alreadie given some instances of this; so we feare from this very par∣ticular, the proofe of wofull experience. The Lord
hath broake the enimies Limbeck. Even no doubt when some spirit of mischeife was come to the verie helm, so that he hath marred the Devils labour, even when he was to be delivered of some monstrous mis∣cheife to the state. But (notwithstanding all this as hath been said) if we thinke the Vessell to be quite broake, and their Oyl & Paines, and all lost, we de∣ceive ourselves exceedinglie; for the menstruous mat∣ter, and the body of the work remains in the bot∣tom: if you give them leave thorow delay, but to lute on a new neck, they will show you a new Spirit, in an ould work, and if you stand not up in the breach, for a furnace of brick, they will make one of marble, and for a neck of glasse, they will make one of steel, so that the last wo will prove worse then the first, and the daye of his death shall bring forth more bitternesse then the day of his life: For know this for a certaintie that Rome, Spaine, France, & Austria; the Prelats, Ar∣minians, and all the crackling Thorns, & fire-work men in the former work will sett all they have, and themselves to upon a rest, rather then they will not make good the wicked work they have begun. Arise then in the name of God, and disperse them, or looke for no∣thing but fearfull desolation from them. 6. The sixt reason is from the present evill condi∣tion, wherein we stand, and the danger whereunto we are lyable. First for our state, as the Physitian said of nature, that it was but all one sicknes, so our state indeed is but all one
distemper; Or with the Prophet: There is nothing sound from the Crowne of the head, to the sole of the foot, the heart is sick, & the head is heavie; yea our consciences are more dominiered over within, & our state more pla∣gued by forrains without, then any free nation profes∣sing the Gospell in the world, and for our religion and worship of God, it is so overlaid with the rubbish of Idolatrie, and superstition that the sacrifice in a man∣ner is mixed with tears, and groans; and if it be not re∣medied, they will raze the verie foundations of Re∣ligion; For they have shooke them shrewdlie alreadie by their Popish and Arminian tenēts and practises. As for Iugdments, besides these alreadie seased, if we return not, as the Lord threateneth by his Prophet: He will cutt off head,Esa. 9.13.14. and tail, branch, and rush in one day. Is it not time then to looke to it? Can Christ endure in stead of the Sacrament of his body and blood, according to his owne institution, a Po∣pish Altar to be erected? Coaps, Cloaths, & Lights befit∣ting the same, Wafers, wine mixt with water, and the Crucifix upon the Altar? with this rotten stuffe, and stifeling Leiturgie hath that corrupt crew pranct up their Masse. Instance Polydamnaes twinns, Iannes and Iambres L. & N. the former of which have braved in these of late, as it were to affront the Parliament, yea and Christ himself.
7. A seaventh motive, to prevaile with you, may be taken from your owne particular; it is said in that forequoted place of Esai, that the Ancient and Honou∣rable is that head, which the Lord will cutt off. You are the Elders of Israell, the Ancient & Honourable, whom the Lord will cutt off by them, if you cutt not them off. We have shewed and proved how they have struck at root, and branch of the Ancients of England, and how they have caused many to fall. You and yours (if you be right) they aym at. How dishonourable & basely have they dealt with the Nobilitie, & Gentrie, striking soms hats from their heads, threatening o∣thers, making some Daunce their attendance. The Iesuite needeth, neither the force of Spaine, nor Austria, nor Italie, to the ruining of our Religion and State, the Arminianised, or right down Popish Prelate, the bellie-serving Machivell, the state-betraying Papist wil make it readie meat for his mouth. From this self vndermining course the wisest of the Counsell of Spaine have prevailed with the rest, to take this for a principall; not to assayle our nation, till by home-bred sedition and disorder of Church & State, it be readie to fall in their mouth, & so they may have it cheap enough. In the mean time your state & families shall be but a prey to the Prelacy, and to such as the Prelacy do support; For all the overturners of the Kingdome turneth upon the hinges of the Prelacy, the storm may overblow the poorer shrubs, when we and our Cedar-like families may be blowen up by the
roots. Curia Romana non captat ovem sine laena: The Prelates will not prey on fleeslesse sheep. Remove then this deadly cup, or your portion of it one day may make you cry out: O! how bitter it is! 8. The eight motive riseth from the generall desire of all the well affected; yea the meerly civill longeth for their downfall: Sions Plea against them hath ever been maintained, since the beginning of reformation; witnesse both the doings & the sufferings of the Saints in that behalf, but now their tyrannie, & treacherie in betraying of the trueth, to Poperie and Arminianisme, together with the prophanesse of them and theirs, unvaileth more fully to men of all ranks, (as Nobili∣tie, Magistracie, Ministerie, Gentrie, and Cominaltie,) the iniquitie of their place, and the ruine thence en∣sueing, which maketh them cry with one voyce, downe with the Babell of Prelacy; For the which they may justly alledge that reason, that the Philistine Princes alled∣ged against David; that he should not go to battle with them, least he be (say they) an adversarie to us, for wherwith should he reconcile himself unto his Master? should it not be with the heads of these mē? 1. Sam. 29.4. So whatsoever ye attēpt for the good of Policy, or religion, for the diver∣ting of evill, for the releef of the afflicted Churches abroad, will be but as watter spilt upon the ground, for all attempts have proved no better. In every good thing they will be your reall adversaries, yea where∣with will they reconcile themselves to their Maister the Pope, but with the ruine of Religion and State,
and more particularly it may be, with the heads or hearts of you and yours. 9. The 9. and last motive, is from the excellency and weight of the work in hand, namely the advancing of the Scepter of the Kingdom of Christ Iesus, which is no other thing, but a restoring or establishing of the true Officers of Christ, the puritie of his ordinances, and the power of his owne Discipline. Of the excellency and necessity of Discipline we have spoken somewhat. Standeth it with equitie or reason, that the Popes Law, which is the Popes owne mouth, should speake or rule in Christs Church? And that it is so with us, the Hierarchy it self can not deny, for it is the very same Popish government, that is pourtrayed out in the Popes Canons,Degubern. cap. 14. pag. 539. for the which our Prelacy standeth as stiffe as any pontificall of them all, witnesse Bishop Bilson, Bishop Whitgift, and others. But this government (as all knew that are acquainted with it)Tract. 8. cap. 6. pag. 72. is 1. Corrupt. 2. Burthensome. 3. Tyrannous. 4. It spoyleth the Church of her Libertie.
5. It hath condigne censure and condemnation put upon it by Iuries of the learned,Instit. Lib. 4. c. 10 witnesse Luther, Calvine, & Morney. Ius Ca∣non &c. Lib. de Confut. Quest. 2.Let Doctor Whitaker speake for all: The Canon Law and Pontifician Decrees should have no place with us; For which marke his reason, because it is (saith he) Anti∣christian, and an enimy to all religion and piety. Hence it will follow that Christ must needes be angry with us, and speake to us in his hott wrath, and smite us also yet 7. times more, if the Scepter of Anti∣christ may be still suffered to iustle out the Scepter of Christ Iesus. What is the breaking of the Lords bands, and casting his coards from us, (spoken off in the second Psalme;V. 3.4.5.) but the reiecting of his government, against which, how fearfull a threatning there is denounced, the same place also doth witnesse. Vp then (right Honourable) and be strong in the Lord,1 Cor. 10.31. and for the Land, since you see the danger. It is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And how can we escape unlesse this evill be re∣moved? We cannot but discover a deceiptfull: conceipt that possesseth, and stealeth away the hearts of many Prefessours among us. It is true (say they) we have amongst us the evill of Bishops, the corruption of some idle Ceremonies, we would with all our hearts, they were away; we also want Discipline, which we earnest∣ly desire. But when it commeth to an overwhelming
judgment, we hope our close walking with God in piety, sanctitie, and equitie (will through Gods mercie) guard us against it, when your Reformed Churches may be ledd through fire and water, and layd desolate, because of the Libertinisme, and profane loosenesse of the best of their people, walking nothing worthy of the puritie of Gods ordinances. We speake what we know, for we have often heard it. But for answer. 1. Good desires are good, if they be joyned with good endevours; otherwise they are vanishing vapours. 2. For our close walking, if it be sheltred from con∣fusion, it must respect all Gods Commandements,Psal. 119.6 and that both for Ceremony and substance: witnesse Zacha∣ry, & Elizabeth,. walking in all the Commandments and Or∣dinances of the Lord. So were they blamelesse. The two words in both tongues, do signifie the substantiall precepts and Ceremonies, which both must be of God; in both we must walke. This their practise, taketh away that unsound and groundlesse distinction, that we must walke in Gods precepts for the substance, and we may in mans precepts for the Ceremonies. As all the learned in Theologie do discover this di∣stinction to be counterfeit: So it shall never hould plea for the removall of judgment. 3. The Lord hath smitten them (indeed) for their unworthie walking, as some with that smoke againe raysed out of the bottomlesse pitt. Instance,Apoc. 9.2. our
neighbour nation of Scotland. Some he casteth into a hott bath of blood, as the French. Other some he hath exposed to destruction and desolation or to sla∣vish captivitie in their owne Land, As Bohemia, the Palatinate, the Austrians, & other Germains, of whom me may say,Ier. 2.14. Is Israell a sonne? or is hee a slave? why is hee spoyled? or in another scripture phrase, were they greater sinners,Luk. 13.5. because they suffred such things? I tell you nay, but except you repent, you shall all like wise perish; let vs not then deceive our selves; our one sinne of spoyling God of his glory, and barring Christ from his Kingdom (if wee had no more predominante sinnes) will weigh downe in the ballance all their great and crying sinnes, for which they are punished; and it is to bee feared (wee pray God avert it) that when or judgment cometh into the ballance, it shall weigh downe the judgment of all the former na∣tions: yea wee feare (as wee often heare it out of pulpits) as they have drunke the brimme; so wee shall drinke the bottom, onely the dregge shalbe left for the whoore: whom hee smiteth last hee plagueth worst: Because their impenitency is of the greatest height against both mercy and judgment, precept, and example: woe to vs, for such is our case, if wee amend not by removeall of our evill upon these mo∣tives. When Gods owne Israell returned not being smit∣ten, hee smote her seaven times more; yea hee threateneth her not onely with such plagues as are
written in the Booke of God (which are abundantly enough) but also with every plague that is not written in the Booke of the Law;Deut. 28.6 that is such as they for the fear∣fullnesse of them could not conceite; and such as the Lord in his just judgment would not make them ac∣quainted with. We have great cause to tremble at these speeches. For it is to be feared that the Lord (as he speaketh) will make our plagues marvellous,Deu. 28.37. & 59. and make us an astonishment to all people. We have just cause to bring home that to our selves, that is spoken of Ephesus;. Rev. 2.4. I have against thee (for so are the words) inti∣mating to us in them, that he will bring some great evill upon us, that he will not expresse; no way see we (under favour) to escape these terrible things threatned but by removing of this Mr. evill. It is not lopping, nor pruning, nor shaving, and trimming, nor pairing of the nailes of this evill (as some of great note have promised) that will serve the turne. As the Great Turke said (of the losse of his men) it is but a shaving; it will quicklie grow againe. So will it be just in this, except you strike at the roote. Except you remove these Majorites, the reforming of the Minorites will do litle or no good. Beleeve us right Honourable, unlesse ye pluck up these stumps of Dagon by the very roots; their Nayls will grow ranker then ever they were, and they will scratch more divel∣lishly then ever they did. Except this strange fire be removed, the Lord must make the consuming fire of his wrath break out upon us.
He usuallie maketh a people to read their sinne in great Characters in their judgments. Will any daube or trimme, or put a new cover upon an ould rotten howse that will fall about their eares: or will they not ra∣ther downe with it, ridde away the rubbish, and build a new one? Will a Chirurgian cicatrize, or skinne a purulent sore, or festered wound? Or will he not rather search to the bottom, and make a sound cure, by purging out the filthie matter, and eating out the dead flesh? Or will any adventure to cure a member that must be cutt off? If they do thus, they kill the partie. So in this case, the whiting, daubing, or palliating, will not serve, but cutting off must make the cure. As a Gentleman said to a great mā, complaining to him, that his howse was all out of order, & he could not well discerne the cause: if he would put away halting Tom, he should soone see what was the cause. And so it was indeed. So if the halting Hierarchie, betweene God & Baal, should hap∣pilie be removed, truth would quicklie discover the necessitie of it. That comfortable speech of Samuel to the people, mourning for choosing Saul their King, is verie re∣markeable:1. Sam. 12.20. Yee have done this wickednes, but feare not, &c. As if he would say, the Lord will pardon: Yet turne not aside to vaine things, but serve the Lord. For if you do, you shalbe destroyed both you and your King. Where observe that the Lord wil be mercifull to them
for manie sinnes, but if they turne to Idolls, the Lord will make havocke of all. We have not onelie turned aside, but we never turned wholly from vaine things. And we turne aside more and more. If then this Hierarchie be so deadlie an evill, that as a great one said of his wicked wife; If it live,Ejus vita mea more. the com∣mon-wealth must dy. Then are they inofficious plea∣ders (how great soever) that hould the maine altera∣tion, or total reformation; to be a perilous operation in a Church. But they go upon false grounds: First, that no certaine ground of government is prescribed by God for his Church. The contrarie whereof is proved, and that to be unalterable. For the further clearing of the unsoundnesse of this Position against the Law of God, the order of nature, & the strength of reason; let us go yet a litle further, because it is delivered by a great one, that thought himself a great statist; yea we wish it had not fallen from the pen of some Minister of note. What can be more expresly and precisely laid down, than Discipline is discovered in that place of the Gos∣pell, so often quoted, and so well knowne, Math. 18.18. where (as it is observed by the learned) are all the parts of Discipline, namely reprehension & Censure.Zanch. in 4. precept. Also the rue and Lawfull Officers: Nempe presbyteri quibus est ommissa non Dominis; To witt the Elders to whom it s committed, not to Lords; Neither must it be used
any other wayes (saith the learned) then Christ hath appointed, qui est causa efficiens, &c. Who is the efficient cause of Discipline. The Elders are the Instrumentall cause, useing the advise, approbation, and presence of the people, in the last act of Censure, namely excommu∣nication. The materiall cause is faith and manners. The formall cause, debitus exercendi modus, a due man∣ner of proceeding. From these particulars the lear∣ned deduce this, definition. Disciplina est facultas Ecclesia à Christo tradita, &c. Discipline is a power given by Christ to his Church, to teach, admonish, reprove, correct; yea to inflict the highest punishment of giving men over to Sathan, if they so deserve. For the further illustration, they apply that Pa∣rable in the Gospell,Marc. 13.34. where Christ is said to be like a man taking a farre journey, who left his howse, and gave authoritie to his servants, and to every man his work, com∣manding the porter to watch. Where be pleased to ob∣serve no authoritie, but that which is given; and no work, but that which is lest; and over these the Porters must watch, that no other authoritie be intruded, nor other work be done. To the same effect, they cite that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, that he was bould after a holy manner to boast according to the mea∣sure of the rule which God had distributed vnto him,2. Cor. 10.13. and not of the things which God had not measured to him. Since by this then, and sundry other proves, by us pro∣duced, it appeareth plainly, that Christ hath appointed in his howse one direct perfect and unalterable form
of government (otherwise as the Learned observe,Calvin. In. stit. lib. 4. it should be worse with Christ his howse, then with mens howses.) How calumnious, (if not blasphe∣mous) are they against the truth of God? How oppro∣brious to his wisdome? How injurious to Soules? How Tyrannous over men of all estates? Who force a state, by word, writ, and practise, to maintaine, that Christ hath left no certain form of government in his howse. These men are the Prelats, against whom especially learned Calvine directeth his speech in his discourse of Discipline, where he telleth us:Ibid. c. 12. Sect. 1. quod Doctrina sit anima Ecclesiae, & Disciplina nervus; that pure Doctrine is the Soule of the Church, and Discipline is the Sinews of the Church. Yet there are (saith he) that hate Discipline so, ut à nomine Disciplinae abhorreant; That they abhor the verie name of Discipline, they are Antidisciplinarians. Then why should men of gifts, for feare or favour, maintaine these Prelats, in giving the Spirit the lye? We would have men to consider why they broach this untruth, and would have others to maintaine it; namely that they may dung and dresse, and still bear out that bitter root, & rotten stump of their Anti∣christian government; the denyall of good govern∣ment in Christ his howse maketh way for all the bad government of the Beast, and such is the Hierarchicall government, which hath as much to doe with the go∣vernment of Christ, as the Masse hath with the Sacra∣ment: It hath none of the causes, or concurring parts, that maketh up the definition of Discipline.
It hath not Christ for the efficient cause; nor the El∣ders for the Instrumentall; not faith or manners (whatso∣ever they pretend) for the matter, but rather the cur∣sing of them, whom God hath blessed; and for the manner it is nothing but misorder it self. That complaint of an ancient Author Anno 1150. concerning corrupt Discipline, may well be applyed to the Prelates Discipline.Potho. lib. de statu Do∣mus Dei. Est in omni ordine, & professione latens Disciplinae figmentum, Spiritui Sancto inimicum, innocentiae ac simplicitati, valde contrarium: There is in everie profession (saith he) a show of order, and the counterfeit of Discipline, but it is enmitie to the Holy Ghost, and altogether adverse to holinesse, and simpli∣citie; Even just so is this their Discipline, of which a learned ancient of the same time giveth this remark∣able testimonie:Petrus Ble∣sens. in Ep. ad Official. Corrumpit, non corrigit, exasperat, non emendat: It corrupteth, but correcteth not, it rather hardeneth men in sinne, then reclaimeth them from sinne. 2. They dreame of as many formes of government as of State Policie, which is nothing so. For God hath not prescribed any particular unalterable forme of government to this or that common wealth (except to the Iewes) but hath left it various to the varietie of States; so it be according to the generall rules of pietie and equitie. But no sooner ordained God a Church, either under the Law or Gospell, but so soone he pre∣scribed a platforme of government for it.Exod. 28.
For clearing of this doubt, let D. Whittaker speake:De autho∣ritat. sa∣crae Scrip∣turae advers. Stapleton. c. 9. p. 436. Regis & Ecclesiae dissimilis est ratio, authoritas legum con∣dendarum Regis est, ac latas & promulgatas abrogare po∣test, &c. at Ecclesia Scripturis, &c. Imo dico ego nec leges ferre potest in Domo Dei, alioqui Scriptura esset imperfecta: There is not (saith he) a like reason of the King, and of the Church; The King and State may make and set forth Lawes, and abrogate the same, making others in their place (as the necessitie of the time, and good of the State shall require,) but the Church hath her Laws from the Scriptures, neither may any King make Lawes in the howse of God, for if they might the Scripture should be imperfect. 3.Acts 20.14. &c. Tit. 1.5. For that pretended danger of totall reformation it savoureth altogether of the flesh, and nothing of the spirit. Is it dangerous to remove a destroying evill? Is it dangerous to do what God commandeth, and to remove that which he hateth? Is it dangerous to remove the government of An∣tichrist, and to plant in the place thereof the govern∣ment of Christ? Now that the Episcopall government is Antichristian, and opposite to the government of Christ hath been formerlie proved.
We feare where we should not feare: and we feare not where we should feare. Should we feare to slay that which would slay us; or to maintaine that which will save us? It is true, that Physitians hould it desperate rashnes to put hand to a deadlie maladie: but there the bodie is given for dead: so if there be nothing but a resolu∣tion to perish, then an evill consequent will sorte with a desperate supposall. But we looke for better things from your Honours (for secret things belong to God,) but you the Physitians of the commonwealth must apply, and ply your Me∣dicines, and God will worke the cure. The remoraes of reformation, and all the belly-God crew will certainly cry out with open mouth, that these reformers are troublers of our State. But was Zepha∣nie a troubler of the State,Cap. 1.4. in putting on Iosiah to re∣move the Chemarim Priests, and all the reliques of Baal? Did Christ himself disturb the Church when he whipt the buyers and sellers out of the Temple?Mat. 21.12 which practise the learned apply as a president for reforma∣tion of Church Discipline; witnesse Michael Decla∣mangis cited to that effect by Morney.
Charles the great,Histor. Pa∣pal. pag. 225 Gabri: Pu∣teol. de Confil. and Lewes his sonne (both Emperours) acknowledged themselves bound, and also endeavoured to follow Iosiah in Church reforma∣tion. Finally did Beza disturbe the Church in wri∣ting an Epistle to Queene Elizabeth for the quite a∣bandoning all the high places,Anno 1572. & a plenary reformation of Church discipline? though Bancroft stormed at him for this, because hee touched the Coppiehould of his belly; yet the good Queene tooke him for no distur∣ber of the peace. 4. And lastly such as write for reformation in part; yet upon carnall reason resist a totall reformation; are evinced by their owne grounds; as stand yee in the wayes,Ierem. 6.15 and aske for the ould pathes, where is the good way, and walke therein. The word there must shew the way vers. 17. now a man must not go halfe in one way, & halfe in another (witnes the same Prophet, the best expounder of himselfe) what hast thou to do in the way of Egipt, to drinke the waters of Nilus, &c.Cap. 2.18. Againe they cite that place from the beginning it was not so:Math. 19.8 which all the learned both ancient & moderne apply to the having recourse to Gods first institution; ad Originem,Cipra ad Pompeium. dominicam, Evangelicam & Apostolicam (saith a Father) let us goe to Gods grounds, to Evangelicall & Apostolical truthes &c. As for that Popish Prelatical objection (that it is not yet time,Hagg. 1.2. as the Iewes said of building of Gods howse:) Or as Pope Hadrian answered Sigismond (Or as Doctor Soame of the same particular for his time) that it was not possible & safe.Quod non sit tutum vel possibile.
This we say is out of date: For it is either high time now or never. So we earnestlie desire (as Paul wished to Agrippa) that not onelie almost, but altogether reformation may be perfected: To the effecting wher∣of, let the terrible sequele of neglect perswade you. Be∣stirre your zeale and courage (right Honourable) for preventing of that black day, which may come upon us unawares. Can a body live without a Sowle? Or a sowle in∣sensate or activate a body without Sinews? As we have heard the puritie of Doctrine to be the Sowl of the Church, whereby it liueth, so also Discipline hath been shewed to be the Sinews of the Church, by which sence and motion is conveyed and maintained in the Church. It is impossible that our state should continue, but must of necessitie fall into desolation, before we be aware, if reformation be not hastened in this parti∣cular. Master Calvine sheweth what enimies they are to the State that hinder Discipline, and that from the desperate condition they bring it to: Qui Disciplinam impediunt extremam desperationem,Instit. lib. 4. cap. 12. &c. They who hin∣der Discipline, bringe the State at length to an ex∣treamly desperate point.
Heathen writers observe;In 2. Reg. cap. 11. pag. 276. and so doth Peter Martyr upon the Kings, that so long as the Romans observed strict Discipline with a competent severitie, so long they prospered, and enlarged their Dominions; Sed labente Disciplina; Discipline decaying, the Empire came to nothing. How then can we chuse but perish, who professe Christ, and yet reject the government of Christ. Nicolaus Orem in his Oration before Pope Vrban the 5. sheweth this to be one of the forerunning signes of the ruine of Church and common-weal, when Disci∣pline perisheth. To draw to a conclusion of the proof. Hear and tremble at that which the Lord threateneth against the rejecting of this his Ordinance:Rev. 3.16. It will come to passe that I will spew thee out of my mouth. A Loathsome people, and a fearfull & unreversible judgment. This threatening intimateth that he can not bear us; that he will cast us out into despicable places; and that he will never looke any more after us; what is the main cause of all these?V. 20. Even our keeping Christ out at doores, that is: we will not have him to raigne over us. Give not then the people and State, our peace and wealth, our sheep & sheepheards, our Crownes, Lawes, and Royall King (the King of his subjects, & Father of his people;) your owne noble and generous families: your faire meanes, and possessions, and Gods glory (which is
worth all:) give not those (we intreate you) as loste, to the pitt of desolation. Before we conclude the point, it shall be verie ma∣teriall to answer one doubt that may arise, and is most objected from the difficultie of the businesse. We verilie beleeve, that all the well affected to State, or Religion, upon the perusall of this Decade shall be really and fully possessed of the truth of this Posi∣tion, namely the absolute necessitie of the removall of the Prelacy;Ier. 4.11.12. and that as the Prophet speaketh: a winde to fan or to clense, will not serve the turn; but it must be a full or mightie winde to root up; and carie away the verie foundation of their being. Ast opus egregium quis, &c. But who shall do this great work, and by what means may it be accomplished? yea who dare bell the Cat? Or where is that Spirit that will dash the brains of that Babilonish Prelacy (we mean their place) against the stones? Or who hath that hand to bring those eni∣mies of Christ (who will not have him to raigne over them) before him, and slay them? We must confesse here goeth the Bare away; for as evills are easier discovered then cured, so duties are sooner discerned then discharged. The difficulty of the duety, the seeming danger in the means, and want of valour to give the onsett, weake∣neth the force of the strongest reasons. But as thrise noble Nehemias said to that false Bellie-God,Nehem. 6.11. betraying Priest Semaiah, should such a man as I flie?
So should you incounter all discouragements, & fright∣ing alarms thus; should such men as we fear to doe that for our King, and Countrie, which is of more necessitie then life it self? To come then to a direct answer; and first for the persons who must effect this, we say this evill must be removed by the Magistrate & Minister, according to their severall places and stations. The Minister must remove the wicked by the sword of the Spirit (namely the word,) and if that cannot move, the Censure of Discipline must be used,. 1 Cor. 5.13 cap. 5.21. accor∣ding to that of Paul: Put away from among your selves that wicked one, and this must be done (saith the Apostle) without partialitie, preferring none before another; by ver∣tue of the same power were Hymeneus & Alexander delivered up to Sathan,1 Timoth. 1 20. that they might learne not to blas∣pheme. But in this the best may lay their hand upon their mouth, and charge themselves with the sinne of concealing this main part of Gods Counsell. As for the worst, the Prophets prophesie falsly,Ier. 5.31. and the Priests bear rule by their means, & my people love to have it so, but what will we do in the end thereof? Yea for our parts we can not tell how the verie best will answer it, for besides the Scripture the Fathers tell us,Cypr. that Disciplina est Dei Custos; retinaculum fidei, &c. It is Gods keeper; the bond of faith, the wholsome guide of a happie way.
Bern.Of which an other: Disciplinae jugo omnis insolentia damnanda: By the yoke of Discipline is all insolencie suppressed. This being commanded in the Word (as hath been shewed) Math. 18.18. having authoritie and ratifica∣tion from above Math. 16.16. being a main principall of Religion; Heb. 6.2. being the practise both un∣der the Law, and under the Gospell in all Reformed Churches; this being taken away (saith Gualter:) nihil nisi confusio & : There is nothing but confu∣sion & Anarchie. Must Ministers not medle with it, nor with the eni∣mies of it? God forbid; for this were, for fear of men, to omitt a main part of Gods Counsell. This is to crosse divine precept, it is against the threatenings of Gods vengeance, and against the practise of the Saints, witnesse these places which we commend to the perusing of Ministers, Deut. 18.18. Math. 28.20. Ier. 1.17. where observe the fearfull threatening, least I consume you before them. Where he clearly intimateth, that vengeance is prepared against them, who dare not faithfullie▪ and fullie deliver their charge, for the feare of mans face, or any other cause. This made Paule assure himself of a woe,1 Cor. 9.16 if he preached not the Gos∣pell. Yea if he preached not all the Gospell, for so was his practise:Act. 20.22. I kept back nothing, as he would say, neither for feare, nor Lucre. So Micaiah would say nothing to the King, but what the Lord had said to him, and all that he would say,1 Reg. 22.13.14. whatsoever should come of it.
We know what Fig-leave defences are made in this behalf. As so, they may leese their Ministerie: they may preach the most and profitablest truths: they may save some sowles: and by striking on this string they should doe no good. All these doth learned and right-downe Mr. Parker answer in his Policie, thus to argue is to be wise above that which is written. God needeth to no mans Mi∣nisterie, with any disadvantage of sinne; and what promise hath the Ministerie without fidelitie. This (as the learned observe) is to offer a Lame sacrifice, condem∣ned Levit. 22.20. where the word doth intimate, the playing the heef with the sacrifice. This is (as one saith) to hide a part of the talent pro∣ditorio silentio; by a betraying silence,Gualt. Ho∣mil. 173, in Luc. 19. which the Lord threateneth fearfully Math. 25. Yea the Lord (as that Author observeth) exposeth them often to the ha∣tred of such as they have pleased by their proditorious silence. The same in effect doth the Lord speake by his owne mouth in that quoted place of Ieremie c. 1. v. 17. I will consume thee, or as the originall beareth it: I will cause thee to fear, (as if the Lord should say:) if thou wilt betray my cause, for fear of man, thow shalt be a Coward indeed; for it standeth not with my honour to bear thee out: This fear was a steyn in the face of all Melancthons excellencies, and what exigents it put him to they who read know.
In Epist. ad Bull.Nemo modestior quidaem, sed nemo timidior, sayth Zan∣chie of him: None more modest I confesse, but none more fearfull. It is a sure maxime, no way to be safe, but to be zealously faithfull. Mr. Parker calleth this, hookstering of the word, in plain tearms: Flagellare Christum, vt vita servetur: a whipping of Christ, that his life might be saved. Then up ye men of God. Nolite consentire tam scelesti vocabulo: Endure not to keep silence, according to that charge given you by God:Esa. 62. V. 6.7. I have sett watchmen upon the walls O Ierusalem! which shall never keep silence, day nor night, and give him no rest till he establish, &c. In the name of the Lord,Eze. 13.5. rise up in the gappe, make up the breach, for so did not the false Prophets. In the like case Moses would not,Exo. 10.26 Daniel. 6.11. Marc. 6.18 for the greatest appearance of advantage, leave so much as one hoofe. Daniell would not boudge one heares-breadth. Iohn Baptist strooke at the roote, and Christ himself went on with his work,Luke. 13.32.33. notwithstanding of the threatenings of Herode the Fox. Downe then with the colours of the Dra∣gon; trample the Scepter of the man of sinne in the dust; advance the standard of Christ, and say: you do not prevaile, your labour shall not be in vain in the Lord. Non minus mercedis vobis debetur lavantibus Ethio∣pem, &c. You shall be as well payed for trimming of a blackamoore Bishop, as though you made him white as snowe.
Thus as the Minister must do his part with the spirituall sword, so the Magistrate must do his part in removing this evill with the Sword of Iustice, and with this more particularly, you the great Counsell of State, or High Court of Parliament stand charged; which trueth, give us leave to demonstrate to your Honours three severall wayes: 1. From precept. 2. From practise, or president. 3. From impregnable reason. For the first is that place of the Proverbs:Prov. 25.4.5. V. Take away the drosse from the Silver, and there shall come forth a Vessels for the fyner. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousnesse. Here we are to understand what is ment by the drosse, namely evill men, and evill Officers; and who worse then the Prelats and their places: They are as Trithemius citeth it from Arnulphus; Bonorum malici, the verie hammers, to beat the good and goodnesse to powder, they eat sinne, and they are cloathed with sinne, as we have shewed. In a word, they make up a very Masse of sinne.
2. Here is to be considered the dangerous nature of this drosse, it overlayeth, corrupteth, fretteth, & consumeth the silver excellencie of a King, State, & Religion; and what else doe the Prelats, as we have shewed at large? That Phrase of the Spirit fitteth just their dealing with our King and State: they have made our silver to become drosse,Esa. 1.22. and our wine they have mixed with water; for the latter of these L.D. or D.L. made it literallie good, as we hear in the Sacrament latelie in his Chappell. Our King, Counsell, Nobles, Ministers, & all sort of people are wofully corrupted by that Romish drosse. 3. Hence we plainly see that except this drosse be taken away, there is no establishing of the Throne in righteousnesse; So that this must be done, all reason∣able men will graunt; but what Magistrate should doe it, whether the supream or others, (if by the supream it be not done) there still riseth a doubt. For the clearing whereof, as well as we can, give us leave a litle. It is the Kings Honour indeed with David, Ezechia, and Iosia, to purge the howse of the Lord: and to purge out these Pymagate Chemarims (the very drosse of his throne,) with the fyrie zeal-consuming love of Gods howse, were a duty worthie of so Kingly a dignity.
The Philosopher out of nature and experience sheweth us, that , or happinesse of a King∣dome, consisteth in the well ordering of these three things;Arist. Politi. Lib. 7. namely ; that is, in matters of Warre; in matters of Iu∣stice; and matters of the Ministerie, and of Gods worship. For the ordering of the last of these there is an un∣alterable platform in the word, in the which businesse Kings must neither adde, diminish, nor take away, but if any thing be not according to this rule, with the foresaid Kings, he must remove it; because he is vindex utrius{que} tabulae, and God will require it at his hands. The truth of this David cleareth in his last will and Testament to his sonne:1 King. 2, V. 2, 3. I go the way (saith he) of all the Earth, be thow strong therefore, and shew thy self a man: But how should he strengthen himself? Keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walke in his wayes, to keepe his sta∣tutes, commandments, and judgments; that is, such wor∣ship, such conversation, & such execution of Iustice, as the Lord commandeth; for all these he calleth his te∣stimonies. Out of the which one of the Learned well ob∣serveth, that he sendeth him not to Counsells,Pet. Mart. Fathers (or as we may say) to Prelats or Rabbins, but to the word of God to be his guide; as it is written (saith he) in the Law of Moses, Deut. 29.9. Iosu. 1.7.
Cyrill Hie∣rosolit. 41. Catech.Yea the Fathers also bear witnesse of this truth : In matters of faith or Mysteries of religion, men must not institute any thing without the authoritie of the sacred word. Augustine upon these words of the 2. Psalm: Be wise therefore o ye Kings;V. 10.11. be instructed ye judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with feare, &c. commenteth ve∣rie prettily: Quomodo Reges serviunt, &c. Nisi ea quae contra Iussa Domini sunt Riligiosa severitate prohibeant, atque plectantur. Aliter servit qua homo, aliter qua Rex; qua homo vivendo fideliter; qua Rex justa praecipiendo, & contraria prohibendo, sicut servierunt Ezechias & Iosiah; Lucos & Templa Idolorum, & excelsa contra precepta Dei diruendo: How doe Kings serve the Lord with feare (saith he) but by forbidding and punishing with a Religious severitie such things, as are contrarie to Gods commandment. A King must serve the Lord one way as he is a Man, and an other way as he is a King: as a Man by beleeving well, and living well; as a King▪ by commanding that which is good, and forbidding and removing that which is evill. So served Ezechias and Iosiah the Lord, by de∣molishing the Temples, Groves, and high places of the Idolaters, yea and their Officers too. So that we see there is neither precept nor president wanting to Kings in this particular.
The King further inforceth this Counsell upon his Sonne from the benefit ensuing; that thow mayst prosper in all that thow doest; which Counsell, saith the same Author, if it had been observed by Kings, the Church of God had not been pestered with such a heap of mens traditions; ad quas cum principes vergunt, &c. To which when Princes begin to incline, they grow incertaine, and fleeting in their Re∣ligion. Hence we see what danger these Lords of Misrule, and Great Masters of Ceremonies bringe our King and State into, which should make us all (and you especiallie, right Honourable, and the faithfull Mini∣sters) on the knees of our hearts, to importune our endangered King, in the words of David: be thow strong, or strengthened, O King, & shew thy self a man, keepe the charge of the Lord in this main & weightie particular of removing the Prelacy; Or (as Abimelech in an other case:) Gratious Sr. take an axe in your hand, and cut∣ting downe, say to your Senate, what ye see me doe,Iudg. 9.8. make haste, and doe. What hath the drosse to do with the gould? Or the Throne of Iniquitie with the Scepter of Christ? A more necessarie work for all Gods Church; a more Princely and profitable act to your Highnesse self; a more happie thing for the State, and more pleasing to God, could not be thought upon.
.That these be the drosse, or perfidiously immorigerous (for so the Septuagint rendereth it) besides all our proofes, wofull experience proclaimes it; And gracious Sr. you know it better then we can tell you; It is their apish condition insensibly to abuse: they are as Worms & Mots unto Kings, and their States, one applyeth di∣rectly that place of the Proverbs to their abusing of Kings:Lavater. Episcopi qui Reges saepiunt eos contra puram religionem accendunt, & cavent ne quis ad colloquiam admittatur, &c. Bishops (saith he) who hedge in Kings, do incense their mindes against the puri∣tie of Religion, and block up the way, that no good man can have accesse or speech to them. This is very true, witnesse the bloody practise of the French Prelats against the Waldenses, whom they accused to Lewes the 12. of many fowle, but forged crimes; bar∣ring all accesse to the King, whereby they might clear themselves: till at length that good King tould those Foxes, that if he were to condemne the Devil, he would give him a hearing. Whereupon he sent his Confessor and Secretarie of State to try the matter; who returning to the King, cleared their innocencie, & commended so their pietie, and integritie, that the King affirmed by his ordinarie oath, that they were better then himself, or the Prelates that accused them. We need not go so farre for instances to your High∣nesse; we have too many at home; witnesse the shut∣ting up of accesse from poore women, and their peti∣tions, for the deliverie of their husbands, imprisoned
against the Law of God, and your Majesties Laws by the Prelates. They are ever as a black cloud between your Majesties pious subjects, and the Princes favour: For the which Swinglius compareth them to the wat∣ching Dragon, that kept the golden Fleece. But this drosse being taken away by your Majesties refining power, and this cloud being dispersed by the irresistable heat of your Sunshining zeal; the beams of your gracious favour shall warme the hearts, and cheer the countenances of all your truelie religious subjects; that Heaven and Earth shall blesse you, honouring Christ with the overthrow of his enimies, and the establishing of his Scepter in this nation; which was never yet done by any of your predecessours: The Lord will honour you, by making your Crowne fast upon your head; by confounding your foes at home & abroad, yea he will sett you as a Signet on his finger, and as a Seal upon his hand. In a word, great King (as hath been said) you shall prosper in all that you doe, and whether soever you turne jour self. Yea this transcen∣dent peece of service to your God, shall make you far more glorious then all your ancients with all their great conquests. With these, or the like speeches, our Soveraigne should be plyed, whose heart is in Gods hand, and who knowes, but by prayers and such speeches we might prevaile?
But put the case that the good Harmlesse King be a captivated Ioash, by Athaliahs Arminianised, & Iesui∣ted crew. Or a misled Henrie the 6 dispossessed of his faithfullest Friends, and best Counsell by the pride of the French. Or a Henrie the 3. overawed by a divellish dominering favorite. Or an Edward the 6. over poy∣sed and born downe from his good purposes to Gods glorie, and the good of the State, by the halting and Falshood of the Prelats, and their Romish confedera∣cies; so that such a King, though he hould the Scepter, yet he swayeth not the Scepter, neither can he free him∣self, nor execute his designes, because the Sonnes of the man of sinne are to hard for him: Shall the Counsell of State leave a good head (though it ake) in the hands of the wicked? God forbid. To cut themselves off from the head, is to show themselves no members, but either rebels or starke cowards; & not to help the head in such danger of de∣struction, both to head and members, is to proclame themselves to all the world, to be dead, dishonourable, & unprofitable members. Then you the great Counsell of State must remove the wicked from the head, and take away the corrupting and corroding drosse from the silver-excellencie, and ex∣cellent integritie of the King; so shall ye have of him a refined Vessell. What can the head do when the hands deliver not? especiallie if the animal spirits are ob∣structed
by the foggie vapours of such an Ephialtes or Incubus; as the Bishops are. As one in that disease would gladly speake and doe, yet can not possible for the weight of those Clogging vapours, overlaying both Spirits and nerves; So good Kings born downe, & overlaid with a drossie crew; and scared with the black vapours of their Chilling fears thence arising, would oftē both expresse their desires of reformation, and reform indeed, but they can not, or dare not vent themselves, because they see so few hearts to affect the businesse, and so few hands to help in it, especiallie amongst the great ones; where on the contrarie the enimies of re∣formation will lay all their lottes together, yea they will sett up estate, and life, yea sowle, and all upon one rest, for the safeguard of the Divels Kingdome; the more shame for us, that we dare doe no more, then now a dayes we dare, for the Kingdome of Christ. Azariah the Sonne of Amaziah is much commen∣ded, that he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord,2. King. 15.3.4. according to all that his Father Amaziah did, but for this he is blamed, even when he was at best, that the high places were not put away, but the people yet offered, and burnt in∣cense in them. A learned Commenter giveth a reason of this; his , or delinquencie, (as he calleth it,Pet. Mart.) et si esset opti∣mum, &c. hoc non tētavit quod fortasse putaret inveteratos hominū errores difficulter evelli posse: thoug total reforma∣tiō was the best (saith the author) & he knew it to be so, yet he
durst not attempt it, because he thought that the people would hardly be brought from their invete∣rate errors. It is just so with us; for how may good motions of reformation, in sundry of our Kings, have miscaried, thorow feares arising from the perfidie, & rebellion of the Prelacy, we have partlie shewed, and might further enlarge our selves, but that your Honours know them well enough. Vndermining Prelates, and dominiering Favorites, have cast our bravest Kings into many cold sweats. Henrie the 3. as wise and well governing a Prince as any we had, after that he was rid of evill spirits; being in danger of drowning upon Thames, he was som∣what transported with feare; and being come on shoare; Mountford bad him be of good cheer, now the danger was past: The King replyed, that he was more afrayd of him, then of drowning, or any other dan∣ger: and of all the feares, and cares, & desperate straits, of this King, who were the prime cause, but the proude Prelates? Yea a Tragicall instance of our late King might serve for proofe enough, if there were no more. If ever Prince deserved the name of the Bishops King, and Father of favorites, that did he; but how was he requited of both? Surely for the reverence that we owe to Kings, we are ashamed to say how grosly they abused him, in life and in death; yea he found himself
so deluded to his face, and (all things going head long to wrack) that he groaned in his sowle to be rid of his burthen; and if he had had as mettle men about him, (as some times he had, who would have broke the snare and delivered his sowle) we should have seene that he would have owned the fact, and thanked them too. Yea with greefe in heart, to come to the verie dayes wherein we now live: Have not the Prelates, & their late Champiō so hedged in our now Soveraigne, that he could scarse looke but at their appointment; to the no small dishonour of his Majestie, the undoing of the State, and the wounding of the hearts of all his loyall and loving subjects. Hence you see, great Senators, what need Kings have of such a Counsell of State, as will deliver their sowles from the snare of the Hunter. The late Lord Verulam gives a verie prettie morall upon that fiction of the contention of the inferiour Gods with Iupiter; wherein it is feigned they were to hard for him, till Briareus came in, and made them know, they were but Rebell-Gods. He compareth the howse of commons to Briareus his hands, whose office and place is to vendicate the Soveraigne power, the good of State-government, and the glorie of Gods wor∣ship from pollution, ruine, & Indignitie: your Honours are the verie hands which must, or should, work our de∣liverance,
in Religion, King, and State: Let flatterers, and enemies to King, State, & Religion, say what they will, you must be to them, that which Antigonus said of Zeno, the great Philosopher: Gestorum Regis Theatrum: The verie Theater of the Kings actions: Or as the Philo∣sopher sayth of the hand: It is the Instrument of In∣struments. So must you be eyes, ad discernenda Regis pericula, to discern the present danger of the King, and hands to him and us, to deliver all out of dan∣ger. The ancients give for an Hierogliph of a wise Senate, and able Counsell, a litle fish going before the great whale, discovering shallowes and other dan∣gers, and shewing the way by the motion of it self. This living the whale is safe, but being dead, he knoweth not what to do; so must your provide for the establishing of the Throne, the rectifying of government, or he may spirit upon the rocks of malicious Counsell, or sinke in the quicksands of base flatteries, and at your hands his miscariage will be required. This course have stout and wise Counsellers taken for the deliveries both of Kings and States, as we may read ad large, both in sacred and prophane Histories. The Counsell of State delivered Ioash from the blooddy tyrannie of Athaliah, Gods worship from Idolatrie, and the Kingdome from destruction; where if any object that Athaliah was an usurper, and that Ioash was kept besides the Crowne; we answer, it is as great a mischeife to a State (if not greater) for a
good King to be manacled & swayed by the wicked in his throne, as to be besides his throne. As it is an evidēt token of Gods wrath, to be without Counsell; as the Spirit witnesseth of his owne people: A nation voyd of Counsels, Deut. 32.28. that is, never a whit of Counsell at all amongst them; so wicked Counsellers (as the same Spirit speaketh) are the very Chair of Deceit, Proverb. 12.5. to carie Kings and Kingdomes headlong to destruction. We read of Vzziah his proud attempt, whose heart being lifted up with prosperitie, and forgetting that God had wrought all his works for him, he will burn incense upon the Altar of the Lord. But Azariah, and the valiant men of the Lord, withstood him, shewing from the Law, that it pertayned not to him, 2. Chron. 26.11.17. &c. Yea though he was wroath, be∣cause he might thinke his good intent might cary him out, yet they would not suffer him V. 19. Why then should ye, great Counsell of State, and our valiant men of God, suffer the Ministers of Anti∣christ? to offer strange fire on the Altar of the Lord, which will cause the fire of Gods indignation, (if it be not removed,) to consume us all.
That passage of the Philistim Princes, is verie remark∣able: They seeing David with his Hebrews marching on with the King, fall to expostulate the matter with the King:1 Sam. 29. what do these Hebrews here? The King apologied Davids fidelitie to the Princes, from that good and faithfull deportment, that he had found in him ever, since the time of his being with him: but with this the Princes were not satisfied, but were wroth, saying to the King: send this fellow back to his place, &c. They render a reason; that he would be an adversarie to them; for where with should he obtain fa∣vour of his Master? should it not be with the heads of these men? In this same passage, there be many usefull, and ob∣servable things: First, that Gods people in their straits should beware how they cast themselves upon the enemies of God; for that may bring them into greater straits. 2. As a learned Author saith well: Politia non ma∣lae, &c. It was not an evill Policie amongst the Phili∣stims,Pet. Mart. ut Rex admoneretur, imo libere reprehēderetur à suis, vt non semper posset quicquid vellet: To admonish the King, (saith he,) yea and freelie to reprove him, (espe∣ciallie in matter of no lesse weight than the saving or leesing of himself and his subjects,) for Kings may not alwayes doe what they list. As if
(saith the said Author) they should further enlarge themselves to the King, by way of expostulation. Is this to guide your affayres by Counsell? to take a man to battle with you; and give him a cheefe com∣manders place, who hath been a heavie enemie to you and yours: the shedding of our blood hath won him the hearts of his people; he hath a fair pull for the Kingdome, and now you will putt a prise in his hand, namely all our lives, by which he may bring himself in greater favour with Saul than ever he was before; beleeve it, that must not be; you (that are worth all us) we, and ours, and all ly at stake, we must not leese you, and the Kingdome, by preferring your fancie or growndlesse affection before sound reason. 3. The grownds of their opposition were verie good; For what wise man could thinke that a man obliged by so many bounds to his Country, and of such faire hopes to the Crowne, would bathe in the blood of his brethren, and vassall the Crowne to an uncircum∣cised enemie, of whose crueltie they had often tasted, which if he could not do, then of necessity he must betray them; and in very deed, if the Lord had not brought David strangely off, he had never been in a greater strait. As for the Kings reply upon the expe∣rience of Davids good behaviour, it might easily be answered: that as there is nothing liker sanctitie then hypocrisie, so there is nothing liker fidelitie then whited treason under trust.
For application: nam fas est & ab hoste doceri, for we may learn of our enimies: is not our King and State in as great danger as Achish and his Kingdome was? Yea sure, and greater. Love you not your Soveraigne and your Country, as dearly well, as the Philistim Prin∣ces did their King and Country? Ye can not chuse, but love both better; then be as faithfully free with him, as they were with Achish. Why should the Prelacie be Domini fac totum, that is: Don do all, or grand commanders in Church & State Policie? Since, 1. they oppose with tooth and nayle every thing that is good. 2. They have had their hand (as hath been proved) in all the great evils, that hath befallen the Church and State. 3. Never any good thing prospered that they putt their hand too. 4. The King & State stood never need, but they al∣wayes deceived them. 5. And lastly, (as the Princes said) if opportunitie serve, they will make peace with their head, if it be with the losse of all our heads, if they continue their places. That which Tullie objecteth to Verres, is the ordi∣narie practise of the Prelacie: Consulem suum deseruit, & venit ad Syllam: He forsooke his Consull (saith he) & went to Sylla: so if the Pope com to winde his horn a litle higher here amongst us, the horns of the Beast will
push downe King & Counsell, and all, to make way for their Master. If once the Pope with Iehu cry: who is on my side? then all his train will be too too readie to fling Gods howse out at windowes. For evidence whereof; take their present actions, as a scantling of their future attempts: if you looke not to them, they may well serve us, as a Graecian Bishop of Muchla, in the Province of Tegaea, served his Coun∣try. The Citie was beleagered by Machumet Sonne to Amurathes: he sent one of his nobles to Asanes, a brave commander and governour of the Citie, soli∣citing him partly by promises, and partly by threate∣nings, to give up the Citie; who answered, that the place was strong enough, and mantled with a three∣fold wall; besides other muniments, and store of mu∣nition; therefore it were a shame, to give a place of that strength for lost; if the great Turk were resolved to assault, they were resolved to maintain their honour, by death or by life. But the Bishop knowing that they could not long hould out, for want of victuals,Leonici Cal∣cōdolae de re∣bus Turcicis citatur à Io∣seph. Scaliger Pag. 263. Proditor Episcopus. sent a privie Messenger to the Turk, showing him what strait they were in, and that he might have the place as cheap as he could desire it. By this meanes the Citie was betrayed; wherefore the Author blaseth him in the margine of the Historie for the Traytor Bishop. But this is but a pettie matter to that which some of our owne have done, who have betrayed whole Kingdomes, besides their stirring up the sub∣jects to rebellion.
Besides the foresaid instances from Scripture, what abundance of examples have we in humain Histories of grave Counsels prevailing with their Princes, to the great good of King and State. It is written of Antonius Pius the Roman Empe∣rour, that he debated with his Counsell a businesse of great weight, so that he would have it according to his will: But Scaevola the great Lawyer, and faithfull Counseller, with others of the like fidelitie, would have it according to his weale, and so indeed they caried it: I see Masters (quoth the Emperour) it must be as you will have it.Dionis. Ha∣lic. lib. 2. Yeelding this reason: Aequius est ut ego tot talium{que} amicorum Consilium sequar; quam ut tot tales{que} amici meam unius voluntatem sequantur: It is fitter (saith he) that I should follow the Counsell of so ma∣ny, and so faithfull friends; then that so many such should follow my will, being but one. The like is related of Lewes the XII. of France, who thanked his Counsell much for their faithfull and con∣stant resolution. But to go no further, have not your Ancestours both kept sundry Kings, for a great while out of the pitt of destruction, and pulled some as Brands out of the fire? Instāce, Henrie the III. whose historie you know, who after that he came to himself was as good a King as the best. It is related of him, that he would often say, that had his subjects followed his will, both he &
they had perished, but he thanked God, that if he knew not how to rule, yet they knew how to obey. Consider those things, and the Lord give you vnder∣standing. Let not men have just cause to say to the body representative of the State: what is become of the activitie, right-downe fidelitie, and love, of English Parliaments to their Princes? Let it not be said of you, as God upbraideth that proud, but cowardly people the Iewes.Ier. 9.3. That ye are not valiant for the trueth. Or as an other Prophet hath it, that will not contend for the trueth, that is, passeth by with∣out regard, or removing the Arch-enemies of the trueth. Give us leave to speake: Ye know how ye went away at the last rising, hanging downe your heads, yea some with tears in your eyes, (as though) ye had been led in Triumph after the Dukes Chariot: and what a deal of Triumph and tantost was there in the Taber∣nacles of the wicked? It grieved the sowles of some, to see the Kings pale lookes, and heavie countenance, howsoever the litle∣good Prelate, and his faction, were alwayes prompting with an omnia bene, or ha, ha, so would we have it: But God hath broke the Base, break you the Treble; or the trouble of the Prelacie, & then the black Sanctos of their Musick is marred: But if you suffer still these grand enemies of State, with their confederate favorites, to turne our silver into drosse, and our wine into water; all
nations will blame you exceedingly, because they doe conceive, if any other nation had our King that they should have of him a refined Vessell: Yea take heede in this case, that it be not said to you by the Lord, as Da∣vid said to Abner, and other of Sauls Courtiers, for the negligent watch they kept over the Kings person; Are you not valiant men,1. Sam. 26.15.16. and who are like to you in Israell? Wherefore then have you not kept your Lord the King? This thing is not good that ye have done. Besides Ministers and Magistrates, all private parties that love God and their Countrie, should have a hand in Babels overthrow; as the benefite tendeth to all, so the dutie belongeth to all. The Counsell of Hushai to Absolon sorteth well with this businesse, that all Israell should be gathered from Dan to Beer-sheba,2. Sam. 17.11.13. as the Sand of the Sea in number, who may with the ropes of their prayers, joyned to the power of your hands, draw the Citie of their Babell into the River of destruction, vntill there be not one small stone found. But more of this when we come to the meanes. 2. We come in the next place to the second point of proof; namely the practize of nations, or the presi∣dent of all reformed Churches. Approvable practise, especially of Gods people, in a thing of high, and ne∣cessarie nature, is both a good warrant and induce∣ment
to others in the like case. Yea it serveth to condemne them, if they do not follow. To begin then with the Vnited Provinces, when Philip the II. of Spaine, contrarie to the nature of a King; the Counsell, & intreatie of his Father, his owne solemne oath, & covenant, made at his entrie, had re∣solved in his heart, by the instigation and evill Coun∣sell of the Duke de Alva, to make slaves of the Nether∣landers; Cardinall Granvell, and the black Counsell of Hell devised for the effecting of this, and for to adde to their burthens, the bringing in of 15. new Bishops, together with the Spanish Inquisition, both which the Duke de Alva established, to the spoyling of their goods, the tormenting of their bodyes, and un∣doing of their sowles; the prisons were so full, they were forced to erect more, upon which cruell courses 100000. families left their places, and meanes, to save their lives, by living other where, but by this fierie triall the Lord did not onely purge the drossie, and heavie disposition of that people, and made them more weeldie for Armes; but he also thereby made the scales to fall from their eyes, that in the midst of the fornace, they saw the light of the Gospell, which with all those dangers they imbraced and maintained with their blood, they gathered themselves into com∣panies, as in Zealand there were 60. companies: they built Churches, which the cruell Duke demolished, and in their place set up Gallowes, executing all that could be found.
Yet for all this they went on, till thorow Gods mercie, and the assistance of neighbouring Princes (both with their purses, and the blood of their subjects) they grew to an united body; and having broake the bands both of Spanish and Popish tyrannie, they tooke away the drosse of that overlaying, & tyrannizing Prelacie, as the grownd of all their wo, and as the onely way to establish the puritie of Christs ordinances. They cashiered the Bishops of Vtrick, & of Haerlem in Holland. The Bishop of Midlebourgh in Zealand. The Bishops of Lewardin, & Groening in Frizeland. The Bishop of Deventer in Overyssell, after which they prospered exceedingly against the enemies, for this is the way indeed; to catch the ould one. If this had not been a good course, or if any thing would have served but this, then notwithstanding of their resisting of the Spanish tyrannie, they might and should have kept these Holy Fathers, the Prelates, as their cheife builders of the howse of God: But God taught them, and heavie experience cleared this prin∣cipall; that there is no building of Gods howse, after his owne Patern, so long as the Pillers of Antichrist beare swaye in the howse, there is no shutting of the dore, whilst the thief is in the howse: so long as they had kept possession, Spaine, & Rome could never fullie have lost their possession, and therefore they tooke the right course, both for reformation, & libertie, to shutte them quite out at dores; neither did ever any true
friend to the Gospell to this day condemne them; not the King of France, being a Papist, nor his brother, Duke de Angue, their governour, though also a Pa∣pist. Vpon this their deliverie from Spaine, and Rome, they gave this devise to their armes; a coller about the Lions neck, with this word: Rosis Leonem, lorris mus liberat: The bands being broken, the mouse setteth free the Lion. And on the other side against it, the King of Spaine, and the Pope, with this devise: Liber Leo, revinciri pernegat: The Lion being once free, will not againe be bound. The summe of all that hath been said,Meteren. Pag. 43. 45 49. 91. 305. concerning this particular, be pleased to see in the Historie of the Netherlands. Onely give us leave to apply the de∣vises. Our Prelates keep not onely the Lion, our Soveraigne, in bands, but even the Lion of the tribe of Iudah; and as the Pope & Spaniard counted no more of the Bel∣gick forces, and their confederate helps, then of so many mice; even so the proud Prelates partly thorow their owne ambition; and partly thorow the carelesnesse, or feare, or part taking of others, are growen with all their rable, so to outbrave the Parliament; that they count no more of them then so many mice: they are growen so pack now with the scare crow-censures of the State, (for they count them no better,) that they are no more afrayd of that terrible Tribunall, then
the frogs were of the log, that Iupiter is feigned to let fall amongst them: Yea as the Hungarian goeth not ordinarily with his weapon, nor is not reputed a brave Gentleman, till he have killed a Turk, so among that crew, he is not a fellow in grain, till he have braved the Parliament: But let them know whom they de∣ride; and as the Belgick mices teeth, or rather the noble Brittans blades freed this Lion (though now too forgetfull of his deliverer;) so cut you the cords (for that is better then to unloose them) set free the Lion of State and Religion, and you shall be more precious to God, and better metall to the state, then the gould whereof the Philistims mice were made, which they sent home in the Ark. Yea your devise shall be this, con∣spicuously glorious to all the world, ingravē in goulden Characters, about the neck of King & Church. Hic Se∣natus est medicus huius Leonis: This Parliament hath cured this Lion of the Kings evill. A second instance of practise may be taken from the North-Britans or Scots, our neighbour nation; who did vendicate the libertie of the Church, and State, to so high an alay, that in everie particular it was without paralell: so that the last King gave this testi∣monie of it, that it was as pure a Church (if not pu∣rer) as any, since the time of Christ; and therefore he thanked God, that it was his lott to live in it; and how came they to the excellencie of that puritie? but by taking away the drosse, namely the Prelacie with all the train of the trumperie; so that they left not one
Hoofe of the Beast. But who did this? even the Counsell of State? but by what authoritie, command, or concurrence from the supream Magistrate? Surely by none at all, but rather against the stern and cruell opposition of three Popish Princes, all raigning over them with an high hand; namely, Francis, & Marie, King, & Queen of France & Scotland, & Queen Mother Regent for the time, Sister to the house of Guise. These three Princes were devoted sowle and body to the Pope, & the two women were as resolute and Po∣litick for atchieving of their malicious ends, as any of their Sex. Besides they had all the power and Counsell of these howse of Guise, (who swayed all France) to further their attempts. They sent great forces into Scotlād, with a number of the fiercest spirits, shrewdest pates, and best soldiers, that were amongst them; that with fire and sword they might destroy those reformers, with their posteritie, and root out the Gospell. We will trouble you but with one in∣stance. One Labrosse, a great Counseller, & Soldier, thought it was fittest to destroy all the nobilitie, and to billet some thousands of the French Horse upon their meanes; and as for the cominaltie to make vassals and slaves of them: his letters directed into France to this purpose were intercepted, which stirred up the state to stand for reformation, as much as for their lives. To these fierce designes the Bishops were Fyre & Bellows; witnesse, one of them in these blooddie
broyls,Ep. Ambian. Buchan. rer. Scotio. lib. 10. p. 174. who railed and cursed the Soldiers, because they did not burne, rob, slay, and ravish all right downe be∣fore them. Especiallie he was vexed, that they did not murther one William Matlan, a brave Gentleman, and so good a Scholler, that he was to hard for all the learning of Sorbon: Therefore the Bishop would have the Sol∣diers to cut his throat, and that should be an unanswe∣rable argument: but the Lord quenched all their fiery darts, and so strengthened the hearts, and guided the hands of the state; with the assistance of Queen Eliza∣beth, that they prevayled mightily against their, and Gods enemies, and never gave over the work, till they layd (as one said) the verie Coapstone of reformation. It is true indeed, that our English Euroclydon, or sulphurious South-burning winde of Babel, together with some rotten Meteors of inclosed vapours a∣mongst themselves, have like an earthquake shaken the howse, and uncovered the roof of it: but let us looke to it; we are the unwholesome point, from whence this infecting winde hath blowen upon them; for if we doe not, it is like not onely to splitt our Ship upon the rock, but also to rent the veyle of three King∣domes. We could relate at large more instances, as the French, Switzers, Bohemians, Germanes, & Geneva,) who presently upon their reformation removed this ground of deformation,) but the truth is so well knowne, we should but take up time; onely observe
this point of reformation, observed by the Biscayns to this day, as some write: this being a Province of Spaines Dominions, the people can not endure a Lord Bishop to tread upon their ground; witnesse, that tryall that Ferdinand the Catholike made, by brin∣ging a Bishop with him, guarding him in the midle of all his great trayn; but the people not able to en∣dure him, the King sent him presently out of their territories, and they digged up the ground, whereon the Bishops Mule stood, and cast it into the Sea. I recite this the rather, because it is cited by that geybing Geographer, who telleth the Puritanes;Helen. that that were a fine place for them to dwell in; but there is a better way then that, root such Bishops out of England, and it will be a finer place for the Puri∣tans to dwell in, and let the Bishops and their favo∣rites go make their peace with Biscay. To conclude the point, you see (right Honourable) what other States have done for the deliverance of them, and theirs, and clearing the title of Christs King∣dome; and that with more resistance, and lesse concur∣rence then you shall have; therefore you shall do well at length to follow in that which is good, least they and their actions rise up against you.
The 3. and last poynt of proofe is from the reasons ingageing you to the service. We have alreadie in some Sections foregoing urged the matter from 9. severall reasons, or motives: now give us leave briefely to adde these foure: nam abundantia non nocet: Plentie is not offensive. 1. Constraynt or command is layd upon you from the word, as we conceive, namely from that place of the Proverbs, so much beaten upon. Compared with other places of Scripture;Deu. 17.12. as, thow shalt take away evill from Israell; where be pleased to observe, that everie evill (without exception) must be taken away, and the greater evill, the greater necessitie of removall, and who must doe this? onely the supreame Magi∣strate? Not so; but also the Senate, yea every Mini∣ster, or Iudge, appointed by God, for so the word tel∣leth us. In divers places the Lord complaineth, yea and wondereth, that men of place stande off from the Lord in this imployment:Esa. 59.16. and when he saw there was no man, he wondered that none would offer himself, &c. Again: cap. 63.5.I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered there was none to uphold, &c. An other Prophet to the same effect: Eze. 22.30I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gappe, before me for the Land,
that I should not destroye it, but I found none, In all these places it is a wonder that the great Ie∣hovah should stand wondring, that there were none to lend a hand, to the saving of the Church and common weal: that there was no Physitian to Minister one Dram to that deadlie diseased State: in the travels of the people in the wildernesse, notwithstanding of the peoples transgressions, they had Moses for a Physitian. In the promised Land, they had many good Iudges. In Eli his time, they had Samuell, and after him sundry good Kings: But at this time not one. What not one? Was there not Ieremiah, Baruch, Ezechiell, and a good remnant, that mourned in Sion,Eze. 9.9. and were marked in the forehead? Yea sure; but Ieremie was imprisoned beaten, and put in the stocks, and to Ezekiell they were as Scorpions; the greater sort, as Princes, Nobles, & Magi∣strates, were either like the Buls of Basan,Hos. 4. & the King of Samaria, trampling all under foot; or like the noble men of Tekoa, they would not put their necks to the work of the Lord;Nehem. 3.5 or they were like the prudent Professors of these times, whose cautelousnesse Amos discovereth, that kept their silence in that time, for it was an evill time.Amos 4.13, Or if there were a remnant, that could not hould their peace, but for Sions sake they must speake; they were houlden, as Lavater well observeth: Hostes Reipub. & Ecclesiae: the enemies of the Church and common weal, tumultuous and factious fellows, they are never quiet; the Land can not beare them.
The foresaid Author commenting, on Ezechiel, ap∣plyeth this to his time, and so may we to our times; for there are some of all sorts, but that the prudent in place of authoritie especiallie should keep silence, or not stand up in the gappe, that is the verie matter of the Lords wonder: for it is no wonder that the wicked in regard of their enmitie to God set their face against God, for in this they doe but their kinde; but for such as have taken Gods presse-mony, weare his live∣rie, given up their names to fight his battailes, and have inrouled themselves for his houshold Servants; for such (we say) to have neither hand nor tongue, for Gods cause, and the removing of Gods enemies, it is a prodi∣gious wonder indeed. In the originall, the Lord is said to cause himself to wonder, as if he could not wonder enough. He speaketh to our capacitie, and herein taxeth our stupiditie; shall all the hoste of Hell, as Atheists, Papists, loose Libertins, Time-servers, Neutrals, Carnall Gospellers, & Hypocrites, band themselves to the desperate service of the Divell, whose end is damna∣tion, and shall not the servants of the most high, whose wages is life eternall, lay all at the Lords foote, for the deliverie of Sion: what a wonder is this? This threateneth (as the Lord speaketh in that place of Ezechiell) a wafling of the vineyarde; yea further a particular judgment to such as are in authoritie, and stande not up in the gappe: I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gappe
before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none. Observe what followeth. Therefore have I powred out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath; their owne way have I recompenced upon their owne head, saith the Lord God. Where we intreate your Ho∣nours, to observe Hieroms observation upon the place, who by the heads understandeth the Magi∣strates, that howsoever the Lord will destroy that na∣tion, where there is none to take his part against the wicked, yet he will plague the heads, especially who should stand up before the Lord in the Land, to save the rest. If for further encouragement you would be further satisfyed, to what commandement the duty should be reduced, since everie act must be warranted by a Law; we answer to the 2. commandement, which as it condemneth all unlawfull governours, and govern∣ment, with all mens devises in Gods worship; so it enarmeth men of place (as Magistrates and Ministers) to abandon all counterfeit government, and supersti∣tious worship. And so much for the first reason. 2. The 2. reason or motive added to inforce this duty upon you, is from the Kings gracious speech, at the last confirmation of the priviledges, in Parliament; wherein he did cast himselfe & the care of the state up∣on you; signifying, that if you had not a happie Par∣liament, you might blame your selves: now what happie∣nesse
can be to King or state, except ye pluck up the plants of all our unhappinesse. As a word to the wise is enough, so a word from a willing King is enough. Your actions of reformation, by supplanting of mightie evills, shall be the best comment to the Kings speeches. Kings are not onely content, but also desirous to have divers things done, that they would hardly be seen in, till they be done, and then they are willing to owne them; the reason is: they love to try what stewards of State they have, and whether they answer their places, in daring to remove the Silver from the drosse. It is worthie the observing, that the State of Silicia presented once a petition to Caesar, against one D. Cal∣phurnius; a lewd Favorite, and oppressing Deputie. Lucius Calphurnius, fur, latro, & maechrus est: quid tibi videtur? Calphurnius is a theef, a robber, & a hoore∣monger; what thinke you? To which Caesar answered no more but thus: Videtur: it seemes so; and so (as they meant to doe) they tooke an order with him, where∣with Caesar was well content. 3. The 3. reason, wich we adde, is taken from that use, which all the ofessed enemies of State and Church make of this relacie, to effect their evill ends: as David said of Golahs sword, there is none to that, so saith the Pope, Spaniard, & Arminian, for over∣turning of a State, and making havock of a Church;
there is none to a Bishop, give them that: that we do not slander them, let their owne actions witnesse, wherein though we might be large, yet we will clear the proofe in one or two instances, that we may draw to an end of the Position. When Cardinall Granvell (as we have shewed) de∣vised to inslave, and sack the Netherlanders, by the Spanish Inquisition, the onely meanes to bring it in, and to keep it on foote, was to put upon them 15. more Bishops, (making 3. Archbishops,) under pretence of better government; and for their maintenance, they turned the Abbeys into Bishopricks, to the great discontentement of all sorts of people; but what was the reason? the storie telleth us, that they might fur∣ther the bringing in, & keeping up of that blooddy In∣quisition; so that they were the maddest lads that could be found, for consuming Church and State, with fire and sword. Duke de Alva, the Popes second Sonne,Meteren. 43. 45. 49. 91. 305. did establish (as we have shewed) both these Bishops, and the Inqui∣sition; for the which Im Pius the V. sent him a rich Sword, with a hilt all of gould, and an imbroydered Hatte, decked with precious stones.
Let the projects of the Arminians serve for an other instance. Arminianisme we know is the verie Elixir of Poperie, the Mysterie of the Mysterie of Ini∣quitie; so fine a threed, that scarsly it can be seen, or felt: the quintessens of Equivocation: the oracle of Delphs; the Cabinat of the Popes secret, and Spaines new-found passage for Britan, and the Low Countries. As this plaguie Comet had its matter from the a dust fierie vapours of that Popish Prelacie, so the Prelacie is meat, drinke, and apparell for the maintayning of it. Things live by the same things that they are bred off: now we have shewed and proved, that Arminianisme, and all other Schismes, and Heresies, have their rise from the Prelacie; and so by the Prelacie it must be main∣tained. With this principall the Netherlands Arminians were well enough acquainted, about twelve yeare ago, when they drew to an head: and after much deba∣ting by armes and tearmes, they plainly expressed themselves, that they desired no more, but that Lord Bishops should be erected, who might set all thing in order, and keep the Church in peace; To that end they had cast their thoughts upon Vtenbogard, to be the man, who with Barnevelt should have vassalled all to their owne will; so that they knew, that peace should have beene the warre of the Church: for the Arminian, & the Antichristian Bishops, are as the Fa∣ther and the Sonne relatives, which mutuallie subsist;
yea the veyns and arteries of the Prelacie, caried both blood & spirits from England, and other parts, to the maintenance of the Belgick Arminianisme, the poyson∣able root, whereof lay lower at that time then we yet well conceive; and had so spred itself over the Low Countries, and England especiallie; that we may say of the Papists & Arminians, as the Britans said of the Danes, and the Sea: Pellunt barbari ad Mare, repellit Mare ad barbaros: We are tossed betweene the Devill, and the deepe Sea of Rome. As it is ordinarilie now; no Papist, or blancher with Papist, no Statesman; so no Ar∣minian, no Bishop, or fatte parson. As the Netherlanders then had best looke to it, that their monstruous Rebellions bring not back againe upon them those pragmaticall Fathers of Arminia∣nisme, to the losse of themselves, and what they have gained; so necessitie is laid upon you the valiant men of Israell, to set both the Fathers and the Children on packing; for if all our enemies, forrain and Domistick use thē as the only fittest Instruments, to undo us; if you remove not them, the State shall be required of your hands; and the practise of the wicked shall condemne you, but we hope better things of you. 4. The 4. and last motive is this, that if the Lord awaken not your hearts, & strenghthē not your hands, to stand up before the Lord, in delivery of the Land; then it is both a cause, & a signe, that the Land is given
for lost; witnesse, the fore-cited place of Ezechiell: I sought a man among them, that should stand up, &c. But I found none. Therefore have I powred out mine indignation upon them, and have consumed them with the fire of my wrath, &c. To this also the Prophet Ieremie beareth witnesse, where speaking of the vineyard of the Lord, they have laid it desolate or waste,Cap. 12.11. (saith he;) and being desolate, it mourneth to me, or over me; and what is the cause of this desolation, or laying waste, because no man layeth it to heart; That is: no man regardeth it, nor endevoureth to remedie it. To the same effect, the Lord speaketh in an other place by the same Prophet: The bellowes are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the founder melteth in vain; That is to say: All paines and cost were spent upon that people in vain: what was the reason? the wicked were not taken away, that was a manifest token, that the Lord had rejected them, for they were but reprobate silver. As this is cleare from the word; so Comineus, and other great Statesmen, giveth this for an unfallible token of ensuing ruine, when none standeth up to deliver a State from the inbred devouring enemies of it.
But some among us besotted insecuritie; may possi∣bly reply: you are very peremptorie, ye are no Pro∣phets; God is not so readie to destroy, as everie Hot∣spure out of the pulpit, or every prognosticating Scribler would make him to be; and if destruction do come, it may be we shall never see it; or if it come in our time, we can shift for our selves, as well as others. For answer, the more warning the Lord giveth from the mouthes of his Messengers, or from the pennes of his Clerks, the nigher hand is destruction: Further we desire those Shifters, to take notice what the Lord saith to them by the Prophet Amos:C. 9.10. v. All the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword, which say the evill shall not overtake nor prevent us. Others will reply, God hath taken off some of our arch-enemies, and will not he in their destruction establish our preservation? Yea sure, as hath been said, if we had hearts to follow home the blow; but other∣wise as the Lord gave us such in wrath, so he may just∣ly take them away in wrath, & give us worse in their stead. If we make not verie good use of Gods execution, & do for God, as he hath done for us; he may justly deal with us, as he dealt with Iudah,Ier. 28.13. when the yoke of wood is broken, he may make us one of yron.
A third sort will object, though our Land hath all signes & symptoms of a deadly disease; yet we are the Lords owne people, and he will be our Physitian to heal us, according to his promise, Exod. 15.26. For answer, we must looke so to the performance of the condition, that we may chalenge the promise: If thow wilt diligently hearken to the voyce of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give eare to his commandements, and keep all his sta∣tutes, then will I put none of those diseases upon thee, &c. For I am the Lord that healeth thee, or thy Physitian. But if they will not heare and obey, then he threate∣neth most of all, to punish them: who ever scape they shall not escape; witnesse, his owne mouth, by the Prophet Amos: Cap. 3.2.You onely have I knowne of all the families of the Earth: therefore I will punish you, for all your iniquities. And it must be so, because they most dishonour God; they cause the wicked to blaspheme; they grieve the Spirit in the Godlie; and they leave the Land de∣stitute of all defence. Some yet will further reply, there are many sincere and upright in the Land, who keep themselves from the evill of their owne hearts, and the iniquitie of the
times; yea they mourne for the sinnes of Sion. For answer, 1. They shew not themselves in their places, zealous of Gods glorie, contending for the trueth,Ierem. 5.1. they are not men in the streets, (as the Prophet speaketh) they do not quitte themselves fullie of these men, and things that are most offensive to God. 2. If there be a few that by self-denyall have laid downe themselves, and all that they have at the foote of the Lords cause; are they not counted as signes & wonders; and left alone to the destroyer, as a Ships mast upon the top of the mountane? who comes forth to help them against the mightie? 3. All the mourners in Sion shall have their life for a prey, which may well content them; but if the great and Maister-evill be not taken away from Israell. It standeth not with Gods honour, nor the zeall of the truely bred; that the Lord for them should still spare a nation; who spareth and maintaineth that evill, that he most hateth. To come to a conclusion of the point, we beseech you (right Honourable) againe and againe, and that by the mercies of the eternall God: If there be in you any zeall to his glorie, any faith to your Countrie, any love to your Souveraigne; any compassion on your fami∣lies, and us, any looking for consolation; that you take away the drosse from the silver; so shall we have a
refined vessel. We are bould to use to you the words of the Prophet Ieremie: Behould we set before you the way of life, and the way of death: Therefore doe the Lords work, and ye shall live. These fiftie yeares, and upward, the Lord hath pleaded by his agents, at the bar of your Parliament, for his owne priviledges, a∣gainst the intrusion of the Hierarchie, yet he could never have right, yea scarse a good hearing; it is time to looke to it, and to give sentence on his side; for if he be forced to take the matter into his owne hand, he will first cast the state over the bar, and then slay those that would not have him to raigne over them. Looke stedfastlie upon these things. All lyeth at stake. You are the ordinarie meanes, or none we see to redeeme them. At anie rate (then) strike neither at great nor small, but at these troublers of Israell. Smite that Hazaell in the fifth ribbe: Yea if Father or Mother stand in the way, away with them; (we be∣seech you,) Nam potius pereat vnus quam vnita: Make rather a rotten Tree fall, then that the rotting droppes thereof should kill the Sheep. The meanes whereby our deliverance from this evill may be wrought, shall be discovered in the hand∣ling of the last Position. And so much for this point.
10. Position proved. NOw followeth the last pointe, but not the least motive of persuation to the worke; namely, the strikinge at this roote of the Hierarchye; the removall of this Idoll; and the erecting of the puritye of Christs or∣dinances (as we conceive upon good ground) shall stay the course of sin; remove judgment; Recover Gods favour; make up the breaches of the Church, and common wealth, redeeme the honour of our state; remove the wicked from the throne; Dash cut the braines of our enemies hopes; and bring many blessings upon our King; Church and common wealth. The euidence of this pointe will undenyablie followe upon the proofe of the former. There be twoe ordinary meanes to inforce the performance of any dutie, namely; feare of punishment, & hope of re∣ward. Wee are bold to presse them both. But wee hope your generous, and noble minds like better to be led then driven; to be persuaded then inforced. The conjunct cause being removed; the effect must cease, and contrary effects must followe: for there is no vacuitie. If we will stay the course of sin, we must go to the fountains head. The Prelacie is the mother of all sinne, and the daughters maintaine the mother; Take away the mother, and the daughter shall not
finde so manie husbands. The sythe to mowe downe sinne (as hath beene shewed) is Discipline, which the Prelates can not endure, and that argueth and plainely convinceth their Kingdome, to subsist by sinne. Some of their Champions scoffing at the desires of Gods people, for removall of them, and erecting of Discipline,B. Bilson de gub. 14. pag. 539. bidde them first set downe, and propound an other government; Facilius est, &c. It is easier (saith one) to subvert, or cast downe a thing then to erect it. Let them first finde out an other government, ere they remove this. His Fellow procter Scultingius hath the very same in effect,Lib. 1. p. 11 for the Popish govern∣ment against the Calvinists. This scoffe relisheth but of a Loose hart, we will not say of blasphemie; as if the government of Christs house were to seeke. Opposers of the trueth should have good memories. For he knoweth and confesseth that there was such a government as we plead for, and so is it yet still in readinesse, if usurpation were re∣moved. Every one knoweth, that an ould rotten or plaguie house must be removed, or consumed with fire before a new Frame be set up:2 Thes. 2.6. . Remove that which with∣houldeth, & Christ who standeth at the doore, readie to come in, will bring his government with him. The foule mouthed Censurers of the petition for reformation, would perswade the State, that Discipline can not suite nor sorte with the subsisting of a Monarchie.Cans. 6.
And why? Because they putt lying aspertions upon it, as excommunicating of Kings; proceeding against them as tyrants, robbing them of their right. It is an usuall thing with whoores to call honest women so, at the very first boute. They seeke the Pres∣byterians where themselves doe lye; si accusare sat est, quis erit innocens; If it is enough to accuse, who shall be cleare? Hath it not beene their owne ordinary course (as hath beene shewed) to interdict Kings, to depose them, and cause their lives to be taken from them, doe they not now usurpe the Kings right, (as hath beene proved.) And where they grant that actions Matri∣moniall of Tithes, and Testamentary actions doe belong to the King de jure; yet they take them all to their owne Courts de facto. But what profit or priviledge can they shew the presbyterians to have robbed Kings off? yea have they not rather parted with their owne, for the advancement of the Gospell? But to answer directly, to say that the government of a King, & the good of his State cānot stand with the government of Christ, jumpeth fully with that im∣pious conceipt of Herode,Math. 2.3.  who hearing of Christs comming in the flesh, was exceedingly troubled, but without cause, for Christ had no eye to his Kingdome. Vpon this conceite one writeth these pritty Iambicks: Hostis Herodes impie, Christum venire, quid times? Non eripit mortalia,
Qui regnat dat coelestia. Impious Herode, enemy to Christ, What makes thee feare Christs comming in our mould? Will he from Earthly Kings their Scepters wrest? Who gives Kings Crownes, more glorious then of gould. In a word, none but enemies to Christ, are enemies to the government of Christ, and if Christ were here on Earth, they that cannot endure his government, would not endure himself. But to go on with the point of removing judge∣ment, and the blessing ensuing upon reformation: be∣sides the grounds from the former Positions; it is as cleare a trueth, as any in Gods booke; from promise; Instances of Examples, and reason: For the first, the Scripture is abundant; it presseth no thing more; witnesse first, that place of Sa∣muell: and Samuell spake to all the house of Israell: Put away the strange Gods from among you,1. Sam. 7.3, &c. and Ashte∣roth, and prepare your hearts vnto the Lord, and serve him onely, and be will deliver you out of the hands of the Philistims. Here a people over head and eares in cala∣mitie; there was in them humiliation, but they wanted reformation: the Prophet biddeth them joyne refor∣mation with humiliation, and they should have what they desired.
To the same effect, the Lord speaketh by the Pro∣phet Esaia:C. 1. v. 22. though the Israelites Silver was becom drosse, and their wine mixed with water; that is; they were becom glistering hypocrites, and they caried a fare show and semblance of Religion, as drosse ca∣ries a show of silver, and wine, mixed with water, a colour of wine; For this especiallie the Lord hateth them, howsoever they pleased themselves in those de∣luding showes; yea their Princes & Priests, that should have reformed others, both by Discipline & Example, were Rebelles, Devourers, Theeves, & Robbers, and com∣panions of such, : such Mistresse, such Maide. Yet for all this; though these their sinnes were of a scarlet, or crimsen die, if they will but heare and obey; if they will clense their hearts, and take away from before the Lord the evill of their workes, and doe good in stead of evill, he will not onely forgive them, but also blesse them, they shall eate the good things of the Land, V. 19. Yea he promiseth to turne his hand upon them, (that is, to turn from smiting of them,) and he will burne out the drosse, till it be pure, and take away all the tinne, V. 25. Observe what followeth: He will restore their judges, as at the first, and their Counsellers, as at the beginning; so shall it be called a Citie of righteousnesse, and a faithfull Citie, V. 26. Observe the fruites of reformation, which though the Lord himself effecteth, (for without him we can doe nothing,) yet he reformeth by fecundarie means, where in he honoureth man much, and maketh him manifest his obedience.
This Mr. Zanchie witnesseth in a treatise of the re∣formation of the Church; speaking of the foresaid place of Esaia: I will burn out the drosse, &c. Quid per stannum, &c. What is ment here by the drosse and tinne? new Doctrine, will-worship, and all such things as have not their foundation from Christ & his Apostles. Sunt igitur omnia stanna novarum Doctrinarum, & no∣vorum cultuum tollenda, & statuenda quae tempore Christi & Apostolorum,Regula 10. &c. Imo Ceremoniae & Disciplina ad prima principia, & primos fontes redigantur, ut profligatur omnis novitas, &c. The tinne of new Doctrines, and new invented worship are to be removed, and things are to be established, according to the institution of Christ and his Apostles; yea all Ceremonies and Discipline are to be reduced to the first principals and fountanes head of Christs institution, that all noveltie may be abandoned. Where he also observeth, that our Saviour Christ bringeth all things to the same standard, in these words,Math. 19.8 from the beginning it was not so, rejecting everie ordinance, that hath not his institution from God. This said Author presseth further this point of re∣formation from that place of Ieremie, which offereth it self for an other proofe:C. 6. v. 7. As a Fountaine casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her wickednesse. To what a corrupt and corrupting habite of sinne was Ierusalem growen? like a poysonable welspring it was ever casting out deadlie waters; yea they were
growen shamelesse in their abominations, and therefore the Lord threateneth to slay them V. 15. Yet for all this the Lord biddeth them: Stand in the wayes, and behould, and aske for the ould way, which is the good way, and walke therein, and ye shall finde rest for your sowles, V. 16. As if the Lord should say: Looke but upon my wayes; compare them with the wayes of sinne, that seeme so sweete unto you, and wherein your deceiving Prophets sooth you up; considder whether my wayes be not both more equall, & more profitable then the wayes of sinne; for in them ye shall finde refreshing, that is both comfort and pros∣peritie, where in the wayes of sinne there is nothing but wo and sorrow. So that (as Zanchie observeth) he allureth, or inforceth them to reformation. Argumento ab utili: From an argument of commodity. So in the fourth of the same Prophesie: O Israell!V. 1. if thow returne unto me, (saith the Lord,) and if thow put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thow not remove. One place more from the Prophesie of Ezechiell:C. 45.8.9. Albeit they set their thresholds by my thresholds, and their postes by my postes, (that is, their Idolls by my wor∣ship, as indeed we have done,) they have defiled my holy name with their abominations, which they have commit∣ted; yet let them put away their fornication, and the car∣kasses of their Kings farre from me; That is, monuments of Idolatrie, erected to Ammon and Manasseth: And I
will dwell among them. Innumerable places from Genesis to the Revelation, we might quote to this purpose; but the point is so pressed dayly from the pulpits, and you are so well acquainted with the Scrip∣tures, that we neede but to give a taste. If Ephesus will repent, and doe her first worke; and Sardis strengthen the things that are like to dye. Yea if our Laodicea will be zealous and amend, the Lord will take up the contro∣versie betwixt us and him; he will set his favour upon us; in stead of judgment we shall have mercie; in stead of Ignomine glorie; in stead of want, plentie; valour and magnanimitie; for faint-heartednesse: our Church shall be buetifull; our common-wealth floorishing, and if ye remove the drosse from the silver, we have the promise of a gloriously refined King. The second sort of proofe is from the never-failing practise of Gods performance, with all such as doe re∣forme: hath the Lord failed, or come short in any thing that he hath promised? Did not the Israelites upon their mourning & put∣ting away their Idolls, (especially Ashteroth) finde de∣liverance from the yoke of the Philistims,1 Sam. 7. and that by a glorious and marvelous victory over them, from the Lords owne hand, without ordinary meanes? What was Ai before Ioshua, when the cursed thing was re∣moved? What was Benjamin before Iuda, when by humiliation their speciall sinne was done away? In a word, can any give an instance, that ever Gods people
were denyed their suite, when they tooke a right course before the Lord? He is still the same God, and wilbe so to us, if we doe as they did for our breaches of Church, and common wealth. The third sort of proof is taken from the reason, why it should be so; namely, from the nature of Gods promisses; which are all yea and Amen: from his end and intent in his threatening, which is not to destroy, but to reclaim: and lastly from his order of proceeding, namely he inviteth alwayes to return, before he overturneth. Return, return, &c. Why will ye die? When God proclaymed his Israel to be nothing but a wellspring of wickednesse; yet how loath is he to cast him off.Ier. 6.8. Be thow instructed o Ierusalem (saith he) lest my sowle depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate in a Land that none inhabiteth: were the rebellions and abominations of Iudah so great, and so grievous that he hounded on the enimies to beseege her, and sack her v. 4.5. and yet was his sowle with her? yes sure or how should he threaten that his sowle, or affection should depart from her; yea his sowle was loath to depart, and would not depart at all if she would but hearken to instruction: here the Lord showeth the carefull desire of a parent, and the powerfull pre∣vayling love of an husband, & that towards a re∣bellious childe, and an Adulterous-woman.
The like affection we see in God towards that Re∣bellious & Hypocriticall Israell and Iudah, whose goodnesse was as the morning cloud, going away as the morning Dew, that is, they seemed to have a cer∣tain holinesse and repentance in them, but it was but formall and Hypocriticall: a cloud without rain, a vaporous matter, quickly dissolved, and as the morning Dew quickly dryed up. Of all things God can not endure those sea-sick conterfeit apish fitts and yet for all this, when nothing could reclaim them, the Lord breaketh out for them (as we may say) in a mother-like passion:Hos. 6, 4. O! Ephraim what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah how shall I intreat thee? as if the Lord should say, all possible means have been used to cause yow Israell and Iudah to return; but nothing hath prevailed, and what shall I doe more? O! that there were any way, or meanes, to recover yow; so that the Lord beareth, till he can bear no longer. Ah (saith the Lord) I will ease me of my adversaries,Esa. 1.24. and aveng me of myne enemies, vox indignationis & commiserationis (as one saith) a voyce of indignation, against sin; and yet a voyce of commiseration toward the sinner; he must in Iustice reveng, and yet his mercie is loath to doe it.
Since then the promise, and practise of the Lord, and reason from the Lord make all good the trueth of this position; why should we either doubt of it, or give our selvs rest, till we enjoy the happie experience of it? wicked men putting far from them the evill day, lett their case be never so desperat, they never say there is no hope; but Gods people fall fowle on the contrarie; when they see a state in a forlorn condition; the wicked advanced, and the absteyner from evill made a prey to the wicked; they are disheartened from vsing means, because there is litle likelihood of prevayling; hol∣ding it their only hope, to have no hope: thus, Zion said the Lord hath forsaken me,Esa. 49.14. and my Lord hath forgotten me: not so; for if thow forget not him and thy dewtie, and indevor, God can not forget thy labor: observe how the Lord preventeth this ob∣jection, Lett the wicked, forsake his wayes, and the vn∣righteous his owne Imaginations, and return vnto the Lord, and he will have mercie upon him, and to our God, for he is verie readie to forgive. But they might have objected; can God ever be reconciled to us, who have transgressed all his lawes, and broken covenant so often with him? no sure; no man will do so; true saith the Lord, nor would yow do so to any, but I am not as man, my thoughts are not your thoughts,Esa. 55.7.8.9. neither your wayes my wayes; for as the heavens are hi∣gher then the earth, so are my wayes higher then your wayes.
Where observe the condition; if wickednesse be for∣saken, and removed by those that are in place; then the Lord can not chuse, but send a blessing. This same Argument ab utili, or profit, hath prevai∣led much in the matter of Reformation, with people or states, meerely seeking themselves, and their owne ends, without any conscience of obedience to the commandement; and if they pretended any zeall, it was but strange fire, a temporarie, and time-serving heat, was the most, and the best. So self-seeking Iehu reformed to a great hight, in removing of the evill, & restoring and establishing of the good; He did execu∣tion upon all Ahabs seed, the Prophets, Servants, and Priests of Baall to a man;1 Kings c. 10. he burnt Baall his Idols; threw downe the Temple, and made a lakes of it; he boasted much of his zeal, and uprightnesse of hart; the Lord giveth this testimony of him, that he had executed that which was right in his eyes; & had done vnto the howse of Ahab all the things, that were in Gods heart, v. 30. And therefore the Lord promiseth, that his Sonne should sit on the Throne of Israell, vnto the fourth generation. The Lord made also this good; but was there either right eye, or right heart in Iehu for all this? No sure, for he departed not from Ieroboam his sinne,Hos. 1. and the Lord punished his posteritie for the very act, that he approved, because he did it for a Kingdome, and not to the Lord: yet we see how farre this temporarie re∣ward
prevailed in the matter of Reformation, with a meer time-server. The Iesuits having got footing in the great Kingdom of Iapan, by their hellish plotts, & undermining of great ones, they sett all the State on fire; the Princes and Nobles against the King, and one against an other, till it was come to blood; but some wiser then the rest, discovering that infernal brood to be the ground, and cause of that state-consuming sedition; called the Ie∣suites to an account, executed some, and banished the rest, and inacted thereupon, that it should be present death for any Iesuite, to enter the Kings Dominions; which remaineth in force to this day. By this reformation they are rid of that crew, who are the curse of us, against whom we have Lawes as good as may be, but no execution. Vpon this same point of ensuing good, the Bis∣caines are at a deadly enmitie, and naturall Antipathie with the brood of Prelats. Vpon this ground Venice, Millane, and Naples, will not endure to heare of the admitting of an Inquisition; for thereby, Honour, wealth, peace, & prosperous successe, should be utterly cashiered, and they their meanes, and families should be worse then Gallie slaves.
By force also of this stronglie prevayling argu∣ment, the Netherlander rid themselves, and their State of that bitter root of Lord Bishops; whom they knew to be the strength, & leaders of the Popes forces, and chiefe Pillers, (as we have proved,) for supporting that great Antichrist. For a closer of this point; be pleased to observe one instance from the present practise of the Hollanders. Since that nation is marked of all the world, to be the procreant & conservant cause of all mixtures of Re∣ligion, as that Aegyptian Nilus, is the mother of all sorts of monsters; it is matter of some wonder, why they are so farre from tolerating that ould Pelagianisme, and new Arminianisme, that they suppresse it with all their main; executing some, banishing other some, offe∣ring meanes and lives, and all in opposition of it; yea if the Arminians meat in private, their house & means are like to be ruined & spoyled by the multitud, the people persewed to the danger of their lives, so as they love no thing so much as Pictures & prunking; so they hate no thing so much as the Spainyard & Arminianisme: but what is the cause of all this indignation against Ar∣minianisme? Is it because it is the Popes Benjamin; the neetest spun threed of Poperie, the last and greatest mon∣ster of the man of sinne, (for as the liker a Mounkie is to a man, the greater monster it is; so the liker impietie is to pietie the more monstrous it is?) Or is it because they love, & longe to be ingrafted in that Antichristian
stem of the Prelacie? Or because it drayneth the verie life out of Religion; and changeth all Religion into a Protean form of Religion? Or lastly, because it dero∣gateth from the verie essence, and attributes of God, exalting man against his maker? No; not for all these; yea directly for none of these; for then they would suppresse Poperie fullie; then would they not with Sul∣tan Solyman, or blanched Atheists, make so much of that Machivilian principall; that a State may tolerate any Religion, so it be for its profit:Maxim. 2. which is directly (as one observeth) against the nature of God; and true Reli∣gion, (for there must be but one,)Specul. Belli sacri. c. 39. p. 232. the vertue of the commandement; the Office of the Magistrate; the dealing of Idolaters with their false worship, confir∣me this truth: and lastly; it is against the true profit of the State. Againe, if in conscience they obeyed the com∣mandement in one particular, they would also in an other, especiallie of the same species, or kinde: But since none of all these be the verie moving cause of their thus plying of the Arminians; what is the cause? Answer; this is the very marrow of the matter; they feare their coppie hould; namely, lest the Arminian grow so strong, that he overtop the State, and get the staffe out of their hand, (as indeed he is like to doe,) lest like a Marmosett (which caries the face of a man, & yet is a great enemie to the Mounkie) he should learn a trick beyond all their tricks; to overturne their tra∣ding; or lest out of desire of reveng, for the supposed wrong done to their sect; like the Arabian Monster
Caccus, they should sett all on fire with their breath, & yet live themselves like the Salamander in the flame; but if they can keep them under from all place of go∣vernment, both in Church and common wealth; both in armes and civill judicature, (though in some of these places the Arminian prevayleth;) and if they can ex∣pose thē to the indignation of the people; and keep his horns so short, that he can not push; then they thinke they shall prosper in what they put their hand to; so that it is clear, that libertie, prosperous successe, glorious re∣noun, plentie, prevailing against the enemie, and the enlarging of their tents, maketh them looke well to the Arminians water, that this bird of divers colours grow not to big in her nest. Then if we set apart Religion, (which God forbid,) yet let glorie, prosperitie, and good successe, at home; victorie over our enemies, abroad; the removall of all evill; the enjoying of all good, all attending upon the downefall of the Prelacie, prevaile with you, to the abandoning of the stinch of these Harpies, which have made our Israell like a bird of divers colours, (as the Lord speaketh,) that is in stead of the Lords liverie, she is all stuck full of the gaudie Feathers of superstition, which causeth the Lord to sett the beasts & birds of all nations about her, to eat her up. They stand gazing indeed at her gay Feathers;Ier. 12.9. but they flout her, and devour her, because she hath quite spent all her Eagle-spirits.
To conclude; be pleased (right Honourable) to take a patern out of the Prelats owne practise, for the con∣firmation of this point. What is the reason, that the Prelats can rather suffer divers sorts of Hereticks, and dangerous Schismaticks, to live by them, then the Re∣formers, or Disciplinarians, as they call them? Is it not because they meddle with the great Diana of their Lordly pomp? These would have the Prelates bring their callings to the tryall of the Sanctuarie: These would have thē lay away their Lording, & do the worke of the Ministerie; yea to be content of the portion of the Ministerie: These would have them to put away their abominations from the Lords eyes; where with they breake the backs, and overburden the consciences of many thousands: These would have them to suffer Christ, whom they have kept so long at the doore, to come in, and reigne among us: But these are saucie fellows: These the Land can not bear: These must be smitten on the cheek, and put in the worst place of Golgotha, or banished the Land? and why good men? what hath the righteous done? A dangerous thing in∣deed; they have spoken against the profit of the Hierar∣chie; and as one of the ancients saith well:Trithe. de Arnulpho ex ejus Chronic. Si Petrus resurgeret, &c. If Peter should rise from the dead, and should meddle with their sinnes; & profits especiallie; they would spare him no more, then they doe the faithfull of our times.
It was a maine motive of the Pharisies hatered to∣ward Peter and Iohn, that they had beene with Iesus, Act. 4.13. So the Prelates hate these men, because they plead for Iesus. One of the Prelates watchmen, preaching before the King, out of the 11. of Numbers, upon Moyses pains taking, and the people his murmuring: In his Misapplication, came first to gird at the loan-mony recusant; and then bitterly to envey against the Pres∣byterians, or Disciplinarians, (as it pleased him to tearm them;) but why against them? because they could not endure that either due obedience, or Honourable maintenance, should be given to the Bishops; and therefore (said he) they had best looke to them; for if they have the cutting of the Bishops Cloath, their trayns will be short enough. But to leave him in his Spiders Web, and to follow the point a litle further: Intruders upon other mens right, can endure any men (how bad so ever) rather to live by them, then the servants of him, whom they intrude upon; and thence it is, that these wicked hus∣bandmen killed the servants, (as it is in the Gospell,) that came to receive their Maisters rent, Mat. 21.33, &c. They did not kill the theeves, or the robbers, and spoy∣lers of the vineyard; but the Servants, yea and the Sonne too; And the end of all was, that they might take the inheritance.
Divers laterall or side-windes may blow together; but windes directly opposite, can not blow together: Herode & Pilate did agree to the crucifying of Christ, because that winde might possibly blow some profit to them both, (as they supposed by the pleasuring of Caesar.) The Pharisees, Saducees, and Herodians (though all at ods one with an other) could yet con∣cure to the insnaring of Christ: Since all these have out of their love to profit, looked so closselie to such as were against their profit; whether they were friends or foes to God; whether their actions or ends were good, or bad; it will be great imputation to you, not to remove that, which hath ever hindered, and shall hinder, till it be removed, all the Honour, and welfare, that can be thought on, for the good of Church and State: and also not to establish the Scepter of Christ; which being established, all honour, and hapinesse, should attend us and ours; yea God shall dwell among us; and then what good thing can be wanting to us. Stand you vp then before the Lord; lend God your hand, (as we may speake with reverence,)Exo. 15.26 and he ac∣cording to his promise, will be our Physitian, and will put no more these heavy deseases upon vs; If we return to him by true reformation, the Lord will turne to vs,Hos. 6.1. and will heale vs, as he hath wounded us; stricke you but the right veine, and God will doe the cure. As for Ho∣nour, if you will Honour God in this particular, (as hetherto he hath not beene honoured in this nation,)
he will not onelie make our ancient honour to re∣turne, but he will heape more honour upon our head, then ever heretofore he hath done; But upon the Kings Majestie especiallie, and you the Instrumentall restorers of all things, you have Gods promise for it, and he will surely make it good:1 Sam. 2.3 them that honour me, I will honour; As for our enimies, forraigne and domestique; this will be to them as the thunder clappe, which discomfit∣ted the Philistims. This will be the onely hornett to stricke terrour to the hearts of all our Romish Cananites. All the prophane crue, and enemies of State, will be glad to hide their heads, at the fall of this Babell; Spaine, Rome, & Austria. And all our English Edomites will be attired in mourning; crying out alas! alas! the hel∣met of our hope is fallen; yea, if you doe it indeed, your Honours shall see, that none but Babels friends will either helpe them, or pittie them. And for this especially, they are to be looked unto. If this be effec∣ted, the hearts of all that plaguie crewe of Dunkerke, and the hearts of all their abetters will faile them. This will be more matter of rejoycing to all the Re∣formed Churches in the world, and especially to Christs distressed people, then ever as yet they heard off from us; For to speake the truth, some Reformed Churches dare not trust us, and all expect litle good of us, whilest the Hierarchie overtoppeth the State; neither is this in them a groundlesse conceite. For first, how can the Scepter carryers of Antichrist affect and further a State, or Church governed by the
Scepter of Christ, quite opposite to their subsi∣stance? 2. How can they helpe them, when they hate their cause? 3. How can they wish them well, and doe them good abroad, when they persecute and kill at home their own brethren, and Countrymen, yea not sparing their kindred in their flesh, for the very same cause, which these forraignes maintaine, and for which they suffer? 4. They are no friends to such people, for they re∣pine much they should have any supply; witnesse, that Amazia, or burden of the Lord, that in the time of collection called the French (Deffendors of the Gospell) by the undeserved name of Traytors from the Pulpit. This Inquisition-Impe, is juxta pontem & pon∣tificem, hard by the Pope, and the foote of the bridge; whose blasphemous scoffing of the word; re∣viling of Gods people; professing of Poperie, and resorting to Gondomars howse, requires that you should rather censure him as a Wolf, than suffer him to be over a flock. To this particular also the Prelates bear witnesse, calling of the Ministers into question, for mony collected to their poore brethren, Ministers of the Pallatinate. As for the last col∣lection, no thankes to them.
5. And lastly; They oppose bitterly, by speech & writing, the Learned, & worthy maintainers of the pu∣ritie of Christs ordinances, or opposers of the Romish trash, and Hierarchicall government, as Beza, Calvine, Cartwright, &c. As the Papists have newly printed a thing against the Calvinists, for rooting of them out of all places, where they reside; so the Prelates are not wanting to second them here with pen, & pike, for their utter ex∣tirpation, yea they and theirs deliver it, as a maxime; If the Presbyterians or omniparians be not taken a course with; they can not stand. Therefore all religious pro∣fessers (whether conformers or non-conformers) had need to looke to themselves: For with them and the Pa∣pists, all these are Calvinists; witnesse that Sack-butt, that bid a plague on all conforming Puritanes. As for state-professors they hould them their friends. Since then the good of Christs cause: the glading of all Gods people: the ruine of Antichrist, and the shaming of his friends faces, calleth for so worthie and noble a worke. Ne vestrae occasioni desitis, nec suam hosti detis: Loose not so faire an oportunitie; give no advantage to your enemie. Strike this basilike-veine: For nothing but this will cure the Pleurisie of our State. Which if you neglect, they may (perhappes one day) tant you to your faces, with this disgracefull proverbe: Physitian heale thy self.
Take of then this Hydraes head: and sense, life, action, and motion of all the wicked, and wickednesse, shall perish. Lastlie, to drawe to an end; It maketh much for the prosperitie, and peace of the State, if we make warre on Gods enemies; because they are Gods enemies: and disburden the Land of that which is a burden to him; he will be at peace with us, and then all things shall go well with us. For if he be with us, who can be against vs? As for th'increase of the Kings estate, and supply for his affaires; what can make more then this? For first, if the King be with God in this; he will be with him, and what can he want? 2. The wealth of the subject shall be much increa∣sed, both by Gods bleshing on their labours; by reason of their better & more holy cariage; and further, by spa∣ring 200000. pound per annum, at least; which the Prelates rake out of them. 3. Being governed by the guidance of the Gospell of peace. They shall not be so prone to law-suits, where∣in much monie is ill spent, and much idlenes & other sinnes do ensue by attendance from their necessarie af∣faires: and by consequence much povertie fol∣loweth.
4. The Ministerie shall save by this meanes 100000. pound per annum, extorted from them by the Pre∣lates. In causes and braules about matrimonie, the people spend not so litle as 50000. pound per annum, besides the great summes which they have for probates of willes, being the Kings proper due, which might inrich his coffers 100000. pound per annum, and save them from abusing the will of the defunct, under a colour of supposed pious vse. To omitt the unlaw∣full gaines of their Soul-censures, with a great share of this; yea or all (if the King and State stood in need) would the subjects be readie to supply for service: For as the wealth and honour of a King standeth in the wealth, and love of his subjects, so what will they not give or do where their love is fixed. Lastlie, the Prelates Lord-like meanes, arising to 23217. pound, or there about, per annum, (as we con∣ceive,) besides their commendames, (and other emo∣luments,) might serve his Majestie for manie good uses, where it doth no good now, but much hurt. Advertis∣ment to the subjects of Scotland. pag. 88. 8. 9By this Princelie revenew (as one of their owne friends observeth) but upon them by the prodigalitie of Princes, they are turned from religious Priests to temporall Princes: Into whose hands by this meanes the Princes have put the verie same sword, wherewith to this day they doe
not onelie cut the throat of Kings and their authoritie, but have also spoyled the puritie, and piety of the Church of God: and in place thereof have introduced this pollution, pride, avarice and superstition, which shall never have an end, so long as they remaine so rich as they are. Devotie peperit divitias, & filia devoravit matrem: Devotion brought out wealth, and the mother devoured the daughter, we use his owne vere words. Thus we see that bad they are by their calling; yet made worse by their revenew, which to remove into his Majesties hands, would be profitable for all, and hurtfull to none. In this respect they may well be called , as Aristotele calleth favorum pestes: the plaguie consumers of hives; they eat up the sweat, and poyson the rest. By removing of this Antichristian calling, and his Majesties taking the meanes to himself, he shall do two good Offices in one; namelie, he shall supply the wants of the State, and pull them as brands out of the fire of their dangerous, and unlawfull condition. Try but the withdrawing of their temporall emoluments, and they will presently forsake their leaden arguments. It is cleare by the former testimonie and others produced to that effect, how they spoyle all both tem∣porall and Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction: If they spare not Christ, they will spare nothing. They that would make Paul conforme, cannot choose, but deforme all.
And therefore M. Bullinger calleth them Harpyes, that is monstrous byrdes with maiden visages, but rave∣nous tallants, leaving an ill smell upon all that they touch. They are compared by one to the Devill, and Scamo∣ny, which alwayes leaveth an evill disposition behinde them. For our parts we will say no more of them, but that which a learned Antiquarie said of Rhumny Marsh: Hyeme mali; aestate molesti; nunquam boni: Bad in Win∣ter: hurtfull in Sommer: never good. And so much for the proofe of the Positions. It will not be amisse before we shut up the treatise, to say some thing concerning the meanes, whereby the Prelacie may be removed. Masculous resolution, and strenuous action, are the two twins of an Heroick Spirit: as armes are never wanting to maintaine true fortitude; so too, these two brought forth by true valour, and mature deliberation, meanes can not be wanting; If out of the pride and feare of the heart, they be not neglected, or quarrelled, the worke shall be done; but if all the meanes that possiblie could be thought on, were laid open to the eye of a state,Lament. 1.6 yet if the Princes (as the Lord speaketh) be like Harts that finde no pasture; or (as he speaketh of Ephraim) if they be like a silly doue without a heart;Hose. 7.11. that is without resolution & courage; there can be no good
done, nor honour atchieved; and that is a fearfull token, that the Lord hath a purpose to slay such a people: but we desire and pray to see better things of you, & from yow, & that the Lord would give you eyes, harts, and hands, to use all good meanes, to bring your appointed worke to passe. Thrise noble Nehemiah undertooke a great work; had very weake meanes, much opposition: not onely by the enemies without, but even by that false bellie∣god betraying priest Semaiah, he was tempted to a cowardly forsakeing of the work; but God gave him an other heart. Should such a man as I flee (saith he:)Nehem. 6.11. so must you (right Honourable) resolve to encounter all discouragements, difficulties, and frighting alarmes thus: Should such men as we feare to doe that for Christ, our King, and Countrie, which is of more necessity then life it self. It were enough that we have proved punctually the worke to belong to you, and to be of so absolute a necessitie, as the avoyding of Gods displeasure, and the procuring of his favour; If we left the meanes to your wisedome, & experience; able to go beyond all that we an say: yet we hope it shall not be offensive, or dero∣gatorie to your judicious invention; if we be shewing nd sharping some tooles, wherewith you may worke.
But before we com to the particulars, be pleased again to remember, that all the means must be planted, and discharged directlie against this grand evill of the Prelacie: reformation must begin at the root. It is a good admonition of Peter Martyr: in Ecclesia reformanda Elizei exemplum imitandum est;in 2. Reg. v. fontem ipsum &c. in the reforming of the Church, the practise of Elizeus is to be imitated; and the fountain is first to be healed, from whence all the poysonable conta∣gion,Oratio ad Maximil. anno 1500. and corruption cometh. These be they (as a learned man complained to the Emperour) à quibus Ecclesia laceratur; by whom the Church is torn in peeces. D. Downam would make the world beleeve that the contempt of these Bishops,In Epist. dedicat. is the cause of the greatest evill, if not of all the evill among us; for which he citeth Chrysostome in 2. Timoth. 2. But D. Downam doth know verie well, that Chrysostom knew no such Bishops as he speaketh off: indeed the contempt of Bishops, of Gods making, is no small cause of the evills that are upon us, and yet are further threa∣tened against us; but all this contempt cometh, upon them by the Prelats Tyranizing over them; who can not, but by removal of the Prelacie attain the ho∣nor due to them. Now to the means.
1. Mean of removall. TO begin then with information, (for we must first know before we do,) we stād all in need from the King to the beggar to be awaked, and made sensible of the necessitie of this worke to be done: we are deadly secure under the pressure of Gods wrath; we are nei∣ther sensible of Gods honour tread under foot, nor of his glorie departed from us, nor of the indignitie and indemnitie, that is upon us, and all that we put our hand too: all that passe by, spoyle us, and we spoyle all that rely upon us: to omitt many instances, which being too wel known, maketh us odious to the world; let us touch upō the last, namely, the black pining death of the famished Rochellers, to the number of 15000. in 4. Monthes, (besides those that had formerly perished,) proclaimeth to the world the vanity, if not the fals∣hood of our help. It may justly be said of us, & them as it was said of Israels waiting, for such help as de∣ceived them, their eyes failed for our vain help;Lament. 4.17. in our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save. Vnder correction, it was a poore part of our State, to leave the releef of Gods distressed people to a mor∣tallie devoured enemie to God and his people: his plots yet take place; we speake what we heare, that he and his damnable confederacie, after that Master peece of the taking in of Rochell, had determined a peace among themselves, that he might with his Prelates and the rest of his Counsell, finish his worke upon us and the Gospell.
The tongues and pennes of forraigne proclaime our infamie: It grieves a truely bred Countrie-man to hear it;C. 1.11. and yet for all this, as it is said in Zacharie: We all (from the highest to the lowest) sitt still, and are at rest. The cause of all this is our houlding of Christ so long at the doore; who though he hath knocked this 60. yeares and upward, yet we would never understand his stroke. His enemies by strong hand have kept him out, and his friends would never help him against the mightie to bring him in: Some have sett their foote upon his government, and fought for the Beast, against the Angell: Some with Gallio count it but a quillet; and so they care not for it: Some raile upon the thing though they know it not; and others will be wilfully ignorant of it. But let us all labour to be instructed, even in this par∣ticular, or the sowle of the Lord must of necessity de∣part from us. Awake & know this you great Senators, who are the Sences & sowle of the King & State. Awake you watch∣men upon the walls, and awaken others; you are these Spirits that should carie vitall heat unto the head, and all the members: you should complaine to the heart, that the head is much distempered; and so should you to the head that the heart is verie sick: and to each of these of their particular diseases, whether they be by consent, or from the part it self: by how much Kings
are more precious then others, by so much the more ye must deal plainly with them: Hear the word of the Lord, o King of Iudah! (saith the Prophet) that sittest upon the Throne of David, thow and thy servants, and the people that enter in by these gates; execute judgment, &c. and doe no evill, &c. And then what honour or happie∣nesse shall not attend the throne;Ierem. 17. V. 9. but if you will not heare these words, I sweare by my self, saith the Lord, that this howse shall be laid waste; And what was the cause of this? Even the forsaking of the covenant of the Lord their God. This was the manner of Ieremies prea∣ching; You must tell the King,Psal. 119.98. that all the commandements of God must be with him; they must be the men of his Counsell; so shall he be wiser then his enemies;V. 29. But if he follow the Counsell of Christs enemies, as the Prelates and others, then Christ will be his enemie. You must bouldly with Ieremie say to the King and to the Queene,C. 13.18. humble your selves, sitt downe, or lye downe, (as the word beareth,) not to put their neck under the yoke of Babell; as that King and his mother was comman∣ded; but by heartie humiliation & reformation, to free themselves and us from the yoke and bondage of Ba∣bell: aske the King in plain tearmes, if the evill (yea this verie evill) be not removed, how he shall give an accompt of his flock, when the destroyer cometh. To the same effect. Ieremie speaketh to the King: Lift up thine eyes, behold them that come from the North. Ieremie spyed that which the King could not spy, and what
further:V. 20. where is the flock that was given thee? and the sheep of thy bewtie? It is true (as one speaketh on the place:) Quod Reges putant se singulari privilegio muniri,Calv. &c. That Kings thinke themselves by a priviledge exempted from the command of the word, and that it is a debasing of their state, to humble themselves under the mightie hand of God; but God will have it so; and great Kings have done so, that had but litle know∣ledge of God. To sooth up Princes in this their misconceit, there are to many Flesh flees; who spawne out their corrupt flatteries upon the eares of Kings; to the undoing of the King, and State; yea these twinge, and bite such as doe deal faithfully with Princes; but let them know, they are but traytors to God, and to the King in the highest degree; For miserable is that Prince (as Gor∣dianus said) from whom the trueth is concealed. Tell his Majestie, that Dagon and the Arke cannot stand together; God and the Devill cannot both be served in his Palaces; and this also should you great Statesmen sound in his eares; Backing and countenancing the faithfull dealing of the Ministerie: be plain with his Majestie, in discovering to him tho∣rowlie the evill of the Hierarchie, who with Elymas cease not, to subvert the wayes of righteousnesse.
Make it plain, as we have proved, that their Anti∣christiā authoritie; the beawty of Christs Church, the glory of his Crown, and the good of his people can not subsist together. But if he will remove that drosse, and make the goulden scepter of Christ onely to sway, and set the crowne of pure worship upon his head; Christ shall make his crouns heer fast upon his head; & crowne him afterward with immortall glory; Britan, and all Gods people shall rejoyce; Spain, Rome, France, & Austria, shall mourn; the sheepe of his bewtie shall then be his ornament; all shall be new; we shall have a re∣fined Church; a refined King; a refined people; refined Spi∣rits, refined conditions, and with all these a refined suc∣cesse. As for Princes Counsellers, and other great ones, by office or honour, tell them that Ieremie his in∣quirie,C. 5. 3. for the knowledge of the Lords wayes & Iudge∣ments, is returned with a non inventus, they have altogether broken the yocke, and cast away the bonds: Some open enemies to Christ, and the State, by Poperie, Prophanes, Athisme, &c. Some close enemies, some neutrals, not regarding what become of Christs cause; and some wish all weere well; but they will be at no cost or paines with reformation: they would gladly countenance goodnesse; but they feare it shall dis∣countenance them: For they will go no further with Gods cause, then it will carie their owne cause.
It is true that the most of the great ones know the Hierarchie, but they partly want hearts to hate it with a perfect hatred; and partly they cannot submitt to the power of Discipline; but if any great ones be re∣solute for Christ and his cause; they are left, as a mast upon the top of a mountaine, and the enemies of Christ hould them to hard meat. And what is the cause of all this their Iniquitie, and pusillanimitie? The Hierarchie is the ground of all; For (as we have shewed) where Honours are erected and maintained against the honour of Christ, there true honour cannot long floorish. Their Lording over the Land, hath rob∣bed the Nobilitie of honour, blessing to their State, of their families, yea and of their sowles; and that not onely by giving evill example, but also by keeping out the power of the meanes, by which they should have beene moulded, and the true Discipline of Christ, by which they should have beene kept in compasse: Give them therefore an Alarm; Make them see their miserie, and the Bishops to be the main cause of it; cause them to cast off the yoke of sinne, and to put their necks to the Lords worke; desire them, and charge them to lend the Lord their hand, especiallie now when it is come to a dead list, or the Lord in judgement will let them grow to such a hight at length, that they will vassall, and sinke, both nobilitie and others, under in∣tollerable burthens. Proclaime to all sortes of people from the word, the Impiety, and Iniquitie of the Pre∣lates places, and practises; Discover to the Prelates
their dangerous condition, will them to come out of Babell; and to cast off their Antichristian pomp. Show them & the people the fearfull sin of pestering Gods worship, and overlayding peoples consciences with the inventions of men; yea with the trumperie of Antichrist. In all this (as you know better then we can tell you) you must be verie free faithfull, and impartiall: the face of man you must not feare, Ier. 1.17. You must speake all that the Lord commandeth, either directly, or by consequence, and not keep back one word,C. 26. 2. as you will answer it: as the Vrim, & Thumnim of the Lord is upon you, so you must say to Fathers, Brethren, & Children, whether naturall or politicall, I know you not; that is, neither nighnesse nor highnesse shall make me play the huckster with the word: you must have your portion; all affection of feare, love, or desire, must give place to the freedome of the Ambassie; and the glorie of God, Deut. 33.8.9. Was Papinian the Lawyer plaine with Caracalla; Ephestion free with Alexander; and Mecaenas so faith∣full with Augustus? what a disgrace will it be, and danger too, for you the men of God, to halt, or be mealie mouthed in a matter of so great weight; as the Lord said of rebellious and knobbie Israell:Hose. 6.5. he he wed them by the Prophets, so you must lay the axe to the root of this tree, and hew it downe; for as it is not of the Lords planting, so it troubleth the ground, as you must make (ac∣cording to the same place) the word and judgements of
the Lord, as the light that is cleare and conspicuous; so if they keep their trenches still against the Lord, ye must slay them with the word, according to that of the Apostle:2 Cor. 10.5 Having in readinesse a revenge against all dis∣obedience. Tell Diotrephes, if he leave not his Lording it over Gods howse, and beating of his howshold servants, if he give not over his hould, Christ will see execution done upon him. Tell all the supporters of the Prelacie, whosoever they be, and all that should put away the evill one, and will not; that the Lord hath determined to destroy the Land,2 Chro. 25.15. because we have done evill, and will not hearken to the Counsell of God. As the inverse Trumpets, that sound a retreat when they should give the Alarm, are the betrayers of the State, agents for the enemie, and the bane of the Mini∣sterie, so we thinke they are much to blame to say no worse, that turne the mouthe of the Canon in reviling those that seeke and stand for reformation. Is it not enough that Hananiah will not suffer Ieremia to Prophecy; that Pashur smite him, and that Amaziah conjure Amos from the court; but also one of the house must beat his fellow servants; but it must be so, for if all be not right, the nigher the line with any opposition, the greater Eclips.C. 20. 10. Ieremie his familiars watched for
his halting; and Davids companion & acquaintance did him the greatest hurt, Ps. 55.13; and Paul was worst used by his Kinsmen the Iewes, Act. 20.19. With such evill requitall, let not good Souldiers be discou∣raged; for so they may with Ieremie in a fitt, to fling away their armes;C. 20. but let them looke about a litle with the same Prophet, and they shall see that the Lord is with them, like a mightie terrible one; therefore their persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevaile;V. 11. they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper. A re∣markable place it is, and full of confort. As it is an evill thing to be set against a good cause; so the speak∣ing evill of good, & good of evill is liable to a fearfull woe. Contumelia non est ira Caesaris digna: that , or requitall of rayling, is pusillanimitie; & if you can do it never so handsomly; you can but come even with him; but by bearing and making use of it, you may have the better of him. Naturalists tell us, how a litle bird, called Charadrea, by secret attractive quality, cureth a mā of the Iandise only by looking on him, for a time; so Christian patience, and magnanimious contempt, will in time, either drayn the gall out of bitter spirits; or make it more overflow to their owne disgrace.
To conclude the clearing of this point, that all sortes may be fully possest of this trueth, give the se∣cond commandement the due extent: This yron, if it be well plyed, will bow downe the back of the Pre∣lacie, and break the yron sinew of all superstitious worship; this hammer handled well, and this law well obeyd, shall purg out the Iniquitie of Iacob,Esa. 27.9. by breaking all the Idolls of Rome, as Chalkstones in peeces. The negative of this, as all expositers witnesse,Fonn. in 2. Com. forbiddeth the use of any rite, or outward mean in Gods worship, which himself hath not commanded. Ritibus sive Ceremonijs à Deo ipso prescriptis, &c. Let us content our selves (saith one) with the rites & ceremo∣nies,Piscator. prescribed by God himself: We give but a touch here, where we could be large, & we speak to those that understand; yea we have the testimony of a Prelate, for the confirmation of this trueth, in his catechising upon this commandement:D. Andrew. God hath left (saith he) his word, the preaching of it; the Spirit, and his works, to instruct us: But all this will not serve, but men must have their owne devises in Gods worship. Further, the affirmative part of this commandement inarmeth and commandeth the Minister, and Magi∣strate, to make reformation; witnesse, that place fore∣quoted out of Esaia: He shall (that is Israell) make all the stones of the Altar as Chalkstones, &c. The cutting, minsing, & manucling of Gods will in this command∣ment maketh (as the Prophet speaketh)Esa. 26.3. other Lords be∣sides
our Lord, to rule over us: That is, that neither rule by authoritie, nor Law. As some speake merrilie of the common Law, that it is all Law, and no conscience, & that the Chancerie is all conscience, and no Law, so we may speake seriously upon costly experience, that their spitefull courts are neither Law, nor conscience. To bind this precept the closser to our sowles, let us observe but the reasons of it. 1. The Iealousie of God, that can endure no com∣petition in the ordering of his howse, is threatened as a fire, to consume the breakers of it. 2. He houldeth them haters of him, that dare ap∣point him any other service; or order in his howse, then himself hath appointed; and so they are indeed; for they that will appoint a Law to God, they can not endure him to be their Law-giver. 3. The Iudgement against the breach of this com∣mandement extendeth to the posteritie. This parti∣cular much concerneth us; for we thinke that the whole nation (save a sillie few) have contented it self with the form of government, and worship prescribed in the Church; and they have lived; and dyed good Christians, with much confort; yea have not divers worthie men among us, after long standing out, re∣turned with peace enough, to imbrace and plead for the Ceremonies and government?
Well this same threatening of visiting the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children, will fright us out of the clift of this rock, if it be well thought on; for what know we, but we are the men with whom the Lord of the howse will reckon, visiting the Idolatrie, and supersti∣tion of our predecessours upon us, especiallie we follow∣ing their steps: and put the case, we be taken away be∣fore the day of visitation come; yet first we know not what it may cost us in our consciences, ere we de∣part, either for never manifesting such love, as we should, in keeping of this commandement; or for lea∣ving our first love once had to this commandement. 2. We must know for a certain, if we reforme not that, our posteritie must pay for it; & thus what great cruel∣tie do we joyne with impietie? 4. And lastly; Let that rich and abundant love of God, promised to the keepers of that commandement, constraine our hearts (if there be any love of Christ in us) to manifest our love to him, and our posteritie, by keeping of this commandement. We have been the larger in the discoverie of this mean of informa∣tion. 1. Because an evill must be knowne before it can be avoyded, or removed. 2. Because in the midst of much knowledge we are like to be led captive, (as the Prophet speaketh,) for want of knowledge of this particular.
The 2. Mean of removall. THe second mean of removall of this great evill, is for Ministers and Magistrates, to set themselves against this superstitious worship, and Antichristian government; teaching, and exhorting others, for to doe the same: they must labour, and cause others la∣bour for a holy hatred of the Prelates, and their burthens, as they are enemies and enmitie to God; Of which that Godly King and Prophet gives a good president: I hate vain inventions, or imaginations,Ps. 119.13 but thy Law do I love. The word doth signifie properlie the branch of a tree; intimating thereby the fiction, or frame of the hart; or otherwise a thing, that by growth would overtop God. With the knowledge of this evill, there must be a hatred of it in the heart; and a forsaking of it. Some will not know, that they may not doe; & some know, and yet will not doe, or dare not doe: but knowledge of sinne, and forsaking of sinne, must go together; If we looke to prosper, you must resolve and draw others on to abandon all the abominations from our eyes, wherewith we have defiled our selves:Eze. 20.7. you must labour, and cause others to be like Ephraim; who in his returning to God said to his Idolls:Hose. 14.8. What have I to doe any more with Idolls: Yea as an other Pro∣phet saith: we must defile the covering of the Images,Esa. 30.2. (that is: count them, and use them as filthie things:)
thow shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloath, then shalt thow say vnto it: get thee hence. In a word, if we will pull our selves and others out of the fire, we must hate the garment spotted with the flesh: under which all the Or∣thodox understand all mans inventions in Gods worship.Iud. 23. Thus we separate not from the Churches, but from the evills of them, and also from obedience to Anti∣christian Lords over them. We have showed this separation to be neither Heresie, Schisme, nor Rebel∣lion, but good divinity, and loyall obedience: Or otherwise the Scots, Hollanders, and Frenche Prote∣stants, be all Rebells, or Hereticks; which no friend to the Gospell will averre: how shall ye ever deliver the Land, or Christ himself, of them, and their bur∣thens, if ye obey them? For all the reformation that good Iosiah made, yet Ze∣phanie will not content himself,C. 1. v, 4. till the Chemarim-Priests and all the remnants of Baal be removed: Sure∣lie, if he had lived in our Land, he had been counted (as others are) an unreasonable man, made for nothing but to trouble the State, by stirring up of contention. Why should ye the Messengers of the great God be the Servants of men? It is a good note of Iohan. Sarisburiens. to this pur∣pose:Policrat. lib. 7. c, 10. Serviendum non Dominandum, nisi quis forte seip∣sum dignum credat, vt Angelis debeat Dominari: Mini∣sters (saith he) must serve in their callings, and not
Lord it over others; except they thinke themselves worthie, to beare rule over the Angells. Aske them for the subjection which they challeng;Gal. 1.10. if they can say, as Paule said: Doe I perswade men or God; and if they can not say so, then everie faithfull Minister must hould the rest that followeth, for his devise: If I yet please men, I should not be the ser∣vant of Christ. And why should Gods people, of what degree so∣ever, subject their necks to a Babilonish yoke? Should they not stand fast in the libertie,Galat. 5.1. wherein Christ hath sett thē free? If they sitt not in Moses chayr, why should they heat them? that is, if they bring not a lawfull warrant of their calling, why should they be obeyed? To heare and obey Christ comming in his Fathers name, and Antichristian Prelates comming in their owne name, cannot subsist together. That which the Spirit speaketh to the faithfull in Thyatira, he speaketh to us all:Rev. 2.24.25. I will put upon you no other burthen, but that which ye have already; hould fast, till I come. A most pregnant place, against subjecting of our selves, to any power, or religious practise, how spe∣cious, and spangled, with depth of divellish learning, soever it be.
This mean of removall may be further followed by the execution of Disciplinarie Censure, or casting out, if no other thing will serve. Every Prelate, (we know,) or his deputed officer, will take upon him, to excommunicate God his people, upon no better ground (though not with so good authoritie) then the Pharisies had to cast the blinde man out of the Synagogue;Ioh. 9.34. yea all the good men in England that stand for reformation of worship and Discipline, by the 2. 4. 6. 7. and 8. Canon stand, (after their Popish manner,) excommunicat ipso facto. To lay open the fowle abusing and prophaning of this sacred ordinance, as by the Prelates sole au∣thoritie; the committing of the power to men uncapable; denouncing it against the good; Abusing of it to bables, and trifles; We have no time: Let this suffice that their practise in these, and other particulars, is against the word of God; the practise of the Apostles; all reformed Chur∣ches, from the beginning to this time; against Fathers, Councils, all Orthodox Authors, and in some things against their owne constitutions; witnesse, Constitut. Anno 1571. but to the point; whereas against all Laws this they do, where they have no authoritie; so the Churches of Christ by that power committed to them, may and should exercise this jurisdiction of Censure against them (if otherwise they will not be reclaimed from tyrannizing over Gods howse,) and that this is
no new Doctrine to any that love, and know the trueth, we are able to make good, from the word, rea∣sons, consent of Popish and Protestant writers, and from practise. D. Downam indeed, with others of the Hierarchie, layeth about him against this trueth, and the maintainers thereoff, as though they touched the apple of his eye: he houldeth it an unworthie speech in holy Lambert, that Honourable martyr:Lib. 4. p. 162. that a Pa∣stor may be Censured by his Church, afterward; he cometh with this Censure over all the Reformed of that Iudg∣ment; that to subject Pastors to their Churches, is phantasticall, imaginarie, ridiculous, and absurd; yea he calleth it a Brownisticall; or Anabaptisticall frensie:Lib. 4. p. 144. But let all the above-said evidences speak, whether D. Downam, and men of his minde, or the reformers be the Schismaticks; and herein we will be breef: First, for the word: tell the Church, (saith the Spirit,)Math. 18.17. where to omitt others. D. Andrews understandeth the words, of everie particular Church, having power & commandement to put this power in practise;Tort. Tort. p. 42. He in∣stanceth in the Church of Corinth: Where we must understand this power not to be divisivè in membris, in everie particular member devided;Lib. contro. p. 362. but vnitivè in tota, joyntly united in the whole; as Gerson well ob∣serveth: Claves non vni, sed vnitati: the Keyes are not given to one, but to unitie, saith Aug.
To come to reasons: the first is from that principle of nature, wherewith everie Childe is acquainted. Omne totum majus est sua parte: The whole is greater then the part; yea, as it containeth everie part in it, so it hath power over every part. Now a Bishop (make the best of him) is but a part, or member of a Church; therefore he must be subject to the Censure of a Church: This Enthymem the Pope cannot evade, being pressed with it, by our writers from the testi∣monie of Gregorie,Lib. 4. Ep. 2.8. against Iohn of Constantinople; but our Hierarchie will cutt this argument, if they can not unty it: For over the Church they will be, and not subject to it. A second reason may be taken from that Sonn-ship that they professe to the Church: they are often up∣braiding others. Non habebit Deum Patrem, &c. they have not God for their Father, that have not the Church for their Mother: They are beaten here with their owne rod; for they beate and spurn their Mother, and yet like ungratious Children they dispise their Mo∣thers correction: If they be within, will they not be judged. Lib. 5. C. 27.D. Fyeld would make us beleeve, that a Bishop must not be judged by Elders; But the Apostle is of an other minde:1 Cor. 5.12 13. do ye not judge those that are within?
Other arguments we might use, as from the dignitie of the Church; from the end of the Churches Cen∣sure; which is to pull men as brands out of the fire; and from the danger of such, as Kick against this prick; but we name them onely, since in every particular lyeth, the force of an argument: as for these that will be af∣fectedly ignorant, let them be ignorant still: but one thing we intreat you to observe, and we desire the Hierarchie to take notice of it; that this exalting of themselves above the Church rellisheth strongly of the grossest Poperie; and with Popish Arguments they doe maintain it. The grosser Papist houldeth the Pope to be above the Church, as Iohannes Saracenus,Pol. Paris. p. 42. Bellarm. and Baronius; but the more moderate Papists teach the contrarie; witnesse, Thomas Corfellis, in his dispu∣tation at the Counsell of Basill, cited by Aeneas Syl∣vius: Dicimus vniversae Ecclesiae potestatem omnimodam esse concessam; Romanum{que} pontificem illi subjectum; posse per ipsam deponi, abijci, excommunicari: We say that all power is given unto the Church; and that the Pope is thereunto subject; and by the Church he may be de∣posed, rejected, and excommunicated. The same question was debated, and concluded affirmativelie; namelie, that the Pope is subject to a Councill; witnesse Gerson, cited by Saravia;Cont. Ger. p. 367 will it not then follow un∣denyablie, that a Prelate, or a pettie Pope, is subject to the Censure of a Church? both Hierarchie and Pa∣pists grant the antecedent: Potestas Ecclesiae supra Pa∣pam: the power of the Church is above the Pope.
This doth D. Morton cite from Sylvius; and why hath not a Congregation,Apot. p. 2. lib. 4. c. 12. or Church, power over a Prelate? Some would faine wrangle with the consequent thus; that there is not the same reason from the power of a Church universall over the Pope; and of a particular Church in controversie with a Bishop: one of their owne Bishops taketh away this instance, pro∣ving that our Saviours words:D. Andrew Tort. Tort. p. 42. tell the Church; are to be understood de Ecclesia qua{que} particulari: of every par∣ticular Church; giving an instance thereof in the Church of Corinth. So D. Whitak. of that place of Mathew 18. Particularis quaevis Ecclesia, &c. Every particular Church hath greater authoritie, then Peter; or any particular person. The trueth of this consequent is also clear from reason, for by what power is a Councill superior, or doth exercise its power, but because it is a Church re∣presentative? and from which ground, both Popish, & Protestant writers, presse the Popes subjection to the Censure of it; In witnesse whereoff, D. Andrews ci∣teth Cardinall Cameracens. Cusan. and the whole Schoole of Sorbon; concluding it against the Pope, in the Councill of Constance: If that man of sinne then should be not onely deposed; but also cast out, if on formall proceeding, he would not repent him of his exalting himself against God; what letteth, but the limbes
of the man of sinne should be so proceeded against, if they persist in their tyrannie and contumacie? If any object the Magistrates interposed authoritie; it is quicklie answered: quod ejus potestas non est privativa, sed cumulativa: that his power is not to abate, or weaken any ordinance of God; but rather for guar∣ding, and making good all the ordinances of God, punishing with the sword the opposers. Vpon this particular Mr. Zanchie writeth both larg∣lie, and learnedlie,In 4. pre∣cept. p. 747. answering all objections of hinde∣rance from the Magistracie; and giving many good reasons, why the Magistrate should rather further, then hinder this ordinance of God. As from the perpetuity of the Gospell, this being a part of it: From the ex∣cellencie of it: From the necessitie; ends, and effects of it. One remarkable argument he useth: that the Ma∣gistrate himself being a member, and subject to the ordinance, cannot exempt any man from this ordi∣nance: For this he citeth the Churches practize upon Ozias, 2. Chron. 26.16. and that instance of Theodo∣sius related by Theodoret Lib. 5. 18. D. Whittaker contriveth this argument into few words: Qui vincit vincentem te, is etiam vincet te:De Cont. q. 5. p. 180. If the Church bring him under, that is over thee; shall it not also bring thee under, meaning the Pope or Pre∣late?
For a closer of the proofe of this point; we produce the judgement of that World of wit, in his halcyon dayes; who in a generall assembly, with much admiration disputed acutelie this point pro & con: whether male∣factors in life or religion, against the first, or second Table, might be cast out, notwithstanding they were lyable to temporall punishment: He concluded affir∣matively, that hereticks, blaspheamers, refactarie schis∣maticks, bloodguiltie persons, and the like of what de∣gree soever they were, ought to be cast out, by the Church; For they might escape the Kings hands; but the hand of God they could not escape. His Lawes must stand, said he; and we must all obey, though the Lawes of man be often made of none effect. Thus, or to this effect, the King spake; yea we could make it appeare, that awfull shaking blade of the Spirit, was more terrible to those robellious spirits, both to God and man, than the power of many Kings. By this it appeareth, who be the Schismaticks in this point. The Sorbonists in their Booke, called the Ec∣clesiasticall Policie, chargeth Bellarmine, and Baronius, to be Schismaticks; because against the Councill of Constance & Basill, they maintaine the Pope to be above a Councill? We require judgement, whether D. Downam, and D. Bridges, with others of the Hie∣rarchie, maintaining Prelates, to be above the Chur∣ches,
deserve not the liverie of Schismaticks, that they would put upon others? Lastly, we want not approved practize for this par∣ticular: Instance, that Censure put deservedly (as him∣self acknowledged) upon Mr. Adamson, Bishop of S. Andrews; for taking that Antichristian title upon him (for litle other fell to his shair but sinne and shame.) The effects of excommunication, which the Apostle calleth a giving up to Sathan, were heavily and fearfully upon him; namelie, inward pangs, outward paines, and much penurie: No forraigne absolution could ease him, till the Church, who had imposed the Censure, upon his humble confession and supplication, released him. The Godlie, and Learned of the Realme, relate this at large; we must give but a touch: onelie this we wish, that they had still so used the stafe in driving away the fowles; that their sacrifice still might have been of as sweete a smell as formerlie: but let them and us up and recover our ground; taking Chryso∣stomes advice in this verie particular: Non purpuram; non fasces, &c. Feare not the scarlet hood; the myter, rochet, nor the crocier stafe; ye have greater power than these; He bindeth this on with good reasons: Si hominem timetis, &c. If ye feare man; that verie man shall mock you; but if ye feare God, you shall be reverenced of men. Yea further, the neglect of
this duetie shall cause their blood, to be required of your hands. But heer flesh and blood will beginne to startle; and turne the back on this honourable service: It will ei∣ther lay or finde abundance of Bears, and Lyons in the way; or at least their skins stuffed with straw. As the faint-hearted spies could not chuse, but commend the sweetnesse of the soyle, and fruit∣fulnesse of the promised Land; but they were daunted with the strength of the people,Numb. 13.27. &c. the height of their walls; the Gyantlike stature of the Sonnes of Anack; the Amalakites, and the rest of their cursed confederacie, dwelling in the mountaines; So all that have any hearts for God, must of necessitie confesse hoc exterminium mali; this rooting out of this evill, to be the most honourable, and profitable businesse, that ever was undertaken; but who is sufficient for it? They are the Sonnes of Anack for strength, (and so they are indeed the sonnes of that monstrous Giant the man of sinne;) they are deeply rooted, and strongly guarded with Amalakites, Hittites, Iebusites, &c. that is, Atheists, Papists, Arminians, Carnall Gospellers, Protestants at large, the openlie prophane, and with all the enemies of the Church, and Common-wealth, and with all the Bellie-serving crew that depend upon them. They have further with them the Counsell of Achitophell; the courting of Shebna; the roaring and braving of Goliah; the cruell pride and vanitie of Haman; the flatterie of Amaziah; the falshood of Semaiah; and
the blooddy cunning of Doeg; and if in this height and might they be incountered, they will rage like the roaring of the Sea, and teare like a Bear, robbed of her whelps? For answer to all this; graunt it be so, (for it may be, al these will be upon their stumps.) Should ye not the rather resist by all good meanes this ,1 Pet. 5.8. or roa∣ring monster, that he may flee from you. Consider, if you be not able to runne with a foote∣man; how will ye hould out with a Horseman? that is, if you cannot tell how to deale with a mortall man, being Gods enemie, how will you deale with God, being provoked, that ye come not out, to help him against his enemies? If the Christaline humor of the bodilie eye be never so litle removed by a blow or cutt to the one side, or other, it maketh one thing seeme two. So by false feares, the Christaline hu∣mor of the eye of faith being never so litle oblique, from directlie looking upon God, & our commission, maketh our foe seeme stronger, and our service seeme harder, than they are indeed, or in verie trueth. Pro∣digious things upon proportionable distance, seeme more fearfull, than if they were nigh hand; so drawe you to your colours, and march on to the charge; and you shall with Alexanders spies, discover them to be but Mounkies, marching over the mountains of Babell, and no men of Armes.
Consider what the Lord saith, and it will strengthen your heart:Esa. 40, 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount vp with the wings of an Eagle, &c. C. 4.1. v. 10.Feare thow me, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea I will help thee; yea I will vphould thee with the right hand of my righte∣ousnesse. V. 11.12.Behould all they that were increased against thee, shall be ashamed, and confounded; they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee, shall perish. Doe as those brave Spirits, Iosuah, and Caleb, coun∣selled faint hearted Israell, to doe with the Canaa∣nites.Num. 14.9 Feare them not, they are bread for vs; their de∣fence is departed from them, and the Lord is with vs, feare them not. Can you read those places, and gather no courage? The Lord will do by you, as he did by Achaz; If ye will not fear,Esa. 7.4. & be faint hearted; as sure as the Lord hath spoken, you shall cutt off the tailes of these two smoaking fire brands from the head of Babell; namelie, Popish Prelacie, & Arminianism; and then all the rest must fall: But if thorow feare of danger, you seeke a hole in your commission; and turne of the service; then the Lord may impute it to you for rebellion, as he did
to Israell his denyall to enter the Land:V. 9. Onely rebell not ye against the Lord, saith Iosuah to them. As the fre∣quencie of a Diarie, or light fever, may grow to a Hectick; so that faithlesse feare of the Israelites, cast them into a deadlie consumption; yea from one de∣gree of sinne, and judgement, to an other; As from feare, they fell to murmuring; from murmuring to re∣bellion; from rebellion to the murthering of their guides, If God had not hindered them; but this did so provoke the Lord, that had not Moses stood up, be∣twixt God and them, he would have cut them off from being a people; and because (as Moses said) they turned away from the Lord, he gave them over to go up against their enemies, without his advise; neither would he be with them;V. 44, &c. and so they were con∣sumed. 2. Some will make a stop, that the Kings authoritie supporting of them, standeth in the way of reforma∣tion. For answer. 1. If they could say with the Apostle, that they were ,Rom. 1.1. sepa∣rated, or sett apart for the Gospell of God, they would not medle with the authoritie of Kings. Duae vir∣gae sunt; altera Regum gentium; altera Discipulorum Christi. Virga Regum, virga Dominationis; virga Discipulorum Christi, directionis. There be two rods (saith Rupertus:)In Math. 10 one of the Kings of the Earth; an other of the Dis∣ciples of Christ; the former is a rod of Princelie su∣perioritie; the latter a rod of direction: the one is
over the body; the other over the sowle. 2. As we have proved, they have no such authoritie (as they doe usurpe) over either sowles, bodyes, or goods of men; and therefore they may be justly called Regis, Legis, & gregis, excidium: The very un∣doing of King, & Law, and people. 3. Say authoritie were graunted, in things incompa∣tible; it were no authoritie at all. Virga dominationis non est concessa Ministris Evangelij pacis (saith the fore∣said Author:) that rod of Princely dominion, is not given to the Ministers of the Gospell of peace. The same argument our Saviour (whom they now and then call Maister) useth, to avoyd the division of the brethrens inheritance:Luc. 12.14 Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you? As if Christ would say: I have no calling to it; and who can give them a calling to doe what they doe? we may use to them the words of Bernhard:De consid. Lib. 1. c. 6. Quid fines alienos invaditis? quid fal∣cem vestrum in alienam Messam extenditis? Why do ye invade others offices, and cast your sikle in others Corn. Cur major vis esse Domino, &c. Why will ye be greater then your Maister, who answered the bro∣ther in matter of division; who made me a judge, &c. then it behoveth you all, according to your places, to vendicate the King, and Kinglie authoritie, the Law, & the subject; yea, and the Gospell, (which is more then all,) from abuse, and tyrannie.
3. And lastly, some will object, if we cast off their bands, and oppose their tyrannie, we shall be called tu∣multuous; they will cry a confederacie: people will forsake us, we shall loose our Ministerie, or place of government; our court-countenance; our credit; we may be banished, or imprisoned; and so our places should want us, where we might have done much good? For answer; first you must make a count, what it may cost you. Nullum periculum vincitur sine periculo: No danger is overcome without danger. And resolve upon self-denyal, if you follow Christ. The fearfull are nei∣ther good Soldiers, nor good Logicians: as God said to the Prophet: though they say a confederacie,Esa. 8, 12. say not ye a confederacie fish not to farre before the nett? Sit vestri cura operis, & Dei cura eventus: Do ye the work; and leave ye the successe to God. May ye not rather reason, that honour, and successe, shall attend you, and yours? Is not God plentifull in promises of assistance in the worke; and a blessing upon the worke? Behould (saith the Lord of Babell,)Ier. 51.25. I am against thee O! destroying mountaine, which destroyeth all the Earth. Sanctifie the Lord of Hostes; and let him be your feare,Esa. 8.13.14. and your dread; and he shall be to you for a sanctuarie.
But say that the evill, which you feare, should come upon you, and us, (as indeed it might, because we have so long stood off with God, and feared man more than him,) yet why should your places of Magistracie, or Ministerie be redeemed with the least detriment, or dishonour to God? is not Thyatira, being (as one saith) a Type of the Church, high in Poperie, from Wickleeff to Luther, threatened for suffering of Ie∣sabell?Park. lib. 1. C. 39. Apot. 2.20. that is: Quod Romam ferrent: that they suffered Rome. As one saith, Iesabell no doubt was re∣proved, but she was not roundly dealt with; she should not have beene suffered at all: But we take not up our Armes at all against the brood of Iesabell. Turpe Christianos Pastores non in prelio Leones, sed potius servos esse: It is shame (saith one) for Ministers, or men of place, not to show themselves like Lions, but as harts in the batle. What it is to be a Lyon, Salamon telleth us: he turneth not away for any.Pro. 30.30. As for your places, libertie, peace, and paines in the Lords harvest, God will say thus:Ps. 50.12. If I be hungrie, I would not tell thee; that is, what need I to thee; or any thing thow canst doe? I am all sufficient, &c. Mens places and paines must serve Gods appointment; but Gods appointment must not serve mans Policie. If you stand not up for God, you are fare to loose your places, and your confort too. Pure obedience, without going to the right hand, or to the left, is the fruite of true love to Gods command∣ment.
Hath the Lord (saith Samuell) so great pleasure in sacrifice, as in obeying of his voyce.1 Sam. 15.12. We know that Earthlie Kings hould it their greatest glorie, to be precisely obeyed in their peremptorie commandes, though they be many times different, or directlie opposite to the rules of State; and men of no meane qualitie, devouted to those commandes, hould it their greatest honour punctuallie to obey, though it be with danger of their head; Instance, that man, who upon the command of Henry the VIII. threw downe the Fort in France; for which the Councill thought him worthie of death. A like instance we have in Duke de Medina, Gene∣rall of the Spanish Armado, in 88. he was comman∣ded by the King, not to Land his forces, in England, before the Prince of Parme & his forces were come to joyne with him; which he precisely obeying, when he might have landed; It was conceived by the Counsell of Spaine, that that neglect overthrew their attempt. The Duke being called to an account, did ingenuously confesse, that in his judgement he might not onely have landed safelie, but done some great and honou∣rable service against the English; but the Kings com∣mand was of more weight with him, then gaine, or losse; yea or life it self; for which the King com∣mended him highlie; affirming, that he had honoured him more in his punctuall obedience, in a thing good to the eye of judgement, than he had gained him a
Kingdome by a contrarie course. If it be thus with obedience to Kings, that may, and doe erre, though their intention be good; how strictlie without alte∣ring or deminishing, should we obey the all-wise God? whose commandements, both for matter & manner, are exceeding just. To conclude the point in the words of one of the Ancients,Greg. lib. 4. Ep. 36. against usurped authoritie. State fortes; State securi, oportet enim, vt constanter, &c. Stand fast, and be strong; be secure in standing for the Lord; keep the Churches of Christ, as ye have received them from the Apostles. Et nihil sibi in nobis haec tentatio Diabolica usurpationis ascribat: Let not that tentation of divelish usurpation, finde any place in us; or let the serious, or sincere exhortation of a reverend Patriot, and Cham∣pion of Christ his Kingdome prevaile with you. Medici Ecclesiae Anglicanae omnes pro viribus esse debe∣mus; profana Episcoporum vsurpatione, imo & saevitia e∣jam vulneratur: qui igitur Medicam manum adhibere cessant, aut desipiunt nescientes, aut salutem Ecclesiae perfidi produnt: we should all be Physitians to the Church of England; by the crueltie, and prophane usurpation of Bishops it is sore wounded; they then that are negli∣gent to put to their healing hand, are either unwise, or perfidiously,M. Park. Lib. 1. c. 39 p. 128. they betray the safetie of the Church, ponder the words well we pray you.
The 3. Mean of removall. THe 3. Mean of removall of this evill, is conceaved by some to be a Councill called; wherein the au∣thoritie of the Prelacie, their superioritie, their Offices, and substituted Officers, their leiturgie, and mainte∣nance, may be thorowly examined, and judged accor∣dinglie: But before we com to the particular applicatiō of this Medsin, it shall not be amisse, to give a taste of the praecognita, or generals of a Councill, for the better clearing of the particular. The Papacie and Prelacie are at strong opposition now and then among themselves, about the necessity, authoritie, and calling of a Councill, yet both joyne in opposition against the Presbyterians, or Reformers, (as they call them;) and this may appeare in divers parti∣culars. First, they charge the Presbyterians with disliking of Councills; and againe, they braulle, & keep a wondering, if at any time they call for a Councill; How can these hang together? That they do both these, let the Hie∣rarchie, and their Soldiers beare witnesse against them∣selves. For the first,Sutcli Tract. de Disciplin. c. 9, p. 140 we dislike of nothing more (saith one of them) than that divers Disciplinarians have no Councills: as though they could not endure Councills.
The untruth of this is manifested by the current of the learned; the practise of all Reformed Chur∣ches, and the confession of their owne writers. Bogerman against Grotius testifyeth from Iunius, & others, what love and good liking the Reformed beare to Councills:Apolog. p. 2. Lib. 4. So D. Morton, citing Calvine. Quod nullum certius sit remedium: there is no better remedie than a Councill.De triplic. Ep. p. 91. q. 3. So Saravia of Beza: De necessitate Synodorum facile Bezae cōsentio: as for the necessity of Sy∣nods, I willinglie agree with Beza. Concilia coguntur vt reformentur Ecclesiae ad formam optimam,De vera Ec∣clesiae refor∣mat. Regula 10. quam Christus & Apostoli, &c. Councills are to be called (saith Zanchie) that Churches may be reformed, both in Discipline, and Ceremonies, to that form, which Christ and his Apostles have left; that all new Doctrine, Worship, and Ceremonies may be done away. To this purpose he citeth that promise or Prophesie from Gods owne mouth, Esa. 1.25. I will purge thy drosse, &c. And so he citeth Ier. 6.16. Stand in the way, &c. Where we see the Reformed make Coun∣cills the meanes, to purge the Churches, and to finde out the good way. It is true we doe not with the Papist, or some of the misled ancients, extoll Councills, or equall them to the Scripture; as Gregorie esteemed of the 4. generall Councills, as of the 4. Euangelists; but we answer, as
Augustine did Maximinus the Heretick,Lib. 3. ad∣versus maxim. willing to heare nothing but Councills. Nec ego Nycenam, nec tu Ariminensem Synodum, &c. Let us not contend by Sy∣nodes, but by the authoritie of Scripture. There have been divers wicked Councills, both un∣der the Law and the Gospell. Foure hundred false Prophets were assembled un∣der Achab, to condemne Micaiah.1 King. 22. The high Priest, and the Pharisies,Ioh. 11.47 gathered a Coun∣cill against Christ. Yee when Councills began to be corrupt. Gregore Nazianzen said:Epist. 25. ad procop. He never did see a good end of any of them. Neither cite we these as Calvine speaketh for us:Instit. lib. 4. c. 9. Quod Concilia minoris facimus, vel quod Concilia metui∣mus: Out of any disesteeme of Councills, or that we feare Councills, but that Councills being subject to err; We beleeve them so farre, as they are ordered and guided. Per lydeum lapidem, & non per lesbiam Regulam humani judicij; (as Zanch. speaketh) by the touch∣stone of the word; & not by the leadin rewle of mans corrupt judgement; and therefore saith Iunius:Animad∣vers. in Bellarm. p. 429. Res Con∣cilijs non debent determinari: Things must not be de∣termined by Councills, without the guidance of the word.
In the next place, the Hierarchie forgetfull of their former challenge, cryeth out on reformers for desiring a Councill; witnesse, D. Bridges his reply, to one desi∣ring tryall, and reformation of things by a Councill: Is not this (saith he) to take away the authoritie of Bishops,Lib. 15. p. 12357. and Archbishops, by whom, as by a compendious way, things may be determined? Te same quarrell picketh D. Whitgift to Mr. Cart∣wright,Tract. 5. c. 3 desiring a Councill: The calling of a Coun∣cill (saith he) is a way full of grievous, and intollerable consequences. The same song doe the Papists sing to all Protestants, desiring a Councill. Iunius citeth Bellarmine thus, upbraiding the Lutherans: efflagitant Lutherani Con∣cilium,Controv. 4. &c. The Lutheranes would gladlie have a Councill; but D. Morton sheweth us how Bellarm. and his followes. Excludunt necessitatem Concilij: they do abandon the necessitie of a Councill. But upon what ground? Vpon the very same ground, in effect with the Hierarchie. Via maxime compendiaria extin∣guendi Haereses, non per Concilia, sed per sedem Apostolicam: The most compendious way, (say they,) to quench He∣resies,Apol. p. 2. Lib. 4. c. 1. is not by Councils; but by the power of the Apostolick Sea, witnesse, Bellarm. & Coster.
To the same effect Perierius: Frustra fit per plura,In Exod. 10 quod fieri potest per pauciora: It is labour lost, to doe a thing by greater paines, when it may be done by lesser: Observe how the Hierarchie and Papacie jump toge∣ther, in the same Positions and grounds; For as D. Morton further witnesseth of the Papacie, that they exclude Councills: Vt cathedrae papalis prerogativam adferant: that they may establish the prerogative of the Popes chayre; the same doth the Hierarchie; wit∣nesse themselves, that they may establish the indispu∣table prerogative of an Archbishop, or Pope Minorite. As in this they are like one to another; so they are both like to the great enemies of State, or Bankrupt Politicians; who least they should be called to an ac∣count, are ever beating on this Matchivillian principle. In statu Monarchico expedit rara esse commitia: In a Monarchicall state, Parliaments should be verie rare; which is both against reason, & the safetie of the state; especially, if the wicked finde place about the throne, whom the power of a Parliament should, and must remove; since this high Court is sett in the midle, betweene the King, and State, yet pertaking of both; that they may redresse the grievances of both; just so, the intrusion, and violent keeping of possession by the Prelacie, cannot endure a Councill.
But to come to the application of the particular; cause them joyne yssew with us, and put the cause upon the tryall of a lawfull Councill; vbi causa cum causa, & res cum re, & ratio cum ratione comparetur: Where cause with cause; and matter with matter; and ground with ground may be compared, and determi∣ned. But in calling of this Councill, the Hierarchie must be content to part with their Romish principle, name∣lie; no Metrapolitan, no Councill. It is D. Bilsons Position in more words delivered, c. 6. p. 453, &c. Saravia, the Prelates Couvert, but like a cake not turned, pleadeth thus for Mammon; that the assemblies of the Presbi∣terians are not Synodes,De triplic. Ep. q. 3. p. 90. but conventicles, because he rea∣deth not of any Synode, without an Archbishop. It is the verie plea of Bellarmine for the Pope: Quomodo convocabuntur Concilia abs{que} vno, in quo omnes, &c? How shall Councills be called without one, in whom all the rest must consist?De Concil. c. 12. Or how can Bishops be assembled without a head? Lib. 4. pag. 114.Si nullus Metrapolitanus in qualibet Provincia; nullus{que} pastor in tota Ecclesia, &c. If there be no Metrapoli∣tane in everie Province, and no universall Pastor in the whole Church, how can a Councill be called, or kept. The argument for the one, is everie way as good as for the other; if a Provinciall, or particular Councill can not be kept without a Metrapolitane; then a generall
can not be kept without a Pope: But the untruth of this Papall and Hierarchicall assertion appeareth many wayes. 1. It is against that place of Scripture, which both they, and we, and all that professe Christ, alledge for the warrantable calling of a Councill:Mat. 18.20 Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I will be in the midst of them. Yea I say unto you;V. 19. if two of you shall agree vpon Earth in any thing, &c. which phrase is taken from that Symphonie, or Harmonie that is in Song; vbi communi consensu, non alicuius imperio:. where it is signified to us, that by the common con∣sent, and not by the imperious edict of any, a Councill is to be gathered; (as one saith verie well): and if by the name of Christ: they understand authoritie, given from Christ; by the verie same the Metrapolitan authoritie is rejected; which is proved (as we have shewed) and confessed by all the ingenuous, to be but a humano institution. Tota Hierarchia instituta est, vt in Ecclesia vnitas,Distinct. 18 & tranquillitas servetur, sayth Duarenus the Civilian, and a great friend to Prelats priviledges: the whole Hierarchy was ordayned, that the unitie, and tranquillitie of the Church might be kept; But what Lord-keepers they have beene, and are to the Church, we have partly shewed you; for we cannot tell you all: But for the point; that they are of mans positive authoritie, let their owne speake; as D. Fyeld, Sutcliv. D. Bilson, &c.
2. Was there any Metrapolitan in that Apostoli∣call Councill, Act. 15? Where if they answer, that the Prelates succeeded the Apostles (as some do) then they crosse their owne confession; that a Metrapolitan is a meer humane institution. But they know well enough, and are forced to confesse; that there was no Metrapolitan for the space of 300. yeares after Christ; and will they say there were no Councils? and if there were, they must be null in their judge∣ment, for want of a Metrapolitan. Fideles per Afiam conveniebant ac nuper natas Doctrinas,Lib. 5. c. 16 &c. the faithfull ones (saith Euseb.) assembled themselves thorow all Asia, rooting out new Doctrines, and all things repug∣nant to the word; in these no Metrapolitan. The same author witnesseth, that Constantine, comming to the Crowne, by a decree, restablished the libertie of calling Synodes, or Christian Societies together; which were formerlie suppressed, by the tyranny of the Dra∣gon. So that ye see the frequencie of Synodes before any Metrapolitan. Yea a Synod was kept at Antioch, as D. Reynolds witnesseth against the minde of a Metrapolitan. 3. What say they to all Synods that have beene kept by Reformed Churches, since the time of reformation? Surely, they dare not say, they are no Synods. Yea they will be founde to be the Synods indeed; For all the Synods kept in Britan by Prelates upon tryall, by the goulden rewle of Gods word, shall prove but Pseudo∣synods;
Or as Nazianzen. speaketh to be : the fixing of evill, not the dissolving of evill. Take for instance (to go no further) that Provinciall Synod, houlden Anno 1603. the first yeare of King Iames; which was all that was houlden from Ao. 1597. which a Learned worthie calleth: Flagellum piorum, & pandoram illam è cuius pixide, &c.Park. de Po∣lic. lib. 5. c. 26. the scourge of the Godly; and the box, out of which a multitude of mis∣chiefes have overflowed the Church of England. But in these Reformed Synods, were there any Pre∣lates? For the closer of this controversie, let a learned Cardinall speake:De concord. cathol. lib. 2. c. 25. Eius authoritas non ita pendet à con∣gregante, &c. The authoritie of a Synod (saith Cusan) dependeth not so on a Metrapolitan, or Pope, that it is null without them; For then the eight gene∣rall Councills had been null, because they were not by a Pope. But what is the reason, the Pope, or Metropolitan pettie Pope will beare such a sway in Councill, or they will have no Councill at all? D. Whittaker giveth Bellarmine the reason: Certum est reum nolle convocare Concilium, à quo judicetur: a Malefactor will never call an Assyze; except he may be judge himself. But as Iunius citeth Augustin; is it any reason, vt vnus judex sit, & accusator? that one should be both judge and accuser? Imo vt quispiam de alio judicare vellet,32. q. & nollet se judicari? yea that he will judge others, and not be judged himself.
Iudge ye then with Luther, cited by Iunius: Expeti∣mus Christianorum liberum Concilium,Controv. 4. &c. We desire a free Councill, as Christians should have; For of their Councills under the Prelates, we may say, as Luther said of the Popes: quod porrigitur panis in mucrone gladij,Lib. de Concil. at propius accedentes manubrio ferimur: They hould us out bread on the point of a sword, but when we come nigh, they beat us with the hilt. Be pleased then to let us have a Councill in the name of Christ; that is, with authoritie from the word, which they reject, (as M. Calvine well observeth,) that ad,Deut. 4.2. Malach. 2.7 Rev. 12, 18 or diminish, from the word; and then we doubt not by the help of God, but the Prelates shall not onely be in danger of a Councill; but they shall be quite extinct by a Councill. For the evidence of this hope, let them but appear to these particulars; 1. What Councill called and guided by the warrant of the word, can chuse, but condemne the unlawfull calling of the Hierarchie, not having one jote of war∣rant from the word; yea directlie condemned by the word; For matter incompatible with the Ministerie; For ground Antichristian authoritie; Conferred onely by our Kings, for want of better information; who are not able, nor any human power, to change the na∣ture of it: and lastly, for manner meerely Popish, and Histrionicall; as we could shew from the Cere∣monies
used, but they are not worth the time. 2. What Councill will approve that feudatarie Leedg-vassalladge of Ministers, with their oath of Ho∣mage, or Hominium, (as some call it;) that is, Man-service? Whereby they intangle,Lib. 1. c. 7. N. 9. Ecclesiae. and tye themselves to Militarie service; Tenentur militari: They are tyed to serve in warre, sayth Spalato. Tollentes libertatem, & numera prophanantes, (sayth that Learned, and much honoured Didoclavius,) undoing the libertie of the Church,Altar. Da∣masc. p. 11. and prophaning the function of the Ministerie. What Councill will approve of their Lordlie and supereminent titles, of Lord, Earle, & Grace, and of the most honourable order of Gartyr? Or will they thinke it right, that they should take place of all the Nobilitie, & some of all the officers of state save the Lord Chan∣celour; as the Archbishop of Yorke; Some take place of the Lord Chancelour too; as the Archbishop of Canterbury. It is worth the observing, when the Bishops were inhibited the Parliament by Edward. 3. that proud Prelate Iohn Straitford, came to the doore, and pressed to be in,Godwin. de Presul. p. 157. affirming that he was the grand PEOR of the Land, and next vnto the Kings person, to have his voyce (and so saith he) I challenge the right of my Church, & entrance into the howse.
Lastly; in this particular of honour, will a Councill thinke it fitte, that the orphanes of the Nobilitie and Gentrie, being feudataries to the Bishops, should as Vassals, do homage or Knights service to them, though they hould other Lands in capite of the Crowne? Our Antiquari sheweth us, how the Earle of Gloster held the Mannor of Tunbridge,Gamden. of the Bishop of Canter∣bury on condition, that he should be the Bishop his Marshall at his instalment.Godwin. So the Earle of Warwick was Marshall at that great and sumptuous instalment of Georg Nevell, Archbishop of Yorke. 3. How can they hould up their face in Councill, to make good that power conferred on them, or abused by them in the high commission. Is it fitte, that Mi∣nisters, by vertue of a secular power, should take upon them, to censure men in the matters of the service of their God; and other points of faith? and not onely so, but also to excommunicate, fine, imprison, break up their doores, and closets; take away their goods, &c. Contrarie to the Law of God; the Lawes of the Land, and Priviledge of the Subject; as we have proved at large? Or would a Councill ever agree, to put two swords into the hands of mad men, or suffer them, to rack the Kings subjects upon that damnable oath of In∣quisition? Yea they infringe the power of the com∣mission itself; by vertue whereoff, as they are to in∣quire for Heresies, & Errors among other things, so are they not to condemne that for Heresie, or Error, which is not determined so to be, by Canonicall Scriptures;
witnesse that act of the 1. Elizabeth, C. 1. 4. What Godly Councill will admitt of their di∣stinctions of degrees of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Priests, and Deacons; not onely contrarie to Gods word, but also rejected by all Orthodox, Ancient, and moderne writers, except a verie few of their owne grain.In 4. pre∣cept. p. 732. Plures gradus seu ordines Ministrorum non le∣gimus in sacris literis, quam quos Apostolus in Epist. ad Ephes. expressit: We read not (saith Zanchie) of more degrees, or orders of Ministers in holy writte, than the Apostle hath expressed in the 4. of Ephes. V. 11. What Councill could endure their Court Canons, and multiplicitie of Popish officers, both in Ecclesiasticall & Lay functions (as they do distinguish:) with the num∣ber, varietie, and iniquitie of their Courts, we meane not to trouble you; since they are to well knowne: onely be pleased to take a vew of that Court of Faults, or Faculties, (as they tearm it,) whereby the Arch∣bishop hath power under his seal from himself, or his commissioner of the said Court, to give, and to graunt Licences, dispensations, & rescripts in all and every cause, wherein the Bishop of Rome did give & graunt the same. And this mischiefe is established also by a law;25. Henr. 8. Rastal. R. 22. but how lawfullie, let Heaven and Earth judge: For by this meanes (as a learned worthie replyeth) we haue the Archbishop surrogated in place of the Pope,Cartw. rep. 1. p. 87. onely the Kings supremacie reserved.
This beastly Romish Court (saith an other Ancient worthie) had its ground from the Canon Law, in which that filthie Marchandise of Lawlesse dispen∣sations is exercised to the undoing of the Church.De Discipl. Fol. 22. Pag. 3.The monition to the Parliament complaineth, (and that justly,) that in this Court, as at Rome, all things are to be soulde. This Romish Mercate (as one saith prettily:) nec modum, nec fundum, nec finem, nec pudorem habet: hath neither measure, nor bottom; nor end, nor shame; For they dispense not onely with humane Laws, but also with divine, as non-residencie, pluralitie, & Symonie, &c. The which dispensations are legum vul∣nera; the wounds of the Lawes; the robbing of purses and the bain of sowles. As for their Officers, we have alreadie laid them out in their colours, onely a word or two more to Church wardens, and Sydmen; because sundry very honest men wrong, both themselves, and others, by this in∣snaring, and inslaving office. They are sworn, not to suffer any man to preach, except he come with the Prelates licence. To present such, as come not duely to devised service, or divine (as they falsly call it;) though there be no more but that Egyptian Garlick, yet that they must not leave to heare a Sermon. They must also present to the Prelates Court, all such as will not kneele at the Sacrament; nor have their Children cros∣sed, and Bishopped; nor their Wives Churched; nor
will not joyne with the Litanie, & unholy Ceremonies; nor will not observe festivall dayes, & other rites; yea if good & holy men be under the unjuste censure of the Prelates, they must barr them from the Sacrament, suf∣fering unworthie wicked men to be admitted to the Sacrament, by the Ministers, at their pleasure; Whom sayth D. Mucket, if they present not to the ordinarie: nefarie sunt periuri, they are wickedlie forsworn; yea further their painfull, and holy Pastors, and teachers,De Polit. p. 344. they must unnaturally, and perfidiously expose, by pre∣sentment to the tyrannye of the Prelates; if they punc∣tually obey not those impure, and plaguie Cannons: and say they could buy out their oath (which is unlaw∣full to doe) yet this is their untoward worke. They are (as we have said) the Counterrfits of Gods true Officers, namely Elders & Deacons, whom they keep out of place, by serving of the tyranny of the Hierarchie, who cannot endure to heare of Gods true Officers indeed: In a word, they Minister matter of filthie Lucre, to the Harpies of the Prelates Courts; yea they greeve and wrong Gods people, and doe the wor∣ser sort no good; we wish for their good, that they might see their service weighed at the beam of the word, (which in deed is, or should be the true scale of a Councill,) and then they would hate their service, & love themselves the worse, yea we are verilie per∣swaded, that never a true honest man would undertake the service, were it not for feare of the Prelates; which strongly argueth, that being an Office in Gods
howse, it is counterfeyt, and stark naught. 6. And lastlie; Dare they bring their Leiturgie and Ceremonies into the true Scale of a Councill: both these and their Patrons shall be found light, as va∣nitie it self. First, for the Leiturgie we have shewed you (though briefly) the palterly pedigree of it; and could (if time would serve) anatomize it intus, & in cute; from the bowell to the skin (as we say;) but that is done in a treatise by it self. What an apish Imitation of the Leviticall Priest is in the Ministers going into the Chancell; praying with his face turned from the people, as though there were some dissention betweene him, and the people? As the Priest under the Law went into the sanctuarie,Levit. 16. Luc. 1. the people being without; so the rubrick prescribeth the Minister, to put a partition betweene him, and the people, where he may as well curse, as blesse; he may speak what he will in a tongue knowne or unknowne, for the people know not: from that same practise Bel∣larmine defendeth prayer in an unknowne tongue.De Verb. Lib. 2. c. 16 As for the Litanie well naturing the name of a laborious service in the Dust and Durt (for so Homer and others useth the name) it is borrowed from the practise of the Heathens,. as Causabon obser∣veth out of Dionysius Habicarnass.Exercit. p. 327. And is in verie
deed nothing, but an impure Masse of conjuring and charming battologies; whereby the name of God is highly prophaned; his howse and worship abu∣sed; Gods people by it abandoned the sanctuarie; and the Prophane love no worship so well as it. Polybius useth a prettie phrase to display the nature of it;  with a multitude of inticeing flattering speeches (to say no worse) to allure the Gods: but not to trouble your ears with the particular blasphemies of it; is it not matter of wonder, that they pray to be delive∣red from lightening, haile, tempest, &c? Yet not one word of that which is prescribed in the Litanie of Edward. V I. namelie to be delivered from the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, which is worse than all the fire and lightning that can be∣fall us. But they know well enough that that prayer stricketh at the root of their being; and therefore they have cutt it of by their expurgatorious Index; and in stead of this, they presse the Ministers to pray for their Lordships, which in effect, is to pray for the esta∣blishing of Antichriste, & keeping Christ still out of his Kingdome. Thence it is that it stiketh on the stommacks of good men, and putteth them divers times to a stand: but compelled prayers (as we speake) doe neither partie good.
Yet for all this Romish stuffe, every Minister is strictly tyed by the Canons, to say or sing all the whole ser∣vice, not omitting any thing, notwithstanding of Ser∣mons, or any other motive to the contrarie, and that upon pain of suspension, excommunication, & deprivation, as he shall double,Canon. 14.38. or triple the offence: so that we see the breaking of the bread of life must give way to the drawing of the waters of Nilus. To come from the inacting of the service, to the rites and ceremonies contayned in the service booke; they are as strictly injoyned upon the same penalties, as the saying of seruice is; witnesse the sayd Canons in that behalf; which is not onely contrarie to the law of God, but also to the lawes of the land, esta∣blishing (as we haue shewed) that seruice booke of Ed∣ward the VI. which expresly thus speaketh, concer∣ning the ceremonies. As for kneeling; the Signe of the crosse; the lifting up of the hand, and smiting of the breast, and gestures of the like nature; it shall be left free to everie one to doe as he list: so that you see by the pressure of these latter Prelates, it is worse with us, then it was in the beginning of reformation. In the proofe of the first Position we haue shewed these ceremonies to be trinkets out of the Popes cookeroome, and haue layd im∣pregnable Positions against them; but that their Im∣pietie, in persecuting for such stuffe; may appeare, (for that is their onely argument,) and that all may see how these things should be liked by a Councill; let us lay
them out yet a litle in their colours, and that as breefly as may be. They are directly against the word of God; against the Positions of the Fathers; the acts of the Councills; the current of the modern Orthodox; the truth of un∣denyable principles; and against the lawes of the land. A touch of each of these, though we might be large, because we desire to keep within bounds. For the first; all addition in Gods worship, as well as taking away, is directly forbidden in Gods word, both in the ould and new Testament; witnesse those places, Deut. 12.32. Rev. 22.18. But these Ceremonies are an addition in Gods worship to the word, as they do not deny. Ergo, they are directly forbidden by the word. Basil. upon the foresaid places of Deut. giveth an ex∣cellent reason of the Major proposition of the argu∣ment:, &c. Infidelitatis argumentum & signum superbiae cer∣tissimum, si quis eorum quae scripta sunt aliquid velit reji∣cere, aut iterim quae non scripta sunt introducere: It is an argument of infidelitie (saith he) & an undoubted evidence of great pride;Serm. de fi∣dei confess. if any man reject any thing that is written; or bring in that which is not written:Defence of the Ceremo∣nies, p. 29. As for D. Morton his destinction of addition corrupting
and perfecting: he hath both the word of the distinction and the illustration of it, by way of simile, from Bel∣larmine,De pontif. Lib. 4. c. 17 in defence of all the rubbish of Rome; to whom they must be behoulding for their answers and arguments (as we have shewed) when they are put to a stand, by force of the truth; but the distinction is corrupt, and taxeth the Scriptures of imperfection, if any thing can be added to the perfecting of them; yea (as one observeth) it is petitio principij, or a begging of the question in hoc ipso contrarium,Tilen. quod di∣vinae legi additur; In the verie same it is against the Word, in that it is added to the Word. Scriptura sacra divinitus perfecta, &c. Eo{que} nec contra ipsam,De pont. lib. 4. c. 17. Not. 10. nec praeter ipsam, &c. The word is divinelie per∣fect; and therefore neither any thing against it, or be∣sides it, may be added, (saith Iunius,) the same we might say of that distinction of essentiall, and acciden∣tall addition; the Pope, and Prelates, will adde to the word, that it may be kept; and God will have nothing added, that it may be kept; are not then they, and their additions Antichristian? As for the Fathers, they make the word the tryall of all traditions. Besides Basil, whom we have quoted, and others; Cyprian is very exact.Epist. ad Pamp. Vnde est ista traditio, &c. whence is that tradition? (saith he) Is it from Christ his Evan∣gelicall authoritie; or the Apostels appointment? Then is it to be done, because God will have that done, which is written, as God said to Iosua: the booke of the
Law will not depart from thy mouth. Where he flatlie condemneth all unwritten traditions. Augustine, speaking of the Indulgencie of God toward his people, under the new Testament.Epist. 118. Levi jugo nos subdidit: he hath putt us under a light yoke (saith he) now if the legall Ceremonies being re∣moved, men might instutute others, then (as the same Father saith:) Tolerabilior esset conditio Iudaeorum, &c.Epist. 119. The state of the Iewes was better then ours; because they were under Gods ordinances, we are under mans presumptions (as he calleth them) the Ceremonies of the Law (as the Learned often observe) were not taken away, that men might substitute others. Nam si ijs su∣latis, &c. If these being taken away (saith D. Whittak.De pontif. q. 7. c. 3.) others might be brought in; where were the benefitt of freedome by Christ? According to that speech: Stand fast therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ hath made vs free;Galat. 1.1. and be not intangled againe with the yoke of bondage. Mr. Calvine calleth the recalling of Ceremonies, not a bringing againe of the vaile, & buriall of Christ: Sed fetida potius stercora, &c. They bring rather in stin∣king dunghils; quibus obruta est sincera fides, & Religio:In Act. 13. by which sincere faith, & Religion, are overlaid; and they who take, or give libertie to use them, (much more they who inforce them,) give more to a Pope then God did graunt to his owne Law; yea the Pre∣lacie take more upon them, then they will graunt to
God; For by their Canons, they strictly enjoyne the punctuall observing of all the Servicebook; with everie rite and Ceremonie therein contayned, and without addition, or diminution, both for matter & form, sub no∣mine poenae, on no small penaltie Canon. 14. Yet they will adde at their pleasure in Gods worship. As for Councills, they argue stronglie against all mens devises in Gods worship, from the negative; namelie, that they are not approved by the word; So the Bracarenses decreed against Milk in the Sacra∣ment; and the Antisidiorenses, against Mulse or Me∣theglin in it; upon this ground; that they had no war∣rant from Christ his institution: Cessat ergo lac, quia evidens exemplum Evangelicae veritatis illud offerri non sinit:Brac. 3. c. 1. Let Milk be no more in the Sacrament, because the instance of that Evangelicall truth will not suffer it. Yea, as the Learned observe, the verie Sacra∣ments should be condemned by the second Com∣mandement,Park. decruce Part. 1. p. 62 under the name Image, if Christ had not instituted them. For the current of the modern Orthodox, we could also be large, but we must give but a taste. Besides Iunius, & others already cited, Beza observeth (as we have formerlie shewed) an Argument a comparatis, from the second of the Colossians. If the rites of the Law, God his owne ordinances, be taken away, be∣cause they were shadowes of Christ to come, what
impudencie is it, to substitute in their place mens su∣perstitions? Mr. Calvine calleth these humane inventions; La∣queos ad strangulandas animas: Snares, to strangle the Sowles of men. Adulterant cultum Dei, & Deum ipsum, qui vnicus legislator est, suo jure spoliant: they corrupt the worship of God, and spoyle God of his right, who is the onely Law-giver. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. s. 1. Besides all this cloud of witnesses against the Cere∣monies; they are opposite also to impregnable Posi∣tions of truth. It standeth not with the nature of true Ceremo∣nies, that these should haue any place in Gods wor∣ship; For a Ceremonie (as the Learned observe, as well Popish as Orthodox) is a sacred action,De cleric. C. 13. or ordi∣nance, having its excellencie (as Bellarm. witnesseth) from no other ground, but in that it is appoynted to the worship of God. He instanceth from kneeling at the Sacrament. To the same effect speaketh Iunius: In jure Politico Reip. sui sunt Imperati, & solennes ritus;De Polit. Mos. C. 7. Ceremoniae vero proprie, non nisi sacrae observationes in cultu divino appellantur: Politick government hath power, to appoint its owne rites, but Ceremonies properlie, are sacred observations in divine worship: Since so it is, what mortall man should dare to take upon him, to appoint Ceremonies, or sacred ordi∣nances in Gods worship.
We wish from our sowles, that men would possesse themselves of that difference betweene Ceremonies, & civill circumstances of order; the want of which obser∣vation breadeth much disorder. 1. Civill circumstances in Gods worship have their ground from nature; as there must be a place to teach in, a cup for the communion; and so of the like; but so have not Ceremonies, but from God his owne In∣stitution. 2. These circumstances of order and Comlinesse may be used in civill, as well as in sacred things; but so may not Ceremonies; witnesse, the Prelates coursing of a Minister, for wipeing his nose on the surplice. A second Position, crossed by the Ceremonies, is this: That all necessarie Ceremonies, under the Gospell; are contayned in the new Testament. The first argument for proofe of this Position may be taken from the nature of a Ceremonie, discovered in the first Position to be a matter of faith; Ergo, it must be contayned in the Gospell. 2. We may prove it by induction.
As Christ instituted the Sacraments; so the Ceremo∣nies in the Sacraments; as breaking of bread, distribution of it; and of the cup (though now removed by that Idolatrous gesture of kneeling:) Et sic de caeteris; and so of the rest. Ergo, &c. If this induction be not good, give us an instance against it, extra propositum. For the truth of this Position, Chemnicius speaketh expresly: Quos ritus Christus addi voluit eosdem insti∣tuit: What Ceremonies Christ would have in the Gos∣pell, he appointed the same. 3. We may prove it also a comparatis, by com∣paring the Gospell with the Law. All necessarie Ceremonies under the Law, were contayned in the Law, Exod. 24, &c. Ergo, all necessarie Ceremonies under the Gospell are contayned in the Gospell; otherwise the Law should be more perfect then the Gospel, which none will affirme. 4. And lastly; we use this argument a distinctis. Either the Gospell must contayne all necessarie Cere∣monies of Gods worship; or Christ hath left to the Churches power, to appoint Ceremonies: But Christ hath left no power to the Churches, to appoint Cere∣monies. Ergo, the Gospell contaynes all necessarie Ceremonies in Gods worship. The proofe of the Mi∣nor is thus: All that Christ hath left to the Churches appointment, is to order things by Christ himself ap∣pointed, 1. Cor. 14.40.
But to appoint new Ceremonies, is not to order things by Christ himself appointed. Ergo, he left it not to the Churches appoint∣ment. For the last particular, that these Ceremonies stand in opposition to the Lawes; it is cleare, as we have shewed from that Leiturgie of Edw. VI. to the which the Law requireth subscription, and the booke leaveth the things arbitrarie. By this which hath been said, it may appeare to your Honours, how the Prelates, and their apurte∣nances, shall never be able to stand in a Councill, which being guided by the word, cannot brooke that which is enmitie to Christ, and the State. In these things we have beene the larger; that all may see how they invade, as Mr. Calvine sayth, the liberties of Christ, bereaving his servants of the same. 2. How their tyrannie (as the same Author saith) exceedeth the Lawes of other tyrans; because they tyrannize over the conscience.
3. To show how by these courses of their tradi∣tions they do not onely transgresse the commandements of God, Math. 15.3. but they make voyd (as the Spirit speaketh) the worship of God, by the commandements of men; namely, in regard of the power of it; and the honour due to it, V. 9. Let the Prelates disesteeme of Gods ordinance witnesse this; not onely in preferring the least, and vilest patch of their Leiturgie, to preaching (as their Canons witnesse;) but also by their phrase of speech in their Canons; where they scarse, or do not at all esteeme preaching to be a part of divine worship; witnesse the 19. Canon, where, in the time of divine service, or preaching (say they) where observe, they make the word divine, a main difference, to distinguish their Leiturgie from preaching: Yea one of their proctors, in plaine tearmes, affirmeth preaching to be no part of divine worship.Howson. ser. in Psal. 118 pag. 78. 4. And lastly; that we may all awake, to be sensible of the fearfull evill that is toward us, except we purge the Lord his howse, and worship of this superstition, and the Patrons of it. Witnesse Esa. 29.14. Therefore behould, I will proceed to doe a marvelous worke among this people; a marvelous worke, and a wonder; For the wisdome of the wise men shall perish; and the vnderstan∣ding of prudent men shall be hid.
Where be pleased to observe the matter of judgement; namelie, the perishing of wisdome & vnderstanding from the wise men; that is from the Governours in Church & common-weal, who should be light to others; and if the light, that is in men be darkenesse, how great is that darkenesse, Math. 6.23. Observe also the manner: it shall be a marvelous worke. And lastly, the degree of it, expressed in the ingemi∣nation, or doubling of the wordes, a marvelous worke; a wonder, as if a man could not wonder enough. Certainely, we are farre overcome in this judgment; we have all knowledge, as the Apostle speaketh; but that wisdome, & prudence, that applicative power, that should actuate, & order this knowledge in the proper Sphere of his activitie, is perished from our wise men. Wisdome is the heart of knowledge; from whose due temperature cometh the bewtie, and strength of a State. Zeal of the Lords honour is as the actuall heat, com∣ming from the heart, inlivening and activating all the members of the body Politick; consuming the super∣fluous humors of benumming, or deading sinne; dispelling the vapours of deluding errors, and abando∣ning all the unnaturall heat of superstition, & Idolatrie: But the want of this working wisdome hath brought us to a Lethargie, or Epilepsie.
All men wonder, and stand amazed at your supine negligence, in hastening to quench the fire, that hath allmost consumed us: They cry out, where are ye? what are ye doing? What is become of that spirit of valor; and true love to the Lords honour, and your Countries deliverance? They that are acquainted with the Councill of God, conceive this to be the cause; that the spirit of wisdome is allmost perished. It is with us, in some measure, as it was with Ephraim: Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment;Hos. 5.11. because he willinglie walked after the Commandement. So because we have willinglie obeyed the Prelates Commandement we are oppressed within, and without; and judgment is as a snare to us; Yea, if these Commandements be not countermanded, the Lord will looke on, till they beate us to powder. there be any spirit therefore of wisdome left in you; stirre up the gift that is in you; And if you meane to live, abandon both them, & their Commandements. And so much for this Mean, of calling of a Councill.
The 4. Mean. NOW we come to the 4. Mean: The case may so stand, that a generall Councill cannot be had; as Beza writeth to Caesar, or Charles the 5. It were a happie thing by a Councill, to reform what is amisse, and so to pacifie God; but as the same Author; If thorow the Iniquitie of time, and height of disorder, it be not possible to have a Councill; yet reformation must not cease; For in all the reformations of the reformed Churches, we doe not read, that they had any Nationall Councill, till they had cashiered the Hierar∣chie, the verie bain of Councils, as we could show by divers instances in our owne Iland, and other where; but we cannot enlarge everie thing. The Mean then of removall is to gather your selves together in serious humiliation,Zephan. 2.2 & reformation, before the Lord, in knitting your hearts together, in the band of love; everie one lending his helping hand (accor∣ding to his place) to the breaking downe of Babell. We meane not to insist in the discoverie of this powerfull prevayling duetie of Humiliation; because the Theorie hath been excellently taught, & writtē off, by our Learned divines; and some of Gods people have plyed the practise of it; We will onely there∣fore give a touch of the generall, with some briefe direction for our particular.
As holy, and valiant Ezra, with his people, being in danger of the enemie, used this, as a speciall remedie;Ezra 8.21, &c. namelie, to humble themselves before God; to seeke a right way for themselves; their Children, and Substance; So it standeth us upon it, to doe for us, and ours, and what we have; For all is like to be lost; but if in seeking of the Lord, we would have Ezra his successe,V. 23. of whom the Lord was intreated; we must with Iosua re∣move that thing of the curse; namelie, the Prelacie from having any power over it; for wofull experience hath taught us, that the Prelates finger is like the Har∣pie his claw, it spoyleth every thing, it cometh in. An able Pastor, some two yeares, gone in august, in a generall fast in London, pleading for reformation, un∣der Iosua his removall of the excommunicate thing;Ios. 7.11. tould us in plain tearmes, that the main thing was that dam∣nable Hierarchie; who made no matter of the sinking of the Church, and State; so they might swimme in their honours, & pleasures. As Iehosophat was sharplie rebuked, and much crossed, for helping of the wicked;2 Chron. 19 2. So in having them to be helpers or ringleaders in this duetie, is to bring a curse, and not a blessing upon it. How can they doe good in humiliation, that are enemies, both to it and reformation? Witnesse, their persecuting of Gods people, for gathering themselves together; Or as an other Prophet hath it; for speaking one to an other;Malac 3, 16 that is, joyning their strength together, to prevayle with
the Lord; which is a practise warranted from the word, the practise of the Saints, and the custom of the Churches; as is fully proved in a particular Treatise. In the reformation of the State of Scotland, the Nobles, and others of the congregation, were put to great straits, by the overtopping power of Queene Mother, and her French forces; but having with them a mightie man of God; who could stand up in the gappe, and tell the Nobles, and other of their particu∣lars, in the controversie with God; every man humbled & reformed himself, so that the Lord was intreated, and at length they were rid of the Prelacie, and all their excommunicate things; yea great feare fell upon the Queene, & Prelates, and all their Popish forces, by the frequent, and fervent humiliations of Gods people; in so much, that the Queen confessed, that she feared more the prayer & fasting of Mr. Knox, & his assistants; than an armie of 20000. men. We have heard, that some 7. yeares ago, two faith∣full Ministers were committed to a strong castle, upon a rock, where their fervencie was such with God, that the Captains ladie (being a Papist) sewed for their en∣largemēt; for she said she was affrayd, they should shake the foundation of the Castle, by their prayers, our God is the verie same. O! that we had but such hearts. We are perswaded, that if your Honours would but clear this service of the Leprosie of the Prelates, and
cause Ministers and people go roundly to work, char∣ging the Ministery, as they would answer it before the Lord, to deale plainelie in this particular of the Prelacie, and with self-reformation to strike neither at great nor small so much as at that; The Pre∣lates hearts would faile them, their knees should smite one against an other; and as the sound of Rams horns shooke the walls of Ierico; so this one peece of hu∣miliation, being of a right bore, and well plyed, would shake the Prelacie all in peeces; yea by this meanes some of them happily might give over their hould, and make their peace with God. But Gods people, with all, must labour to be of one minde, and of one heart; and by entering cove∣nant with God, against those his enimies, and all that is enmitie to God, resolve to hould them at staves end, till God give the victorie.
The 5. Mean. THe 5. convenient Mean, to take them off will be the removall of their surfitting, & sowle-starving Meanes, which maketh them adventer upon their owne bain, and maketh them the bain of the nation. One of the ancients discovereth well, the cause of the break-neck-haste to be Bishops. Propter dapes, vesti∣tum, Comitatum, &c. Cupiunt esse Episcopi, & Ec∣clesiarum Prelati; vt Ecclesiae Dei magis praesint, quam pro∣sint: For delicious faire, gorgeous apparell, and pom∣pous train,Arnulph. p. 7. they seeke to be Bishops, and Prelates over Churches, that they may rather rule over the Church than benifite the Church. As the Devill said of Iob calumniously: Doth he feare God for nothing? So it may be truely said of the Prelates, doe they serve the man of sinne for nothing? The flesh pots of Egypt, maketh them such devouted enemies to the government of the spirit. We have shewed from the penne of one of their owne howse, how their great revennews have undone King, States, & Religion: Yea we have for this the Astipulation of Romes Champion-Cardinall; name∣lie Bellarmine; who pleading for Constantines sup∣posed donation of the Lateran Palace, and other emoluments; confesseth, that the spirituall wealth
decreased as the temporall wealth, increased lib. 2. c. 17. de Pontif. As by the Munificence of Princes, this poyson was poured into the Church; So from the ac∣cumulative bountie of other Princes, the Ambition and Avarice of Prelates, grew intollerable, & insatiable, till at length superstition overtopt Religion; and a Lording Tyrannie suppressed the power of the Mi∣nisterie, and vassalled temporall authoritie. The cutting of the large Trains of their Bishopricks out of other mens cloath, maketh all the nations where they raigne, to go tattered and torn, both in sowle, and state; Yea, and some they make to go stark naked. It is well observed by one, that if Henrie the VIII. had taken the Bishopricks all in peeces, after the sup∣pression of the Abbies; and made everie mans bur∣then proportionable to his portage, it had beene more honourable to the Ministrie, and more profitable to the State; But leaving them laden with to much tem∣porall honour, and revenew; as men overgrowen with flesh and fatte, they become unweeldie, dishonou∣rable, and unsupportable burthens to the State. Is it fitte, that one should have the provender of so many labouring oxen, for lying like a dogge in the manger, hindering the Pastor, to feed, and the hunger-starved Sowles to eate? Yea, they musle up the mouthes of the oxen, and ty up the tongues of the faithfull la∣bourers,
both from treading out the corne, and eating of the corne. Is it fitte, or possible, that one man should rule over so many places, so many miles distant from his person; as though he were a Metaphisicall entitie, or of such an infinite being, that he had spirit enough for them all: But what man is sufficient for one flock? For a speedie redresse then of those evills, we in∣treat your Honours, to remove this fewell, and the fire shall cease; take away the Carion, and the Kites will be gone. We need not tell you againe, what neede the State hath of these Meanes; and how well they might be imployed; onely this, we are bould to commend unto you, that as our nation (to our shame) is growen the Ape, and Monster of all strange fashions; So if you will bring the Prelates in such a cutt, that their cloaths may sitte closse to their bodyes; It will be the onely best fashion, that ever came into the Land. Yea so that sinne of strange fashions should fall with others.
The 6. Mean. THe 6. and last Mean of removall, is the conti∣nuance of a Parliament, till the tenets of the Hierarchie be tryed, by God, and the Countrie; that is, by the Lawes of God, and the Land. The Kings royall word; the confirmation of the Lawes, and giving of subsidies, imply a necessity of redresse of grievances; which cannot stand with the dissolving of a Parliament, till reformation be effected; but if the common adversaries should inforce a disso∣lution, because all reformation (if they be well sear∣ched) intrencheth upon them; Can it stand with the wisdome, valour, and fidelitie, of you, the great Maisters of State, to quite the ship, upon the tempestuous hard-blowing of a Babilonish Euroclydon? No sure; for as Paule said to the Centurion, and the Souldiers, Except ye abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved;Act. 27.32. So except ye keep the ship, till ye have beaten the Dunkirkers of State; neither King, you nor we can be saved. Your Honours know, that everie dissolution of a Parliament, without reall reformation, is against right, reason, & record. Is it not the right of the State, to be disburdened of Caterpillers, moathes, & Canker-wormes; and of such Lions, & Beares, as devour Religion, & State-Policie? What reason is it, that the State assembled from all the parts of the Kingdome, should waste time
and meanes; and when they pitch upon the point, they should be blowen up with the Romish breath of the enimie? so that, as Ioab said to David, concerning Absolon: Let them live, and if we all die, it matters not. Lastly; for Recorde, there is an ancient one, the sight whereof your Honours may command, though we cannot. The Tenour whereoff is this, that this Court should continue sitting so long, as there were any matters belonging to this high Court to be deter∣mined; and for the more exact effecting of this; it was openlie published by proclamation; some conve∣nient time before their rising; that the subjects should appeare, if they had any more matter of grievance, determinable in that Court. This was confirmed (as we are informed) by William the Conquerour, notwithstanding that he came to the Crowne by the sword. Then stand your ground, and quite your selves like men in this matter of refor∣mation; wherein (as we have shewed) you must be∣ginne at the head, or ye cannot prosper. As we may say with David, there is but a litle between our life & death; so it shall become you with the same Prophet to make haste,Ps 19.60 and not to delay the keeping of Gods Commandement in this particular. As the same Prophet vowed that he would not come into the Ta∣bernacle of his howse; nor go vp to his bed; that is, he would give himself no rest, or take no other thing to
his thought; till he had found out a place for the Lord; So should ye not take any privacie, so much to your thoughts, at home, or abroad, in your bed, or in the fieldes, as the making way for the Lords dwelling a∣mong vs; which cannot be done but by the removall of his enimies. We have made bould to be the larger, because the matter is weightie, & we desired to prove as punctual∣lie as we could. We might have beene larger, if the time and State would have permitted. But we know your Honours are perswaded of these things: (or as Paule said to Agrippa: we know you beleeve.) The pondering and maintenance whereof we humblie intreat at your hands. We doe acknowledge that it is an inveterate evill, and by custome and continuance hath much prevailed, as tyrannous Lawes use to doe Yea like the Idoll of St. Rumball,See the Em∣blemes in the Perambul. of Kent. p. 232. Edit. 1596 with their ginnes & pinnes they have made it so heavie, that mē thinke it not poy∣sable, with all the strength of the State. But pull out their shiftie pinne of pompe, and revenews, and then they are easilie removed from their place. Si nullum tempus occurrit Regi: If there be no prescription to the King. It standeth with lesser reason, that any prescrip∣tion of time should prejudice the right of the King of Heaven. It is most true, ardua prima via est, &c. the entrance will be somewhat hard, but the beginning is more then half. The way is verie steepe: but the
glorie of the action, is of force enough to effect it. Remember that gracious, and incourageing speech of God, concerning Zerubabels finishing of that great work:Zach. 4.7. who art thou, O! great mountaine, before Zerubabell; thou shalt become a plaine, and he shall bring forth the head∣stone thereof, with shouting and crying, grace, grace, vnto it.V. 5. If your hands beginne it (as it followeth there) your hands shall finish it; And they shall know, that the Lord of Hoasts hath sent you. But what need all those arguments, let this one plead for all: aut hoc, aut nihil: either this, or nothing. The neglect of this one thing together with that main mean of true humiliation, maketh us more and more adoe; for as it weakeneth us, and strengtheneth the enemie; so it enarmeth the Lord in zeal daylie, to give us more and more matter of humiliation; wit∣nesse, his heavie hand in sinking that hopefull plant, the Prince of Bohemia, just at that time when this worke was a finishing. As all the enemies of Sion will rejoyce at it; so it is more matter of mourning to us, than we are aware off; yea (it may be) we may mourne more for it many yeares hence. Alase! why was he smitten but for our sinnes? which blasteth in the ve∣rie bud all the hopes of Sions deliverance. The Lord smite the hearts of his Princelie parents; our Royall Soveraigne; of you, the State representative, and the hearts of us all, to lay it to heart, as we should; for if we make not a right use of it, he hath a heavier rod for all and everie one of us; he will never leave smiting, till we smite that which smiteth at his Honour; If we love
sinne better then our first born, he will not only smite our first born, (that is our darling, whatsoever it be,) but he will at length consume us. With heavie hearts, and mournfull eyes, we speake it; The like ominous thing hath not befallen our King and State, since the much like lamentable casting away of the two Sonnes, and one Daughter, of Henry the first; whose ship, by the carelesnes of the shipper, was splitt upon a rock; where of 150 persons, one one∣ly was saved, by laying hould on the mast, and was brought to Land the next day after. This losse proved after, the ground of great trouble, to the State; of the demolishing of many faire howses, and noble families, and of the effusion of rivers of blood. The Popes (or Prelates) Penmen, would make the Kings harshnesse to the Clergie, a speciall cause of this; but our Histories witnesse, that he suffered more of the Hierarchie, than was fitting for a King; witnesse that monstrous proud affront offered him by that tottering Prelate, Rudolph of Canterburie, in for∣bidding the Kings mariage, with the Duke of Lorains Daughter, because another than he was to joyne them. Yea, further at Barkley, at the Queenes coronation, he malapertly asked the King, who sett the Crowne upon his head; The King re∣plyed: he remembred not well; neither was it materiall. The Prelate (in a great rage) tould
him, that whosoever did it, he had done more then could be justified; and therefore (said he) to the King: You shall either leave off the Crowne, or I shall leave off saying of Masse. The King, without change of counte∣nance, said no more, but if I have it not by right, doe with it as you please; whereupon he stept toward the King, & began to unty the button, to take the Crowne off the Kings head; but the Nobilitie, and others waxing wrath,Antiquit. at Britannic. p. 124. at the impudencie of that saucie shave∣ling, caused him, by crying out on him, to leave off his attempt with shame enough. Is it not a wonder, that Kings & Queens should either affect, or endure such a viperous generation? Some would make us beleeve, that the King (being struck with some panick terrors) repented his rough usage of that surly crew; but we are of that minde, that Kings, Queenes, & others, have greater cause to repent that they either maintaine them, or have any thing to doe with them at all. For so long as they are the unhappie husbandmen of the vineyard, there is not a slip of any good like to grow in it; but either they spoyle it, or the Lord plucketh it up, that it may not be spoyled; witnesse (besides other instances) the present dolefull instance of our loosing the rarest Iewell of his age. As we all desire in the band of duetie, and the bowels of compassion, to condole in soule, with that mournfull King and Queene; so let us all desire the Lord, to put it into their & our hearts, to joyne reformation with humiliation; and that in particular they may hate this Hierarchie, and their infectious Leiturgie, with a perfect hatred, for they shall never prosper by corre∣spondencie with them.
As for the Kings admirable deliverance, we may say, though the one hand of the Lord was over him, yet the other was vnder him: And we wish his song may be of mercie, and of judgment; and that he may pro∣claime to all the world, by amendment, that his greatest losse hath proved his greatest gaine. To make an end of our present Subject. We wish your Honours might prevaile with the Prelates by faire meanes, to cast off that overcharging calling. If they would goe by president that is not wanting: Gregorie Nazianzen rejected this calling to stay conten∣tion. Here in England Iohn of Beverley,Anno 722. Schoole∣maister to Bead forsooke his Prelacie, for the conten∣tion raised by the monkes and others about the Cere∣monies, and betooke himself to Beverley, where hee preached the word constantlie, till his death, and thus hee became a Bishop indeed. If they object that these men forsooke their places occasionallie upon the cor∣ruptions of contentious people, & not for the unlaw∣fullnes of their calling: we answer first, that by reason of the Popish Ceremonies, and their tyrannous go∣vernment, there is now as much mischiefe & conten∣tion, as was then: And who is in the fault, but they that doe, and presse such things, which if they would re∣linquish, these things should cease. But to answer more directlie, let them take Hierax, for a president, without exception. Who forsooke the Prelacie (as Isidore witnesseth) meerelie for the vnlawfullnes of the calling.Epist. 223. Which calling was not then come to that height of unlawfullnes by many degrees that now it is: If they will not thus be persuaded, from the practize of
the living, we could by relation bring them evidence from the dead Monachus electus Episcopus, &c. a certain Monke being chosen Bishop, refused the burthen, who after his death (as they say) appeared to his friend spea∣king to him thus:Caesar. Flisterb. Il∣lustr. miracl. L. 2. c. 29. si Episcopus fuissē periissem: if I had beē a Bishop saith he I had been damned; but if they will not beleve the living word; if one should rise from the dead they would not beleve him. We feare they are like pleuritickes patients that cannot spitt, whom nothing but inscision will cure (we meane of their callinges, not of their per∣sons,) to whom we have no quarrell, but wish them better than they either wish to us, or to themselves. One of their desperate mounte-banks out of the pulpitt could finde no cure for us, (their supposed enimies) but pric∣king in the bladder: but we have not so learned Christ. To conclude, we desire to say no more to your Honours but up & do it: for the Lord hath bidden you. Your priviledges both from divine & humane lawes are both impregnable and irresistable: then give us leave to desire your Honours to doe no more thā Heaven & Earth; King, Church, & State; you & yours require at your hands. So re∣mēbring yet once more that high Commission & safe conduct of your God, with which in al dutie we con∣clude:Esa. 41.13. The Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying vnto thee, feare not; I will help thee. Magnum iter ascendis, sed dat tibi gloria vires. Non est è terris mollis ad Astravia. High must you soare, but glory giv's thee wings. No low attempt a starr-like glorie brings. FINIS. KInde Reader, beare with the Literall Faults; want of due points, or accents; and some Sections not well devided; whereof we could give you divers causes.
