16830 99844476 9292
THE KINGS DECLA∣RATIONS VPON HIS E∣dicts for Combats, Importing the confir∣mation and enlarging of the same. Published in a Parliament holden in Paris, the 18. day of March. 1613. Herevnto is also adioyned the said Kings Edict, Importing an order for apparell, therein prohibiting all his Subiects from vsing vpon the same, any Gold or siluer, either fine or counter∣feit; all Embroderie, and all Lace of Millan, or of Millan fashion: either to make any guilt workes in their houses, vnder the penalties therein contained. PVBLISHED IN A PARLIAMENT holden in Paris the 2. of Aprill. 1613. Hereunto is also annexed, A Letter from the Lord Rosny, Trea∣surer of France, to the Queene Regent. Faithfully translated into English by E. A. LONDON Printed by Tho: Creed for William Wright, and are to be sold at his shop on Snowe-hill, at the signe of the Harrow neere Holborne Conduit. 1613.
TO ALL WOR∣THIE AND GOOD LAW-MA∣makers, Rulers, Iudges, Obseruers, Pleaders, and keepers in generall, past, present, and to come, gree∣ting; vnder fauour, hereby not to offend any, but euer to respect and honour all of them, as most especiall Instruments in any Common∣wealth vnder God. HErein may Fully, Effectually, and plainly appeare, the iust and true intent of LEWES, the (Now French King,) in the behalfe, and for the generall good of his Common-wealth, and all his loyall and true harted Subiects therein: Whereby he earnestly, with a full and well inten∣ded Resolution, doth desire, aime at, and intend, the hap∣pie & most flourishing Estate of that most Christion King∣dome, and well-gouerned people: To the great comfort of them in generall, and assured hope of his most happie Raigne ouer them. To his timely (Infant beginning, Honour;) by intending of their Eternall benefites: For which cause, let vs looke home with a speciall eye, vnto the well & due intended Reformation and Execution of these Lawes and Edicts, lately made in Paris, by their hopefull King, That hath (as you may hereafter see) not onely renued diuers olde Lawes and Edicts concerning Combats, and other lawes, with speciall remedie for offenders therein: But al∣so hath inlarged and declared the same in Parliament, the 18. day of March last. Wherein hee hath also set downe and published for generall good, the very Law of Lawes, or absolute cause and directest meanes of true continuance, and due performance and keeping of these, or other lawes fit for any worthy Prince in any Common-wealth, made for
gene∣rall good, to be performed and kept according to their true intents, which is performed in this King, Queene Re∣gent, &c. Assembled in Parliament, fully, freely, firmely, and effectually set downe and made knowne within all that kingdome, to all persons, that they shall be duly iust∣ly, absolutely and effectually performed and kept, by all persons whatsoeuer within their iurisdictions, without ex∣ceptation of any person, For byrth, kindred, affiance, or any other cause whatsoeuer, wherein he also taketh away all hopes of graunts, fauours, pardons, remissions, or any meanes whatsoeuer. To be discharges to any of the Trans∣gressors of the said Lawes; So that those wilfull persons that will presume notwithstanding those good lawes, with so due and effectuall declaration thereof, are well worthie (in my opinion) by the lawes of God and man, for their great presumption therein, to vndergoe and endure the penalties in those, or any other good Lawes contained. These are true, iust, and direct meanes, to shew that God gaue not vnto men lawes in vaine, but that if they would presume to breake or offend against those good lawes by him or his Deputies in any Common-wealth made and ordained, That then those persons so offending, should suffer or forfeit, according to the true intent and meaning of those good lawes, what, when, or wheresoeuer, that without any manner of hope of fauour (to imbolden them therein) they might make and be examples to o∣ther to beware to sinne, or offend any iust lawes contrarie to their true intents, for which they weare and are made and ought to be duly and truly performed and kept, for the vpholding of peace, plentie and vertuous actions in generall: And the auoyding and beating downe of sinne and vice in generall, according to the diuine founding, and true intent of good lawes in generall, which God grant may hereafter be well established, redressed, renewed, de∣clared, performed and kept, within these lands: To the ho∣nour and glorie of God, The honourable and perpetuall memorie of our King, The euerlasting memorie of all the
good instruments therein. The beating downe sinne, the rewarding of vertue, the speedie doing of true iustice be∣tweene partie, and partie, the most good of this great and flourishing Cōmon-wealth, And happy comfort of all his Maiesties true hearted subiects therein in generall. Blame me not in being long herein, for in some lawfull, and some law lesse proceedings, which some too many, too well knoweth, in many causes, is to great length: All which, I will leaue nowe to touch: And so proceede to the o∣ther Lawes and Edicts lately made in Paris, herein men∣tioned against the generall wearing of gold and siluer lace, and diuers other sortes of gilt workes, &c. With many other things which they haue found as harmefull weedes or instruments of pride, most idle and vnfitting to be suf∣fered longer amongst them, to hurt and abuse their peo∣ple and Common-wealth. And I trust in Cod our worthie King and his honorable priuie Councell, with the Lords, Bishops, and Iudges, and other good members of this Common-wealth; will (in due time) of themselues, and by good example from other Princes, make, amend, re∣new, declare, and publish, (to a vertuous end) our good and holesome lawes in this Common-wealth, whereby to banish and beate downe (as in their good discretions shall eeme best) all, and all manner of vanities, vices, idle toyes and abuses in generall, according to the true intent and meaning of our good lawes in generall, the rather for that e seldome finde loue, Charitie, vertue, and honest dea∣ing, Now in that measure vnder many of those superflu∣ous garnishes of apparell, as formerly was ordinarily to be ound vnder a Frise Ierkin, or other abilliments sutable. So that I wish there were vpon many (seeming) Gentle∣men in these our daies lesse vitious cost, & in them more ause of truely vertuous, Honour, and Worship, which in word would become them better, and be a good meanes  cast off pride, whereby vertue might increase, (which ride keepes lowe,) and to beate downe vice which it ex∣lts, to the generall good of all these kingdomes, ouer
which it hath pleased God by his mercie and grace many dangers past) to make his Deputie & Seruant, our King and gouernour, and we to be his faithful loyall Subiects duely to obey him, which I desire m long continue, to Gods will and pleasure, and the co of all his faithfull subiects soules, so to liue here, as to chase with Gods mercie in their departing hence, eternall. Farewell.
THE KINGS DE∣CLARATIONS VPON HIS E∣dicts for Combats; As also an order for Ap∣parell: Therein prohibiting all his Subiects from vsing vpon the same, any Golde or Siluer, either Fine, or coun∣terfeit; All Embrodery, and all Lace of Millan, or of Millan Fashion: Either to make any Guilt∣workes in their houses, vnder the penalties therin contained. Published in a Parliament holden at Paris the 2. of Aprill. 1613. The Kings declaration vpon his prohibition of Combats. LEWES, by the grace of God, King of France and Nauarre; To all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting: With extreame sorrow and griefe doe we daily see our Edicts and Drdinan∣ces, concerning Quarrells, Combats of méetings, and others, so slenderly obserued and kept, contrary to the holy intents of our late King: our most honored Lord and Fa∣ther, [who God pardon] and ours; That our Subiects doe beare themselues in a maner, in as great licentiousnes in matter of Quarrels, Combats, Chalenges, Enquiries, and méetings, as aforetime: which yet would procéed fur∣ther
to the contempt and most grieuous preiudice of our authoritie, and grow to a meer and publique disobedience, were it not speedily and seriously preuented. In this regard, Wée are resolued with the good aduise, and discréet Counsell of the Queene Regent, our most hono∣red Lady and Mother, in such sort to prouide, that cutting vp this mischiefe in the very roote▪ our Subiects may reape the fruit which we desire, and our Conscience rest dischar∣ged. But as wée cannot bring it to passe with greater foresight and better order then the same which our said late Lord and Father, by his Edicts of the yeares 1602. and 1609. had enacted and ordained, and the same which since (after his imitation, and for the effecting of his will and re∣solutions) we haue determined, as well by our Letters of Declaration, of the 4. of October, 1610. as of the first of July, 1611. Wee are now onely to prouide, by confir∣ming of them, for a more seuere and assured punishment of the Repugnances, and disobediences there against com∣mitted: Also to cut off all sorts of Excuses, Recommen∣dations, Supports, and Fauours, which not without great griese of conscience, we acknowledge to haue bene sought out, to delude the iust chastisements of those, who vnto this day (falling into such offences) haue not bene pu∣nished as they ought. In these considerations, hauing caused very diligently and carefully to peruse in our Counsel, The Queene Regent, our most honored Lady and Mother being present, with the assistance of the Princes of our blood, other Princes, and the Officers of our Crowne, with sundrie others, the most notable of our Councell about vs, all the said Edicts and Declarations, as well of our said Lorde and father, of the moneth of Aprill, 1602. June, 1609. and our Declara∣tions confirmatiue of the same, of the said fourth of Octo∣ber, 1610. and of the first of July, 161. Wée haue againe saide, Decréed, and Declared, and doe Say, Decrée, and de∣clare by these presents, Signed with our hand, that they all shall take place; That to that end it shalbe againe read
and published in our Courts of Parliament, and through∣out all our iurisdictions within the extent and resort of the same, yea euen within our Court and traine: So as here∣after none of our Subiects of whatsoeuer state, condition or recommendation soeuer they be, may hope by vs, as likewise we neither will nor meane that they shall by o∣thers, to be dispensed withall, or discharched from the en∣tire and absolute execution of our said Edicts, and decla∣rations: As to the end to take away the meanes, and to put them out of all hope, to obtaine at our hands any thing that may be contradictorie to the same. We for our entire discharge before God and man, and that the dis∣charge of the said Quéene Regent our mother, and for the common acquite of our consciences: doe declare with a firme and irreuocable resolution: That we will, and doe entend hereafter, to maintaine and preserue the said Edicts and declarations in their full force for euery man, with∣out exception or acception of any person, merite, or other fauourable consideration whatsoeuer, so to cause them to be kept, procéed and grow to their full effect according to their forme and Tenure, throughout the Extent of our Realmes, Countreyes, and Landes of our Obedience, without swaruing hereafter, or for our parts dooing any thing to contrary the same: neither to permit or suffer it to be disobeyed, contradicted, or any thing to be attempted, directly or indirectly, vpon any cause or pretence, or by any person whosoeuer. This with our resolution and deter∣mination, we will, and ordain to be knowne to all the said Princes of our Blood, other Princes, Officrs of our Crowne, of our courts of Parliament, and other our Offi∣cers, seruants, and subiects, and that wee neither will nor purpose hereafter, to giue or graunt, or cause to be dispat∣ched, deliuered, or recorded, any fauours, pardons, aboliti∣ons, remissions, or whatsoeuer discharges to any the trans∣gressors, or disobeyers of the said Edicts and declarations, to the end that all men may be out of hope to obtaine them of vs: and that none presume to be so holde as to require
vs thereof, in respect of any néerenes in Blood. Obligation, or other Recommendation and fauourable consideration, that he may pretend to haue. Which we haue at this pre∣sent forbidden them, and doe forbid them, that they shall neither pray, interpose, intreat, or become mediators and intercessors for this, to our selues, or to our saide Ladie and Mother; vnder paine of incurring our indignation. Likewise most expressely forbidding them) to receiue or conceale in their houses, or in any other place, any the trās∣gressors, or to yéeld them any Retreat, support, or assistance whatsoeuer▪ But rather to the contrary, we enioyne them (vpon the like penalties) to accuse & bewray them, but espe∣cially, to deliuer them into the hands of Justice, if by the of∣ficers they be so required. Also, to minister all aide, force, and assistance to that Effect, if they be in place where they may doe it. Also that we may the more aduance and make easie the effect of the said Edicts, in the course and execution of that which our said Lord and Father did parcicularly or∣daine by that of the moneth of Iune, 1609. We or∣daine, that such as shall haue receiued any hurt, shall doe their endeuours, within one moneth after the saide hurt receiued, to frame their complaint, and to prouide them∣selues for the reparation of the same, before our déere and welbeloued Couzins, the Constable and Marshalles of France, or other the Judges to that purpose ordained, and established by the saide Edict. Otherwise, the time of the moneth ouerpassed, the saide parties cannot be tryed by them, but shalbe bound to prouide themselues, and to vn∣dergoe the iurisdiction for the said offences. Also, in regard of that which may after ensue in conse∣quence of the same, before the Ordinary Judges, and by Appeals into our courts of Parliament. Also, in respect of the parties that may be pretended to haue done the Of∣fence, If after due calling and summons, in vertue of the Oidinance of the saide Judges, established by the said E∣dict twise pronounced, they make default, they shall haue iudgement according to the extremity of the said Edict.
And shall likewise be bound to prouide themselues, and to vndergoe the iurisdiction for the Offence and Quarrell, and for all that shall thereof depend, in our saide Ordinary Courts of Justice, and Courts of Parliament, in euery of them, accordingly as it shall appertaine: so as the said Jud∣ges ordained by the said Edict, shall take no further notice thereof, which as well in the one, as in the other cases, wée haue euen at this time, for that cause forbidden and prohi∣bited, and doe forbid and prohibite, in paine of Nullitie of all that may by them be committed or done to the contra∣rie. And the saide knowledge is attributed, and wée doe at∣tribute it to our said Ordinary Judges, and by Appeale, to our saide Courts of Parliament, except in such cases, as may fall out in the same Townes or Cities, where our Courts are established: Of the which our meaning is, that they shall directly take notice. Most expressely enioyning them to proceede in one or other of the said Courts, as is a∣foresaide, by the course, and with the seueritie of our Ordi∣nances, and therin to execute Justice, without the support or acception of any person whatsoeuer. Also to our Attur∣nies general, and their substitutes, in the said ordinary Ju∣risdictions to assist them, and by the said substitutes, to cer∣tifie our Courts of their diligence, so spéedily as they may, according to the distances of the places, & generally from 2. moneths to 3. moneths, to aduertise them of all that shall passe in this respect throughout the extent of their charge: And this vpon the Declarations that shall be made by the Judges ordained by the said Edict, of the yeare 1609. who shall be bound, as we doe also now expresly enioyne them to the said substitutes, in the iurisdictiōs that shall lie neérest to the place of their ahead: the Abstract copie of such records as they are to make of their Judgements, importing how they haue Declared to the parties, that they are no longer their Judges. Wée will also, doe Decree, and Declare them to bee vnworthie, and incapable to be Admitted in their complaints, and to be tried before our said Couzens,
Gouernours, or Lieutenants generall, for quarrells, iniu∣ries, or offences, or other matter, cōcerning the said Edicts: But all such shall be presented and tryed in our said ordi∣nay Seaz of Judgement, or courts of Parliament, in like forme as Offenders aforesaid, who before they haue sought remedies by the wayes aforesaid, shall either by chalenges, or in open Act, maintaine their Quarrels & controuersies. And moreouer shall, euen as the aforesaid offenders, be de∣priued of their Pentions, if they haue any, and of all Offi∣ces, Charges, or Estates whatsoeuer: & besides, to be con∣demned by our said ordinary Judges, and courts of Parlia∣ment, to whome the knowledge thereof is (as is aforesaid) attributed, according to the rigor of our said Edicts & Ordi∣nances, wherein they shal procéed with all possible diligence. And the rather to take from them all occasiōs of default or delay, our intent is, that all the charges of Justice shall be leauyed of the goods of the said offenders and transgressors. We therfore doe command our beloued, and trusty Coun∣cellors, the People holding our courts of Parliament, that these presents, together with the former Edicts & declarati∣ons, they cause to read, publish, and enroull, that they kéep, holde, maintaine, & obserue them, and that they cause them to be holden, maintained, & obserued inuiolably throghout the ertent of their Resort wt out contradiction: neither that they suffer any attempt or resistance, directly or indirectly: for any cause or pretence, or by any person whosoeuer: ceasing, and incontinently causing to cease, repaire, and restore all things to the contrary heereof. For such is our pleasure. In witnes whereof, we haue caused our seale to be affixed to these presents. Giuen at Paris, the 28. of Ianuary, in the yeare of grace, 1613. and of our Raigne, the third: Signed, LEWIS. And vpon the fould, By the King in his Councell The Queene Regent his Mother being present. DE LOMENIE. And sealed vpon a double Labell, with the great seale, in yealow Waxe.
LEWES by the grace of God, king of France and of Nauarre. To our beloued and trustie Councellors, the people holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, Gréeting. By our Letters Patents of declaration of the 28. of Januarie last, wee haue in confirmation of the Edicts of the late King our most honoured. Lord and fa∣ther (whom God pardon) and other our declarations vp∣on matter of combats, largely enough giuen to vnderstand our pleasure and intent, concerning the execution of the same, and the punishments of the transgressions and dis∣obediences daily committed, hauing with the aduice of the Quéene Regent, our most honoured Ladie and mo∣ther, the Princes of our blood, other the Princes Officers of our Crowne, and the most notable personages of our Counsell added thereto the premisses, we thought it fit∣ting for stay of the course of such wretched accidents and inconueniences as haue but too often fallen out, and doe still daily happen, which we presumed should haue ceased after the publication of our letters, had the same bene per∣formed. Now since vnderstanding, the reasons and con∣siderations, whereupon ye haue hitherto delayed the said publication, we with the like aduice of our said Ladie and mother, of the Princes of our blood, other Princes and Officers of our Crowne and Councell, haue againe, and moreouer said and declared, and doe say and declare by these prosents, signed with our owne hand, that we will not, neither doe meane vpon any causes or considerations that are or may be, to grant any pardons, remissions or abolitions to such as shall vnder whatsoeuer colour, pre∣tence, or occasion, transgresse the said Edicts and declara∣tions in matter of Combats and quarrels, Chalenges, or other heads therein contained and specified, but will, that they be extraordinarily procéeded against, and according to the rigour of our Edicts and declarations against the transgressors, and those that shall harbour, conceale, assist, or haue them in their powers: who vpon the like penal∣ties,
and other more grieuous, if it so happen, shall be bound and forced to bring thée into tryall. We also forbid all Judges, that they vndertake nothing to the preiudice of these presents: Namely, the Prouost of our house, and great Prouost of France, that they take no knowledge of all such transgressions as may be committed against our said Edicts and declarations in matter of combat, and of all that may depend thereof, vnder paine of defacing, and reuocation of all procéedings, and of all expences, dama∣ges, and interests in behalfe of the parties that may haue bene pursued. Moreouer, we will, and it is our pleasure, that if to the preiudice of these presents, the said Prouost of our house, or other Judges shall haue taken knowledge of such causes, yet notwithstanding our Atturneys gene∣rall, their substitutes, and parties diminished, their wi∣dowes and heyres shall be admitted to sée the guiltie and their complices, who shall be debarred, as also their wi∣dowes and heyres to pretend extinction of crime by lapse of twentie yeares, or any other time. We also doe commend and ordaine, that our said let∣ters of declaration, and these presents, together with the said Edicts and declarations precedent, you cause to be read and published ouer the contents of the same inuiola∣bly executed, kept and obserued from point to point, ac∣cording to their forme and tenure: Also that of the fines to vs adiudged, the third part be applied to the suste∣nance, and maintenance of the poore shut vp in this our Towne of Paris, and the Suburbes of the same. Enioy∣ning our Atturney Generall, in our said Court, to vse all requests and diligence necessarie for the said publication and execution. For such is our pleasure. Giuen at Paris, the 14, day of March, 1613. and of our raigne the third. Signed, LEWES. By the King in his Councell, the Quéene Regent his mother, being present. DE LOMENIE. And sealed with the great seale, in yealow waxe, vpon a single Labell.
Read, published and recorded, in the hearing, and at the request of the Kings Atturney generall. The court doth ordaine, that Copies examined, shall be sent to the Baylywickes and Stewardships, there to be read, publi∣shed, recorded, and executed, by the diligence of the substi∣tutes of the Kings Atturney Generall, who are thereof to certifie the Court within the moneth: Likewise, if to the preiudice of the same, any letters of abolition haue bene directed to the Prouost of the house, or iudgements by him pronounced, notwithstanding the said letters, his iudgements, and all other proceedings shall be voyd, and as such defaced: and processe shall passe against the guiltie according to the Kings Edicts and declarations, wherein the obstinate shall not be admitted his purgation, vnlesse he pay the third part of the fine assessed vpon him, applia∣ble to the poore, shut vp, without repetition. At Paris in a Parliament, the 18. of March. 1613. Signed, Voisin.
A LETTER FROM THE LORD OF ROSNY, GREAT Treasurer of France. TO The Queene Regent of France, Concerning the Resignation of his offices. MADAME, AMong all the honourable Conditions of a French Gentleman, I alwaies held that to be of the most estéeme, which was em∣ployed in the Important Affaires of his Countrey, in the happie Administration of the same: and in obeying the Commaundements of his Prince: Throughout the course of manie yeares, I haue managed the principall of this Estate, with vnexpected successe: vnder my king, from a bottomlesse Gulfe of miserie, I haue guided them to the toppe of all glo∣rie.
At this day (MADAME) I doe obey the desire and expresse will of your Maiestie, I remit into your hands the two fairest Tokens of the benefites and rewards of my good Mai∣ster, The Bastc, and the Treasurie, which (so long as he liued, I possessed;) Now that he is deceased, I restore them to you: and well con∣tent my selfe, that the Effects of my seruices may remaine ingrauen in the hearts of your people. An other not so faithfull as my selfe, might fill all France, with his complaints: But my perpetuall deuotion to the place of my Natiuitie, and to my King, doe restraine and bridle my Tongue, and maketh me to seeke rather in mine owne incapacitie, then in any other consideration, the cause of so great an alteration. In one onely point is my spirit impati∣ently tormented: that is; Of that more then absolute resolution of your Maiestie, to vrge me to take money in recompence for my Of∣fies: Not that I doe not sufficiently iudge how necessarie this course is, for the good of your seruice: But on the other side, it is to my selfe so preiudicall, and so contrarie to my de∣mands, that whatsoeuer power I haue ouer my selfe to content you, yet haue I not suffi∣cient to accept it. But contrariwise (MA∣DAME) I am forced to refuse it, and con∣trarie to my dutie in this occasion, to preferre my particular Interest, before that of your Maiestie: of all the meanes prouided to wade through this busines, this must néedes be to me the most odious: and indeed I doe abhorre
it, and holde it as proceeding not from your goodnesse, but from the malice of mine Ene∣mies. For (MADAME) wherefore doe they not rather laye this pretence vpon my ouer∣wild humour, an incompatible estrangement from all gratification of whatsoeuer societie, and dissimulation, vpon the weake order that I may paradueture haue taken in the affaires of my Offices: vpon my bad Husbandrie, in matter of the Treazurie: vpon the euils that haue procéeded of such strong intelligences as I haue practized, as well within as without the Realme: and vpon such extreame care as I tooke to establish my selfe in the preseruation of my Fortunes: Wherefore (I say Madam) haue they not rather chosen this founda∣tion, rather then any other: neither so faire in shewe, and yet farre more vnlikely? For, so publish or giue out, that I neuer craued a∣ny other recompence, then for my Office of the Treasurie, neither yet any other reward then the Office of a Marshal of France. It is a matter that cannot bee truely maintained; The impudencie of mine Enemies, and the complaint of some of my Friendes, shall neuer be of force sufficient, otherwise to testi∣fie it. But if your Maiestie doe accuse me, that of my selfe I haue offered you all that I did pos∣sesse, I confesse it: Neither doe I denie, but that many times I haue assured your Maie∣stie, that all that was mine depended vpon you; yea, euen my very life it selfe.
But surely (MADAME) I will also ad∣uow, that at that time I could not imagine that such Offers to a mans Soueraigne, could be offence sufficient to be therefore depri∣ued and put from his Dignities. So as if now you doe so take it, it is a principle in my opinion, very new: Yet shall not this nouel∣tie neuertheles euer make me to repent that I haue done my dutie. But contrarywise (MADAME) at this present, I doe againe offer to your Maistie, not onely my honors, my goods, but also my ve∣ry life, with the liues of my Children: Nei∣ther doe I present them vnto you vppon a∣ny condition, but to vse them according to your pleasure; Yea, euen to honour my very Enemies with them, if to take them from me simplie be not matter of content. If my passed Actions haue tended to the aduancement of this Crowne, I will also that my obedience shall bee the first to shewe the meanes to pressrue it. And whatsoeuer my Enemies doe publish of my loue to that I pos∣sesse, or whatsoeuer other mens humors may helpe to bréede beliefe, yet is it true (MA∣DAME) that I will abandon all that my ser∣uices haue purchased me, with more constan∣cie, yea, with a thousand times more reso∣lution, then an other shall possesse them with pleasure. It shall suffize me in my solitarines, to learne how your Maiestie doth daily make your Scepter to flourish, and preferring in these Affaires a goodly Order, and in your Coffers Treasure sufficient to support this Estate, which principally subsisteth vppon the support of these two Pillers. This is it wherein I will most quietly
entertaine my idle cogitations, and comforte my selfe ouer the losse of my good King, with∣out being constrained (if it may so please you) to accept or reserue any other recompence for my Offices, then my contentment to receiue none, and the honour of your expresse Com∣mandements▪ But if neuerthelesse, for a finall Resolution, and that I may not shew my selfe disobedient to your willes, your Maiestie doe absolutely enioyne me to the contrarie. This then (MADAME) is the grea∣test fauour, and that which I most desire, wherewith I doe most humbly beseech you to recompence me, that it may please your Maie∣stie (MADAME) immediately to command my greatest enemies to goe into the ChamberThe Millions are of Crowns and not of Pounds. of Accounts, there to verifie & take view of the profites or detriments of my 12. yeares wat∣chings. Then if it be not foūd, that during the saide time, vnder the power and aucthoritie of my great King, I haue by my dexterity and by my trauails, rooted out the greatest confusion that euer was in the Treasuries of France: that beside the sparing of eight Milliōs euery yéere: whereof hée yerely became indebted to his Of∣ficers, besides the payment of all charges, and of all the ordinarie Expences of the Estate, of all the wages of the soueraigne Courts, of all the wages of the men of Warre, of all the Garrisons, Embassages, the Kings house, the Voyages & Mar∣riag giuing of Rewards & Recompences, with a thousand other expences, too tedious to be here set downe, besides also the Guardes ordinary summes, without augmenting either Taxes or Impositi∣ons in the Realme.
Yea contrariwise, If they finde not that I haue yet for the entertainment of three great Armies, whereof the one recouered Amiens, an other reduced Bretaigne, and the third conque∣red Bresse, and Sauoye: found meanes extraor∣dinarily to furnish aboue twelue Millions: for the discharge of the debts of France, grow∣en by Treaties, aboue fiue and twenty Milli∣ons: for the payment of those of Switzerland, Germanie, Italie, and England, aboue thirtie Millions: For the payment of Pensions, both within and without the Realme, aboue foure and twentie Millions: For the succour of for∣raigne Prouinces, aboue eight Millions: For the refurnishment of the Artilleries, Fortifi∣cations, High-wayes, and Buildings, aboue eight Millions: For the reliefe of the poore, aboue sixe Millions: To lay vp in the Trea∣surie, in the Coffers of the Bastille, or to leaue in Deposito, in the hands of the Treasurer of the Espane, aboue seuētéene Millions: To satis∣fie many other Expences, which may easily be verified, aboue twenty Millions: If I haue not also besides procured Contracts for the re∣déeming of the Demaynes of France, that were engaged, wherof the greatest part is daylie put in Execution; Such Redemptions, amoun∣ting to aboue fortie Millions. Finally, (MADAME) If I haue not in my great care, by my onely Vigilancie, put in practise these sparings: If also to continue the same duty to Frāce, I haue not at all times offred to your Maiestie, to loose my life, or to sup∣port the affaires, & that in the same eminencie, yea, euen to present them in a higher degrée.
If I say, I haue not preferred all these things and more, then doe I submit my selfe (MA∣DAME) to any punishment for my presum∣tion, to receiue such odious recompence, that you shall appoint me, as the price of my honors & of my offices: But if also (MADAME) there be not any one of these Articles found false, (vnlesse it be that they speake too little) & that my former affection hath receiued no o∣ther alteration, but to be growne more ardent and strong, suffer me (MADAME) for my more worthy satisfaction, to endure the harme that you doe me, without accepting the good that you offer me. Reuoke and call in my offi∣ces without this gratious charge. Or if ne∣cessarily (MADAME) you will vouchsafe yet to honor me with some fauour, Let it be onely, if it may so please you, a perpetuall re∣membrance of my fidelitie: A fauour which I desire of your Maiestie: not that hereafter I might be recalled to the painefull trauell of the affaires: but onely to leaue me in rest, that I may still liue in the remembrance of her, who is this day the Regent of my country: the li∣uing soule of my maister, and the mother of my King. And surely (MADAME) it is also an honor, and last acknowledgement which you Madame cannot iustly denie me: for sith all they whom in my offices I may haue offended, doe labour to see me depriued, much more may they remember my seruices that doe triumph in them. Farewell house, farewell fortresse, which I haue had in kéeping and gouernment aboue
twelue yeares. Farewell Temple of the God∣desse Monta Mony, who haue procured me so great enuie: Let me now goe, now that I am wearie of these affaires; Returne me to a pri∣uate life, wherein I may no more haue such cares. I am he, who strong in spirit and cou∣rage, hauing comprehended the very ground of the riches of the King and Kingdome, haue gouerned them: I am he, vnto whom the fe∣licitie of this estate, augmented in new reue∣newes, and the coffers of our yong maisters, replenished by iust and lawfull meanes, stand bound for that plaine and assured order that I haue established; I haue reaped great honors and large recompēce for that industrious care that I tooke vnder a great king. I was of great power, & had great authoritie, but euen in the turning of a hād, in his bloody fall, I haue séene all fallen and ruined. In the same mishap, haue I séene extinct, all that enuie, that made diuers many times to threaten my vndoing and vtter ruine, whiles I procured the good of the estate, and that I sought nothing but to purchase onely my maisters fauours, without any regard of the great ones, and neuer know∣ing what it was to séeke the fauour and good will of the people, euermore bending my selfe wholy to this purpose. But now in the end, depart from me all troublesome carking care, I am now resolued to mew vp my ship in a calme, and safe hauen: peraduenture the state hauing lost me, shall better acknowledge wherein I haue bene pro∣fitable vnto it, and the people shall finde it, al∣beit
ouerlate, when fauour and affection shall succéed hatred: but I doe not so highly estéeme my owne grace and good, as that I should de∣sire to obtaine it, by the disasters and calami∣ties of my countrey: But contrariwise, grant O God, that the fortune of this Realme, may euermore continue in good estate, that I may neuer sée it ouerthrowne, and that it may ne∣uer haue cause to be sory for the losse of me, or to wish for me againe. FINIS.
THE KINGS E∣dict, Importing the orde∣ring of Apparell: with prohibition to all his Subiects: not to weare vpon the same any gold or siluer, pure or counterfeit: Embroderie, Lace of Millan or of Millan fashion: neither to make in their hou∣ses any guilt worke, vnder the penalties therein contained. LEWES, by the grace of God, King of France and Nauarre, To all people pre∣sant, and to come, Gréeting. The late Kings our Predecessors, to the end to restraine the great and ex∣cessiue expences, growing of the excesse and superfluity of Apparell; haue En∣acted sundry iust and commendable Or∣dinances; Yea, euen the late King, our most honored Lord and Father (whome God pardon) by his Edicts of the mo∣neth of Julie, 1601. and of Nouember, 1606. Did forbid all manner of men whatsoeuer, generally to weare in their Garments, any Gold or Siluer: which notwithstanding, the most part of our Subiects haue suffered themselues to be led away with this vaine and vnprofitable expence, and that with so much licentiousnesse, and excesse, that were there no prouision made to the contrary, themselues would remaine either vtterly vndone or brought into such dis∣commodities, that they could haue no meanes to serue, if any important occasion should fall out for the good of our
Estate. Vpon these considerations, with the aduice of the Queene Regent, (our most honoured Ladie and Mother) of the Princes of our Blood, and of other Princes, Officeers of Crowne, and principall of our Councell: and of our owne full power and auctoritie Royall, by this our perpe∣tuall and irreuocable Edicts, haue Decréed and Ordained, and doe Decrée and ordaine as followeth. I.First, wée doo enioyne all Church▪ men (euer hereafter to continue, as now they doo) in wearing of modest Apparell, decent, and conuenient for their profession: Also all other our Subiects, to abstaine from all those superfluities, whereinto in time past they haue bene carryed away: vn∣der paine of such penalties, as the ordinances of the Kings our Predecessors, for such causes doe import. II.Wée doo expressely forbid all persons whatsoeuer, gene∣rally within our Kingdomes, Lands, Countreys, and the Dominions of our obedience, of whatsoeuer Sexe, Quali∣tie, Calling, or condition soeuer they be; Not to weare a∣ny Garments enriched with Gold or siluer, Fyne or coun∣terfeit, whether woollen or Linnen, Purileurs, Embrode∣ries, Laces, Stripedstuffs, or any thing equiuolent, which may serue their bodies, in whatsoeuer sort or manner: vn∣der paine of fifteene hundred Francks fine: one third part appliable to our vse, an other third part to the poore, shut vp in this our good Towne of Paris, and the Suburbes of the same, and the other third parte to the Enformer. Alwayes excepted, the Harnesse and Saddles for Horses, allready made, wherein wee are content for sixe Moneths, to Tollerate the workemanship of Golde and siluer. III.Wée also forbid, in whatsoeuer kinde of Garments, all Embrodery of Golde, Siluer, or Silke, as also the vse of Laces of Millan, or Millan-fashion, vnder paine of a thousand pounds Fyne.
IIII.Nowbeit, wee meane not in these Prohibitions, to comprehend the vse of Golde, Siluer, or Embroderie, in Gyrdles, Hangers for Swordes, Hat-bands, Garters, Knots, Irons, Tagges, and Supporters, and Collers, for Women and Maydes, Ladies and Gentlewomen. Nei∣ther also the guilding of Sword Hiltes, or Chapes, at the ende of the Skabberds in Armours, Spurres, Bittes for Horses, and Stirrops. V.We also forbid all workemen hereafter not to guild, or cause to be guilded, any Carroches, vnder paine of a thousand-pounds, to employed as it is aforesaid. VI.We also forbid from henceforth, the making of any guilt worke, in any of the houses of our subiects, either vp∣on the lead, stone, timber, plaister, or other thing whatso∣euer, vnder paine of the like fine. VII.We also forbid all Lords, Gentlemen and others, of whatsoeuer calling, hēceforth not to cloath their Pages or Laquies, in any garments of silke, whom we will haue to be apparelled in stuffes of wooll, with a passement lace vpon the seames and outward edges onely. VIII.We moreouer forbid all Taylors, Embroderers, doublet makers, Hosiers, and other workemen, as well of our owne Traine, as dwellers in any Townes else where, not to make, or cause to be made, any garments or other thing heretofore forbidden: vnder paine if they be found transgressors against this our ordinance, to be condemned in the somme of thrée hundred pounds Fine, for the first time, and for the secōd, in an other fine double the former, to be employed as before, and for the third, in corporall punishment. IX.We will and ordaine, that this our present ordinance be strictly obserued by all persons of whatsoeuer calling or condition, the same to take place at the day and feast of Easter at hand.
X.And the better to preuent such transgressions as may be made to the preiudice of our said prohibitions, we will and ordaine, that all Judges royall, by preuention, all Commis∣saries, Guardes, and all other Officers, shall take notice, Execute, and cause to be kept, and obserued, these our pre∣sent Prohibitions, and that the Fines be assessed as well a∣gainst the proper Owners of the things forbidden, as a∣gainst all concealers, and paide notwithstanding any Op∣positions, or Appeales whatsoeuer, and without preiudice of the same. Wée also do command all our trusty and beloued Coun∣cellors, All such as holde our Courts of Parliament, and all our Bayliffes, Stewards, Prouosts, Judges, and other our Justices and Officers, to whome it may appertaine, that these our saide Inhibitions, and Prohibitions, they cause to be Red, Published, and Recorded, in all parts and places of their Resorts, Jurisdictions, and Liberties, and the same (from point to point) to maintaine, kéepe, and in∣uiolably obserue. Expressely enioyning out Atturneyes generall of our said Parliaments, and their substitutes, in euery of our said Bayliwickes, Stewardships, Prouostships, and other Jurisdictions, to assist the said Executions, and to make out all Processes and Instances, thereto requisite and necessa∣rie: Our Receiuers of Fines in their Accounts, to make actuall Receipt of all such, as vpon this cause shalbe asses∣sed: Also, to all gouernors of Hospitalls, and Masters of the Fyles or Records of the poore, vpon their loyalties and consciences, to employ the said money vpon the sustenance and maintenance of the saide poore: For such is our plea∣sure. And for that in sundry and many places, they may stand in neede of these pres, Wée will, that vpon the Vidimus of the same, being duely collationed and examined, faith shalbe giuen thereto as to this present Originall. Whereto in witnes hereof, wee haue caused to set our Seale.
Giuen at Paris, in the moneth of March, the yeare of Grace, 1613. and of our Raigne, the third: Signed, LEWIS. And vnderneath By the King in his Councell. The Queene Regent being present. Signed DE LOMENIE. And on the side, VISA. And sealed with the great Seale, in greene Waxe, vpon Laces of Red and gréeeene, and lower Written, Read, Published, and Recorded, in the hearing of the Kings Atturney generall, requiring that it might take place, to beginne the fiftéenth day of May, in the same yeare, and Decrd, that Coppies examined should be sent to the Bayliwickes and Stewardships, there to be Read, Published▪ Recorded, and put in Execution, by the dili∣gence of the substitutes of the Kings Atturney generall, who shall monethly certifie the Court. At Paris, in Parliament the second day of Aprill, one thousand, sixe hundred, and thirteene. Signed VOISIN.
