18274 99855800 21303
HIMATIA∣POLEOS. THE TRIVMPHS OF olde Draperie, or the rich Cloathing of ENGLAND. Performed in affection, and at the charges of the right Worthie and first honou∣red Companie of Drapers: at the enstalment of Sr. Thomas Hayes Knight, in the high office of Lord Maior of London, on Satturday, being the 29. day of October. 1614. Deuised and written by A. M. Citizen and Draper of London. LONDON, Printed by Edward Allde. 1614.
Himatia-Poleos. Or, The Olde Draperie and Clothing of ENGLAND. IN euery well-gouer∣ned Kingdome and Com∣mon-wealth, the chiefest Citie and Citizens therein, haue euermore held the prime place and prioritie; as well in matter of honor, as due right of Antiquity. And as the Lacedemo∣nians, the first instructers of the olde Romaines, and so (from them) we, and all other Nations deriued our forme of rule; As they (I say) made a distinguishing of their most memorable So∣cieties, from other of much lesse note and me∣rite: Euen so this famous Cittie of London, whose continuall teeming wombe (from time to time) brought forth many seuerall Mysteries
or Professions, hath referred them all in emi∣nencie of place, to twelue onely. Amongst which twelue gradations of honour and digni∣tie, the first originall began in the first Compa∣nie of all other in this Citie the ancient fellow∣ship or Societie of Drapers. To approoue the society of Drapers of the first, when (as yet) there was none other: it is auouched byHe liued and wrote in the time of king Stephen. William Fitzstephen, Iohn Bale, Roger Houeden, and others, that the Wooll-winder, (who was the olde Draper or Clothier, as bor∣rowed from the word Drappier) did carde and spinne his wooll, then weaue it into cloth, full, rowe, sheare, dresse, and dye it, and sell in after∣wards in his shop, performing all these seuerall offices thereto, by himselfe and seruants: which (since then) hath branched it selfe into diuers o∣ther Companies, and of one entire Trade or Mysterie, is become many. Out of this list or band of Drapers, issued Sir Henrie Fitz-Alwine knight, descended from that Alwine, Vnckle to king Edgar, who made him Alderman of all England, when as (till then) the name of Alderman, or Eldermen, was neuer knowen. This Henrie Fitz-Alwine had the first honour to be stiledIn the olde Saxon tongue from whence it was deri∣ued, it signifi∣eth Dominus or Lord. Maire, or Maior of London, by favour of King Richard the first, surnamed Cuer de Lyon, and was himselfe (as is crediblie a∣vouched) a Brother of the same Societie, in ho∣nour of the man by him so aduanced, before his iourney to the Holie Land. For, vntill his time,
the troublesome combustions of the Citie be∣ing not fully setled: the gouernment thereof remained first in Portgreues, next in martiall Provosts, thirdly in Bayliffes, and lastly in Lord Maiors, as in meete place is more at large decla∣red. Heere before I passe any further, it may ap∣peare as a blemish on mine own browe, because in my Booke in the worthie Company of Gold∣smiths, I did set downe Henrie Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane to be a Goldsmith, and the first Lord Maior of London, alleadging my authoritie for the same in the margent of the same booke, out ofThe ancient Chronicler of the Citie. Iohn Stowe, which now I may seem to denie, and affirme the same man to be a Draper, to the disgrace of the forenamed Company, and mine owne deepe discredit. What then I did, was by warrant of my fore-alleaged Author, who fin∣ding Henrie Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane, to bee Maister or Guardian of the kings Mint, did ther∣fore set him downe to bee a Goldsmith; which was no error in me to doe the like, being there∣to secured by him, and knowing (as then) no o∣ther proofe to the contrary. But hauing per∣sed more assured authority in the Drapers Hall, that one, not named Henrie Fitz-Alwine Fitz-Leofstane, but Henrie Fitz-Alwine, a brother of the olde Drapers, was Lord Maior of London, foure and twentie yeares and a halfe (by yerely electi∣on) and longer had been if he had longer liued, who had also giuen his dwelling house by Londō
stone, to his owne free brethren of the Drapers, with an annuity yearely to be paide to the king, out of such land as is held of his by them; and that hee lieth in the parish Church of S. Marie Bothawe buried, the Parish wherein hee liued and died; whereas Iohn Stowe affirmeth him to bee buried in the Priorie of the holy Trinitie, called Christs Church, on the right hand with∣in Aldegate, which is now called the Dukes place. Nay more, Maister Clarentius Cambden, with the aduise of diuers other good Antiqua∣ries beside, hath (vnder his hand and Seale of Office) confirmed him to be none other then a Draper. What more free confession can any man make, then of his blinde misleading by a blinder guide? In whose behalf I dare yet boldly maintaine, that no such error escaped from him wilfully or willingly, his care and endeauour was so great, but mis-information, or incapaci∣tie of reading, may (as it hath done to many) wrong better men then any that are concerned in this case, yet without any preiudice or disho∣nest taxation. What offence then may the Companie of Mercers take, who make challenge likewise to the very same man, by mistaking Peter Fitz-Al∣wine (a Mercer indeed) for Henrie Fitz-Alwine the olde Draper? Or that of the Fishmongers, who deeme their worthy Wallworth, the first Knighted Maior in the field, to be the same man also, and that no man before him was Maior of
London? I answere freely for my selfe, and ap∣peale to an especiall Gentleman in the imagi∣ned iniured Companie of Goldsmiths (who tooke no meane paines to be resolued in this case) that no certaine assurance could be had therein, but that it remained doubtful between both the Societies. And therefore we persona∣ted old Faringdon, not Fitz-Alwine, as the booke yet may be seene, to cut off all such contentious questions. Seeing then that reuerend anti∣quitie, eminencie of honour, and due right of merit; bestowed so high a dignity vpon the Drapers: I might well be iustly condemned, if I should seeke after any other argument of cre∣dit for them (when so maine a busines doth ne∣cessarilie require it) then their owne due deser∣uing, so long time sleeping in obliuion, yet now reuiued, to their endlesse honor. The walles of any Citty, were termed by the Grocians, according as we title our instant dis∣course, Himatia Poleos, The Cloathing or gar∣ments of the Cittie. Intimating thereby, that as garments and cloathing doe ingirt the body, defending it continually from the extremities of colde and heat: so walles, being the best gar∣ments of any Citie, do preserue it from all dan∣gerous annoynances. Here on we lay the foun∣dation of our deuise, in the honour of Draperie the rich Clothing of Englād▪ which (long before the knowledge of fantasticke habites) clothed both Prince & people all a like, to the  meane
renowne of the Kingdome, and admiration of forraigne nations, to whome our Draperie (a∣bounding in her owne plenty) by meanes of na∣uigation and commerce, affoorded the rich Li∣uerie of this land; better imbraced by them, and much more highly esteemed, then all other tra∣fficque whatsoeuer. As well appeared by that famous Knight and trauayler, Sir Frances Drake, who hauing roūded the whole world, and noa∣ted the riches & best endowments of euery na∣on founde none to equall the Draperie and cloathing of England. In regarde whereof, he chose to be a louing Brother of the Drapers So∣cietie, before all other Companies of the Citty. Wherefore our first land deuise is a Shippe, ve∣ry artificially and workemanly framed, called the Barke-Hayes, fitted with Captaine, Maister, Mate. &c. and supposedly laden with woollen cloathes, to make exchaunge for other Coun∣tries best commodities, and thought meet to v∣sher the way to the residue of the showes, which are directed to follow in this manner. A beautifull Chariot, drawen by two golden pelltted Lyons, and two golden Woolues Er∣minnois, after the manner of the triumphall Chariots of the Romaine Emperours, is graced with the supposed shape of King Richard the first, with the seuerall figures of so many Citties in England about him, as conueniencie of place and cariage graunted libertie vnto. Those Cit∣ties are disciphered by their Eschuchions of
Armes, and that their best aduantage euer en∣sued by making of woollen Cloathes, for the continuall maintenance of Englands Draperie. But London sitting neerest vnto himselfe, as chiefe Mother and matrone of them all: he ho∣nours the head of his chiefest Chamber, with a triple imperiall Crowne of golde, vnder battel∣led or branched with Cloudes, and beames of the Sunne, being the Armes of the Drapers So∣cietie, and declaring his loue and fauour besto∣wed on her, by his aduauncement of Sir Henrie Fitz-Alwine to the Maioraltie, in whom began the olde Drapers dignitie. After this Chariot, followeth a Pageant or goodly Monument, figuring the whole estate of Londons olde Draperie. In the supreame and most eminent seate, sitteth Himatia, of Cloa∣thing, as Mother, Lady and commaundresse of all the rest, who by their distinct emblemes and properties, (apted for the easiest apprehension) doe expresse their dutie and attendance on so gratious a person, in their seuerall places and offices to them belonging; As in Carding, Spinning, Weauing, Rowing, Fulling, Shea∣ring Dressing, Dying, Tentering and perfor∣ming all other seruices to woollen Cloathes, which at first was done onely by the Draper, or Clothier. Peace, Plentie, Liberalitie, Councell and Discreet Zeale, doe supporte the florishing condition of Himatiaes Common-wealth, and striue to preuent all occasions which may
seeme sinister or hurtfull thereto. Our deuise which wee spake last of, and yet is appointed the first in seruice, serueth both for the water and land. Till the yeare 1453. the L. Maiors of London vsed to ride on horsebacke to Westminster, at such time as each one went to take his oath. But S. Iohn Norman Draper, being then Maior, at his owne cost and charge, and for the reliefe of poore Watermen, who were much distressed in those daies: made a very goodly Barge for himselfe and his Brethren, to be rowed therein by water to Westminster, and so to continue for a yearely custome. It was a cost∣ly Barge, and the Oares are said to bee couered with siluer: in memorie whereof, and the ho∣nest benefite yerely found thereby: the Water∣men made a pleasant song called, Rowe thy Boate Norman, &c. This honour beginning likewise in the Draper, and falling out so fitly to helpe our invention: in a goodly faire Barge, made meete for the purpose, attendeth the supposed shadow of Sir Iohn Norman, with the seauen li∣berall Sciences (all attired like graceful Ladies) sitting about him, vntill such time as the Lord Maior commeth to take water, and then he sa∣luteth him with this speech.
S. Iohn Normans speech on the Water. VVElcome to the water, worthy Brother Draper. Imagine me to be the true resemblance of olde S. Iohn Norman, sometime Lord Maior of this famous Cittie, and the first that deuised this water honour, ma∣king my Barge at mine owne proper cost, and rowed with siluer Oares to Westminster, when (as you now) I then went to take mine oath. In re∣gard whereof, I was the first Maior, that was presented to the Barons, of the Exchecquer. The imaginarie shapes of the seauen liberall Sciences, each one distinguished by their true charracter, are placed as my companions in my Barge: in memorie of the loue I euer bare to learning, and no meane bounties by me exten∣ded for the maintenance thereof. I ioy, that in∣uention would make vse of my remembrance in this manner, to doe any seruice to so desertfull a Brother, and to the Companie of Drapers which I dearly affected. On then my hearts, and as in those elder dayes you declared your loue to olde Iohn Norman: so expresse somewhat nowe to delight my honourd Brother, singing cheerfully, Rowe thy Boate Norman. Which beeing no sooner ended, but diuers sweet singing youths, belonging to the maister that enstructeth the yong Quiristers of Pauls, be∣ing
all attired in faire wrought wastcoates, and caps belonging also to them, each hauing a sil∣uer Oare in his hand; do sing a most sweet dittie of Rowe thy Boate Norman, and so seeme to rowe vp along to Westminster, in honour of the Lord Maiors attendance. For the seuerall peales of Ordinance, which make better report in the aire, then they can be expressed by pen: For the Drums, Fifes, Trum∣pets, and other musicall Instruments, whereof each Company maketh their choice, to grace this honourable seruice out and home againe, in the true affection of louing Citizens, not suf∣fering their chiefe Magistrate to want any part of their kinde respect and furtherance: they can much better speake for themselues then I, and serue but as a breathing time to mee, vntill my Lords returne and landing. When all our deui∣ses being martialled in order, according as wee haue formerly related, except a goodly Ramme or Golden Fleece, with a Sheepheard sitting by it; as occation serueth, deliuereth his intenti∣on in this ensuing speech. The Sheepheard. VVHy gaze yee so vpon me! am I not a man flesh, bloud, and bone, as you are? Or in these silken sattin Townes, are poore plaine meaning Sheepheards woondred at, like Comets or blazing Starres▪ Or is it this
goodly beast by me, that fills your eyes with ad∣miration? If it be so, let me then resolue ye, that it is an article of dutie which we Shepheards of Cotswold owe to the old Drapers of Londō, for ke∣ping their flocks on the Cotswold hills, that whē any worthy Brother of their Society comes to be L. Maior of this City, the very fairest Ram in all their flocks is sent vnto them as a solemne offring, as being the Crest of their Companies Armes, and the chiefe maintainer of Wooll for cloathing. In which respect, my Father a∣bout some six and twenty yeares since, when S. Martin Calthrope (a Brother of the same Society) was Lord Maior, brought then the like goodly. Ramme as his oblation; and I hearing, that his man S. Thomas Hayes, and another Martin, Mai∣ster Martin Lumley (by the blessing of heauen and their owne vertuous endeauours) were the next chosen Brethren of the same Band, the one to succeed in the selfe same dignitie of the Ma∣ioraltie, and the other of the Shriuealty; haue brought this as my hearts free offring, in ho∣nour of them that so dearely affect them, and in my dutie to them both, with all my vtmost ser∣uice beside. For thus say we in Catswolde. From the Ramme we haue the Lambe From both our finest woolles are shorne.
Wooll had thus from the Ramme and Lambe, Makes the best Cloath, that can be worne. Thanke then the Draper that began: To make such Cloathing, meete for man. For, if wee haue no Ramme, wee are sure to haue no Lambe: no Lambe, no Wooll: no wooll, no Cloth: no Cloth, no Draper. Heauen graunt that we may neuer see these noes, For we shall then feele twise as many woes: But that of Ram, Lambe, Wooll, Cloth, still we may haue store: So shall the Drapers then thriue more and more. As meane additions, to giue some small Iust∣er to the Showe, because ouer many were thought inconuenient; we make vse of a golden pelletted Lyon, a supporter to the Companies Armes, with a Champion mounted on his back, and a golden woolfe Erminnois, the Ensigne or Imprese belonging to the Lord Maiors Creast. And with these fewe slender deuises, we vsher his Honors way toward Guilde-Haule; vntill he come to S. Laurence-Lane, where the figure of S. Henrie Fitz-Alwine, thus fauourably stayeth him.
IN times of olde Antiquitie, When men liu'd long and healthfully, Detesting sloth and idlenesse, Which breeds but surfet and excesse. When yea and nay was greatest Oath, And mens best weare, good woollen Cloath, Yeleped Englands Draperie, More worth then gaudie brauerie, Of Silken twine, Siluer and Golde, Nere knowen in those blest daies of olde: Then liu'd that graue and worthie man, That Londons honour first began, By title of the Maioralty, A high and famous dignity: Henrie Fitz-Alwine was his name, Noble by birth, and of much fame. Whose substance though his graue hath kept, Foure hundred yeares, where he hath slept: Yet is his shadowe raisde in me, To grace this daies solemnitie. For he being first that held the sway Of Maior in London, iustly may Challenge (by right) prioritie, In honouring his owne Companie, With all that sacred Poesie can Deuise, to grace so good a man, As first with hearts, hands, and free voice, Was thought meet in the peoples choice To rancke in that rich rowle of fame: That honoured first the Drapers name. And worthie Brother here suruay
Those seuerall kinds of Londons sway Till royall Richard first in me, Altered the rule to Maioraltie. Portgreues held first by strict command, Next Prouosts with a sterner hand, Such from the Conquest was the case Of Londons awe, till milder grace Made choice of Bayliffes, men thought fit In the Kings iudgement Courts to sit, And right all causes of contention: By vpright censure, or preuention. Yet all this could not please the king, In two mens rule grew varying, By leaning to what part each listed, So might by might was still resisted. Wrongs vnredrest, offences flowing, Garboyles & grudges each where growing. Therefore as God had giuen him place, Solely to rule, and iudge each case, So would he plant a deputie, To figure his authoritie, In the true forme of Monarchie, Then which, no better soueraigntie. Which office being imposde on me, By such a gracious Maiestie: I held it foure and twentie yeares, (Yearely elected, as appeares.) Vntill my verie dying day. Since when (my Lord) I can well say, The Science of olde Draperie, (Our louing kind Society)
Hath yeelded many a Magistrate,The number of 45. Lord Maiors, In the selfe-same degree of State. And Time reserueth in his store, For the like honour, many more. On then before, for we must tend, Till this daies triumph haue full end. The solemnitie of so pompous a feast being finished, and his Honor (according to yearelie custome) returning towards Paules, with all the former conceits gracefully borne before him: he is mildlie sollicited for a minutes stay by old Sir Iohn Norman, who (in this manner) giueth him a reason for it. The Speech at the little Conduit in the after∣noone, at my Lords going to Paules. HOnorable Lord and Brother, it is impo∣sed on olde Iohn Norman, brieflie to dis∣cribe these two beautifull deuises to yee. In the first, which manifesteth the Honor of Draperie, your well iudging eye may easily con∣ceiue, each person by their apt distinguishment. The Mother, Olde Draperie, with her Daugh∣ters and attendants placed about her, doe deli∣uer the Drapers true antiquitie, and that which he and his onely performed, is since become the benifit of diuers trades or occupations. Car∣ding, Spinning, Weauing, Fulling, Rowing, Shearing, Dressing, Dying, Tentering, and what
else appertained to wollen cloath, was the aun∣cient Drapers sole profession, and the chiefe ho∣nour of this famous Kingdome: flourishing thereby in so many happy blessings, and so for∣tefied by Peace, Plenty, Bountie, Councell and Dis∣creete Zeale, that all other nations sate and admi∣red thereat. You haue a taste of this felicity in that other Deuise, beautified with the chiefe Clothing Cities of this Land, for maintenance of auncient Draperie, whereof London sitteth the highest aduaunced, as being his choyce Cham∣ber that first made a Draper the onely Gouernor thereof. I am loath to hold yee long, and well I wot, more ample relation hath beene made vnto yee; and therefore to God and your good deuotions I heartily commend yee. Night folding vp bright day in dimme man∣tles of darkenesse, and those diuine ceremonies ended, which waite as Henchmen on that daies duetie, the Starres seeme to leaue their places in their fixed Spheares, and become as so many bright flaming Torches to grace our worthy Magistrate home, euen to his house, (as it were) in the malice of blacke-fac'd night, and to fur∣ther the finishing of so solemne a Tryumph, which endeth with this humble farewell giuen to his Honor.
The Speech deliuered to the Lord Maior at parting. THe longest daies haue end at last, And pleasures pompe is but a blast, You see my Lord that sullen night, Sworne enemie to daies delight, (For all the pride these Tapers make,) Whispers, that we must farewell take. To doubt of your ensuing care, Or to aduise yee, to prepare For enuies stormes, or soothing smiles, That wait on such high place some whiles: Longs not to me. For in your eie Such true Charracters I espie Of vertue, zeale, and vpright heed, That you will prooue the man indeed, Meet such a charge to vndergoe: Whereto heauens hand hath raisde you so▪ And that you'le equall any yet That in the selfe-same place hath set. Such is the hope of all that loue yee, Mongst whom, I cannot choose but moue yee With their remembrance, that this day Haue done as much as men well may In honouring this Solemnity, The Drapers worthie Company. Their loue and bountie hath exprest, How with their fauours you are blest: For, as their kindnesse hath not scanted: So hath no needfull seruice wanted.
For this daies honour and delight: And so my worthie Lord good night. Thus the worthy and first honoured Compa∣ny of Drapers, hauing (in louing and bountifull manner) declared their kinde affection to as affable a Magistrate: I may not omit one thing more, wherein the duteous respect of them∣selues, and loue to the Citie very manifestly ap∣prooued their worth: for, when many solemne meetings haue beene made in the Guild Hall, for election of a Sheriffe by common consent, and as many refusalls still hapning day by day, to the great disquiet of the Companies, and mighty delay of time; yet when no one would vndergoe the Office and charge, a Draper hath done it, worthily and willingly, though no Al∣dermans place as then was voyd, witnesse Mai∣ster Benedict Barneham, a learned and iudicious Gentleman, who chearefully vndertooke the Shrieualty in Anno 1591. Next, Maister Henrie Iaye, but a yeare since, and Maister Martin Lum∣ley now Sheriffe of London, all of them louing Brethren of the Drapers Society. To conclude, as the seuerall Inuentions (with all their weakenesses and imperfections) were mine owne: so the worth and credit of their performance (if any may waite on so meane a businesse) belongeth to the exact and skilfull
Painter Maister Rowland Bucket, whose care, di∣ligence, and faithfull dealing I must needs commend, and should wrong him ouermuch if I did not giue him due praise to his merit. ({inverted ⁂}) FINIS.
