18520 99848450 13544
Expicedium. A FVNERAL Oration, vpon the death of the late deceased Princesse of famous memorye, Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland. Written: by Infelice Academico Ignoto. Wherunto is added, the true order of her Highnes Imperiall Funerall. LONDON Printed for E. VVhite, dvvelling neere the little north doore of Paules Church, at the signe of the Gun. 1603.
Epicedium. A Funerall Oration vpon the death of the late deceased Princesse, (of famous memo∣ry) Elizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland: written by Infelice Academico Ignoto. IF the sighes of the heart were conuerted into eloquēce of the tongue (as in the instruments of breath, the spirit is exchanged into soun'd) I would desire (right worthy Auditory) that all those sighes which are assembled together in your brests, might be centered in my heart: to the ende that my defect of eloquence to expresse this fatall ac∣cident, might be supplyed by my increased sorrowes, so happily conuerted into discourse. But since this my conceited desires may not be reduced to act, my wish were that this floud of teares, that makes his channell through our eyes, might like a ri∣uer of fit discourse, flow from out my lippes; to the ende that the forecible weight of the same being inritched by these supplyes, might plant amazement in your eares, to heare the flowing elo∣quence of my tongue; and the boundles number of her praises. But why spend I my breath in wishes? or to what end fashion I my desires to be greater then my power? since your reuerent si∣lence that attendeth my discourse is sufficient to giue worth to the weaknes of my performance, and her vertues worke wonder in the meanest Orator. But because a good life maketh only the
graue happie, and the glory that is deriued to after ages, depen∣deth on the actions of fore-passed yeeres: Let vs discourse a while on that Elizabethes life, whose death wee lament with such hartie complaints. She was borne of a father of famous memory, Henry the eight, deriued from a mother of great vertue, Anne Bullem; and descen∣ded so royallie, and from so mightie Princes, that Europe knew not her equall, eyther in birth, bewtie, or perfection: Greater then Alexander she was, for the world which he subdu∣ed by force, she conquered by loue; her beautie was so great, that it rather was enuied then equalled; beloued then pray∣sed, admired then described. Her power so great that whole kingdomes were affrighted at her name, and many rich coun∣tries made happy by her protection; her learning so admirable that as from east and west many nations resorted to Rome: not for any wonder they expected in the Cittie, but onely to be∣holde Liuy: So many from all parts repayred to her kingdome, where eyther they were inchaunted with beauty, amased at her greatnes, enriched by her bountie, confirmed by her wisdome, or confounded in their Iudgments. Her chastitie so great, that the question is whether the conquest of her enemies wrought her more fame, or the continence and gouernement shee had in her selfe, more merrit: In a word, she enioyed so much grace, as all the graces possessed not together; and hee that had the grace to see her grace accompted it his happinesse to be so graced. The desires her beauty kindled, her modesty quenched; the attempts which ambition intēded, her constancie ouercame: The peace which al kingdomes affected, her pollicy effected: and her state which her greatest foes enuied, her wisdom maintained: her countrie was the fostresse of banisht men: the sanctuary of the distressed: the harbour of the wronged, the enricher of her allies the bane of her enemies: in aword, the world had nothing more praise-worthie in it, then that it knew her. I will not rip vp the rare perfections of her youth, neither her
fatall daunger before her comming to the Crowne, nor her sun∣drie good fortunes in the gouernment of her kingdome, nor the continuance of her peace, nor the prosperitie of her warres, least the memorie of these things added to her losse, should make our sorrowes stronger then our sufferance could admit of. But for my owne part I may say this of her, that if this Soueraigne Prin∣cesse had dyed among those ancient Thracians, who wept at the birth of their children, and sung and feasted at their deaths: they would haue changed their custome, and beway∣led her infinitely. For by her death, alas what miserie are wee not acquainted with? wee lost that head whereof wee bee the members; the gouernesse of our fortunes and felicitie, the life of all our peace, the death of all our ioy. Since her departure, Justice scale is distempered, prudence mirrour is dimmed, strength's pillers are shaken, Temperance vessell is emptied the Oliue (that peace bare) is leaueles, the oyle of mercy is wasted, liberalities hands are closed; the head of magnificence droopeth, pittie hath hir smiles changed, the lawes are silent, and pardon tongueles. Alas what should I say? if Petrarch knew not in what Sphere of Planets to lodge his Law∣ra, how shold I guesse in what order of Angels I should plāt our Elizabeth? dead she is, but so dead as she is pittied by death him∣selfe; who being senceles and passionles towards all other crea∣tures, yet hath afforded her this priuiledge, to liue in our sorowes. And to giue her place in heauen, what mortall apprehēsion dare presume▪ since in earth our best hopes are wrapped in feare and trembling, and no man can beget that being for another which hee cannot assuredly hope for himselfe? what shee was whilst shee liued, wee iudge, but by the out-side, the sence must informe the intellect before he can determine: what she is, for the earth we know, for the soule we leaue it with the Plato∣nists, to infinitie; wherein, God that knoweth best of truth can in∣forme truth. When Pelopidas the Theban, after he had manfully combated against Alexander Pheraeus, was vnfortunately and
mortally wounded; the report is that the Thessalians that were present at that battell, neuer laid aside their armour nor drewe the reyne from their horses, neither tyed vp their woundes, vntill they had lamented him, armed and heat in the conflict, they ranne to comfort him; halfe breathles they clipped their horses manes, they shaued themselues: if colde made them chill, the fier of their zeale would not suffer them to kindle fire in their tents: their sorowes shut vp their stomacks from receauing meate: silence and mourning possessed the whole armie. And they that had gotten a victorie ouer fame by their conquest, by the losse of their generall, became slaues to their affections; when the Citties heard of his losse, the magistrate and meane men, the Prince and Plebeian came out to meete him: they fixed Crownes on his Hearse, cast flowers on his coarse, & stroue how to honour him being dead, that had so faithfully fought for them in life: yea his enemies contended with the conque∣rer for Funerall, thinking it a blessing to enioy his bones, whose valour had restrayned their ambition. If for Pelopidas the war∣riour, the Greekes were so passionate, what should wee bee in the losse of Elizabeth our peace-maker and Princesse, whose per∣fections are entombed in her enemies teares: whose losse hath made the mightie weake, the prudent diffident, the rich su∣spitions, the poore amazed, and all sorts hardes? Pelopidas ver∣tues were onely the obiects of Greece, Elizabeths the wonders of the world: he onely a subduer of a Cittie or prouince, she the ter∣rour of many kingdomes: hee onely wonderfull in an Angle, She famous in the worlds fayre Anglia. But alas, why talke I of death in so diuine a subiect? she liues as yet in the hartes of her gratefull subiects, because they might not dye with her; liuing, they keepe her aliue in their louing hartes, the memorie of her death in their teares, her name in their tongues, her wordes in their eares, her liuely Image in their lasting imaginations: her mightines in her is an admirable mi∣racle, where nobilitie in the vitious is a grieuous infamie.
Heere like a true Ioseph hath she lost this cloake of mortalitie, to obtaine an immortall Crowne of glorye, and to escape the em∣bracements of the lewde worlde. How happily hath she cast off the prison of her mortalitie? how happy is she by death, that is deliuered frō the troubles of life? The enamoured Thisbe to flye from the iawes of a hungrie Lyonesse, cast off her vayle that sha∣dowed her shoulders; so this beloued of Christ, to escape that Lyon of perdition, that raging wandreth to seeke whom he may deuour, hath disburdened her selfe of her earthly ornamēts, hath choakte the rauenous enemie of mankinde, by casting her earth in his teeth: Happy happy Elizabeth, that hath forsaken the Ba∣bilon of this world, to obtaine her Countrie the heauēly Paradice. The Moone (as the Philosophers write) is ecclipsed by the shadow of the earth, and nothing more obscureth the soule then this prison of the bodye. Since therfore our Elizabeth hath cast off her earthly vayle to get a heauenly Priuiledge; let vs mode∣rate our passions by imagining her felicitie, since what she lost was not in her possession to keep; and what she hath, is a greater purchase then coniecture can apprehend. The generous young man Crates, forsooke his possessions to buye an heritage in Philosophye. Diogines left his Countrie and house. Democritus lost his eyes, to apprehend knowledge. How farre better a match hath our Soueraigne made, that for her pos∣sessions in earth, hath got the Paradice in heauen? that for her earthlye prison, hath attayned a heauenly mantion? that for her eyes that beheld the vanities on earth, hath gotten the meanes to beholde the paradice of heauen? Plato in his lawe, interdicted the vse of lamentation in Funerals, neither thought he it requisit to lament publiquelie, or conuey the Coarse to his Tombe with teares and sorowfull exclamations, because (as the Philosophers say) teares yeild no remedye in tribulation. But had Plato liued to beholde these times, and considered the blessings we posses∣sed whilste she liued; how carefully she guided the helme of common-weale, and faithfully defenced her Countrye from no∣uations;
how prouidently she fore-stalled the audacious de∣signes of her enemies; how constannly she with-stood her grea∣test dangers; he would doutles haue remitted a great part of his austeritie, and saluted her Hearse with some lamentable Elegie. There is a Lake (as Aristotle reporteth) neere vnto the riuer of Eridanus, wherin (if any Poets fiction may beare credit of faith) proud Phaeton being strooken with lightning, was final∣ly drowned. The water of this Lake is in qualitie hot, in odour greeuous, fearfull in beholding. Heerof no creature drinketh, but he dyeth: heer-ouer no bird flyeth, but he is drowned. Of the nature of this riuer, is her losse we lament for: The proudest enemie that beholdeth it is drowned in confusion: The teares that are wept on it, blinde the eyes with their scalding. The odours that perfume her Hearse, are of the nature of va∣pours drawne vp by the Sun, which ascend in fume but desend in shewers. He that beholdeth this Hearse, how can he choose but feare, since ouer it he may meditate on the vncertainties of life? what brutish or sauadge nature, beholding this sight and feeding his eyes on her Monument, but will dye with sorow? or what soule houering in the ayre ouer this disconsolate Hearse, dissolueth not into teares? (if exempted soules may be subiect to passions.) I am amazed and can no more, and your iudgements shall require no further discourse at my hands: the reason is, because others glories may be expressed in words and writings, wher∣as hers cannot be aptly described but in wonder and silence. I will therfore supply with my teares, what I fayle in my wordes: & if any aske why I end so abruptlye: let the Poet answer who can truly iudge of passion, Curae leues loquntur ingentes stupent.
A true Subiects sorowe, for the losse of his late Soueraigne. I Ioyne not handes with sorowe for a while, To soothe the time, or please the hungrie cares: Nor do inforce my mercinarie stile, No feigned liuerye my Inuention weares. Nor do I ground my fabulous discourse On what before hath vsually bene seene: My greife doth flowe from a more plentious source, From her that dy'd a virgin and a Queene. You Cristall Nimphes that haunt the banks of Thames, Tune your sad Timbrils in this wofull day: And force the swift windes and the sliding streames To stand a while and listen to your Lay. Your fading Temples bound about with vewe, At euery step your hands deuoutly wring, Let one notes fall anothers height renewe, And with compassion your sad Naenia sing. Graces and Muses waite vpon her Hearse: Three are the first, the last the sacred Nine: The sad'st of which, in a blacke tragique verse, Shall sing the Requiem passing to her shrine.
An Ebon Charriot to support the Beere, Drawne with the blacke steedes of the gloomy night: Stooping their stiffe Crests, with a heauie cheere, Stirring compassion in the peoples sight. The Pyle prepard where on her body lyes, In Cipresse shadowes sit you downe forlorne: Whose bowes be dew'd with plenty of your eyes, (For her with griefe) the Branches shall adorne. Let fall your eye-lids like the Sunnes cleere set, When your pale hands put to the vestall flame: And from your brests, your sorowes freely let, Crying one Beta and Elizas name. Vpon the Alter, place your Virgin spoyles, And one by one with comelinesse bestowe: Dianaes buskins and her hunting toyles, Her empty quiuer and her stringles bowe. Let euery Virgin offer vp a teare, The richest Incence nature can alowe: And at her tombe (for euer yeare by yeare) Pay the oblation of a mayden vowe. And the tru'st vestall the most sacred liuer, That euer harbored an vnspotted spirit, Retaine thy vertues, and thy name for euer, To tell the world thy beautie and thy merrit.
Wher's Collin Clout, or Rowland now become, That wont to leade our Shepheards in a ring? (Ah me) the first, pale death hath strooken dombe, The latter, none incourageth to sing. But I vnskilfull, a poore Shepheards Lad, That the hye knowledge onely doe adore: Would offer more, if I more plenty had, But comming short, of their aboundant store, A willing heart that on thy fame could dwell, Thus bids Eliza happily farewell. FINIS.
THE True Order and formall proceeding at the Funerall of the most high, renovvned, fa∣mous and mightye Princesse, Elizabeth of England, France & Irealnd, late Queene: from White-hall to the Cathe∣dral Church of Westmin∣ster. The 28. day of Aprill. 1603. BEfore thou reade, prepare thine eyes to weepe, If that thine eyes containe one liquid teare: Or if thou canst not mourne, fall dead in sleepe, For naught but death such sorrow can out-weare. Twill grieue heereafter soules as yet vnborne, That one soules losse, did make so many morne. Did make so many mourne? oh heauie time That brought a Period to her happie life. But cruell death, the fatall stroke was thine, Her losse is ours, heauen thereby gaines a wife. Yet had not sin bin hug'd in th' armes of Pride, England had smil'd, and heauen had lost a Bride. But now, oh now, our mourning weedes are on, And many thousand blacks for her are worne: Which do demonstrat that Eliza's gone, For whose vntimely losse so many morne. What these sad mourners are, good reader see: And seeing reade, and reading, weepe with me.
Queene Elizabeths Funerall. These persons heer-after named, came in their place and order as was appoynted. Also the names of such Noble∣men & Gentlemen, as caryed the Standerds & other Ornaments at the Funerall. First, Knight Marshals men to make roome. Then folowed 15. poore men. Next, 260. poore women. foure and foure in a ranke. Then, Seruants of Gentlemen, Esquires, & Knights. Two Porters. Four Trumpeters. Rose, purseuant at Armes. Two Sergeants at Armes. The Standerd of the Dragon. borne, by the worshipfull sir George Boucher. Two Querries leading a horse couered in blacke cloth. Messengers of the Chamber. Children, Of the Almondry. Children of the Woodyard. Children of the Scullery. Children and Furners of the Pastry, Scalding house, and Larder. Then folowed Groomes, being: Wheat-porters. Coopers. Wine-porters. Conducts in the Bakehouse. Bel-ringer. Maker of spice-bags Cart-takers, chosen by the boord. Long Carts. Cart-takers. Of the Almonry. Of the Stable, Woodyard. Scullery. Pastry. Scalding-house. Poultrye. Caterye. Boyling-house. Larder. Kitchin. Lawndrie. Ewerie. Confectionary. Waferie. Chaundrye. Pitcher-house.
Groomes. Buttrie. Seller. Pantrye. Bake-house. Counting-house. Then, Noble-mens and Em∣bassadours seruants. and, Groomes of the Chamber. Foure Trumpeters. Blewemantle. A Sergeant at Armes. The Standerd of the Greyhoūd borne by Master Herbert, brother to the Erle of Pem∣brooke. Yeomen: being Seruitors in the Hall. Cart-takers. Porters. Almonrye. Herbengers. Wood-yard. Scullery. Pastrye. Poultrye & Scalding-house. Purueyers of the Poultrye. Purueyers of the Acatrie. Yeomen. Stable. Boyling-house. Larder. Kitchin. Ewerye. Confectionarye. Waferye. Purueyer of the Waxe. Tallow-Chandler. Chaundrye. Pitcher-house. Brewers. Butterye. Purueyers. Seller. Pantrye. Garneter. Bake-house. Counting-house. Spicerye. Chamber. Robes. Wardrobe. Erles and Countesses seruants. Foure Trumpeters. Portcullis. A Sergeant at Armes. Standerd of the Lyon, borne by M. Thomas Somerset.
Two Querries leading a horse trapped with blacke veluet. Sergeant of the Vestrie. Gentlemen of the Chappel in Copes, hauing the Children of the Chappel in the mid∣dle of their company, in sur∣plices, all of them singing. Clarkes. Deputie Clarke of the market. Clarkes extraordinarye. Cofferer. Dyet. M. Cooke for the housholde. Pastrie. Larder. Scullerye. Wood-yard. Poultrye. Bake-house. Acatrie. Stable. Sergeants. Gent▪ Harbenger. Wood-yard. Scullerye. Pastrye. Caterye. Larder. Ewerie. Seller. Sergeants. Pantrie. Bake-house. M. Cooke of the Kitchin. Clarkes of the Equerrie. Second clarke of the Chaūdry. Third Clark of the Chaundry. Second Clark of the Kitchin. Third Clark of the Kitchin. Super-visors of the Dresser. Surueyer of the Dresser for the Chamber. Musitians. Apothicaries. Chirurgians. Sewers of the Hall. Marshall of the Hall. Sewers of the Chamber. Groom-Porter. Gent. Vshers quarter wayters Clarke. Marshall. Auenor. Chiefe Clark of the wardrobe Chiefe Clark of the Kitchin. Two Clarkes Controllers. Clarkes of the Green-cloth. M. of the Housholde. Sir Henry Cocke Cofferer. Rouge Dragon.
The Banner of Chester, borne by the Lord Zouch, be∣tweene two Sergeants at Armes. Clarkes of the Counsell. Clarkes of the priuie Seale. Clarkes of the Signet. Clarkes of the Parliament. Doctors of Phisicke. Q Chaplaines. Secretaries, for the Latine, & French tongues. Rouge-Crosse. The Banner of Cornwall, borne by the Lord Herbert (eldest sonne to the Earle of Worce∣ster) betweene two Serge∣ants at Armes. Cheife Officers to the Lord Maior of London. Aldermen of London. Soliciter. Attourney. Sergeants at Law. M. of the Reuels. M. of the Tents. Knights, bachelers. Lord cheife Baron. Lord Cheife Iustice, of the Common Plees. M. of the Iewell-house. Knightes, which haue beene Embassadours. Gentlemen Agents. Sewers for the Queene. Sewers for the bodye. Esquires of the bodye. Gent. of the priuye Chamber. Gentlemen Pencioners, hol∣ding their Pol-axes heades downe-wards, couered all with blacke. Heere Reader stay: & if thou aske me whie. Tis to intreate thee beare them company. But if th' high spirit cannot weepe so lowe, Weepe with these flowers of honour that drooping goe. Lancaster. The Banner of Wales, borne by Viscount Bindon. Lord Mayor of London. Sir Iohn Popham. Sir Iohn Fortescue.
Sir Robert Cicill, Principall Secretarie. Controller of the housholde. Treasurer of the housholde. Masters of Requests. Agents for Venice and for the Estates. Windsor. The Banner of Ireland, borne by the Earle of Clanricard. Barons. Bishops. Erles eldest sonnes. Viscounts. Dukes second sonnes. Erles. Marquesses. Bishop of Chichister, Almner, and Preacher at the Fune∣rall. Lord Keeper. Arch-Bishop of Canterburie. French Embassadour. Foure Sergeants at Armes. The great imbrodered Banner of England, borne by the Earle of Pembrooke, assisted by the Lord Howard of Ef∣fingham. Somerset & Richmond. Yorke, Helme & Crest. Chester, Target. Norrey, K. at Armes. Swoord. Clarenciaux, K. at Armes. Cote. Art thou yet dry, as if thou hadst not wept? Reade further then, and thou wilt force a teare. But hadst thou scone her figure as she slept, In memorie, thou would'st her semblance beare. Whose deere remembrance would so touch thy minde, That in thy passion thou no meane could'st finde.
The liuely picture of her Maiesties whole body in her Parlia∣ment robes with a Crowne on her head, and a Scepter in her hand, lying on the corpes inshrin'd in leade, and balmed couered with Purple-veluet: borne in a Charriot drawne by foure Horses trapt in Blacke-veluet. Gentlemē Vshers, with white roddes. A Canopie ouer the Corpes, borne by 6 Knights. Six Earles, assistants vnto the bodye. On Each side the Corpes, 6. Ba∣nerols, caryed by 12. No∣ble-men. Footemen. The Earle of Worcester maister of the horse, leading the Pal∣frey of Honour. Two Esquiers and a groome to attend & leade him a way. Gentleman vsher of the priuie Chamber. Garter K. at Armes. The Lady Marques of North∣hampton, Chiefe mourner: assisted by the Lord Trea∣surer & the Lord Admirall: her traine caryed vp by two Countesses, and Sir Iohn Stanhop, master Vicecham∣berlaine. Two Earles assistants to her. 14. Countesses assistants. Countesses. Ladies of honour. Viscountesses. Earles daughters. Baronesses. Maides of honour of the pri∣uie Chamber. Captaine of the Guard, with all the Guard following, fiue, & fiue in a ranke, holding their Holberds downeward. Loe heere are all that in blacke weedes do mourne, And now me thinkes I soe thy count'nance turne: What trill thy teares? nay (Reader) then a don The firmament containes but one cleore Sun.
And since that Delia is from hence bereauen, We haue an other Sun ordein'd by heauen. God graunt his virtues may so glorious shine, That after death he may be crown'd diuine. Amen. The 12. Bannerols, vvere caried by 12. Barons: beginning at the yongest first. The first Banner, was of King Henry the second, & Elenor of Aquitaine. Caried by the Lord Norris. The second, of King Iohn, & Isabel of Angolisme: caried by the Lord Compton. The third, of King Henry the third, and Elenor of Arragon: caried by the Lord Chandois. The fourth, of King Edward the first, and Elenor of Castillia: caried by the Lord Compton. The fift, of King Edward the second, and Isabel of France: caried by Lord Darcy of the South. The sixt, of King Edward the third, and Philippa of Haynolt: caried by Lord Cromwel. The seuenth, of Edmond of Langley Duke of Yorke, & Isabel of Castil: caried by Lord Windsor. The eight, of Richard Erle of Cambridge, and Anne Mortimer: caried by Lord Darcy of the North. The ninth, of Richard Duke of Yorke, and Cicely Neuill: caried by Lord Dudley.
The tenth, of King Edward the fourth, and Elizabeth Wooduile: caried by Lord Gray. The eleuenth, of King Henry the seuenth, and Eliza∣beth, daughter to King Edward the fourth: caried by Lord Cobham. The twelfe, of Henry the eight, and Anne Bulleine, Father and mother to our late deceased Queene: caried by the Lord de la ware. Viuat Iacobus: Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae et Hiberniae Rex. FINIS.
