19078 99855297 20783
¶ AN ADMONITION TO the Towne of Callays. VVhē as I call to remēbrāce how many wayes God hath sought,Englād strai¦eth frō the gospel, and Callays fol∣loueth the sa¦me. to induce the to repētāce (O Callays, thow towne of myne educatiō) & on the other syde thine in∣durate rebelliō, & hypocritical dissimulation in folowinge the footsteppes of thy mother Englād, I cānot but with teares lamēt thyne emynēt destructiō,Lam. 1. as the Prophet Ieremie be∣wayled the subuersiō of his Cyte Ierusalem.God hath fought alme∣ants to call Callays to repentance. For what thīge hath god done in tymes paste to other coūntries & townes to cal thē to re∣pētance, that he hath nor performed the lyke vnto the, & to thy murmuringe mother, with a great deale more?Mat. II. Hath he not (as the pro∣uerbe pronoūceth) piped vnto the pleasāt sō¦ges, & yet thow haste not reioyced?Luc. 7. Hath he not also played vnto the morninge notes, & yet thow hast not lamēted? O what a melo∣dious harmonie was the swere sōge of his ho∣ly gospel in thine eares, coupled with the sice re ministratiō of his holy Sacramētes, & that vnder the autorite of a moste ℣tuouse & in∣nocēt kynge?Hon Callais hath reioy∣ced at the prechige of the gospel. But how dideste thow reioice thereat? For sothe in the libertie of the flesh e & nor in the fredome of the spirite. For vn∣der the title of that spiritual melodie, the car∣nal mā reioiced in his carnalite: the couitou∣se, in his couitousnes: the Extorsioner, in his
extorsiō:The vvic∣ed make the gospel a cloc¦ke for theire vvichednes the ābitious, in his ābitiō: the drō∣kard, in his drōkenes: the Prowd, in his Pryde: the Adulterer, in his Adulterie, in makīge the same a cloke for their impietie. Where as thei shoulde haue reioiced in a spiritual ioye laudī∣ge the lorde that so louingly in the middes of darcknes & ignorācie had visited thē with the light of his gospel. But whē as God saue that this his benignite did no thinge moue thy mo¦ther, nor yet the, to reioice in the praise of his name,God for in: gratitude ta¦keth a vvaie his gospel & sendeth pa¦pistry. & in the amendmēt of thy life. Then thought he it highe time to take from you the pipe of mirth & cōsolatiō, & to sende the mornīge songe of sorrowe & lamētatiō. For in stede of his gospel he hath sent you papist∣rie: in stede of his holy Sacramētes, the blas∣phemus masse,For a christi¦an Kïge, god giueth an I∣dolatrous Quene. 3. Reg. 18. & vnsa℣y sacrefice of the bred∣dē god: & in stede of a moste christiā kinge, a moste wicked & idolatrous Quene. A very Ie¦zabel, that is, a frinde to Baal & his pristes, & an vtter enemie to god & his people. Yea a nother Athalia, that is, an vtter distroier of hir owne kinerede,4. reg. 11. kyngdome & coūtrie, a hater of hir owne subiectes, a lo℣ of strāgers, & an vnnatural stepdame both vnto the & to thy mother Englāde. This is the morninge songe that the lorde now singeth vnto the, O thow vnkinde Callais. But how doest thou morne there at? Forsoth evē as before thou didest re∣ioice. For as before thou didest conuarte thy ioye frō a spiritual into a carnal reioicinge, euē so now where as thow shouldest mourne in sprite, in bewailinge thy sinnes, ingratitude & infidelite, in repētinge & tournīge vnto the lorde, who seketh al meanes to reclaime the. Thow mournest in the flesh with the Gergesi¦tes rather for the losse of thy hogges,Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Luc. 8. thine e∣arthly cōmodites, which Sathā in his tyrānous instrumēts hath, & his like to take a waie frō the, thē for the departure of Christ, his worde & sacramētes.Callais mor∣neth for fere of temporall plages & not for hir sines as did kinge Achab for the death of Naboth, Luc. 19. Esa. 5. Thow mournest rather for the tēporal plages which {pre}sētly thow felest, & gre¦ater forscest to folowe, thē for any desire thou hast of the kingdome of god, & the florishīge prosperite of the same, which now is taken a∣waie for thine ingratitude, & for not knowin¦ge the time of thy visitatiō. And therefor moste iustly hath the lorde brokē downe the hedge of the Englishe churche and made it a praie to the Romishe bore, & his sweinishe pa¦pistical pigges, which now vnmercifully wro∣teth vp the rootes & brāches thereof, in defi∣līge it with the stinkīge doūge of dissaiuable doctrine, & in stede of swete smellīge flowers doeth plāte therein the odiouse wedes of ido∣latrie & hypocrisie. The which so plētifully sprīgeth vp at this {pre}sēt, that or it be lōge, it wilbe thorow ripe for the sickle of the lordes indignatiō.Apoc. 14. For the tares of sathā with ī these &. yeres sowē ī the & thi mother,Mat.
13. hath brought forth more plēty of increse, thē did the good seade of the gospel in 7. yeres before. O la∣mentable alteration. Who euer woulde haue supposed (O Callais) that thow beīg so perfitly plāted in the plētiful knowlege of the ℣itie,Callais in ste¦de of grapes bringeth forth thor∣nes. Math. 21. Esa. 5. & so sēsiblie hedged about with the sin cere vnderstādinge of the gospel, as a profita∣ble vine to ylde plēty of good frute, that thow wouldest haue brought forth such thornes & breers as appereth in the at this {pre}sēt? Who e¦uer woulde haue thought that Callays cōtai∣nīge so many erneste gospellers in outward ap¦parēce,The doinges of idolaters & hypocri¦tes. that there should haue bī sene in it, such gaddīge to the masse, such mūblīge in the prys¦tes eare, such gapinge after a strāge god, such gaddīge a processiō, such haūtinge of papistrie such dissimulatiō in Idolatrie, such regestringe of names in the booke of the Beaste to the o∣pē renoūcinge of Christ, as is & hath byne v∣sed in the of late, to the great dishonour of god, the greuous sorrowe of thy frindes, & to the no litel reioisinge of thyne enimies. But it stādeth with equite that such as haue no plea∣sure to walke in the shinīge light of the gospel, that thei do stūble & fal into the palpable dar∣knes of errour & ignorātie. For how cā it o∣therwise be chossē,vvhō Christ forsaketh, Sa¦than fourth uvith poces¦seth. 1. Pet. 5. Mat.
12. but that if the light do lea∣ue vs, darknes must nedes ouerwhelme vs: & if verite ons forsake vs, errour must nedes pos¦sesse vs: that is, if Christ do relīquishe vs, then must Sathā nedes ceasō vpō vs. For he is that toring liō that seketh cōtinually to deuoure. Who, if he ons finde the house of our hartes cle¦ne swept & ēpty of godlines, thē retourneth he with 7. deuels worsse thē hīselfe, & so shal oure ēde be worse thē the beginīge, the which thinge is al redy ℣ified in a great manie,1. Pet. 4. who beinge ons clēced, do with the sowe, wallawe thēselfes in the stinkinge puddell of papistrie againe. Wherefor (my derely beloued) I beseche the in the bowels of Iesus Christ (whose wealth I wyshe for as myne awne) that thow do not ressayue the grace of god in vaine, neither yet be ashamed of his gospel, where of in his mer∣cie he hath made the a partaker, frō the which thow semeste now to slyde a side by dissimu∣latiō, by plainge cole vnder cādelstick (as the prouerbe goeth) by rōninge with the hare & holdige with the hoūde,The great dissimulatiō of Callais, by goinge vnto god in thine harte & vnto the deuel in thy body, by sainge one thinge with thy mouthe & thi kinge the cōtrary with thy mīde, much like vn¦to the Israelites in the tyme of Iesabels raigne, who couitinge to halt ō both sydes, with their hartes to serue God,3. Reg. 18. and with their bodis to serue Baal, accordinge to the Quenes proce∣dinge. They straied from the narowe path of godes sauour, īto the brode waie of his desple¦asure,Mat. 7. prouokinge him thereby to plage the lā¦de with sterilite & barrynes so that he kepte raine & dewe from the earth for space of in.3. reg. 17. yeres and vi. mounthes.
Cōpare that storie with thy tyme, & state of thy mother Englād, & thow shalt finde thē dis¦agreable in no thinge but ōly in this, that god¦des plages are not yet so fully performed vpō the & hir, as fel vpō thē, but do now firste of al begine to appere & most certaīly wil followe, al though not in the same forme, yet to the like ēde, if she & thow cōtineue & perseuere in the like iniquite as you haue begone.A compari∣son betvvix¦te Israel and Englande. ʒ. reg. 18. ʒ. Reg. 21. For as in the time of Iezabels raigne the prophetes of the lorde were slaine in Israel, so are thei now in Englāde: Thē iuste Naboth loste hir vini∣arde by oppressiō, so doeth many rightous mē now in Englāde theire lādes & pocessiō: The people of god thē in Israel were forced to flee into strāge coūtries,ʒ. Reg. 19 so are thei now in Englād, Other were imprisoned & most cruelly intre∣ated, so are they now in Englād.ʒ. Reg. 18. Other some were faine to crepe into holes & caues, rōnīge frō poste to piller, liuinge in moste painful pe∣nurie, glad to haue bread & water, how many in Englād at this present are cōpelled to do the like, experiēce teaceth in al partes of the lāde. The Rulers, the Maiestrates & multitude dissē¦bled both with God & the Quene, euē so do thei now in Englād. The lorde thē resarued so me of the nobilite in Israel, as Obadia & other, who showed thēselfes ℣y fauorable vnto his seruātes, so hath god likewise reserued some of the nobilite of thy mother Englād (althōught thei be but few in nōber) as wildes to preser∣ue his people frō the tyranny of Antichrist in his blouddy mēbers (as thow Callais cāst suf∣ficiētly witnes the same). No thinge doubti∣ge but that thei shal finde fauoure with Oba∣dia in the sight of Elias & Iehu,3. Reg. 18.4. Reg. 9.10. whē as the lor¦de shal stire thē vp to ouerthrowe the Auters of Baal, and to distroie his idolatrous Prestes, with theire Princesse-Iezabel. As Israel & England a∣greeth in sin¦nes so are thei like to a¦gree in po∣nishment.This farre agreeth Englād with Israel, and as thei agree ī grauite of sinnes, so (I fere me) thei are like to agree in grauite of ponishmēt. For the lorde is the same aeternal, immutable God, that he was then, fauorable in mercie vnto the penitēt & iuste in iudgmēt vntō the wicked. The plages af Israel in the daies of Iezabell were these, derth, famine,2. Reg. 17 18.20.22. and mortalite of man and beaste, warre, battail, and inuasion of the enimie, to the great spoyl of the lande, and slaughter of the people, the kynge slaine,4. Reg. 10. the Quene distroied, and al their posterite consumed from the earth. Praier very nedefull for England.This was the Viale of the Lordes indigna∣tion in those daies powred forth vpon Israel for the sinnes of the same. Let vs praye that the like or rather greater do not happen vnto Englande, whose sinnes waied in the ballance of Goddes iustice, are no doubt foūd a great deale heuier.
And thow (Callays) let the state of Sa∣maria in those dayes be an admonition to moue the to repentance:4. Reg. 6 Let Samari∣a be a vuar∣ninge to Cal∣lais. which for the sinnes before expressed, was not ōly besegede with the power of a most puisant prince, but also so extremely oppressed with famine, that the peo¦ple therein were cōpelled, to eate theire owne doūge, & the filthe & doūge af theire beastes & byrdes: yea, the mothers were cōpelled to eate their owne childrē, such was the wooful wrath of god vpō thē for their sinful dissimu¦latiō & declininge frō god to Idolatrie, as wit¦nesseth the holy scriptures.4. Reg. 6 Let that exāple (I saie) O Callays moue the to throw downe & hūble thy selfe vndre the mighty hāde of god in cōfessinge thy sinnes, & bewailige thy wea¦knes, that so sone haste bin o℣blowē with so litel a blaste of tēpratiō:Callais is go¦ne back frō the gospell vnto papist∣ry. That so sone haste go ne backe frō the knowē truthe & pure religiō of god, vnto that polluted puddel of papistry by dissimulatiō, where as thy duety had bin be sore many other (cōsidering thine anciēt gos∣pelick professiō vniuersally knowē) to haue stāde stedfaste in the truthe, hauiuge for thy manifeste cōfirmatiō therein, the moste certai¦ne worde of god, the testimonie of thine ow∣ne cōsciēce, the exäple of a gret nōber of cōstāt marters, & the continual admonition of many godly mē, now flede into strāge lādes, to saue theire lifes for a praie vntil the determinate ti¦me, & in the meane ceason to be profitable vn¦to you at home. Wherfor as thine vnfained frinde & lo℣
e∣uē such a one as for thy preseruatiō coulde be cōtēted to taste much miserie) do ernestly ex¦horte the to fle vnto repētance,The oneli re¦medi to pre∣serue Calais from distruc¦nion, is repē¦tance. the onely in∣sallible remedie, able not onely to restore thy health, but also to preserue the frō distruction wich is eminēt ouer thy beade.
Nota.For what kingdome or coūtrie, Citie or tow∣ne, mā or womā was there e℣ that beinge in∣fected with the like sicknes of sinne,Gen. 7.8.19. 4. reg. 17. Dan. 5. Vvith Sax∣ons. Danes. Britōs, and nou vvith Spaniardes. did not pe¦rishe therein, if this resaiued remedie did not {pre}¦uēt the same. For wāt of this remedie, was not the firste worlde drowned? Samaria distroy∣ed? Babelō in one night subuerted? And thy mother Englād thrise with strāgers infected, & now the fourth time like to be desolated? Yf this remedie of repētāce do not spedely {pre}∣uēt it? On the other side where as this reme∣die hath bin in time resaiued, the dāger bein∣ge ne℣ so great, yet hath it al waies deliuered frō distructiō. As the exāples of lerusalē, Beru¦lia, Niniue & many other do euidētly declare, which onely by this meanes, as testifieth the scriptures, remoued the plages {pre}sently purpo∣sed againste thē. O that thow hadeste the like grace to fle vnto this remedie in this thine ap¦prochinge peril: which although thow (blin∣ded with the loue of thy selfe, carnal securite,Other {pre}sai∣ue that Cal∣laies seeth not. & cōfidēce in thine owne strēght) doest not now presaiue, yet thy frīdes, who with a more vigilāt eye watche ouer thy wealth do eui∣dētly behold spedely to approche. Wherefor (I saie) in time rise vp frō thy sinne. Cease frō thine idolatrie. Throwe awaie the mātel of thine hypocrisie. Washe thy hādes in inno∣cencie, & be contented rather to suffer afflictiō with the sainctes of god, thē with ease to ēioye the pleasure of sinne for a ceason, the ende where of wilbe thy vtter subuersion. For true¦ly thow that haste refused to drike of the lor∣des cuppe of tribulatiō with his holions, thou shalt most certainely taste of the dregges of destructiō with the wicked: where of thy mo∣ther Englād is like shortly to be a partaker. For there is no token that is the foregoer of destructiō,All tokens vvhich are the forego∣ers of dest∣ructiō fulfil¦led in englād but it is apparant in hir. For if the subuersiō of godes pure religion thē crectin∣ge vp of idolatrie & superstitiō, the raginge raigne of traiterous tyrātes, the dayly decaye of the prudēt & honorable, the tyrānous cru∣altie of the clargie,Esa. 3. the dissembling impietie of the laiety, the abondāt shedinge of innocēt bloude, the cruel imprisoninge, banishinge & persecutinge of the seruantes of God. If the∣se signes (I saie) haue al waies bin the forgo∣ers of rewyne & distruction, as the stories of the holy scriptures doeth euidently witnesse, then let not thine vnsaightful mother thinke to escape the same, in whom at this present al these tokens are euident. And especially the vniuersal shēdinge of the innocēt bloud of the constant witnesses of Iesus Christ now flowinge through out euery Shire, Cyty and Towne cryinge for spedy vengance: The which with out al doubt is cominge, euen as it were with in a kenninge.vvhen Eng∣lād is plaged let not Cal∣lais thine to escape free. And doest thow thincke (O Callais) thow that arte the doughter of so wycked a mother (if thow be founde partaker of hir impiety, that thow shalte not taste of hir plages? Yeas truely: And that paraduenture with the fyrste. For commonly when as God purposeth to ponyshe the parent, he beginneth with the chylde. And therefor thy lott ys so much the nerer, for that thow doest not one¦ly lye in the waye of the enemye as a butte against his arrowe,Callais is co¦uited of ma∣ni. but also forthy strenght, beawty and commodite thow art desyred of many. And that thinge (as sayeth the prouerbe) with much a do is preserued, that is of diuers couited and desyred,Callais is in the custody of a vvomā. especiallye when as the custodie thereof is in the handes of a woman, who with great difficultye cā restrayne any Iewel that she hath from him, whom she loueth, he crauinge the same. Nota. Vvhy the hinge loueth the Quene.And doest thow thynck that he wyll not craue, who loueth hir onely for hyr trea¦sure and Iewels, and not for hir person? And supposeste show that he wyll not as∣ke the (the nexte Iewel vnto the beste,Callais the nexte ieuell vnto the bes¦te. and lyinge so much for his commodyte) that hath all redy attempted to haue all togy∣ther? Yeas be thow sure of it.
The braggī∣ge boste of the Spaniar∣des.The Spaniardes cā boste & make their auasite that if their kinge had the, he would both bry¦del Frāce & rule Englād at his pleasure. And therefor he seketh but oportunite, to optaine, that which his harte so much desireth.
The french Kinge vvat∣cheth but for oportunite to recouer Callais.On the other side the Frēche kī that which his ancesters of lōge time haue loste. And whē for that pur¦pose was there euer better occasion ministred thē at this {pre}sent? For thy mother the staffe of thy defence,England at this present scat able to helpe callais is now so debilitated & weake∣ned as wel in worthy Captaines & valiāte Sol¦diours, as in mony, monitions & victail, that she is scant able to defende, & releue hir selfe: much les then to succor the in thy necessite. Thus art chow inuironed with enimies on e∣uery syde,Callais van∣ting frendes, is inuironed vvith eni∣mie. without hauinge any assured frinde to leane vnto. Wherefor I admonishe the to cōsider thy {pre}sent state, before it be to late, & in to what eminent danger thy sinne hath brought the. But whether now wilt thow turne the for they preseruatiō?psal. 137. The strēght of Callais is to vveahe for hir defē∣ce, if the lor∣de do not {pro} teete thesa. me. Vnto thine ow¦ne strēght? Alas in veine. For in vaine doeth the watchmā watch the Cyte, if the lorde do not kepe the same. And how shal he kepe the, thow that hast made no cōsciēce to forsake him the wholsome water of life, in digginge vp againe the filthy Cestoms of papistrie & Idolatrie. wilt thow turne the for helpe vnto thy worthy Gouernour & prudēt coūsailourst In vaine also.callais is li∣lie to lose hir frindes. For they shalbe takē awaie frō the. Wilt thow require aide of some of the no bilite that seme to fauour the. Euē thei parad∣uēture shal betraie the. For how should they loue the, that passe not of thy mother, but seke al possible meanes to alie nate hir frō hir law∣ful enhe ritors vnto forriners & strāgers. Fi∣nally wilt thou seke for succour of thy ancient Soldiours & worthy warriours, of thy louin∣ge cōmons & wealthy marchātes? That is al∣so in vaine. For with what hartes shal thei de∣sende the (theire towne, the staffe of theyre earthly cōmodites) that haue showed thēselfes so faint harted in stādinge to the ℣ire of god∣des worde, the shoranker of their aeternal sal∣uatiō. As easely wil their suffer them selfes to be thretened & psuaded to resigne the o℣, as they haue al redy cōceaded without any ap∣parāt dāger, to relinquishe the pure religiō of god, & the fredome of the gospel, to be co∣me the bonde slaues of Antichriste the Pope. For truely such as haue showed thēselfes fait harted in the one, cannot be valiant in the o∣ther: excepte such as haue setled their souer∣aigne felicite on earthly thinges, whose attēpp¦tes cōmonly the lorde doeth not prosper. For such as for the safegard of theire lifes do denie him, & yet for the preseruation of temporal thinges do hassarde the same, thei do thereby plainely declare; how litel thei regarde heauē & how much thei are addicte vnto the earth. Who cōmonly (such is the iuste iudgmēt of God) in sekinge to saue their goodes, do lose theyre liffes, in that they haue no thynge est∣emed the lyffe of the Soule in respecte of the earthly pleasures here. But whether now (O Callays) wylt thow turne the in this thy ne extreme necessite? Euen vnto the Lorde God thyne onely soueraigne remedie: Who onely in ryme of nede is able to preserue and delyuer the: and now onely able, but also moste wyllynge, so thow turne the vnto him. For he hath promised by his prophe∣tes, that if we turne vnto him,Zach. 1. ler. 3. Ioel. 2. Hou Callais ought to tur¦ne vnto the Lorde, Esa. 1. he wil turne vnto vs, to showe mercye vpon vs. Whe∣refor O thow backslydinge Towne turne vn∣to the Lorde thy God with al thy harte, from thy wicked waies, forsake thy sinnes, caste a∣waie thyne abhominations, and then shalt thow lyue, and the wrath of God shalbe tur∣ned into mercye. Turne vnto the lorde thy God (I saie) in repentance,Mat. 3. in fayght, in hattred of thy sinnes, in confessinge of thy∣ne offences, and in the amendment of thy lyffe. Turne vnto the Lorde thy God with the Cytes of Niniue and Betulia,Ionas. 3. Iudith. 8. and then wil the Lorde beholde the with mercie, and couer the vnder the whynges of his defence.
He wilbe thy Buckler, thy spere and shilde. He wil be thy fortresse, thy wal and bulwar∣ke. Al thyne enimies shall not preuaile a∣gaynste the. They may besege the, they may subtelly conspire to betraye the, but all in vaine.psal. 31.91. For the Lorde wil be thy watch∣man. Yea, he himselfe wil ringe the Alarom, Sound the trompet, Stryke vp the drome, & auance thy Stādart agaynst thyne aduersari∣es, in mouinge thyne harte into thyne owne defence, and assiste the in the same, as a thinge lawfull both by the lawes of God,Nota the lawes of the Lande, and instincte of nature. For thow art not so farre sworne to obaie, as by obedience to showe thy selfe a Traytresse to thyne owne country:hovu farre Callais is subiecte to the Quene. Neyther art thow so subiect to ths Quene, as for hir sake, to with drawe for euer thy subiection from the crow¦ne of Englande, and the ryghtful enhaeri∣tours of the same. Wherefore take hede: and make the Lorde of hostes be tymes thy frynde, and then thow nedeste not to passe who is thyne enemye.god vvil be vvraie the attemptes of traitors. For he wyl bewraye the dissemblinge deuyces of thy fay¦ned fryndes (but secret enemies) as he did the trayterouse coun∣sel of Achitophel, against his seruant Dauid.2 Reg. 17 For it is he that tur∣neth the deuyces of the vn∣godly into theyr owne destructi∣on. Wherefore gett the be tymes vn∣der his defence, and thow shalt not nede to fere the power of al thy aduersaryes.
But if thow dispice this frindly admonition,Callais is sie he, but she fe¦leth it not. persuadinge thy selfe that thow art in a better case, then in dede thow art, as the most parte of wordly persons do, euen in the extremite of death persuade vnto thēselfeslōge life: Thow shalt surely perishe in thy sinnes. Beleue not those flattringe Pharises that crie out in euery pulpet,The plages of England vuil come o¦uer to Cal∣lais as did the svvetīg¦siones, peace, peace, plenty, plentye, when as famine & distruction is at hande. Which now beginneth to appere in thy mother Englāde & wil shortly approche vnto the, al thoughe thou canneste not foresee the meanes, how, nor the time, whan. For of this be thow sure that God doeth neuer leaue such impiete. as is in the, longe ūponished. The waie to auoide it I haue shewed the, if now through thy negligence thow perishe,If callais nou perishe, it is not for vant of vvarnīge thy blou∣de be vpō thyne owne head. For I am free from the sa∣me. Saie not but that thow art warned. From Exile the .12. of April. 1557. R. P. Wicked people bringeth a Citie into decaie: but wysse mē set it vp againe.Prouerb. 29.
