20530 23060269 26156
DIVINE FANCIES: Digested into EPIGRAMMES, MEDITATIONS, AND OBSERVATIONS. BY FRA: QVARLES. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for IOHN MARRIOT, and are to be sold at his Shop in St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1633.
TO THE ROYALL BVDDE OF MAIESTIE, and Center of all our Hopes and Happinesse, CHARLES, Prince of Great BRITAINE, France and Ireland, SONNE and HEYRE Apparant to the High and Mighty CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great BRITAINE, FRANCE, and IRELAND, &c. Illustrious Infant: GIve mee leave to ac∣knowledge my selfe thy Servant, ere thou knowst thy Selfe my Prince: My Zeale burnes mee, and my desires are im∣patient:
My breeding Muse longs for greene fruit, and cannot stay thy ripenesse: Sweet Babe; The loyalty of my Service makes bold to conse∣crate these early Leaves to thy sa∣cred Infancie, not knowing how to glorifie themselues, more, then by the Patronage of such Princely In∣nocencie. Modell of Sweetnesse, Let thy busie Fingers entertaine this slender Present, and let thy harme∣lesse Smiles crowne it: When thy Infancie hath crackt the Shell, let thy Childhood tast the Kernell; In the meane while, let thy little hands and Eyes peruse it: Lugge it in thy ten∣der Armes, and lay thy burthen at thy Royall Parents feet; for whose sake, it may gaine some honor from their glorious Eyes. Heaven blesse thy Youth with Grace, and crowne
thy Age with Glorie: Angells con∣duct thee from the Cradle, to the Crowne: Let the English Rose, and the French Lilly florish in thy loue∣ly Cheeke: And let their united Co∣lours presage an euerlasting League. Let the eminent Qualities of both thy renowned Grand-fathers meet in thy Princely Heart; that thou mayst, in Peace, be honourable; and in Warre, victorious. And let the great addition of thy Royall Parents Vertues make thee vp a most incom∣parable Prince, the firme Pillar of our happines, and the future Object of the Worlds wonder Expected, and prayd for by Your Highnesses most Loyall and humble servant, FRA: QVARLES.
TO THE RIGHT HONOV∣rable and truely vertuous Lady, MARY Countesse of Dorset, Governesse to that Royall Infant, CHARLES, Prince of Great BRITAINE, France, and Ireland, the Mirror of unstained HONOVR. Most excellent LADY, YOV are that Starre, which stands over the place, where the Babe lyes; By whose dire∣ctions light, I am come from the East, to present my Myrrh, and Frankincense to the yong Child:
Let not our Royall JOSEPH, nor his Princely MARY be affrayd; there are no Herods here; We have all seene his Starre in the East, and have rejoyced: Our loyall hearts are full; for our eyes have seene him, in whom our Posterity shall bee blessed: To him, most hono∣rable Lady, I addresse my thoughts; To Him, I presume to consecrate these Lines; which, since it hath pleased our gracious Soveraigne to appoint you the Governesse of his Royall Infancy, I have made bold to present, first, to your noble hands; not daring, in my very thoughts to disjoyne, whom his Sacred Majestie, in so great Wisedome, hath put together; or to consider severally, where his Highnesse hath made so in vi∣olable a Relation. Madam, May your Honors increase with your howers, and let eternall Glory crowne your Urtues;
that when this Age shall sleepe in Dust, our Children, yet unborne, may honour your glorious Memory, under the hap∣pinesse of his Government, whose Go∣vernesse you are; which shall be daily the Subject of his Prayers, who is The sworne-Servant of your Ladiships Perfections, FRA: QVARLES.
To the Readers. REaders, I wil not (like One that knowes the strength of his owne Muse) commit Rape upon your Vnderstandings, nor rayle at your Ignorances, if our Wits jumpe not: I have written at my owne peril; understand you at your owne plea∣sures: I have nor so little Man in me, as to want my faults; nor so much Foole in me as to thinke it; nor so little Modesty, as to sweare it; nor so much Childe in me as to whine at Zoilus: My request is, That the faultles hand may cast the first stone, So although I cannot avoyd the common Lot of man, Error; I may escape the punishment of the Common Man, Censure. I heere present thee with a Hive of Bees; laden, some with Waxe, and some with Ho∣ney: Feare not to approach; There are no Waspes; there are no Hornets, here: if some wanton Bee should chance to buzze about thine eares, stand thy Ground, and hold thy
hands: There's none wil sting thee, if thou strike not first: If any doe; she hath Honey in her Bagge, will cure thee too: In playner tearmes, I present thee with a Booke of Fan∣cies; Among which, as I have none to boast of; so (I hope) I shall have none to blush at. All cannot affect all: If some please all; or all, some, 'tis more then I expect; I had once thought to haue melted the Title, and cast it into severall Bookes, and have lodg'd Obser∣vations, Meditations, and Epigrams by them∣selves; but new thoughts have taken place: I have required no helpe of Herauld, either to place, or to proclaime them. Cards, well shuffled, are most fit for Gamesters: And of∣tentimes, the pastime of Discovery adds plea∣sure to the Enioyment: The Generous Faulk∣ner had rather retrive his Partridge in the open Feilds, then meet her in his coverd Dish. On∣ly this: when you read a Meditation, let me en∣treate thee to forget an Epigramme. Fare-well.
AD LECTORES VTRIVS{que} GENERIS. Candide, si mala sint nostra inter carmina, parce; Et bona si quae sint, Zoile, parco tibi.
To GOD. GLorious and Great; whose power did divide The Waves, and made them Walls on either side; That didst appeare in Cloven-tongues of Fyre; Divide my thoughts: and with thy selfe, inspire My soule; O cleave my Tongue, and make it scatter Various Expressions in a various Matter; That like the painefull Bee, I may derive From sundry Flow'rs, to store my slender Hive: Yet, may my Thoughts not so divided be, But they may mixe againe, and fixe in Thee.
DIVINE FANCIES, Digested into EPIGRAMMES, MEDITATIONS, AND OBSERVATIONS. 1. On the Musique of Organs. OBserve this Organ: Marke but how it goes: 'T is not the hand of him alone that blowes The unseene Bellowes; nor the Hand that playes Upon th'apparent note-dividing Kayes,
That makes these wel-composed Ayres appeare fore the high Tribunall of thine ear: They both concurre: Each acts his severall part: Th'one gives it Breath; the other lends it Art. Man is this Organ: To whose every action Heav'n gives a Breath (a Breath without coaction) Without which Blast we cannot act at all; Without which Breath, the Vniverse must fall To the first Nothing it was made of: seeing In Him we live, we move, we have our Being: Thus fill'd with his Diviner breath, and back't With his first power we touch the Kayes and act: He blowes the Bellowes: As we thrive in skill, Our Actions prove, like Musicke, Good or Ill. 2 On the contingencie of Actions. I Saw him dead; I saw his Body fall Before Deaths Dart; whō tears must not recall: Yet is he not so dead, but that his Day Might have bin lengthen'd, had th'untrodden way To life beene found: He might have ose agin, If something had, or something had not bin: What mine sees past, Heav'ns eie foresaw to come He saw, how that contingent Act should summe The toall of his Dayes: His knowing Eye (As mine doth see him dead) saw he should die That very fatall howre; yet saw his death, Not so so necessary, but his Breath
Might beene enlarg'd unto a longer date, Had he neglected This, or taken That: All times to Heav'n are now, both first and last; He see things present, as we see them past. 3. On the Sacraments. THe Loves of Bread were five; the Fishes two, Whereof the Multitude was made partaker. Who made the Fishes? God: But tell me, who Gave being to the Loaves of Bread? the Baker: Ev'n so thse Sacraments, which some call seaven, Five were ordain'd by Man, and two, by Heaven. 4. On the Infancie of our Saviour. HAyle blessed Virgin, full of heavenly Grace, Blest above all that sprang from humane race; Whose Heav'n-saluted Womb brought forth in One, A blessed Saviour, and a blessed Son: O! what a ravishment 'thad beene, to see Thy little Saviour perking on thy Knee! To see him nuzzle in thy Virgin Brest! His milke white body all unclad, undrest; To see thy busie Fingers cloathe and wrappe His spradling Limbs in thy indulgent Lappe! To see his desprate Eyes▪ with Childish grace, Smiling upon his smiling Mothers face!
And, when his forward strength began to bloome, To see him diddle up and downe the Roome! O, who would thinke, so sweet a Babe as this, Should ere be slaine by a false-hearted kisse! Had I a Ragge, if sure thy Body wore it, Pardon sweet Babe, I thinke I should adore it, Till then, O grant this Boone, (a boone far dearer) The Weed not being, I may adore the Wearer. 5. On Iudas Iscariot. VVE raile at Iudas, him that did betray The Lord of life; yet doe it day by day. 6. On the life and death of Man. THe World's a Theater; The Earth, a Stage Plac'd in the midst; wheron both Prince & Page, Both rich and poore; foole, wiseman; base, and high; All act their Parts in Lifes short Tragedy: Our Life's a Tragedy: Those secret Roomes Wherein we tyre us, are our Mothers Wombes; The Musicke ush'ring in the Play, is Mirth To see a Manchild brought upon the Earth: That fainting gaspe of Breath which first we vent Is a Dumb-Shew, presents the Argumnt: Our new-born Cries that new-born Griefes bewray, Is the sad Prologue of th'ensuing Play:
False hopes, true feares, vaine ioyes, and fierce distracts Are like the Musicke that divides the Acts: Time holds the Glasse, and when the hower's run, Death strikes the Epilogue; and the Play is done. 7▪ On the seven liberall Sciences of a Christian. Grammar. IT is an Art, that teaches not t'excell In Writing, Speaking, as in Doing well. Logicke. IT is an Art sometimes of Plotting treason Against the Crowne and Dignity of Reason. Rhetoricke. IT is an Art, whereby he learnes t'encrease His knowledge of the time, to Hold his Peace. Arythmeticke. IT is an Art, that makes him apt to raise And number out Gods Blessings, and his Dayes. Musicke. IT is a potent Science, that infringes Strong Prison dores, and heaves them from their hinges.
Astronomie. IT is an Art of taking out the Lead From hi dull Browes, and lifting p the Head. Geometrie. IT is an Art, insructs him how to have The World in scorne; and measure out his Grave. 8. Christs foure houses. HIs first house was the blessed Virgins Wombe; The next, a Cratch; the third, a Crosse▪ the fourth a Tombe. 9. Of Light and Heate. MArk but the Sun-beames, when they shine most bright, They ld this lower world both heat & light: They both are Children of the selfe-same Mother, Twinnes; not subsisig one without the other; They both conspire unto the Common good, When, in their proper places, understood: Is't not rebellion against Sense to say, Light helps to quicken: Or, the Beames of day May lend a Heat, and ye no Light at all? 'Tis true, some obvious Shade may chance to fall Vpon the quickned Plnt, yet not so great, To quench the  of the Heate:
The Heate cannot be parted from the Light, Nor yet the Light from Heate; They neither might Be mingled in the Act, nor found asunder: Distinguish now fond man; or stay and wonder: Know then; Their vertues differ though themselves agree; Heat vivifies; Light gives man power to see The thing so vivifyed: no Light, no Heate; And where the heat's but small, the light's not great: They are inseparable, and sworne Lovers, Yet differing thus; That quickens; This discovers: Within these lines a sacred Myst'ry lurkes: The Heat resembles Faith: the Light; Good workes. 10. On Judas Iscariot. SOme curse that traytour Iudas life and lim▪ God knows, some curse thēselves, in cursing him. 11. On the possession of the Swine. WHen as our blessed Saviour did un-devill The Man possest; the Spirits, in conclusion, Entred the Swine (being active still in evill) And drove them headlong to their owne confusion. Drukards, beware, and be advised then, They'l find you as y'are Swine▪ if not, as Men:
12. On a SunDyall. THis Horizontall Dyall can bewray To the sad Pilgrim, the houre of the Day: But if the Sun appeare not his Adviser, His eye may looke, yet he prove n'er the wiser: Alas, alas; there's nothing can appeare, But onely Types, and shadow'd Figures there: This Dyall is the Scripture; and the Sun, Gods holy Spirit; Wee, the ookers on: Alas, that saceed Letter, which we read, VVithout the Quickning of the Spirit's dead: The knowledge of our Peace improves no better, Then if our Eye had not beheld a Letter: I, but this glorious Sun shines alwayes bright: I, but we often stand in our owne light: Vse then the day, for when the day is gon, There willl be darknes: there will be no Sun. 13. On the three Christian Graces. Faith. IT is a Grace, that teaches to deprave not The Goods we have; To have the goods we have not. Hope. IT is a Grace▪, that keeps th'Almighty blamelesse, In long delay: And men (in begging) shamelesse.
Charitie. IT is a Grace, or Art to get a Living By selling Land; and to grow rich, by giving. 14. On a Feast. THe Lord of Heav'n and Earth ha's made a Feast, And ev'ry Soule is an invited Guest: The Word's the Food; the Levits are the Cookes; The Fathers Writings are their Dyet-bookes; But seldome us'd; for 'tis a fashion growne, To recommend made Dishes of their owne: What they should boyle, they bake; what rst, they broyle; Their lushious Sallats are too sweet with Oyle: In briefe, 'tis now a dayes too great a fault, T'have too much Pepper, and too little Salt. 15. On Dives. THat drop-requesting Dives did desire His Brothers might have warning of that Fire, Whose flames he felt: Could he, a Fiend, wish well To Man? What, is there Charity in Hell? Each Soule that's damned is a Brand of fire, To make Hell so much hotter; And the nigher In blood or love they be, that are tormented, The more their paines & torments are augmented:
No wonder then, if Dives did desire, His Brothers might have warning of that Fire▪ 16. On outward shew. IVdge not that Field, because 'tis Stubble, Nor Him that's poore, and full of trouble▪ Though t'one looke bare; the tother thin; Judge not; Their Treasure is within. 17. On the reading of the Scriptures. IN reading of the Sacred Writt; beware, Thou climbe no Stile, when as a Gapp stands faire▪ 18. On the life of Man. OVr Life's the Modell of a Winters Day; Our Soule's the Sun, whose faint and feeble Ray Gives our Earth light; a light but weak, at strongest, But low, at highest; very short, at longest: The childish Teares, that from our eyes doe passe, Is like the Dew that pearls the morning grasse: When as our Sun is but an hower high, We goe to Schoole, to learne; are whipt, and cry: We truant up and downe; we make a spoyle Of precious Time, and sport in our owne Toyle:
Our Bed's the quiet Grave; wherein we lay Our weary Bodyes, tyred with the Day: The early Trumpet, like the Morning Bell, Calls to account; where they that have learnd well Shall find Reward; And such as have mis-pent Their Time, shall reape an earned punishment: No wonder, then, to see the Sluggards eyes, So loath to goe to Bed; so loth to rise. 19. On the Crowing of a Cocke. THe Crowing of a Cocke doth oft foreshow A change of Weather: Peter found it so: The Cocke no sooner crew, but by and by He found a Change of weather in his eye: T's an easie thing to say, ad to sweare too, Wee'l dye for Christ; but tis as hard to doe. 20. On Mammon. MAmmon's growne rich: Does Mammon boast of that? The Stalled Oxe, as well may boast, Hee's fat. 21. On Church-contemners▪ THose Church-contemners, that can easily waigh The profit of a Sermon with a Play;
Whose testy stomacks can digest, as well, A profer'd Injury, as a Sermon-bell; That say unwonted Pray'rs with the like wills, As queazy Patients take their loathed Pills: To what extremity would they be driven, If God, in Iudgement, should but give them Heaven. 22. On Morus. HE is no Flemming: For he cannot Swill: No Roman; for his stomacke's fleshly still: He cannot be a Iew; he was baptiz'd: Nor yet a Gentile; he was circumciz'd: He is no True man; for he lyes a trot: Prophane he is not; for he sweares ye not: What is he then? One Feast without a Bill Shall make him all; or which of all ye will. 23. On the Hypocrite. NO mans condition is so base as his; None more accurs'd than he: For Man esteemes Him hatefull, 'cause he seemes not what hee is: God hates him, 'cause he is not what he seemes; What griefe is absent, or what mischiefe can B added to the hate of God and Man?
24. On a Pilgrime. THe weary Pilgrime, oft, doth aske, and know▪ How farre hee's come; how far he has to go▪ His way is tedious, and his hart's opprest, And his desier is to be at Rest: Our life's a Wayfare; yet fond Man delaies T'enquier out the number of his Daies; He cares not, He, how slow his howers spend; His Iourney's better then his Iournies end. 25. On the Needle of a Sun-diall. BEhold this needle; when the Arctick sone Hath toucht it, how it trembles vp and downe; Hunts for the Pole; and cannot be possest, Of peace, untill it finde that poynt, that rest: Such is the heart of Man; which, when it hath Attayn'd the vertue of a lively faith, It findes no rest on earth, makes no abode, In any Object, but his heav'n, his God.
26. On Afffiction. WHen thou afflict'st me, Lord, if I repine, I show my selfe to be mine owne, not thine. 27. On a Sun-dyall. GOe light a Candle: By that light, make tryall, How the night spends it selfe, by the Sun-dyall▪ Goe, search the Scripture; Lbour to increase In the diviner knowledge of thy Peace By thy owne light, derived from thy mother: Thou maist as easly doe the one, as t'other. 28. On PETER. VVHen walking Peter was about to sinck Into the sea, In what a case d'ye thinke, H'ad bin; if he had trusted his complaint To th'intercession of some helpfull Saint: Beleeve it; if Romes doctrine had bin sound, And soundly follow'd, Peter had bin drown'd.
29 On Merits. FIe, Rome's abus'd: Can any be thought able To merit heaven by workes: Tis a meere fable: If so; stout Rome had never bin so faint To move her suit by a Collaterall Saint. 30. On Servio▪ SErvio serves God▪ Servio has bare relation (Not to Gods Glory) but his owne salvation: Servio serves God for life: Servio, tis well: Servio may finde the cooler place in Hell. 31. A Soliloquie. WHere shall I find my God! O where, O where Shall I direct my steps, to finde him there? Shall I make search in swelling Baggs of Coyne? Ah no; For God and Mammon cannot joyne: Doe Beds of Down containe this heavenly stranger? No no; Hee's rather cradled in some Manger: Dwells he in wisedome? Is he gone that rode? No no; Mans wisedome's foolishnes with God: Or hath some new Plantation, yet unknown, Made him their King, adorn'd him with their Crowne?
No, no, the kingdomes of the earth thinke scorne T'adorne his Browes with any Crown but Thorne. Where shall I trace; or where shall I go winde him? My Lord is gone; and O! I cannot finde him: Ile ransack the dark Dungeons: Ile enquire Into the Furnace, after the sev'nth fire. Ile seeke in Daniels Den, and in Pauls prison; Ile search his Grave▪ and see if he be risen: Ile goe to th'house of mourning; and Ile call At every Almes-abused Hospitall: Ile goe and aske the widow, that's opprest; The heavy laden, that enquiers rest: Il search the Corners of all broken hearts; The wounded Conscience, and the soule that smarts; The contrite spirit fill'd with filiall feare; I, there he is; and no where else, but there: Spare not to scourge they pleasure, O my God, So I may finde thy presnce, with thy Rod. 32. On Daniel in the Den. FIerce Lyons roaring for their prey? and then Daniel throwne in? And Daniel yet remaine Alive? There was a Lyon, in the Denne, Was Daniels friend, or Daniel had bin slaine: Among ten thousand Lyons, Ide not feare, Had I but only Daniels Lyon there.
23. On those that deserve it. O When our Clergie, at the dreadfull Day, Shal make their Audit; when the Iudge shal say Give your accompts: What, have my Lambs bin fed? Say, doe they all stand sound? Is there none dead By your defaults? come shepheards, bring them forth That I may crowne your labours in their worth: O what an answer will be given by some! We have bin silenc'd: Canons strucke us dumbe; The Great ones would not let us feed thy flock, Vnles we pla'd the fooles, and wore a Frock: We were forbid unles wee'd yeeld to signe And crosse their browes, they say, a mark of thine. To say the truth, great Iudge, they were not fed, Lord, here they be; but, Lord, they be all dead. Ah cruel Shepheards! Could your conscience serve Not to be fooles, and yet to let them sterve? What if your Fiery spirits had bin bound To Antick Habits; or your heads bin crownd With Peacocks Plumes; had ye bin forc'd to feed Your Saviours dear-bought Flock in a fools weed; He that was scorn'd, revil'd; endur'd the Curse Of a base death, in your behalfs; nay worse, Swallow'd the cup of wrath charg'd up to th' brim, Durst ye not stoope to play the fooles for him?
34. Doe this and live. DOe this and live? Tis true, Great God▪ then who Can hope for life? for who hath power to Doe? Art thou not able? Is thy Taske too great? Canst thou desier help? Canst thou intreat Aid from a stronger Arm? Canst thou conceive Thy Helper strong enough? Canst thou beleeve, The suffrings of thy dying Lord can give Thy drooping shoulders rest? Doe this and live. 35. On Ioseph and his Mistresse. WHen as th'Egyptian Lady did invite Wel-favor'd Ioseph to unchast delight, How well the motion and the place agreed! A beastly Place, and twas a beastly Deed: A place well season'd for so foule a sin; To sweet to serve so foule a Master in▪ 36. On Scriptum est. SOme words excell in vertue, and discover A rare conclusion, thrice repeated over. Our Saviour thrice was tempted: thrice represt Th'assaulting tempter with thrice SCRIPTVM EST. If thou would'st keepe thy soule secure from harme, Tho know'st the words: It is a potent Charme.
37. On the flourishing of the Gospell. HOw doe our Pastures florish, and refresh Our uberous Kine, so faire, so full of flesh! How doe our thriving Cattell feed our young With plenteous Milk; & with their flesh the strong▪ Heav'n blest our Charles, and he did our late Iames, From Pharohs troubles, and from Pharohs Dreames. 38. On Ioseph's Speech to his Brethren. GOe, etch your Brother (said th'Egyptian Lord) If you intend our Garniers shall afford Your craving wants their so desir'd supplies; If He come not, by Pharoes life, y'are Spies: Ev'n as your Suits expect to find our Grace, Bring him; or dare not to behold my face: Some little food, to serve you on the way, We here allow, but not to feed delay; When you present your Brother to our Hand, Ye shall have plenty, and possesse the Land; Away; and let your quicke obedience give The earnest of your Faiths; Do this and live: If not; your wilfull wants must want supply, For ye are Spies, and ye shall surely dye: Great God, th'Egyptian Lord resembles Thee; The Brother's Iesus; and the Suitors Wee.
39. Of common Devotion. OVr God and Souldiers we alike adore Ev'n at the Brink of danger; not before: After deliverance, both alike requited; Our God's forgotten, and our Souldier's slighted. 40. On the Day of Iudgement. O When shal that time come, whē the loud Trump Shall wake my sleeping Ashes from the Dump Of their sad Vrne! That blessed Day, wherein My glorifi'd, my metamorphiz'd Skin Shall circumplexe and terminate that fresh And new refined substance of this flesh! When my transparent Flesh, dischargd frō groans, And paynes, shall hang upon new polisht Bones! When as my Body shall re-entertaine Her cleansed Soule, and never part againe! VVhen as my Soule shall, by a new Indenture, Possesse her new-built house, come down and enter! VVhen as my Body and my Soule shall plight Inviolable faith, and never fight Nor wrangle more, or alcercat, agin, About that strife-begetting question, Sin! VVhen Soule and Body shall receive their Doome Of O yee Blessed of my Father, Come! VVhen Death shall be exil'd, and damn'd to dwell VVithin her proper and true Center, Hell!
VVhere that old Tempter shall be bound in Chaynes, And over-whelm'd with everlasting paynes; VVhilst I shall sit, and, in full Glory, sing Perpetuall Anthems to my Iudge, my King. 41. On Death. VVHy should we not, as well, desier Death, As Sleep? No diffrence, but a little Breath: 'Tis all but Rest; 'tis all but a Releasing Our tyred lims; VVhy then not alike pleasing? Being burthen'd with the sorrowes of the Day, VVe wish for night; which, being come, we lay Our Bodies downe; yet when our very Breath Is yrkesome to us, w'are affraid of Death: Our Sleepe is oft accompanied with rights, Distracting Dreames and dangers of the nights; VVhen in the Sheets of Death, our Bodie's sure From all such Evils, and we sleepe secure: VVhat matter, Doune, or Earth? what boots it whether? Alas, Our Bodye's sensible of neither: Things that are senslesse feele nor paynes nor ease; Tell me; and why not Wormes as well as Fleas? In Sleepe, we know not whether our clos'd eyes Shall ever wake; from Death w'are sure to rise: I, but 'tis long first: O, is that our feares? Dare we trust God for Nights? and not for Yeares?
42. On the Body of Man. MAns Body's like a House: His greater Bones, Are the maine Timber; And the lesser Ones, Are smaller Splints: His Ribs are Laths, daubd o'er, Plaister'd with flesh and bloud: his Mouth's the Doore: His Throat's the narrow Entry: And his Heart Is the Great Chamber, full of curious Art: His Midreife, is a large partition Wall, 'Twixt the Great Chamber, and the spacious Hall: His Stomacke is the Kitchin, where the Meate Is often but halfe sod, for want of Heate: His Spleen's a Vessell, Nature does allot To take the skimme, that rises from the Pot: His Lungs are like the Bellowes that respire In ev'ry office, quickning ev'ry Fire: His Nose, the Chimney is, whereby are vented Such Fumes, as with the Bellowes are augmented: His Bowels are the Sinke, whose part's to drine All noysome filth, and keepe the Kitchin cleane: His Eyes like Christall Windowes cleare and bright Lets in the Obect, and lets out the sight: And as the Timber is, or great or small, Or strong or weake; 'tis apt to stand, or fall; Yet is the likelyest Building sometimes knowne, To fall by obvious Chances; overthrowne, Oft-times by Tempests, by the full mouth'd Blasts Of Heav'n; Sometimes by Fire; Somtimes it wasts Through unadvis'd neglect: Put case, the Stuffe Were ruin-proofe; by nature, strong enough,
To conquer Time and Age: Put case, it should Ne'er know an end, Alas, Our Leases would: What hast thou then, proud flesh and bloud, to boast? Thy Dayes are ev'll, at best,; but few, at most; But sad, at merryest▪ and but weake, at strongest; Vnsure, at surest; and but short, at longest, 43. On the young man in the Gospell. HOw well our Saviour and the landed Youth Agreed a little while? And, to say truth, Had he had will and power in his hand, To keepe the Law, but as he kept his Land; No doubt, his soule had found the sweet fruition Of his owne choyce desires without Petition: But he must Sell and Follow; or else, not Obtaine his heav'n: O now his heav'ns too hot: He cannot stay; he has no businesse there: Hee'l rather misse, then buy his heav'n too deare: When Broth's too hot for hasty hounds, how they Will licke their scalded lips, and sneake away! 44. On Mans goodnesse and Gods love. GOd loves not Man, because that Man is good; For Man is sinfull, because Flesh and Blood: We argue false: It rather may behove us, To thinke us good, 'cause God thinks good to love us▪ Hee that shall argue up from Man to God, Takes but the paines to gather his owne Rod:
Who from such Premises, shall drawe's Conclusion, Makes but a Syllogisme of his owne confusion. 45. On Mans Plea. MAns Plea to Man, is, That he never more Will begge, and that he never begg'd before: Mans Plea to God, is, That he did obtaine A former Suit, and therefore sues againe. How good a God we serve; that when we sue, Makes his old gifts th'examples of his new! 46. On Furio. FVrio will not forgiue; Furio beware: Furio will curse himselfe in the Lords Prayer. 47. On Martha and Mary. MArtha, with joy, receiv'd her blessed Lord; Her Lord she welcoms, feasts, and entertains: Mary sae silent▪ heares, but speakes no word; Martha takes all, and Mary takes no paines: Mary's to heare▪ to feast him Martha's care is; Now which is greater, Martha's love, or Mary's? Martha is full of trouble, to prepare; Martha respects his good beyond her owne:
Mary sits still at ease, and takes no care; Mary desires to please her selfe, alone: The pleasure's Maryes; Martha's all the care is; Now which is greater, Martha's love, or Maryes? Tis true; Our blessed Lord was Martha's Guest; Mary was his; and, in his feast, delighted: Now which hath greater reason to love best, The bountifull Invitor, or th'invited? Sure, both lov'd well; But Mary was the detter, And therefore should, in reason, love the better▪ Marye's was spirituall; Martha's love was carnall; T'one kist his hand; The other, but the Glove: As far as mortall is beneath eternall, So far is Martha's lesse then Marye's love: How blest is he, Great God, whose heart remembers Marye's to Thee; and Martha's to thy Members! 48. On our Blessed Saviour. WE often read our blessed Saviour wept; But never laught, and seldome that he slept: Ah, sure his heavy eyes did wake, d weepe For us that sin, so oft, in Mirth, and Sleepe. 49. On Sinnes. SIes, in respect of Man, all mortall be; All veniall, Iesu, in respect of Thee.
50. On Mans behaviour to God. VVE use our God, as Vs'rers doe their bands; We often beare him in our hearts, our hands▪ His Paths are beaten, and his Wayes are trod, So long as hee's a profitable God: But when the Money's paid, the Profit's taken, Our Bands are cancel'd, and our God's forsaken. 51. On Mans Cruelty. ANd da'st thou venture still to live in Sin, And crucifie thy dying Lord agin? Were not his Pangs sufficient? must he bleed Yet more? O, must our sinfull pleasures feed Vpon his Torments; and augment the Story Of the sad passion of the Lord of Glory! Is there no pitty? Is there no remorse In humane brests? Is there a firme diors Betwixt all mercy, and the hearts of Men? Parted for ever? ne'r to meet agen? No mercy bides with us: 'is thou, alone, Hast it, sweet Jesu, for us, that have none For Thee: Thou hast ore-stal'd our Markets so, That all's Above, and we have none Below: Nay, blessed Lord, we have not wherewithall To serve our shiftlesse selves, unlesse we call To thee, that art our Saviour, and hast power To give, and whom we Crucifye, each hower:
W'are cruell (Lord) to thee, and our selves too; IESV forgive's; we know not what we doe. 52. Mans Progresse. THe Earth is that forbiden Tree that growes Ith' midst of Paradise; Her Fruit that showes So sweet, so faire, so pleasing to the eyes, Is worldly pleasure in a faire disguize: The Flesh suggests: The fruit is aire and good Apt to make wise, and a delicious Food; It hath a secret vertue, wherewithall To make you Gods; and not to dye at all. Man asts, and empts the frailty of his Brother; His Brother eats; One bits calls on another: His guilty Conscience opes his eyes; He sees, He sees his mpty nakednesse▪ and flees; He stiches slender Fig-leaves, and does frame Poore Arguments t'xcuse his Sin, his Shame: But in the cooler evening of his Dayes, The voyce calls Adam: Adam's in a Maze: His Conscince bids him run: The voyce pursues; Poore Adm trembles, ere he knowes the newes: Adam must quit the Garden, lest he strive To tast the saving Tree of life, and live; Poore Man must goe; But whether is he bound? Ev'n to the place from whence he came, the round.
53. On the two great Flouds. TWo Flouds I read of; Water, and of Wine; The first was Noahs; Lot, the last was thine: The first was the Effect▪ The last, the Cause Of that foule Sin, against the sacred Lawes Of God and Nature, Incest: Noah found An Arke to save him, but poore Lot was drownd; Good Nah found an Arke; but Lt found none: W'are safer in Gods hands then in our owne: The former flood of waters did extend But some few dayes; this latter ha's no end; They both destroy'd, I know not which the worst: The last is ev'n as Gen'rall, as the first: The first being ceas'd; the world began to fill; The last depopulates, and wasts it still: Both Flouds ore welm'd both Man and beast together; The last is worst, if there be best of either: The first are ceas'd: Heav'n vow'd it by a Signe; When shall we se a Rainebow after Wine? 54. On Fuca. FVca▪ thou quo't the Scriptures on thy side, And maks Rebeca patronize hy pride; Thou say'st that she wore Ear-rings: Did she so? Know this withall, She bore the Pitcher too: Thou may'st, like hr, were Ear-rings, if thy pride Can stoope to what, Rebecca did beside.
55. On Abrahams servant. THis faithfull Servant will not feed, utill He doe his trust-reposing Masters will: There's many, now, that will not eat before They speed their Masters work: They'l drink the more. 56. On Alexander. NO marvell, thou great Monarch, did'st complaine And weep, there were no other worlds to gaine; Thy griefes and thy complaints were not amisse; H'as Griefe enough, that findes no world but this. 57. On rash Iudgement. IVdge not too fast: This Tree that does appeare So barren, may be fruitfull the next yeare: Hast thou not patience to expect the hower? I feare thy owne are Crabs they be so ower: Thy Judgement oft may tread beside the Text; A Saul to day, may prove a Paul, the next. 58. On Iacobs purchase. HOw poore was Iacobs motion, and how strang His offer! How unequall was th'exchange!
A messe of Porrage for Inheritance? Why could not hungry Eau strive t'enhaunce His price a little? So much undrfoot? Well might he give him Bread and drink to boot: An easie price! The case is even our owne; For toyes we often sell our Heaven, our Crowne. 59. On Esau. WHat hast thou done? Nay what shal Esau do? Lost both his Birthright, and his Blessing too! What hath poore Esau left, but empty teares, And Plaints, that cannot reach the old mans eares? What with thy Fathers Diet, and thine owne, Thy Birthright's aliend, and thy Blessing's gone: How does one mischiefe overtake an other: In both, how overtaken by a Brother? Could thy imperious stomack but have stay'd, And if thy Fathers had not bin delay'd, Thou had'st not need have wept and pleaded so, But kept thy Birthright, and thy Blessing too: Had thy unprosp'rous, thy unlucky hand Dispatch'd thy Venz'on, as it did thy Land, Thy sorrowes had not made so great a Heape, That had not bin so deare; nor this, so cheape: Had thine given place but to thy Fathers will, Thad'st had thy Birthright; and thy Blessing still.
60. On the absence of a blessing. THe blessing gon, what do's there now remaine? Esau's offended; Iacob must be slaine: The heart of man once emptyed of a Grace, How soone the Devill jostles in the place! 61. On the younger Brother. I Know, the Elder and the Yonger, too, Are both alike to God; Nor one, nor other Can plead their yeares, But yet we often doe Observe, the Blessing's on the yonger Brother: The Scripture notes it, but does spare to show A reason; therefore, I despaire to know. 62. On Kain. BEfore that Monster spilt his Brothers blood, W're sure the fourth part of the world was good: O, what a dearth of goodnes did there grow, When the Fourth part was murd'red at a blow! 63. On the righteous Man. PRomise is dtt: And Det implyes a payment: How can the righteous, then dout food, & raymēt?
63. On Faith, Love, and Charity. BY nature Faith is fiery, and it tends Still upward: Love, by native course, descends: But Charity, whose nature doth confound And mixe the former two, moves ever round: Lord, let thy Love descend, and then the Fire Of sprightly Faith shall kindle, and aspire: O, then, my circling Charity shall move In proper motion, mixt of Faith and Love. 64. On Iacobs Pillow. THe Bed, was Earth: The raised Pillow, Stones, Whereon poore Iacob rests his head, his Bones; Heav'n was his Canopy; The Shades of night Were his drawne Curtaines, to exclude the Light: Poore State for Isacks heyre! It seemes to me, His Cattell found as soft a Bed, as Hee: Yet God appeared there, his Ioy, his Crowne; God is not alway seene in Beds of Doune: O, if that God shall please to make my Bed, I care not where I rest my Bones, my Head; With Thee, my wants can never proove extreame; With Iacobs Pillow, give me Iacobs Dreame.
65. On Faith. FAith do's acknowledge Gifts, altho we have not; It keepes unseene those Sins, Confession hid not; It makes us to enjoy the Goods we have not; It counts as done, those pious deeds, we did not; It workes; endowes; it freely accepts; it hides: What Grace is absent where true Faith abides? 66▪ On Zacheus. ME thinks, I see, with what a busie hast, Zacheus climb'd the Tree: But, O, how fast How full of speed, canst thou imagine (when Our Saviour call'd) he powder'd downe agen! He ne'r made tryall if the boughes were sound, Or rotten; nor how far 'twas to the ground: There was no danger fear'd: At such a Call, Hee'l venture nothing, that dare feare a fall: Needs must he downe, by such a Spirit driven▪ Nor could he fall, unlesse he fell to Heaven: Downe came Zacheus, ravisht from the Tree; Bird that was shot, ne'r dropt so quicke as he. 67. On the Thiefe and Slanderer. THe Thiefe, and Sland'rer are almost the same; T'one steales my goods; the tother, my good name: T'one lives in score; the other dies in shame.
68. On Abram pleading for Sodome. HOw loth was righteous Abraham to cease, To beat the price of lustfull Sdoms peace! Marke how his holy boldnesse intercepts Gods Iustice; Brings his Mercy downe, by steps: He dare not bid so few as Ten, at first; Nor yet from Fifty righteous persons, durst His Zeale, on sudden, make too great a fall, Although he wisht salvation to them all. Great God: Thy dying Son has pow'r to cleare A world of sinnes, that one shall no appeare Before thine angry eyes: What wonder then, To see thee fall, from Fifty downe to Ten! 69. On Mans goodnesse. THy hand, great God, created all things good; But Man rebell'd, and in defiance stood Against his owne Creation, and did staine, Nay lost that goodnesse which the Beasts retaine▪ What ap ha's Man, poore Man, above the rest, That hath lesse goodnesse left him, then a Beast! 70. On Zacheus. SHort-legg'd Zacheu▪ 'Twas the happiest Tree That ever mortall climb'd; I meane, to Thee:
Thy paynes in going up, receiv'd the Crowne Of all thy labour, at thy comming downe: Thy Statures lownesse gave thee faire occasion To mount that Tree; that Tree, to find Salvation: But was't the Tree, Zacheus? No, t'was Hee, Whose bleeding Body dy'd upon the Tree. 71. On the Roman, Turke, and Atheist. THe Roman worships God upon the wall; The Turke, a false God; Th'Atheist, none at all. 72. On Babels Building. GReat God, no sooner borne, but we begin Babels accurs'd Foundation, by our Sin: Our thoughts, our words, our deeds are ever yeelding The sad materials of our sinfull Building: Should not thy Grace prevent it, it would even Rise, and rise up, untill it reach'd to heaven: Lord, ere our Building shall begin to show, Confound our Language, and our Building too▪ 73. On the Theife and the Lyer. THe Lyer and the Thiefe have one Vocation; Their difference is but only in their Fashion: They both deceive; but diversly proceed; The first deceives by Word; the last, by Deed.
74. On the Egyptians Famine. MArke but the course the pin'de Egyptians run: When all their coyn, when all their corn is done: They come to Ioseph, and their stomacks plead; They chāge their beasts for corn, their flocks for bread, Yet still they want: Observe what now they doe; They give their Lands, and yeeld their Bodies too: Now they have Corne enough; and now, they shall Have seed to sow their barren soyle withall; Provided that the fit of their encrease Be Pharoe's: Now their stomacks are at peace: Thus when the Famine of the Word shall strike Our hungry Soules; our Soules must doe the like: We first must part with, (as by their directions) Our Flocks, our Beasts, our Bestiall Affections; When they are gone, what then must Sinners doe? Give up their Lands, their Soules, and Bodies too: O, then our hearts shall be refresht and fed, Wee shall have seed to sowe, and present Bread: Allowing but the fift of our encrease, Wee shall have plenty, and our soules have peace▪ How art thou pleasd, good God, that Man shold live! How slow art thou to take! how free to give! 75. On Zacheus. WEll climb'd, Zacheus; 'Twas a step well given; Frō hence toth Tree; & frō the Tree to Heavē!
76. On the Plough-man. I Heare the whistling Plough-man, all day long, Sweetning his labour with a chearefull song: His Bed's a Pad of Straw; His dyet, course; In both, he fares not better then his Horse: He seldome slakes his thirst, but from the Pumpe, And yet his heart is blithe; his visage, plumpe▪ His thoughts are nere acquainted with such things. As Griefes or Feares; He onely sweats, and sings: When as the Landed Lord, that cannot dine Without a Qualme, if not refresht with Wine; That cannot judge that controverted case, 'Twixt meat & mouth, without the Bribe of Sauce▪ That claimes the service to the purest linnen, To pamper and to shroud his dainty skin in, Groanes out his dayes, in lab'ring to appease The rage of either Buisnes, or Disease: Alas, his silken Robes, his costly Diet Can lend a little pleasure, but no Quiet: The untold summes of his descended wealth Can give his Body plenty, but not Health: The one, in Paynes, and want, possesses all; T'other, in Plenty, findes no peace at all; 'Tis strange! And yet the cause is easly knowne; Tone's at Gods finding; t'other, at his owne.
77. On a happy Kingdome. THat Kingdome, and none other, happy is, Where Moses, and his Aarn meet, and kisse. 78. On Gods appearance to Moses. G first appeard o Moses, in the Myre; The next time he appeard, happeard in Fire; The third time, he was knowne to Moses eye Vpon mount Sinai, cloath'd in Maiestie. Thrice God appeares to Man: first, allowing in His oule pollution, and base Myre of Sin; And like to Pharoes daughter do'es bemone Our helplesse State, and drawes us, for his owne: The next ime, he ppeares in Fyre, whose bright And gentle flames consume not, but give light; It is the Fire of Grace; where man is bound To d'off his Shs, because 'tis holy ground: The last apparance shall be in that Mount, Where every Soule shall render an Account Of good or evill; where all things Transitory Shall cease▪ & Grace be crownd with perfect Glory.
79. On Gods Law. Thy Sacred Law, O God, Is like to MOES od If wee  i i our hand, It will doe Wonders in the Land; If wee sleight and throw it to the Ground; 'Twill A Wound that Flesh and Blood cannot endure, Nor salve, untill the Brazen Serpent cure: I wish not, Lord, thou sholds ithold it; Nor wold I have it, and not hold it: O each me the my God▪ To handle MOSS Rod. 80. On Pharos bicke. OVr God's not like to Phao; to require His  for Fie: His workemen wanted Straw, and yet were lasht, For not performance: We have Straw unthrasht, Yet we are idl, and we wch, and kicke Against our Burthens, and returne no Bricke: We spend our  the Sabl, And then we cry▪ Alas! W are not able; Thinke not on Israls sufferings, in that day, When thy offended Justice shall repay Our labo; Lord▪ when Thinke,  was a Tyrant; Thou▪ a od.
81. On the insaiablenesse of Mans heart. THis Globe of earth ha's not the pow'r to fill The Heart of Man, but it desirs still: By him that seekes, the Cause is easly found; The Heart's Triangular; The Earth is Round; He may be full; but, never to the brim Be filld with Earth, till earth be fill'd with him. 82. On Pharoe's ard-heartednes. PLages after Plagues? And yet not Pharoh yeeld T'enlarge poore Israel? Was thy heart so steel'd, Rebellious Tyrant, that it dare withstand The oft repeated Iudgements of Heav'ns hand? Could neither Mercies oyle, nor Iudgements thunder Dissolve, nor breake thy linty heart in sunder? No, no, what Sun beames soften not, they harden; Purpos'd Rebellions are asleepe to Pardon. 83. On the change of Pharoe's fortunes. OBserve what peace great Pharo's kingdom found while Ioseph liv'd; what prospro blessigs round His happy dayes! Heav'ns plague-inficting hand Was then a stranger to his peacefull Land: Peace was entyl'd upon his Royall Thron; His Land had Plenty, when the World had none;
His full desiers over-flowd their Brim, Favors cam downe unaskt, unsought by him: His Scepter florish'd, from a God unknown, No need to troble any of his owne: While Ioseph liv'd, his Blessings had no end; That God was his, whil'st he was Iosephs Frend: These temp'rall Blessings heav'n doth, often, share Vnto the wicked, at the Good-mans Prayer: But Ioseph dyes: And Iosphs Sons must fall Beneath their Burthens, and be scourg'd withall; Whilst Tyrant Pharoh's more severer hand Keeps them laborious Pris'ners in his Land: God oft permits his Children to be hurld Into distresse, to weane them from the world: But Pharohs Blessings alter with his Brow; The budding Scepter's turn'd a Serpent now: His Land must groan; her plagues must still encrease, Till Iacobs Off-spring shall find Iacobs peace; Gods Children are the Apples of his Eye, Whose touch is death, if beeing toucht, they cry: Now Tyrant Pharoh dares no longer chuse, Israel must goe: Pharoh, repents, pursues; Pharoh wants Brick; Pharoh, ere long, I feare, Will find the purchase of his Brick too deare: Moses holds forth his Rod: The Seas divide; The Waves are turn'd to Walls on either side: They passe secure; Pharoh pursues them still: God leaves his Children to the brunt of Ill: The Chariot- Wheeles flye off, the Harnesse cracks; One wants a Nayle; the next, a Hammer lacks: How Man is cross'd and puzzel'd in that Plot, Where Heav'n denyes successe, and prospers not!
Moses holds forth his Rod: The Easterne wind Calls backe the Tydes: The parted Waters ioynd, And overwhelmd great Pharo and Pharoes Host; None scap'd to ell the newes: All drownd, and lost: Thus thrives Rebellion: Plagues, nor doing good, Oft-times conclude their Ceremony in Blood: Thus hardned hearts grow more and more obdure; And Heav'n cuts off, when Earth is most secure. 84. On the first born. THe Fir Borne of th' Egyptians all were slaine, From him that holds the Scepter to the Swayne: But all that are First-borne in Israel, be Accepted, Lord, and sanctiied to Thee: Thy lookes are always turn'd upon the Prime Of all our Actions, Words, our thoughts, our time; Thy pleased Eye is fixt upon the First; And from the Womb w'are thine, or else accurst. 85. On baptized Infants. I Dare not judge those Iudgements, ill advis'd, That hold such Infants sa'd, as dye, baptiz'd. What hinders Life? Originall hath bin New wast away; There's yet, no Actuall Sin: Death is th'Effect of Sin: The Cause being gon, What ground is lef for Death to worke upon? I know not: But of Israels sons 'tis found, Moses was sav'd; I read that none was drownd.
86. On the grumbling Israelites. NO sooner out, but grumble? Is the Brick So soone forgotten? 'Tis a common trick: Serve God in Plenty? Egypt can doe thus▪ No thankes to serve our God, when God serves us: Some sullen Curres, when they perceive a Bone, Will wagg their Tayles and faune; But snarle, if none. 87. On Mans Rebellion. O, How perverse is Flesh and Bloud! in whom Rebellion blossomes from the very Wombe! What Heav'n commands, how lame we are to do! And things forbid how soone perswaded t We never read rebellios Israel did Bow to strange Gods, till Israel was forbid. 88. On Israel. HAd Israel, in her want, been truely humbled, Isr'el had prayd, & ground to heav'n; not grumbled: But Isr'el wanted food. Isr'els complaint Could not be servent, Isr'el being faint: Isr'el gets food: Now Isr'el is so full, That her Devotion, and her Zeale is dull: Lord when art thou in season? When's the time, To doe thee service? When's our Zeale in prime?
'Tis alwayes either not full ripe or wasting: We can not serve our God nor Full nor Fasting. 89. On the Sinners Refuge. HE that shall shed, with a presumptuous hand, The blood of Man; must, by thy just command Be put to death: The Murtherer must dye; Thy Law denyes him refuge where to flye: Great God Our hands have slain a man; nay further, They have commited a presumptuous murther, Vpon a guiltles Man; Na, what is worse, They have betraid our Brother to the Curse Of a reproachfull death▪ Nay, what exceeds, It is our Lord, our dying Saviour bleeds: Nay more; It is thy Son; thy only Son; All this have we, all this our hands have done: On what deare Obiects shall we turne our eye? Looke to the Law? O, by the Law, we dye: Is there no Refuge, Lord? No place that shall Secure our Soules from Death? A, none at all? What shall poore Mortals do? Thy Lawes are jst, And most irrevocable: Shall we trust Or flye to our owne Merits, and e freed By our good Workes? I; there were helpe indeed! Is there no City for a Soule to flye, And save it selfe: Must we resolve to dye? O Infinite! O (not to be exprest?) Nay, not to be conceived by the brest Of Men or Angels! O transcendent Love! Incomprehensible! as farre above
The reach of Man, as mans deserts are under The sacred Benefit of so lest a Wonder! That very Blood our sinfull hands have shed, Cryes loud for Mercy, and those Wounds do plead For those that made them: he that pleades, forgives; And is both God and Man; both dead, and lives; He, whom we murther'd, is become our Garden; Hee's Man, to suffer; and hee's God to pardon: Here's our Protection; Here, our Refuge City, Whose living springs run Piety and Pitty: Goe then, my Soule, and passe the common Bounds Of Passion, Goe, and kneele before his Wounds; Go touch them with thy lips: thou needst not feare; They will not bleed afresh, though Thou be there: But if they doe, that very Blood, thou spilt, Beleev't, will plead thy Pardon, not thy Guil. 90. On the deposing of Princes. I Know not by what vertue Rome deposes A Christian Prince: Did Aaron command Moses? If sacred Scriptures mention such a thing, Sure Rome has colour to depose a King. 91. On PETERS Keyes. THe pow'r of Peter does all pow'r excell; He opens Heav'n; He shuts the Doores of Hell: The Keyes are his; In what a ae were they, Should Peters Successors mistke the Ky?
92. On Offrings. ARe all such Offrings, as are crusht, and bruis'd, Forbid thy Altar? May they not be us'd? And must all broken things be set apart? No, Lord: Thou wilt accept a Broken Heart. 93 On Vsurers. OF all men, Vs'rers are not least accurst; They robb the Spittle, pinch th'Afflicted worst. In others griefe they'r most delighted in; Whilst Givers suffer for the Takers sin: O how unjust a Trade of life is that, Which makes the Lab'rers leane; and th'idle, fat! 94. On Repentance. CAnst th recover thy consumed Flesh, From the well-feasted Wormes? Or put on fresh? Canst thou redeeme thy Ashes from the dead? Or quit thy Carkas from her sheet of Lead? Canst thou awaken thy earth-closed eyes? Vnlock thy Marble Monument, and rise? All this thou mayst performe, with as great ease, As to Repent thee, mortall, when thou please: It is thy Grave, not Bed that thou art in: Th'art not asleepe, but thou art dead in Sin.
95. On Wine and Water. NAture and Grace, who ever tasted both, Differ as much, as Wine and Water doth: This clenses, (if not grosly stayn'd with Sin) The outward Man: but scowers not, within: That cheares the heart, & makes the Courage bold, Quickens and warmes dead spirits that are cold: It fires the Blood, and makes the Soule divine: O hat my Water, Lord, were turnd to Wine! 96. On Balams Asse. THe Asse, that for her slownesse, was orbid To be imployed in Gods service, did Perorme good service now, in being slow: The Asse received stripes, but would not goe: She baukd the way, and Balam could not guid her: The Asse had farre more wisedome then the Rider: The Message being bad, the Asse was loth To be the Bearer: 'Twas a happy sloth; 'Twas well for Balam: Had his Asse but tryde Another step, Balam had surely dy'd: Poore Asse! And was thy faithfull service payd With oft-repeated strokes? Hadst thou obayd, Thy Lord had bought thy travell, with his blood: Such is Mans payment, often, bad for Good: The Asse begins to question with his Master, Argues the case, pleads why he went no faster:
Nay, shewes him Myst'ries, far beyond his reach▪ Sure, Godwants Prophets, when dull Asses preach: The Asse perceives the Angel, and fals downe; When Balam sees him not; or ees, unknowne: Nor is't a wonder: for Gods Spirit did passe From blindfold Balam, into Balams Asse. 97. On some raw Divines. SOme raw Divines, no sooner are Espous'd To their first Wives, and in the Temple hous'd, But straight the Peace is broke: They now begin T'appoint the Field, to fight their Battailes in: School-men must war with School men; text with text: The first's the Chaldee's Paraphrase; the next The Septuagints: Opinion thwarts Opinion; The Papist holds the first; The last, th' Arminian; And then the Councells must be call'd t'advice, What this of Lateran sayes; what that of Nice: And here the poynt must be anew disputed; Arrius is false; and Bellarmine's confuted: Thus with the sharpe Artill'ry of their Wit, They shoot at Random, carelesse where they hit: The slightly studied Fathers must be prayd, Although on small acquaintance, in to ayd, Whose glorious Varnish must impose a glosse Vpon their Paint, whose gold must gild their drosse: Now Martine Luther must be purg'd by them, From all his Errors, like a School-boyes Theame; Free-wil's disputed, Consubstantiation▪ And the deepe Ocean of Predestination,
Where, daring venter, oft, too far into't, They, Pharo like, are drownd both Horse and Foot: Forgetting that the Sacred Law enioynes New-married men to sit beneath their Vines, And cheare their Wives: They must not venter out To Warre, untill the Yeare be run about. 98. On Buying of the Bible. TIs but a folly to rejoyce, or boast, How smal a price, thy wel-bought Pen'worth cost: Vntill thy death, thou shalt not fully know Whether thy Purchase be good cheap, or no; And at that day, beleev't, it will appeare, If not extreamely cheape, extreamely deare. 99. On the Buying of the New Testament. REader, If thou wilt prove no more Then what I terme thee, ev'n before Thou aske the price, turne backe thine eye; If otherwise, unclaspe, and buy: Know then, the Price of what thou buy'st, Is the deare Blood of Iesus Christ; Which Price is over-deare to none, That dares protect it with his owne: If thou stand guilty of the price, Ev'n save thy purs-strings, and be wise: Thy mony will but, in conclusion, Make purchase of thy owne Confusion:
But if that guilt be done away, Thou mayst as safely buy, as pay. 100. To my BOOKE. MY Little Pinnace, strike thy Sayles, Let slippe thy Anchor? The VVine fayles: And Sea-men oft, in Calmes doe feare That foule, and boy rous ather's neare; If a  Storme should rise And bler from Censorious Eyes, Although the swelling VVaes be rough, And proud, thy  sae enough: Rest, Rest a while, ill bbing Tides Shall make thee stanch, and breme thy sides; When VVinds shall serve, hoyst up thy Sayle, And flye before a prosp'rous Gale▪ That all the Coasters may resort, And bid thee welcome to thy PORT. The end of the first Booke.
DIVINE FANCIES. The second Booke. 1. To Almighty GOD. LORD, Thou requir'st the first of all our Time, The first of all our Actions, and the prime Of all our Thoughts; And, Lord, good reason, we, When Thou giv'st all, should give the First to Thee: But O, we often rob thee of thy due, Like Elies Children, whom thy vengeance slue:
We pinch thy Offring to enlarge our Fee; We keepe the Fat, and carve the Leane to thee: We thrust our three-tooth'd Flesh-hook in thy Pot, That only, what the Flesh-hook taketh not, We share to thee: Lord, we are still deceiving; We take the Prime, and feed thee with our leaving: Our Sluttish Bowles are cream'd with soile & filth, Our Wheat is full of Chaffe; of Tares, our Tilth: Lord, what in Flesh and Blood can there be had, That's worth the having, when the best is bad, Here's nothing good, unlesse thou please to make it; O, then, if ought be worth the taking, take it. 2. On Gods Dyet. DEare Lord; when wee approch thy sacred Fire, To burne our Sacrifice, thou do'st require The Heads of ev'ry Beast that dyes; the Hearts; Th'enclosed Fat; and all the Inward parts: Our Senses and our Memories must be, All set apart and sanctifi'd to Thee; The strength of our Desires, the best perfections Of our imperfect Wills, the choyce Aflections Of our refined hearts must all conjoyne To seeke thy Glory: They must all be thine: I know thy Dyet, Lord; Of all the rest, Thou do'st affect the Head and Purnance, best.
3. On Moses Birth and Death. VVE read; no sooner new-borne Moses crept Into this vale of Teares, but th'Infant wept; But, being warned of his Death, his Last, We find it storied, that he sung as fast: These sev'rall Passions found their reason, why; He dy'd to live, but he was borne to dye: To whom this Transitory life shall bring Just cause to weepe; there, death gives cause to sing. 4. On Ieptha's Vow. VIctorious Ieptha, could thy Zeale allow No other way, then by a rash-made Vow, T'expresse thy Thanks? A Vow, whose undertaking Was ev'n a Sin more odious, then the making: 'Twas cruell Piety that taught thee how To paddle in thy Daghters Blood: But thou, Vnlucky Virgin! was there none to e▪ Betwixt thy Fathers mortall Brow▪ and Thee? Why cam'st thou forth, sweet Virgin? To what end Mad'st thou such needlesse hast? Thou cam'st, to lend Thy filiall Triumph to thy Fathers Wreath; Thou thought'st to meet a Blessing, and not Death: Rash Ieptha▪ may not thy repentance quit That Vow, when Rashnesse was the Cause of it? O canst thou not dispence with that, wherein▪ Thy strict Religion's a presumptuous Sin?
Is she unhappy, or thou cruell rather? Vnhappy Child▪ and too too cruell Father. 5. On Jesus and Sampson. AN Angel did to Mnohs wife appeare, And brought the news her barren Womb should beare: Did not another Angel, if not He, Thrice blessed Virgin, bring the same to thee? The Wife of Mnoh (nine moneths being run) Her Hev'n-saluted womb brought forth a Son: To thee, sweet Virgin, full of Grace and Heaven, A Child was borne, to us a Son was given: The name of hers was Sampson, borne to fight For captiv'd Israel, and a Nazarite: Thine was a Naz'rite too, and bore to ease us From Sathans burhens, and his name is Iesus: Spson espons'd, and tooke in Marriage her That was the child of an Idolater; Our Iesus tooke a wife, that bow'd the knee And orshipt unknown ; as well as she: Assaulted Sapso me, and had to doe VVith  fierce Lyon; oyld, and  him too: Our conquering Iesus purchas'd higher fame; His arme encountred Death▪ and overcame▪
But what! Is Sampson singular in this? Did not our Iesus doe the like to his? Sampson propounds a Riddle, and does hide The folded Myst'ry in his faithles Bride: Our blessed Iesus propounds Riddles too, Too hard for Man, his Bride unsought, t'undoe: The Bride forsakes her Sampson; do's betroth her To a new Love, and falsly weds another: And did not the adult'rous Iewes forgoe Their first Love Iesus, and forsake him too? Displeased Sampson had the choyce to wed The younger Sister in the Elders stead: Displeased Jesus had espous'd the Younger; God send her fairer; and affections stronger: Sampson sent Foxes on his fiery errant, Among their corn, & made their crims his warrant: Offended Jesus shewes as able signes Of wrath: His Foxes have destroyd their Vines: Our Sampsons love to Delilah was such, That for her sake poore Sampson suffer'd much: Our Jesus had his Delilah: For her His Soule became so great a sffrr. Sampson was sbject to their scorne and shame: And was not Jesus even the very same? Sampson's betrayd to the Philistians hands, VVas bound a while, but quickly brake his bands: Jesus the first, and scond day, could be The Graves clos pris'ner; but, the third was free: In this they differ'd; Jesus dying Breath Cry'd out for Life; but Sampsons cald for Death: Father forgive them; did our Jesus crye; But Sampson, Let me be reveng'd and dye:
Since then, sweet Saviour, tis thy Death must ease us, We flye from Sampson, and appeale to Iesus. 6. On Elyes double ensure. VVHen barren Hanna, prostrate on the Floore, In heat of zeale and passion, did implore Redresse from Heav'n, censorions Ely thought She had beene drunk, and checkt her for her fault; Rough was his Censure, and his Check, ausere; Where mildnesse should be us'd, w'are oft severe. But when his lustfull Sonnes, that could abuse The House of God, making her Porch their Stues, Appear'd before him, his indulgent tongue Compounded rather then rebuk'd the wrong; He dare not shoot, for feare he wound his Childe; Where we should be severe, w'are oft too milde: Vnequall Ely! was thy Sentence iust, To censure Zeale, and not to punish Lust? Could thy parentall mildnesse but have past The former by as eas'ly, as the last, Or had the last, by just proportion, bin Rated but like the first supposed sin, Perchance thy aged head had found encrease Of some few dayes, and gone to sleepe, in peace: Passions misplac'd are dangerous: Let all Remember Elies Faults, with Elies Fall.
7. On the refining of Gold. HAst thou observed how the curious hand Of the Refiner seekes to understand The inadult'rate purenesse of his Gold? He waighs it first, and after does infold In Lead; and then, commits it o the Fire; And, as the Lead consumes, the Gold drawes igher To his perfection, without wast or losse Of his pure substanc, but his waight, his drosse: The Great Refiner of Mans baser Heart Vses the like, nay showes the selfe-same Art; He weighs it, first, and finding it too full Of Trash and Earth, he wraps it in some dull And leaden crosse, of Punishment, or Sin; Then, tryes it in Afflictions Fire; wherein, The Lead and Drosse evaporate together, And leaves the Heart refin'd, and quit of ither: Thus though Mans Heart be lessen'd by the Crosse, And lighter; 'Tis but lighter by the Drosse. 8. On Dagon and the Arke. WHat newes with Dagon? Is thy Shrine so hot, Thou canst not keepe it? Or has Dagon got The falling sicknes, that his Godship's found On such a posture, prostrate on the Grond? Poore helplesse God! But stay! Is Dagon growne So weake ith'hamms: Nor stand, nor rise, alone?
A God, and cannot rise? Tis very odde! He must have help, or lye: A proper God! Well, Dagon must requier helpe of hands; Vp Dagon gos the second time, and stands As confident as though his place had bin His owne, in Fee: Downe Dagon falls agin: But Dagon's shrewdly martyr'd with the jumpe, Lost hands and Head; and nothing left but stumpe: Sure, all's not well with Dagon, now a late; Hee's either sicke, or much forgot the State, Belonging to so great a God: Has none Offer'd some stinking Sacrifice, or blowne Some nauseous fume into his Sacred Nose, And made his God-ship dizzy? Or who knowes, Perchance h'as taken Pett, and will resigne His sullen place, and quitt his empty Shrine: No wonder, a false God should stoope, and lye Vpon the floore when as a true God's by: It was unlikely Dagon should forbeare Respite of Homage, when the Arke was there: If I would worship a false God at all, It should be one that would not scorne to fall Before his Betters: whose indiff'rent arme, If it could doe no good, could doe no harme; I'd rather choose to bend my idle knee, Of all false gods, to such a God as Hee, Whose spirit's not too quick: The fabulous Frogg Found greater danger in the stork, then Logge: And to conclude, I'd choose him, Dagon-like, Not having Head, to plot; nor Hand, to strike.
9. On Saul and David. SVre, Saul as little lookd to be a King, As I: and David dreamd of such a thing, As much as he; when both alike did keepe, The one his Fathers Asses; t'other, Sheepe: Saul must forsake his Whip: And David flings His Crooke aside; And they must both be Kings: Saul had no sword; and David, then, no speare, There was none Conquer'd, nor no Conqu'ror there; There was no sweat; There was no blood, to shed; The unsought Crowne besought the wearers head; There was no Stratagem; No Opposition; No taking parts; No jealous Competition: There needs no Art; There needs no sword to bring, And place the Crown, where God appoints the King. 10. On David and Goliah. SAthan's the great Goliah, that so boasts And threats our Israel, and defyes her Hosts: Those smoother Stones couragious David tooke From the soft bosome of the silver Brooke, Are Scriptum ests: The Sling, that gives them flight, Is Faith; That makes them flye, and flye aright: Lord, lend me Davids Sling, and then I know, I shall have Davids strength and courage too; Give me but skill to pick such Stones, as these, And I will meet Goliah, when he please.
11. On Sauls Witch. WHen Saul receiv'd no answer down frō heav'n How quickly was his jealous passion driven A despr'ate Course! He needs must cure the Itch Of his extreame desiers, by a Witch: When wee have lost our way to God, how levell, How easie to be found's the way toth' Divell. 12. On the necessity of Gods presence. VVHen thou wert present with thy strengthning Grace, Saul prophesied, and fought: But when, Great God, thou didst with-draw thy face, Murther was in his thought: Thus, as thou giv'st, or tak'st away thy hand, We either fall, or stand. 13. Davids Epitaph on Jonathan. HEre lyes the fairest Flowre, that stood▪ In Isr'els Garden; now, in Blood; Which, Death to make her Girland gay, Hath cropt, against her Triumph Day: Here, here lies Hee, whose Actions pen'd The perfect Copie of a Frend:
Whose milke-white Vellam did incurre No least suspition of a Blurre: Here lyes th'example of a Brther, Not to be follow'd by another; The faire indented Counter-part Of Davids Joy, of Davids Heart: Rest then; For ver, rest alone; Thy Ashes can be touch'd by none, Till Death hath pickt one such another: Here lyes a Flow'r, a Friend, a Brother. 14. On Gods Word. GOds sacred Wrd is like the Lampe of Day, Which softens wax, but makes obdure the clay; It either melts the Heart, or more obdures; It never falls in vaine; It wounds, or cures: Lord, make my brest thy Hive, and then I know, Thy Bees will bring in Waxe and Honey too. 15. On Man. BY Nature, Lord, men worse then Nothing be; And lesse then Nthing, if compar'd with Thee; If lesse and worse then Nothing, tell me than, Where is that Smthing, thou so boasts, proud Man?
16. On AhazDiall MAns Heart's like Ahaz Diall; If it flees Not forward; it goes backward ten Degrees. 17. On Lust. LVst is an Ignis fatuus, that arises From the base Earth, that playes her wanton prizes, In solitary Hearts, and ever haunts Darke places, whose deceitfull flame inchaunts The wandring steps of the diverted stranger, Still tempting his mis-guided feet to danger: She never leaves, till by her faire delusion, Shee brings him headlong to his owne confusion. 18. On Thamar and Ammon. SHe must be lov'd; Then courted; and what more? Enjoy'd; then hated; then expeld the dore: Ammon must be discov'red; must obtaine License to Feast; and then, be drunke; then slaine: O what Repose is had in sinfull Breath, Whose love, in hate; whose mirth cōcludes in death!
19. On Love and Lust. THey'r wide, that take base Lust, for Loves halfe-brother, Yeelding two Fathers, but the selfe same Mother: Lust is a Monster, that's conceiv'd and bred Of the abused Will; maintain'd, and fed With sensuall thoughts; Of nature rude, uncivill; Of life, robustious; and whose Sire's the Devill: But Love's the Childe of th'uncorrupted Will, Nourisht with Vertue, poys'ned with the swill Of base respects; Of nature, sweet and milde; In manners, gentle; eas'ly knowne▪ whose Childe; For, by the likenesse, ev'ry eye may gather, That he's the Off-spring of a heav'nly Father: This, suffers all things; That, can suffer nothing; This, never ends; That, ever ends in loathing: T'one loves the Darknesse most: The other, Light: The last's the Childe of Day; The first, of Night; The one is meeke; The other, full of Fyre; This never laggs; That ever apt to tyre; T'one's rash and furious; T'other milde and sage; That dies with youth; whilst This survives with age; The One's couragious; Tother full of Feares; That seekes; The other baulks both eyes and eares: In briefe, to know them both aright, and misse not; In all respects, t'one is, what to'ther is not: So farre from Brothers, that they seeme disioyn'd, Not in Condition only, but in kinde: Admit a falshood: that they had one Mother, The best that Lst can claime's a Bastard Brother▪
Great God, must thou be conscious of that Name, Which jealous Mortals ount the height of shame? And not thy Nuptiall Bed alone defil'd, But to be charged with the base-borne Childe? And yet not mov'd? and yet not move thy Rod? Hast thou not cause to be a Iealous God? Can thy just Iealousies, Great God, be grounded On Mans disloyalty, not Man confounded? 20. On a Tinder-Boxe. MY Soule is like to Tinder, whereinto The Devill strikes a Sparke, at ev'ry blow; My Heart's the Flint; The Steele Temptation is; And his Suggestions hit, and never misse: His Hand is sure; My Tinder apt to catch, Soone sets on fier ev'ry profer'd Match. 21. On ACHITOPHEL. SAge were thy Counsels, and as well apply'd, If thou hadst had but Loyalty on thy side: I like thy last Designe (above the rest) When thou hadst set thy house in order, best; In all Exploits, the Rule is not so ample, Not halfe so beneficiall as th'Example: Th'Almighty prosper Christian Crownes; and blesse All such like Counsels, with the like successe: Confound Achitophel: and, Lord, impart His Head to us; and to our Foes, his Heart.
22. On Sinne. Vnhappy man! Whose every breath Is Sin: Whose every Sin is death: SIN, first Originall; Then our actuall Sin: Our Sins that sally forth: Our Sins that lurk within, Our wilfull Sins; and worlds of Sins, by chance, Our conscious Sins; our Sins of darker Ignorance, Our ot-repeated Sins: Sins never reckon'd: Gainst the first Table Sins: Sins done against the second, Our pleading Sins; our Sins without a cause: Our gospel-Sins; rebllious Sins against thy laws: Our Sins against our vowes; fresh Sins agin: Sin of infirmity; and high presumptious Sin: Thus like our Lines, our Lives begin, Continue, and conclude in Sin: 23▪ On the Sun and starres. OVr dying Saviour's like the setting Sun; His Saints, on earth, are like the Stars of night: Experience tels us, till the Sun be gon, The starres appeare not▪ and retaine no light: Till Sun-set we descerne no Starres at all, And Saints receive their Glory, in his fall:
24. On Absolon and Sampson. SAmpsons defect▪ and thy excesse of hayre, Gave him his death, oth'ground; thee, thine ith' ayre; His thoughts were too deprest; thine sor'd too high; As mortals live, so oftentimes, they die: 25. On Gods favour. GOds favour's like the Sun, whose beams appeare To all that dwell in the worlds Hemispheare, Though not to all alike▪ To some they expresse Themselves more radiant, and to others; lesse: To some, they rise more early; and they fall More late to others, giving day to all: Some soyle's more grosse, and breathing more impure And earthy vapours forth, whose foggs obscure The darkned Medium of the moister aire; Whilst other Soiles, more perfect, yield more rare And purer Fumes; whereby, those Beames appeare, To some, lesse glorious; and to some, more cleare: It would be ever Day; Day, alwayes bright, Did not our interposed Earth make night: The Sun shines alwayes strenuous and faire, But, ah▪ our sins, our Clouds benight the ayre: Lord, drayne the Fenns of this my Boggy soule, Whose grosser vapours make my day so foule; Thy SON hath strength enough to chase away These rising Foggs, and make a glorious Day:
Rise, and shine alwayes cleare; but most of all, Let me behold thy glory, in thy Fall; That being set, poore I (my flesh being hurld From this) may meet thee, in another world. 26. On a spirituall Feaver. MY soule hath had a Fever, a long while; O, I can neither rellish, nor digest, My nimble Pulses beat; my veynes doe boile: I cannot close mine eyes, I cannot rest: O, for a Surgeon, now, to strike a Vaine! That, that would lay my Heate, and ease my Paine: No, no, It is thy Blood, and not my owne, Thy Blood must cure me, Iesus, or else none. 27. On Davids hoise. FAmine? the Sword? the Pestlence? which is least, When all are great? which worst, when bad's the best? It is a point of Mercy, yet, to give A choise of death to such, as must not live: But was the choise so hard? It seemes to me, There was a worse, and better of the three, Though all extreame: Me thinks, the helpe of hands Might swage the first; The bread of forraine lands Might patch their lives, & make some slender shift To save a while, with necessary thrift: Me thinks, the second should be lesse extreame Then that; Alas! poore Israel could not dreame
Of too much peace, that had so oft division Among themselves, and forrain opposition: Besides, their King was martiall; his acts glorious; His heart was valiant, and his hand victorious; Me thinks a Conquerour; a Man oth' sword Should nere be puzzeld a so poore a word: In both, however, David, at the worst, Might well presume he should not die the first▪ But oh, the Plague's impartiall, It respects No quality of Person, Age, nor Sex: The Royall brest's as open to her hand As is the loosest Pesant in the land: Famin? the Sword? the Pest'lence? David free, To take his choice? and pick the worst of three? He that gave David power to reuse, Instructed David, in the Art to chuse; He knew no forrain Kingdōe could afford Supply, where God makes Dearth: He knew the Sword Would want an arm; the arm would want her skill; And skill, successe, where heav'n prepares to kill: He knew▪ there was no trust, no safe recourse To Martiall man, or to his warlike horse; But it is Thou, Great God▪ the only close Of his best thoughts, and the secure repose Of all his trust; He yields to kisse thy Rod; Israel was thine, and thou art Israels God: He knw thy gratious wont, thy wonted Grace; He knew, thy Mercy tooke the upper place Of all thy Attributes; 'Twas no adventure To cast himselfe on Thee, the only Center Of all his hopes; Thy David knw the danger To fall to th'hands of man; or frend, or stranger:
Thus Davids filiall hopes, being anchor'd fast On Gods knowne Mercy, wisely hose the last: If thou wilt give me Davids heart: Ile voyce, Great God, with David; and make Davids choyce: But stay; deare Lord, my tongue's too bold, too free, To speake of choyce, that merits all the Three. 28. On Mans unequall division. LOrd, 'tis a common course; w'are apt and free To take the Best, and share the worst to Thee: We Fleet the Mornings for our owne Designe; Perchance, the Flotten Afternoones are thine: Thou giv'st us Silke; we offer Cammills hayre. Thy Blessings march ith' Front; our thanks, ith'Reare▪ 29. On Beggers. NO wonder that such swarmes of Beggers lurke In every street: 'Tis a worse trade to worke Then begge: Yet some, if they can make but shift To live, will thinke it scorne to thrive by gift; 'Tis a brave mind; but yet no wise forecast; It is but Pride, and Pride will stoope at last; We all are Beggers; should be so, at least; Alas! we cannot worke: The very best Our hands can doe, will not maintaine to live; VVe can but hold them up, whilst others give: No shame for helples Man, to pray in aid; Great Sol'mon scornd not to be free o'th' Trade;
He begg'd an Almes and blusht not; For the Boone He got, was trble fairer then his Crowne: No wonder that he thriv'd by begging, so; He was both Begger and a Chuser too: O who would trust to Worke, that may obtaine The Suit he beggs, without or sweat, or paine! O what a priviledge, Great God, have we, That have the Honour, but to begge on thee! Thou dost not right us with the tort'ring Whips Of Bedels; nor dost answere our faint lips With churlish language; Lord, thou dost not praise The stricter Statute of last Henries dayes: Thou dost not dampe us with the empty voyce Of Nothing for yee: If our clam'rous noyse Should chance t'importune, turn'st thy gracious eye Vpon our wants, and mak'st a quick supply: Thou dost not brand us with th'opprobrious name Of idle vagabonds: Thou know'st w'are lame, And canot worke; Thou dost not, Pharo-like, Deny us Straw, and yet requier Brick: Thou canst not heare us grone beneath our Taske, But freely giv'st, what we have Faith to aske: The most, for which my large desire shall plead, To serve the present's but a Loafe of Bread, Or but a Token (ev'n as Beggers use;) That, of thy love, will fill my slender Cruse: Lord, during life, Ile begge no greater Boone, If at my Death, thou'lt give me but a Crowne.
30. On the two Children. MY Flesh and Spirit, Lord, are like those payre Of Infants, whose sad Mothers did repayre To Iustice: T'one is quick; the other dead: The two promiscuous Parents that doe plead For the live Childe, is Thee and Sathan, Lord: Both claime alike; Iustice cals forth the Sword, And seeing both, with equall teares, complaine, Proffers to cleave the Children both in twaine▪ And make them equall sharers in the same That both doe challenge, and what both disclaime: Sathan applaudes tho motion, and replyde; Nor thine, nor mine, but let them both divide; And give alike to both: But thou, deare Lord, Dislik'st the Iustice of th'unequall Sword: Rather then share it dead, thou leav'st to strive, And wilt not own't at all, if not alive: The Sword's put up, & straight condemnes the other To be the false; calls Thee, the nat'rall Mother: Lord of my Soule: It is but Sathans wilde, To cheate thy bosome of thy living Childe; Hee'd have the Question by the Sword decided, Knowing the Soule's but dead, if once divided: My better part is thine, and thine alone; Take thou the Flesh, and let him gnaw the Bone:
31. On two Mysteries. A Perfect Virgin, to bring forth a Son! One, three entyre; and Three, entirely One! Wonder of Wonders! How might all this come? We must be deafe, when th' holy Spirit's dumb; Spare to enquire it: Thou shalt never know, Till Heav'n dissolve, and the last Trump shall blow. 32. A forme of Prayer. IF thou wouldst learne, not knowing how, to pray, Adde but a Faith, and say as Beggers say; Master, I'm poore, and blinde, in great distresse; Hungry and ame, and cold, and comfortlesse: O, succour him, that's graveld on the Shelf Of payne, and want, and cannot help himself; Cast downe thine eye upon a wretch▪ and take Some pitty on me for sweet Iesus sake: But hold! Take heed this Clause be not put in, I never begg'd before, nor will agin: Note this withall, That Beggers move their plaints At all times Ore tenus, not by Saints. 33. On Solomon and the Queene of Sheba. IT spreds: The sweet perfume of Salomons Fame Affects the Coasts; And his illustrious name
Cannot be hid: The unbeliev'd report Must flye with Eagles wings to th'honourd Court Of princely Sheba: Sheba must not rest, Vntill her eye become th'invited Guest Of Fames loud Trumpet; her impatience strives With light-foot Time, while her Ambition drives Her Chariot wheeles, and gives an ayry passage To'th'quick deliv'ry of her hearts Embassage: True wisdome planted in the hearts of Kings, Needs no more glory then the glory'it brings; And, like the Sun, is viewd by her owne light, B'ing, by her owne reflection, made more bright: The emulous Queen's arriv'd; Shee's gon toth' Court; No eye-delighting Masque? no Princely Sport, To entertaine her? No, her ye, her eare Is taken up, and scornes to see, to heare Inferiour things: Sh'allowes her eare, her eye No lesse then Oracles, and Maiestie: How, empty pastimes doe resolve and flye To their true nothing, when true wisdome's by! Th'arrived Queene has Audience; moves; disputes; Wise Solomon attends; replyes; confutes; Sh' objects; he answers; She afresh propounds; She proves; maintaines it; he decides; confounds: She smiles; she wonders, being overdaz'd With his bright beams, stands silent; stands amaz'd: How Scripture-like Aporypha's appeare To common Bookes! how poore, when Scripture's neare! The Queene is pleas'd, who, never yet did know The blast of Fame, lesse prodigall, then now; For now, the greatest part of what she knew By Fame, is found the least of what is true;
We often finde that Fame, in prime of youth, Does adde to Falshood, and subtract from Truth: The thankfull Queene do's, with a lib'rall hand, Present him with the Riches of her Land: Where Wisdome goes before we often finde That temp'rall Blessings seldome stay behinde: Lord, grant me wisdome; and I shall possesse Enough; have more, or have content with lesse. 33. On REHOBOAM. COuld dying Parents, at their peacefull death, Make but a firme Assurance, or bequeath Their living Vertues; Could they recommend Their wisdome to their heyrs; Could hearts descend Vpon the bosome of succeeding Sons, As well as Scepters doe; as well as Thnes; Sure Rehobeams Reigne had found increase Of Love and Honour, and had dyed in peace: Kingdomes are transitory: Scepters goe Frō hand, to hand, and Crownes, from brow, to brow, But Wisdome marches on another guize: They two things; to be Worldly great, and wise; It was the selfe same Scepter that came downe From Solomon to thee: The selfe same Crowne, That did enclse his Princely browes, and thine; Th  same flesh and blood, the next o'th'Line; The selfe same people were alive, to blesse The prosp'rous dayes; But not the same successe: Where reste the fault? what secret mischiefe can Vn-same thy peace? 'Twas not the selfe same Man.
34. On the Prophet slaine by a Lyon. TWas not for malice; not for want of Food, The obvious Lyon shed this Prophets blood: Where faithlesse man neglects the sacred Law Of God; there, beasts abate their servile awe To man: When Man dares take a dispensation, By sin, to frustrate th'end of Mans Creation, The Beasts, Oft-times, by mans Example, doe Renounce the end of their Creation too: The Prophet must abstaine: He was forbid; He must not eate: And yet the Prophet did: Th'obedient Lyon had command to shed That Prophets Blood: and see, the Prophet's dead: O, how corrupt's the nature of Mans Will, That breaks those Lawes which very Beasts fulfill! 35. On Ahab. HOw Ahb longs! Ahab must be possest Of Naboths Vineyard, or can find no rest: His tongue must second his unlawfull eye: Ahab must sue: and Naboth must denye: Ahab growes sullen; he can eat no Bread; His Body prostrates on his restlesse Bed: Vnlawfull lust immoderate often brings A loathing in the use of lawfull things: Ahabs defier must not be with-stood, It must be purchas'd, though with Naboths Blood;
Witnesse must be suborn'd: Naboth must lie Open to Law; must be condemn'd; and dye: His goods must be confiscate to the Crowne; Now Ahab's pleas'd; The Vineyard's now his owne▪ Vnlawfull Pleasures, when they jostle further Then ordinary bounds; oft end in murther. Me thinkes, the Grapes that cluster from that Vine, Should (being prest) afford more blood then wine. 36. On Rehoboam. PEople have Balances; wherein to weigh Their new-crown'd Princes; which can soone bewray Their native worth: Some counterpoyse th'allow: Vnhappy Israel had not weights enow, To weigh thy Fingers▪ Heads can never rest In peace, when their poore members are opprest: Had thy unlucky Fingers weigh'd no more Then thy light Iudgement; had thy judeement bore But halfe the burthen of thy Fingers weight, Thou hadst bin prosp'rous, both in Crowne, and State: The Lyon's knowne by's Paw; The people spends Their Judgement of a Prince by's Fingers ends. 37. On Leprous Naaman. THe Leper, prompted with his lothsome griefe, Seekes to the King of Israel for reliefe: But Naaman's vayne desiers could not thrive; Israel's no God; to hill, or make alive:
The Morall Man is of too meane a Stature, To reach his hand above the head of Nature: The willing Prophet undertakes the Cure; The Leper must goe wash, and be secure From his Disease: He must goe paddle straight, In Iordan's water: 'Tis a faire Receipt: And why in Iordan? Have our Syrian streames Lesse pow'r then Isr'els? sure the Prophet dreames: How hard it is for Mortals to rely On Faith! How apt is sense, to question, why? The Cure perplxes more then the Disease; Prophets prescribe no better meanes then these? I lookd his Ceremonious hand should stroke The place; I look'd the Prophet should invoke: Some men would faine he cleane, if God would stay Their times, or would but cure them their owne way: The techy Leper is displeas'd; hee'l hence: The Iordan Prophet dallyes against sense: His wiser servants urge their hasty Lord To Iordan's streames: He washes; is restor'd▪ How good a God have we, whose grace fulfils Our choyce desires oft-times against our wills! The Leper's clens'd; And now he dos applaud Not Isr'els streames alone, but Isr'els God: The Prophet must have thanks, and Gold beside; The thanks are taken, but the Gold's deny'd: Who would not deale with Thee, that are not nice, To sell such Pen'worths at so small a price! Naaman, in lieu of his refus'd reward, Vowes the true God; provided, when his Lord Shall serve ith house of Rimmon, if he bow For fashion-sake, he may secure his Vow:
Some will not stick to lend their God a house, Might they reserve one roome for their owne use: Gehazi thinks the Cure too cheape; He soone Oretakes the Lepers Charit, asks a Boone I'th' Prophets name: But marke what did befall; He got his Boone; but got his plague withall: Vnlawfull gaines are least what they appeare, And ill got Gold is a alwayes bought too deare: Lord, I did wash in Iordan, and was cur'd; My Flesh, that false Gehazi, hath procur'd A sinfull purchase, having over-run The clensed Naaman of my Soule: What's done By false Gehazi, let Gehazi beare; Let Naamans Leprosie alone stick there; O, clense them both, or if that may not be, Lord, strike Gehazi; and keepe Naaman free, 38. On Chamber-Christians. NO matter whether (some there be that say) Or goe to Church, or stay at home, if pray: Smiths dainty Sermons have, in plenty, stor'd me With better stuffe, then Plpets can afford me: Tell me, why pray'st thou; Heav'n commanded so: Art not commanded to his Temples too? Small store of manners! when thy Prince bids Come, And feast at Court; to say, I've at at home.
39. On the Widowes Cruse. LOrd, I'm in debt, and have not where withall To pay: My score is great; my wealth but small; My house is poorely furnisht, and my Food Is slender; I have nothing that is good: Lord, if my wasted Fortunes proove no better, My Debt is ev'n as desp'rate as the Detter: All the reliefe thy servant this long while, Hath had, is but a little Cruse of Oyle; There's none will give of Almes: I neither get Enough to satisfie my wants, nor debt: Lord, if thee please to show the selfe same Art Vpon the slender vessell of my Heart, The Prophet did, upon the Widowes Cruse, I shall have Oyle to sell, have Oyle to use; So shall my Debt be paid, and I go free; No Debt is desp'rate, in respect of Thee. 40. On the swimming Axe. THe borrow'd Axe fell in: 'Twas lost; lamented; The Prophet moov'd; the Workman discontented; A Stick he ne downe; and by the Prophets hand, Throwne in; the Axe did float, and came aland: And why a Stick? Had that the pow'r to call The massy ron up? Sure, none at all: Moses must use his Rod; Moses I doubt it, Had beene but lame, but impotent without it;
Nor could that Rod have scourged Pharoes Land, Had it beene waved by an other hand: God often workes by meanes, and yet not so, But that he can, as well without them, too. God can save Man without the helpe of Man, But will not; Wils not alwaies that he can: Something is left for us: we must not lye Ith' ditch, and cry, And if we dye we dye: We must not lye like Blocks, relying on The workmans Axe; There's something must be done: The workmans Axe perchance had never bin Recald againe, if not the sticke throwne in: We must be doing, yet those Deeds, as our, Have no more native vertue, nay, lesse power To save us, then that sticke had, to recall The Axe from the deepe bottome of his Fall: I will be doing; but repose in Him; Throw I in sticks: hee'l make my Iron swim. 41. On Baals Priests. IEhu's crown'd King; Iehu the King must fall To Ahabs Gods: Iehu must worship Baal: The gods-divided people must goe call Baals sacred Priests: Iehu must worship Baal: None must be left behinde; They must come all; Iehu must burne a Sacrifice to Baal: The Priests come puffing in; both great and small Must wait on Iehu that must worship Baal: Baals house is fill'd and crouded to the wall With people, that are come to worship Baal.
What must there now be done? what Offring shall Perfume Baals nostrils? ev'n the Priests of Baal: Baals holy Temple's now become a Stall Of Priestly flesh; of fleshly Priests for Baal; How would our Gospell flourish, if that all Princes, like Iehu, would but worship Baal! 42. On the Tempter. HOw dares thy Bandog, Lord, presume t'approach Into thy sacred preence? or incroach Vpon thy choyce possessions, to devoure Thy sporting Lambs? To counterfeit thy po'wr, And to usurpe thy Kingdome, ev'n as He Were, Lord, at least, a Substitute to Thee? Why dost not rate him? why does he obtaine Such favour to have liberty of his Chaine? Have we not Enemies to counterbuffe, Enow? Is not the Flesh, the World enough To foyle us? this abroad, and that at home; But must that Sathan, must that Bandog come T'afflict the weake, and take the stronger side? O, are there not enow, enow beside? Is there not odds enough, when we have none But mighty Foes; nay, Rebels of our owne, Beneath a false disguise of love and peace, That still betray us? Are not these, all these Sufficient, to encounter and o'rthrow, Poore sinfull Man; but must that Bandog too, Assault us, Lord? We dare not cast our eyes Our timorous eyes to Heav'n, we dare not rise
From off our aking knees, to plead our case, When he can commune with thee face to face; Nay more, were it but possible to doe, Would draw thee, Lord, to his bold Faction too. Lord, lend me but thy power to resist What Foes thou sendst, and send what Foes thou list: It is thy Battaile: If thou please to warme My blood, and find the strength, Ile find the Arme; March thou i'th' Front, Ile follow in the Reare; Come then ten thousand Bandogs, Ile not feare. 43. On a Cypher. CYphers to Cyphers added, seeme to come (With those that know not Art) to a great sum: But such as skill in Numeration, know, That worlds of Cyphers, are but worlds of show: We stand those Cyphers, ere since Adams fall; We are but show: we are no summe at all: Our bosome-pleasures, and delights, that doe Appeare so glorious, are but Cyphers too: High-prized honour, friends, This house; The tother, Are but one Cypher added to another: Reckon by rules of Art, and tell me, than, How great is thy Estate, Ingenious Man? Lord, be my Figure, Then it shall be knowne That I am Something: Nothing, if alone: I care not in what place, in what degree; I doe not weigh how small my Figure be: But as I am, I haue nor worth, nor vigure: I am thy Cypher; O, be thou my Figure.
44. On Haman and Mordecay. THe King wold fain take rest; But thought denies To pay her nightly Tribute to his eyes: The Persian Chronicle must be brought, to set His eyes in quiet, till they'r payd the debt: He turnes the leaves; The first he lights upon, Is the true service Mordecay had done: Heav'n often works his ends, at such a season, When Man has will to banish sense, and Reason: His loyall service must be now recall'd To blest remembrance: Haman must be call'd To Councell; question'd, but not know the thing The King intends: He must advise the King, What Ceremony must be us'd, what Cost, What Honor, where the King shall honor most; Observe but in the Progresse of this Story, How God turnes Factor for his Servants glory: Haman perswaded that such honour can Fit none but him; ne'r questions, Who's the Man; His more ambitious thoughts are now providing A Horse of State, for his owne Princely riding; In briefe; his Iudgement is, That such a One, Must lack no Honor, but the Royall Throne: How apt is Man to flatter his owne heart! How faire a Debter to his false desert! The royall Horse is ready, all things fit, That could be broach'd by a vain-glorious wit: Haman expects his answere; His Ambition Spurrs on, wants nothing but his large Commission:
Haman must haste with all the speed he can, And see it done: But Mordecay's the man▪ God often crownes his Servants at their Cost, That hate their persons, and disdaine them most: Lord, if thou please to make me but thine owne, I shall have Honour, spight of Honours frowne. 45. On Jobs Temptations. GOd questions Sathan: Boasts his Iobs desert, In the perfection of a Simple Heart: Iobs Faith was servent; Sathan was as chill To yeeld it; but must yeeld against his will; Condemnes it to be Servile, to be bought With Gods own coyn? Does Iob erve God for nought? It is a common trick, the Tempter uses, The Faith he cannot conquer, he abuses. Alas, that Faith requires not so much praise, 'Tis a good Faith, as Faiths goe now a dayes: Is it not strengthen'd by thy indulgent hand, That blest his Labours, and inricht his Land? Puffe out the Fire: his Faith will quickly chill: Sathan puffe thou; nay Sathan puffe thy will: Nor Ebbe nor Floud of small, or great estate, Are certaine Badges of Gods love or Hate: What's now to doe? Poore Iob must be bereaven Of all his stronger Herds; Fire, sent from Heaven, Must burne his fruitfull Flocks, that none remaine; His houses fall; and all his Children slaine; And yet not rse? Alas, poore Iob adresses His thoughts to heav'n; he worships God & blesses▪
The lively Faith that can retaine her God, May groane; but seldome rav beneath the Rod. But what sayes Sathan now? The hedge is broke, That fenc'd my Servant Iob: What further Cloke For his uprightnesse hath he? what pretence For his continued Love and Innocence? Has not thy malice had her owne desire? 'Twas soundly puff'd; thy Puffs have blown the ire: Gods Tryals are like Bellows: Sathan's Blower, Blowes out false Faiths, makes true ones blaze the more. True Lord; His Raith is tough: But Snailes as well Can thrive without, as live within their Shell: To save a life who would not lose some skin? Touch but his Hornes; O how hee'l draw them in Sathan I give thy malice leave, be free To peele the Barke, but spare to touch the Tree. Feare not ye little flocke: The greatest ill Your Foes can doe's to scratch; They cannot kill. What now's th'exployt? Afflicted Iob does lye, A very Hospitall of misery: I thinke, that all the Vlcers that have bin In Egypt cu'd, are broken out agin In his distempered Flesh; yet Iob is still The very same, nor charg'd his God with ill: A Faith that lodges in a double Brest, May stand the touch; None but true Faiths the Test: If these be Flames poore man must swelter in, He needs a World a patience, not to sin.
46. On bauling Curres. I Feard the world and I were too acquainted; I hope my feares are, like her Joyes, but painted: Had I not bin a Stranger, as I past, Her bauling Curres had never bark'd so fast. 47. On DAVID. STands it with State, that Princely David, who Did weare the Crown, should play the Harper too? He playes and sings; His glory ne'r disdaines To dance, and to receive a Crowne for's paines: Tis no disparagement, 'tis no misprision Of State, to play before the Great Musitian. 48. On ABRAHAM. THe word is out: Poore Abr'am must be gon; Must take his Isaak; take his onely Son; The Son of his Affection; him, from whom, From whose blest loynes so many Kings must come: Ev'n him must Abr'am slay, Abr'am must rise, And offer Isaac a burnt Sacrifice. God scornes the Offals of our faint desires; He gives the best, and he the best requires. Abr'am forbeares to question; thinks not good To reason, to advise with Flesh and Blood;
Begs not young Isaacks life, nor goes about T'object the Law of Murther; makes no doubt: He rises, rises early, leads his Son; Hasts where this holy Slaughter must be done: Where God bids Goe, that very Breath's a warrant: We must not linger there: Haste crownes the Arrant. His Servants must no further: They must stay: Private Devotion claimes a private Way: They must abide with th' Asse, whilst th'aged Syre In t'one hand takes the knife: in t'other, Fire: The sacred Wood of Offring must be pil'd On the young shoulders of th'obedient Childe: O here mine eye must spend a teare to see Thee beare that Wood, great God, that, since, bore Thee: Mistrustles Isaac seeing the wood, the fire, The sacrificing Knife, begins t'enquire, But where's the Sacred Lambe, that must be slaine? Resolved Abr'am (lest the flesh should gaine Too much of Nature) sayes not, Thou my Son Art he: but, The Almighty will provide s one: Where God commands, 'tis not enough t'effect, But we must baulk th'occasion of neglect. The faithfull Abra'm now erects an Altar: Orders the wood: what tongue can chuse but falter, To tell the rest? He layes his hands upon His wondring Isaac, binds his only Son: He layes him downe, unsheath's his Priestly knife: Vp-heaves his arme, to take his Isaacks life. True faith is active: Covets to proceed From thought to action; and from will to deed: Before the strengthned stroke had time to fall, A Sudden voyce from Heav'n cryes hold: Recall
Thy threatning Arme, and sheath thy oly Knife, Thy Faith has answer'd for thy Isaac's life; Touch not the Childe; thy Faith is throughly showne, That has not spar'd thine owne, thine onely Son: How easie is our God, and liberall, who Counts it as don, what we haue will to doe! 49. On Censorio. CEnsorio takes in hand, by sharp reproofe, To mend his Brothers errror, and to snuffe His darkned Flame; and yet Censorio's crimes Are rankt among the foulest of the Times: Let none presume, Censorio, to controule Or top the dim light of anothers Soule, If not more pure then him, that is controll'd: The Temple-Snuffers must be perfect Gold. 50. On Mordecay and Haman. TWo Steeds appointed were by Hamans hand; The one at Grasse; The other Steed did stand In Persia's Mues: The former was providing For Mordecay: the last for Hamans riding: But since, in order, last things prove the worst, Hamans ambition drove him to the First: But see, proud Hamans prouder Steed did cast His glorious rider, whilest the Iew sits fast: What matter Haman? Fortu, though no Friend Of thine, first brought thee to thy Iourneyes end.
51. On three Fooles. THe Wise man sayes, It is a Wise mans part, To keepe his tongue close pris'ner in his heart; If he be then a Foole, whose thought denies, There is a God, how desp'rately unwise, How more then Foole is he, whose language shall Proclaime in publike, There's no God at all! What then are they, nay Fooles, in what degree, Whose Actions shall maintain't? Such fooles are we. 52. On miserable Man. ADam, the highest pitch of perfect nature, And lively image of his great Creator, Declin'd his God; and, by one sinfull Deed, Destroy'd himselfe, and ruin'd all his seed: How wretched, then, how desp'rate's our Condition, Whose ev'ry minute makes a repetition Of greater sins, against both light of Nature, And Grace, against Creation and Creator! Alas! we claime not by descent, alone, But adde by hourely purchase of our owne: There is no breach of Loyalty, no sin We are imperfect, and unpractis'd in; Shall not a world of Sins bring ruine, then, To One; when one Sin slew a world of men?
53. On Mans two enemies. TWo potent Enemies attend on Man; T'one's fat and plump; The other leane and wan; T'one faunes and smiles; The other weepes as fast; The first Presumption is; Despaire, the last: That feeds upon the bounty of full Treasure; Brings jolly newes of Peace, and lasting pleasure: This feeds on want, unapt to entertaine Gods Blessings: Finds them ever in the waine: Their Maximes disagree; But their Conclusion Is the selfe same: Both jump in Mans Confusion: Lord, keepe me from the first, or else, I shall Sore up and melt my waxen wings, and fall: Lord, keepe the second from me; lest I, then, Sinke downe so low, I never rise agen: Teach me to know my selfe, and what I am, And my Presumption will be turn'd to shame: Give me true Faith, to know thy dying Son, What Ground has then Despaire to worke upon? T'avoid my shipwrack upon either Shelfe, O, teach me, Lord, to know my God; my selfe. 54. On Queene ESTER. ILlustrious Princesse, had thy chance not beene, To be a Captive, thou hadst bin no Queene: Such is the Fortune, our Misfortune brings; Had we not first bin Slaves, w'ad ne'r beene Kings.
55. On Slanders. HAve sland'rous tongues bin busie to defame The pretious Oyntment of my better name? Or hath censorious basenesse gone about With her rude blast to puffe my Taper out? They have: And let their full mouthd bellowes puffe: It is their Breath that sinks, and not my Snuffe: I, let them snarle and burst, that I may smile, Doe, let them jerk, and I will laugh the while: They cannot srike beyond my patience; No, Ile beare, and take it for an Honour too; The height that my Ambition shall flye, Is only to deserve their Calumny: O, what a Iudgement 'twere, if such as they Should but allow my Actions, and betray My'endangered ame, by their maligne applause, To good Opinion, That were a just Cause Of Griefe indeed! but to be made the Story Of such base tongues, it is my Crowne, my Glory: I, let them spend their Dust against the winde, And bark against the Moone, till they be blind, And weary; Let their malice not forbeare To baule at Innocence, to wound and teare An absent name, whilst their unallowed tongues Make me a glorious Martyr in their wrongs: I beg no Favour: Nay, my hearts desire Is still to be calcin'd by such a Fyre: That, in conclusion, all men may behold A faire gilt Counter, from a Crowne of Gold.
Great God, I care not this, how foule I seeme To Man; May I be faire in thy esteeme: It matters not how light I seeme to be To the base world, so I be weight to thee. 56. On NABVCHADNEZZER. WHat lucklesse Accident hath bred such ods Betwixt great Babels Monarch, and his Gods, That they so oft disturbe him, and affright His broken slumbers with the Dreames of night! Alas, what hath this Princely Dreamer done, That he must quit the Glory of his Throne, His Royall Scepter, his Imperiall Crowne? Must be expeld his Honour, and come downe Below the meanest Slave, and, for a Season, Be banisht from the use, the Act of Reason? Must be exil'd from humane shape, and chew The cudde, and must be moistned with the dew Of heav'n; nay, differ in no other thing From the bruit beast, but that he was a King? What ayle thy Gods, that they are turn'd so rough, So full of rage? what, had they meat enough To fill their golden Stomacks? Was thy knee Bent oft enough? what might the reason be? Alas, poore harmelesse things! it was not they; 'Twas not their wills: I dare be bold to say, They knew it not: It was not they that did it; They had no pow'r to act, or to forbid it: Deserv'st thou not, Great King, the stile of Beast, To serve such Gods, whose Deities can digest
Their servants open wrongs? that could dispense With what they'endure, without the least offence; Illustrious Beast, methinks thy better'd state Has no great reason to complaine of Fate: Thou art more neere to him thou didst adore, By one degree, then ere thou wert before: Tis some promotion; That there is lesse ods 'Betwixt thy Nature, and thy senslesse Gods. 57. On PARTIO. HAst thou forsaken all thy Sinnes, but One? Beleeve it, Partio, Th'ast forsaken None. 58. On Ignorance. THe greatest Friend Religion hath t'aduance Her glory's unaffected Ignorance: The burning Taper lends the fairest light, And shines most glorious, in the shades of night. 59. On a great Battaile. VVHen my rebellious Flesh doth disagree With my resisting Spirit; me thinks, I see Two mighty Princes draw into the Field, Where one must win the Day; the other, yeeld: They both prepare; Both strike up their Alarmes; Both march; Both well appointed in their Armes;
They both advance their Banners: T'one displayes A bloody Crosse: The other Colours blaze A Globe terrestriall: Nature carries one, And Grace the other: Each by's Ensigne's knowne: They meet, encounter, blowes exchange for blowes: Dart is returnd for Dart: They grapple, Close: Their Fortune's hurryed with unequall Sailes, Somtimes the Crosse; somtimes, the Globe prevailes. We are that Field; And they that strive to win us, Are God and Sathan; Those, that warre within us, The Flesh, the Spirit: No parting of the Fray, Till one shall win: the other, lose the Day: My God, O weaken this rebellious Flesh, That dares oppose: O, quicken and refresh My dull and coward Spirit, that would yeeld, And make proud Sathan Master of the Field: Deare Lord, the Field's thy own; thou thoughtst it good To purchas't with my dying Saviours Blood: 'Tis thine, Great God, by title, and by right; Why should thou question, what's thy owne, by fight? Lord, keepe possession thou, and let th'accurst And base Vsurper doe his best, his worst. 60. On the World. THe World's an Inne; and I, her Guest, I eate, I drinke, I take my Rest: My Hostesse Nature, do's deny me Nothing, wherewith she can supply me: Where, having stayd a while, I pay Her lavish Bills, and goe my way.
61. On the Sabbath. AWay my thoughts: Away my words, my deeds; Away, what ever nourishes and feeds My frayle delights: Presume not to approach Into my presence; dare not once t'encroach Vpon the hallowed Temple of my Soule; Ye are not for this Day, y'are all too foule: Abide yee with the Asse, till I goe yonder, And cleave the Isaac of my heart in sunder: I must goe sacrifice: I must goe pray, I must performe my holy vowes, to day: Tempt not my tender frailty: I enjoyne Your needfull absence; y'are no longer mine: But if it may not be, that we must sever Our yoakt affections, and not part for ever; Yet give me leave, without offence, to borrow, At least, this day, although we meet to morrow. 62. On Prayer. IN all our Prayers, th' Almighty do's regard The Iudgement of the Ballance, not the Yeard: He loves not Words, but Matter; 'Tis his pleasure To buy his Wares by Weight, and not by Measure.
63. On FIDO. FIndst thou no comfort on this fickle Earth? No Joy at all? No Obiect for thy Mirth? Nothing but Sorrow? Nothing else, but toyle? What, doe thy dayes shew nothing, worth a smile? Doe worldly pleasures no contentment give? Content thee, Fido, Th'ast not long to live. 64. On CHARISSA. WOldst thou, Charissa, wish thy fortunes better, Then, by thy act, to make thy God thy Detter? Ile teach thee how to doe't: Relieve the poore, And thou mayst safely set it on Gods Score: 65. On RAYMOND SEBVND. I Wonder, Raymond, thy illustrious Witt, Strengthned with so much learning, could commit So great a Folly, as to goe about, By Natures feeble light, to blazen out Such Heav'n-bred Mist'ryes, which the hearts of Men Cannot conceive, much lesse the darkned Pen Expresse; such secrets, at whose depth, the Quire Of blessed Angels tremble, and admire: Could thy vaine-glory lend no easier taske To thy sublime Attempt, then to unmaske
The glorious Trinity, whose Tri-une face Was ne'r discovered by the eye of Grace, Much lesse by th'eye of Nature, being a story Objected only to the Eye of Glory? Put out thy light, bold Raymond, and be wise; Silence thy tongue, and close thy'ambitious eyes: Such heights as these, are Subjects far more fit For holy Admiration, then for Witt. 66. On Sinnes. MY Sinnes are like the hayres upon my head, And raise their Audit to as high a score; In this they differ; These doe dayly shed, But, ah, my sinnes grow dayly more and more: If, by my Hayres, thou number out my sinnes, Heav'n make me bald, before that day begins. 67. On the Gospell. OVr Gospell thrives the more by forreine Iarres; It overcomes in outward opposition: But O, it suffers still, in Civill Warres, And loses Honour by a home-division: If thou assist, I care not, Lord, with whom I warre abroad, so I have peace at home.
68. On the dayes of Man. LOrd, if our dayes be few, why doe we spend And lavish them unto so evill an end? Lord, if our dayes be evill, why doe we wrong Our selves, and Thee, to wish our Day so long? Our dayes decrease; but, still, our evils renew; Great God, we make them evill; Thou mak'st them few. 69. On Sinnes. MY Sinnes are like the Sands upon the shore; Which every Ebbe layes open to the Eye: In this they differ; These are cover'd ore With ev'ry Flood; My sinnes still open lye: If thou wilt make mine Eyes a Sea of teares, O, they will hide the sinnes of all my yeares. 70. On KAIN and DAVID. THeir Sins were equall; Equall was their guilt: They both committed Homicide; Both spilt Their Brothers guiltles blood: Nay, of the twayne, The first occasion was lesse foule, in Kain: 'Twas likely Kains Murther was in heate Of blood; There was no former grudge, no threate: But Davids was a Plott; He tooke the life Of poore Vriah, to enjoy his Wife:
Was Iustice equall? Was her Ballance even? Kain was punisht: David was forgiven: Both came to tryall: But good David did Confesse that Sin, which cursed Kain hid: Kain bewaild the punishment; wherein, His Sin had plung'd him: David wayles his Sin: If I lament my sins; Thou wilt forbeare To punish, Lord; or give me strength, to beare. 71. On PLAVSVS. PLausus of late, hath rais'd an Hospitall, Repay'rd a Church; Founded a Colledge Hall: Plausus hath built a holy Temple; vow'd it To God: Erects a Schoole, and has endow'd it: Plausus hath given, through his abundant pity, A Spittle to the blind, and lame o'th' Citty: Plausus allowes a Table for the poore O'th Parish; besides those, he seeds at doore: Plausus relieves the Prisons; Mends the Wayes; Maintaines a Lecture, on the Market dayes: Plausus, in briefe, for bounty beares the Bell; Plausus has don much Good; but nothing, Well. 72. On Sinnes. MY Sinnes are like the Starres, within the skyes; In view, in number, ev'n as bright, as great: In this they differ: These doe set and rise; But ah, my Sinnes doe rise, but never seit:
Shine Son of glory, and my sins are gon, Like twinkling Starres, before the rising Sun. 73. On change of Weathers. ANd were it for thy profit, to obtaine All Sunshine? No vicissitude of Raine? Thinkst thou, that thy laborious Plough requires Not Winter frosts, as well as Summer fires? There must be both: Somtimes these hearts of ours Must have the sweet, the seasonable Showres Of Teares; Sometimes, the Frost of chill despaire Makes our desired sunshine seeme more faire: Weathers that most oppose to Flesh and Blood, Are such as helpe to make our Harvest good: We may not choose, great God; It is thy Task: We know not what to have; nor how to ask. 74. On PROSPER. TAke heed, thou prosp'rous sinner, how thou liv'st In Sin, and thriv'st; Thou, that dost flourish in thy heapes of gold, And summes untold; Thou, that hadst never reason to complaine Of Crosse, or paine. Whose unafflicted Conscience never found Nor Check, nor Wound. Beleeve it, Prosper, thy deceitfull Lease Allowes thee neither wealth, nor Ioy, nor Peace.
Thy golden heapes are nothing but the price Of Paradise; Thy Flattering pleasures, and thy ayrie oyes, But painted Toyes; Thy peacefull Conscience is but like a Dogge, Tyed in a Clogge; Beleeve it, Prosper, thy deceitfull Lease Allowes thee neither Wealth, nor Ioy, nor Peace: Thy heapes of Gold will stand thee in no steed, At greatest need; Thy Epty Pleasures, will convert thy laughter, To groanes, hereafter. Thy silent Conscience, when enlarg'd, will roare, And rage the more: Beleeve it, Prosper, thy deceitfull Lease, Affords thee neither Wealth, nor Ioy, nor Peace. 75. On the Sight of a Plague bill. FIve thousand in a weeke, in one poore City? Because it was thy Pleasure, twas no pity; Why should thou pity us, Just God, when we Could never finde a time to pity thee? Thou never strik'st without a reason why, Nor often, then: We easily cast our eye Vpon the punishment, but blinde toth' sin, That farre transcends the judgement it calls in: O, if the weekly Bills of our Transgression Could but appeare, and make as deepe impression In our sad hearts, to make our hearts but know As great a sorrow, as our Plague-bills doe;
No doubt, no doubt but Heav'ns avenging hand Would turne a Stranger to our prosprous Land O, if that weekly Catalogue of Si Could, with our City Bills be brought but in; And be compar'd wee'd think our Bills not high, But rather wonder there are men, to dye. 76. On Theaters. SIx dayes were made for work; the seventh, for rest; I read of none, that Heav'n ordaind for Play; How have our looser Theaters transgrest The Decalogue, that make it ev'ry Day: Me thinkes that they should change their Trade for shame, Or honour't with a more laborious name, 77. On Players and Ballad mongers. OVr merry Ballads, and ascivious Playes Are much alike: To common censure, both Doe stand or fall: T'one sings; the other sayes; And both are Frippries of anothers Froth: In short; They'r Priest and Clark of Belials Altar; T'one makes the Sermon; T'other tunes the Psalter.
78. On God and the King. OVr God and Prince (whom God for ever blesse) Are both, in Mercy, of a Constitution: Both slow, till meere necessity shall presse, To put their penall Lawes in Execution: And marke, How in a like successe they joyne; At both we grumble; and at both, repine. 79. On the life and death of Man. THe life of Man is but th'imperfect Story Of his Adventure, towards future Glory; For death to finish: Who will sticke to say, A glorious Ev'n foretells a glorious Day? 80. On FOX. THere was a time, (wo-worth that heavy time) When rav'nois Foxes did devoure the prime, And choyce of all our Lambs: But Heav'n did raise A more ingenuous Fox, in after dayes, Whose high immortall Pen redeem'd their breath, And made those Lambs revive, in spight of death: To see, how mutuall Saintly Favours be! Thou gav'st them life, that now give life to thee.
81. On the Booke of Common Prayes. THe Booke of Common Pray'r excels the rest; For Pray'rs that are most Common are the be. 82. To MVNDANO. WOldst thou Mundano, prove too great, too strong For peevish Fortunes angry brow to wrong? Renounce her power: Banish Fortune hence, And trust thee to the hands of Providence; The poorest heart that ever did importune Heav'ns ayd, is farre above the frownes of Fortune. 83. On Romes Sacrifices. IT cannot be excus'd: It is a wrong Proceeding from a too-too partiall tongue, To say, The profer'd service of false Ro Had no good savor, and did never come Toth' gates of Heav'n; Eye, poore Rome's belyde; For when our Troopes of glorious Martyrs dy'd, In that warm age, who were their Priests? By whom Was their blood shed? Was't not by holy Rome? Such sweet Perfumes, I dare be bold to say, Rome never burnt before, nor since that day: A sweeter Incense, save his dying Son, Heav'n ne'r accepted since this World begun.
84. On a dead Man. IT is a common use to entertaine The knowledge of a great man, by his Trayne: How great's the dead-man then? There's none that be So backt with troopes of Followers, as He. 85. On corner Sinners. SVch men are like to Owles; They take delight, To make the night their day; their day, the night, They hate the Sun, and love dark corners best; But they shall houle, when day-birds are at rest. 86. On the Kite. MArke but the soaring Kite; and she will reade Brave rules for Diet; teach thee how to feede; She flyes aloft; She spreads her ayrie plumes Above the reach, above the nauious umes Of dang'rous earth; She makes her selfe a stranger T'inferiour things, and checks at ev'ry danger; At length, she stoopes; and, with a brave disdaine, She strikes her prey, and mounts her up againe; By her example, learne to use the earth, And thou shalt find lesse mischiefe, and m mirth.
87. On FORMIO. FOrmio bewailes his Sins, with the same heart, As Frends do Frends, when they'r about to part, Beleeve it, Frmio will not entertaine A merry Thought, untill they meet againe. 88. On bosome sinnes. HOw loath is Flesh, to yield! the Spirit, to win The glorious Conquest of a Bosome sin! O, how th'ingenious Flesh will pleade! abuse The height of Wit, to argue, or excuse: At length, it yeelds: O, give it leave to stay A yeare, a moneth; a weeke; at least, a day; And if not so, yet let my breaking heart But hugge it once or twice, before we part; Let me but take my leave, my thoughts shal bind me From the least touch; let me but looke behind me: Nay sin, Gehezilike, will have a blow At cleansed Naamans bounty, ere she goe. 89. On the Eccho. AN Eccho's nothing, but a forc'd rebound, Or airy repercussion of a Sound, Proceeding from some hollow place, well knowne To have to Bulk, no Beeing of her owne:
It is no Substance; nothing, but a Noise; An empty sound; the picture of a voyce: Such is my Courtly Friend, At my request, Hee'l breath his service from his hollow brest, And Eccho-like for every word that's blowne Into his eares, returnes me two, for one; But when they come to th'Test, alas they'r found More light then Ayre, meere shadowes of a Sound; Ile trust my God; His bounty still afords As many deedes, as my false Friends do words. 90 On a Water-Mill. THe formall Christian's like a Water-mill: Vntill the Floodgate's open, he lyes still: He cannot work at all; he cannot dreame Of going: till his wheeles shall finde the streame. 91. On PAVL and APOLLOS. TIs not, what this man, or what that man saith, Brings the least stone, toth'building of my faith; My eare may ramble, but my Conscience followes No man: I'me neither Pauls, nor yet Apollo's: When Scripture gold lyes by me, is it just To take up my Salvation, upon Trust? My Faith shall be confin'd to no mans Lists; Ile onely follow Paul, as Paul is Christs.
92. On MORVS. IF a poore timorous Hare but crosse the way, Morus will keepe his chamber all the day; What Evill ortends it, Morus? It does show, That Morus is not wise, for thinking so. But Morus keepes his Chamber: There will be, Morus, one Foole the loe abroad by Thee. 93. On some Faiths. SOme Faiths are like those Mills, that cannot grind Their Crne, unles they worke against the Wind: 94. On the Temporizer. HE seemes to be a Man of Warre; His sayle Being fill'd and prosper'd with a foreright Gale, Makes speedy way; and, with her Keele, divides The sparkling furrowes of the swelling Tides; Or if the wind should slacke, or ase to blow, Can make a shift to Tide it to and fro; But if it prove a Storme, or the wind croe, His wavering Bottom soone begin to tosse Vpon the troubled aves, without rgard Of either stear, or yet the sea-mans ard; His prouder Courage quailes, & the rough weather Transports his wandring keel, he knows not whither;
Till, after many a ruine-threatning knock, He's overwhelmd or splitt upon a Rock. 95. On our sins. IT is an Errour even as foule, to call Our sins too great for pardon, as too small. 96. On the Hypocrite. HEe's like a Christmas Candle, whose good name Crowns his faire actions with a glorious flame; Burnes cleare and bright, and leaves no ground for doubt To question, but he stincks at going out; When Death pufs out his Flame, the snuff will tell If he were Waxe or Tallow, by the smell. 97. On Secret mungers. HE, that at Secrets, shall compose his aime, Is like the Flie that sports about the Flame; He never leaves to buzze, untill he brings Hiselfe to ruine; or at least, his wings: And like a desp'rate Fly, though he has bin Once schorcht, hee'l venture at the Flame agin.
98. On a Flye. THe Sun-delighting Flye repayres, at first To the full Cup, onely to quench her thirst; But, oftentimes, she sports about the Brinke, And sipps so long till she be drownd in drinke: When wanton leysure shall present thine eye With lavish Cups, Remember but the Flye. 99. On Scripture and Apocrypha. VVHen as the Scripture opens to mine eyes, I see my Lord in's Bed: But when I meet Th' Apocrypha at th'end, me thinks it lyes, Like his well countnanc'd Page, at the Beds feet; Who wears his Lords old Cloths, made lesse; & sayes His owne Inventions in his Masters Phrase. 100. To my BOOKE. HEre comes a Criticke; Close thy Page: Thou art no Subject for this Age: And censure, oftentimes, yee know, Will strike the Dove, and spare the Crow: But hold; Thy Guilt does not require That thou shouldst lurke, or yet retyre; Be open as the Eye of Noone: And let Dogs barke against the Moone:
Thou hast no Luster of thy owne, But what's deriv'd from Heav'n alone: Feare not: Thy Heav'n-instructed Page, Will either please, or teach the Age. The end of the second Booke.
DIVINE FANCIES. The third Booke. 1. On old Wine and new. OLd crazy Casks are not designd to hold New-Wines; nor yet new Vessells, for the Old: Old must, with Old; and new, with new, be filld: Else will the vessels breake, and Wine be spilld: These empty Vessels are thy heart and mine; The Law and Gospell represents the Wine: The new's the Spirit, and the old's the Letter; With reverence to the Text, The new's the better.
2. On ZACHARIAS and the blessed Virgin. HIs tongue requir'd a Signe, which might afford A cleerer Evidence, then the Angels word; And had it too: Vntill those things shall come To passe, his faithlesse lips are stricken dumb: Our blessed Virgin, at her Salutation, Seemd ev'n as faithles, on the selfe same fashion Her lips reply'd: And how can these things be? Hard Iustice! why he punisht, and not she? The Reason's easie to be riddeld out; Hers was the voyce of Wonder; His, of doubt. 3. On a Picture. SOme Pictures, with a fore-right eye, if seene, Present unto the view some beauteous Queene; But step aside, and it objects the shape; On this side, of an Owle; on that, an Ape: Looke full upon the world, It proves the Story, And beauteous Picture of th' Almighties Glory; But if thy change of posture lead thy sight From the full view, to th' left hand, or the right, It offers to thine eye, but painted Toyes, Poore antick Pleasures, and deceitfull Ioyes.
4. On SERVIO. SErvio's in Law: If Servio cannot pay His Lawyers Fee, Servio may lose the day, No wonder, formall Servio does trudge So oft to Church: He goes to Bribe his Judge. 5. On PETERS Cocke. THe Cocke crow'd once, And Peters careles eare Could heare it, but his eye not spend a teare: The Cocke crow'd twice, Peter began to creepe To th' Fyer side, but Peter could not weepe: The Cocke crow'd thrice: Our Saviour turnd about, And look'd on Peter; Now his teares burst out: 'Twas not the Cock, It was our Saviours Eye. Till he shall give us teares, we cannot crye. 6. On AMBIDEXTER. GOd keepe my Goods, my Name, they never fall Into the Net of Ambidexters Lawes; But, for a Cause, he seldome prayes at all; But curses, evermore, without a Cause: I'de rather have his Curses, all the day, Then give his Conscience the least cause to pray.
7. On Lazarus, the Damosell, and a sinner. LAz'rus come forth? why could not Laz'rus plead, I cannot come, great God, for I am dead: Dam'sell arise? when Death had closd her eies, What power had the Damsell to arise? Sinner repent? Can we as dead, in sin, As Laz'rus, or the Damsell, live agin? Admit we could; could we appoint the hower? The Voyce that calls, gives, and gives then the power. 8. On Sinne. HOw, how am I deceiv'd! I thought my bed Had entertaind a faire, a beauteous Bride: O, how were my beleeving thoughts misled To a false Beauty, lying by my side! Sweet were her Kisses, full of choyce delight; My Fancy found no difference in the night. I thought they were true Ioyes, that thus had led My darkned Soule, But they were false Alarmes; I thought I'd had faire Rachel in my Bed, But I had bleare ey'd Leah in my armes: How seeming sweet is Sin, whē cloathd with Night; But, when discover'd, what a loathd delight.
9. On Repentance. TIs not, to Cry God mercy, or to sit And droope; or to confesse, that thou hast faild; Tis, to bewaile the sinnes, thou didst commit, And not commit those sinnes, thou hast bewaild: He that bewailes, and not forsakes them too, Confesses, rather, what he meanes to doe. 10. On Man. MAn is a mooving Limbeck, to distill Sweet smelling waters; where withall to fill Gods empty Bttle: Lord doe thou inspire Thy quickning spirit; Put in thy sacred Fire; And then mine eyes shall never cease to droppe, Till they have brimd thy Bottle, to the Toppe: I can doe nothing, Lord, till thou inspire: I'm a cold Limbeck, but expecting Fire. 11. On the pouring out of our hearts. TIs easie to poure in: But few, I doubt, Attaine that curious Art, of pouring out: Some poure their hearts, like oyle, that there resides An unctions substance still, about the sides: Others, like Wine; which, though the substance passe, Does leave a kinde of savour in the Glasse;
Some pour their hearts like Milk, whose hiew distaines Though neither Substance, nor the sent remaines: How shal we poure them, then; that smel, nor matter, Nor colour stay? Poure out your hearts like water. 12. On Friends. GOd sheild me from those friends, I trust; and be My firme defence from such, as trust not Thee. 13. On the Hypocrite. HEe's like a Bul-rush; seems so smooth, that not The eye of Cato can discry a knot: Pill but the Barke, and strip his smoother skin, And thou shalt find him spungie, all within: His browes are alwaies ponderous as Lead, He ever droopes, and hangs his velvet head: He washes often; but, if thou enquire Into his depth, his rootes are fixt in myre. 14. On SERVIO. SErvio would thrive; and therefore, do's obay Gods Law, and shuts up Shop oth' Sabbath day: Servio would prosper in his home affaires, And therefore dares not misse his Dyet-Prayres. Servio must put to Sea, and does implore; Toth'end, that he might safely come ashore.
Servio's in Suit, and therefore must be tyed To morning prayre, untill his Cause be tryed: Servio begins to loath a Single life, And therefore prayes for a high-portion'd Wife: Servio would faine be thought religious too, And therefore prayes as the Religious doe: Servio still prayes for Profit, or Applause; Servio will seldome pray, without a Cause. 15. On the Devils Master-Piece. THis is the height the Devils Art can show, To make man proud, because he is not so. 16. On our Saviours Fishing. WHen as our blessed Saviour tooke in hand To be a Fisher; Marke the rule he keepes; He first puts off a little from the Land; And, by degrees, he launchd into the Deepes: By whose example, our Men-fishers hold The selfe same course; They do the same, or should. 17. On Mans greatest Enemy. OF all those mortall enemies, that take part Against my Peace, Lord, keep me frō my Heart.
18. On the Hypocrite. HEe's like a Reed, that alwaies does reside, Like a well planted Tree, by th'water side; Hee beares no other fruit, but a vaine bragge Of formall sanctitie; A very Flagge: Hee's round, and full of substance, to the show; But hollow hearted, if enquir'd into: In peacefull seasons, when the weather's faire, Stands firme; but shakes, with every blast of Aire. 19. On the holy Scriptures. WHy did our blessed Saviour please to breake His sacred thoughts in Parables; and speake In darke Enigma's? Whosoere thou be That findst them so, they were not spoke to Thee: In what a case is he, that happs to run Against a post, and cries, How dark's the Sun? Or he, in Summer, that complaines of Frost? The Gospell's hid to none, but who are lost: The Scripture is a Ford, wherein, tis said, An Elephant shall swim; a Lambe may wade. 20. On Mans heart. NAture presents my heart in Ore; Faire civill cariage gilds it o're;
Which, when th'Almighty shall behold With a pleas'd eye, he brings to gold: Thus chang'd, the Temple Ballance weighs it; If drosse remaine, the Touch bewrayes it; Afflictions Furnace, then refines it: Gods holy Spirit stamps and coynes it: No Coyne so currant; it will goe For the best Wares, that Heav'n can show, 21. On Drunkennesse. MOst Sins, at least, please Sense; but this is treason Not only 'gainst the crowne of Sense, but Reason. 22. On a Kisse. ERe since our blessed Saviour was betrayd With a Lip-Kisse, his Vicar is affraid: From whence, perchance, this common use did grow To kisse his tother End; I meane his Toe. 23. On the Alchymist. THe patient Alchymist, whose vaine desire, By Art, is to dissemble natures Fyre, Imployes his labour, to transmute the old, And baser substance into perfect Gold: He laughs at unbeleevers, scornes and flouts Illiterate Counsell; neither cares, nor doubts:
Vntill, at length, by his ingenious Itch, Hee's brought most poore, in seeking to be rich: Such is the Civillman; that by his even And levell actions hopes to merit Heaven; He thinks, by help of Nature, to acquire, At least to counterfeit the Sacred Fire Of saving Grace, to purge and to refresh His base desires, and change his stone, to flesh: He spurnes at Counsell; He derides and jerks Those whining Spirits that renounce their works; Till, too much trusting to their doing well, In seeking Heav'n, they find the flames of hell, 24. On the ten Lepers. TEn Lepers clensed? And but one, of ten Returne the Clenser thanks? Vngratefull Men! But Ten i'th' Hundred? 'That's a Gaine that we Receive or Sue, yet oft deny it Thee. 25. On the last Epigram. HOw, how, am I deceiv'd, that speake to thee Of Interest, when the purchase was in Fee! Thou mad'st a cleane Conveyance to the Ten, And ne'r expectd'st the Principall agen: Lord, we must reckon by another Rate: They gave not one yeares Purchase for th' Estate: Lord, how we palter with thee! We pretend A present Payment, till w'obtaine our End:
And then we crave, and crave a longer Day, Then pay in Driblets; or else, never pay. 26. On the Boxe of Oyntment. IT is no wonder, he, above the rest, Whom thirty pieces tempted to betray The Lord of Glory to his death, profest The Boxe of Oyntment was but cast away: He that dare murther at so small a cost, May eas'ly thinke the charge in Buriall, lost. 27. On MARY and JVDAS. MAry did kisse him: Iudas kist him too, But both their aymes were coverd in a mist; Both kisse our Saviour; but their kisses doe Differ as farre as did the Parts they kist: There's danger still, where double hearts doe steale The forme of Love, or weare the cloake of Zeale. 28. On our Saviour and his Vicar. ME thinks thy Vicar Gen'rall beares the Keyes, And executes thy Place, with greater case. And in one Iubile, enjoyes more mirth, Then thou, my dying Lord, didst from thy Birth, Alas: Thou hadst not, wherewithall to fill Thy craving stomack: He has Cates at will:
Thy empty Costers had not to defray Thy Tribute charge: To him Kings Tribute pay; Foxes haue holes; Thou hadst not, whereupon To rest thy wakefull head: He snorts in Downe: In short, Thy life was nothing but the Story Of Poverty; and his, of Princely Glory: When tempting Sathan would have giv'n thee all The wealth and glory of the World, to fall And worship him; at thy refusall, Lord, Thy Vicar tooke the Tempter at his word; So came thy wants so great; so great his store; The Vicar so-so rich; the Lord, so poore. 29. On the great Prelate. OVr Saviours Feet were kist: The people doe The very same to thee, great Prelate, too; O, who will seale but such another Kisse Vpon thy Lips, our Saviour had on his! 30. On Idolatry. CAn common madnes find a thing, that's more Repugnant to the very Lawes of Nature; That the Creators Image should adore The senslesse Image of a sensuall creature! If such be Gods; if such our helpers be, O, what are Men! How more then Beasts are we!
31. On the Tables of Stone. THat stony Table could receive the print Of thy just Lawes; Thy Lawes were written in't: It could be hew'd, and letters grav'n thereon; Sure, Lord, my Heart is harder then that Stone. 32. On Mans three Enemies. THere's three, that with their fiery Darts, do level Against my Soul, the World, the Flesh, the Devil. Lord, give me patience, if not strength; For there Are Three t' afflict me; I'm but One, to beare. 33. ☞On DINAH.☜ WHen Dinahs careles Eye was grown too lavish To entertaine, Sechem found time to ravish: It is no lesse then silent invitation, Although we scorne the Sin, to give th' occasion: Sure, Dinahs Resolution was too strong, Or to admit, or not resist a Wrong, And scornes to stoope to the Adult'rers armes; We often burne, intending but to warme's: She went but out to see, Perchance, to heare What Lust could say: What harme to lend an eare? Anothers Sin, sometimes, procures our shames: It staines our Bodies; or, at least, our Names.
34. On FIDO. MArk, when the good man prospers with his Plot, Hee's still envy'd; despis'd, if prosper not; The Wicked have no peace with God; And, then, How canst thou, Fido, look t'have peace with men? 35. On JACOB. HOw Iacob's troop'd: Laban pursues with one Great Troope; and Esau meets him with another. Laban resolves to apprehend his Son: Esau, to be reveng'd upon his Brother: Me thinks I see how Jacob stands supplide, Like Vertue with a Vice on either side: Laban pursues him, to regaine his Gods: Esau, t'avenge his Birth-right and his Blessing: What hope has Iacob now? 'Twixt both, 'tis ods, There will be either Death or Dispossessing: God takes delight to turne our helper, then, When all our helps and hopes are past with men. Laban encounters Iacob: He requires His Gods: And Esau's neare at hand, by this: Laban's appeas'd; and quencht are Esaus Fyres; T'one leaves him; T'other meets him with a Kisse; Iacob's in league with both: The Soule that shall Have peace with God, has League and peace with all.
36. On Drunkennesse. IT is a Thiefe; that, oft, before his face, Steales Man away, and layes a Beast in's place. 37. On a Tenis-Court. MAn is a Tenis-Court: His Flesh, the Wall: The Gamesters God, & Sathan. Th'heart's the Ball: The higher and the lower Hazzards are Too bold Presumption, and too base Despaire: The Rackets, which our restlesse Balls make flye, Adversity, and sweet Prosperity: The Angels keepe the Court, and marke the place, Where the Ball fals, and chaulk out ev'ry Chace: The Line's a Civill life, we often crosse, Ore which, the Ball not flying, makes a Losse: Detractors are like Standers-by, that bett With Charitable men: Our Life's the Sett; Lord, In this Conflict, in these fierce Assaults, Laborious Sathan makes a world of Faults; Forgive them Lord, although he ne'r implore For favour: They'l be set upon our score: O, take the Ball, before it come toth'ground, For this base Court has many a false Rebound: Strike, and strike hard, but strike above the Line: Strike where thou please, so as the Sett be thine.
38. On Abels Blood. ABel was silent, but his Blood was strong, Each drop of guiltles blood commands a tongue, A tongue, that cryes; 'Tis not a tongue, implores For gentle Audience, 'Tis a tongue that rores For hideous Vengeance: 'Tis a tongue that's bold And full of Courage, and that cannot hold: O, what a noyse my Blessed Saviours Blood Makes now in heav'n! how strong it cries! how loud! But not for Vengeance: From his side, has sprung A world of drops; From ev'ry drop, a Tongue. 39 On the Memory. DOes thy corrected Frailty still complaine Of thy disloyall Mem'ry? do'st retaine Nothing that's Good? And is the better part Of what thou hear', before it warme thy heart, Snatcht from thy false Remembrance? Is the most Of what th'inspired Prophets tell thee, lost In thy unhospitable eares? And not To be recall'd? Quite buried? Quite forgot? Feare not: Thou hast a Chanc'lour in thy Brest, That keeps th' Exchequer, and hoards up the least, The poorest Summe: No, no, thou needst not feare, There's nothing will be lost that's taken there: Thinkst thou, that thou hast lost that piece of Gold That's dropt into a fairer Heape, untold?
Or canst thou judge that Fier, clos'd about With rak'd up Embers, 'cause not scene, is out? Gold, lost in greater summes, is still thine owne; And rak'd up Embers will, in time, be blowne To Flames: Beleeve't the Words thine eares have lost, Thy heart wil find, when thou shalt need them most. 40. On the Babel-Builders. SVre, if those Babel-Builders had thought good To raise their heav'n-high Tower before the flood, The wiser sort of people might deride Their Folly, and that Folly had salv'd their Pride; Or had their Faiths but enterpriz'd that Plot, Their hearts had finisht what their hands could not; 'Twas not for love of Heav'n: nor did they ayme So much to rayse a Building; as a Name: They that by Works shall seeke to make intrusion To Heav'n, find nothing but their owne Confusion. 41. On ESAV and JACOB. ESau goes forth; strives, with his owne disquiet, To purchase Ven'son for his fathers Diet: Iacob abides at home; and, by his Mother, Is taught the way, how to supplant his brother: There's some that hunt, like Esau, sweat and toyle, And seeke their Blessing by their owne Turmoyle; Whilst others crave assistance, and bewray Their wiser weakenes, in a safer Way:
O, if the Church my Mother will instruct me; Make savory Meate, and cloath me, and conduct me Into my Fathers Armes, these hands shall never Trust to the poorenesse of their owne Endevor: Bring I a Kid but of my Mothers dressing, 'Twill please my Father, and procure my Blessing. 42. On severall Sinnes. Grosse Sinne. IS like a Show'r, which ere we can get in Into our Conscience, wets us to the skin: Sin of Infirmity. IS like the falling of an April Shower; 'Tis often Raine, and Sun-shine, in an hower. Sin of Custome. IS a long Showre, beginning with the Light Oft-times continuing till the Dead of Night. Sin of Ignorance. IT is a hideous Mist, that wetts amaine, Though it appeare not in the forme of Raine.
Crying Sin. IT is a sudden Showre, that teares in sunder The Cope of Heav'n, & alway comes with Thunder. Sin of Delight. IS like a fethered showre of Snow, not felt, But soakes to th' very skin, when ere it melt: Sin of Presumption. DOes like a Showre of Hayle, both wet and wound With sudden Death: or strikes us to the Ground. The Sin of Sinnes. IT is a sulph'rous Shower, such as fell On Sodom, strikes, and strikes to th' Pit of Hell. 43. On these Showers. GOod God! what Weather's here! These soules of our Have still the luck to travell in a Shower: Lord, we are cold and pitifully drencht; Not a dry thrid; And all our Fyer's quencht:
Our very Blood is cold; Our trembling knees Are mutuall Andvils; Lord, we stand and freeze: Alas we find small comfort from the Eye Of Heav'n; These showring clouds, our sins, doe flye Betwixt the Sun and us: Wee dry no more, Then if the Sun had giv'n his office o'r: Nay Lord; if now and then those Beames do chance To breake upon's, and lend a feeble glaunce Vpon our reeking soules, ere we begin To feele the warmth, w'are dous'd and drencht agin: In what a case are we! Our nightly damps And daily storms, have fild our Soules with Cramps, With wav'ring Palseyes, and our hoarser tongues Can doe thee service, nor in Prayers, nor Songs: Our Zeales are Aguish; hot and cold: They be Extreamely hot toth' World, as cold to Thee; Our Blood has got a Fever: Lord, it must Be set on fire with every wanton Lust: What worlds of mischiefes are there, that prevaile not Vpon our fainting Soules? What is't we ayle not, That Wet and Cold can bring? Yet have no power To keepe us in, but dable in the Shower: Shine forth, bright Sun of glory; Be as feirce, As these eclipsing Clouds are blacke; Disperse And cleare them with thy stronger beams, that thus Dare interpose betwixt thy Glory' and us: Reflect on my distempered Soule; Refine This vap'rous Earth, this sinfull Flesh of mine, That, tho some Drops m fall, I may have power, Shelter'd by thee, t'avoyd the down right Shower; O let my dabled Spirit still retyre To thee, and warme her by thy Sacred Fyre;
That having ravill'd out some weary howers, She may arrive where's neither Clouds nor Showers. 44. On DIVES and LAZARVS. DId ever Iudge more equally proceed To punish Sin? so right, in kind, and nature? Poore Laz'rus was refus'd a Crum of Bread; And Dives was deny'd a Drop of Water: Children are oftentimes so like the Mother, That men may eas'ly know the one, by th'other. 45. On two Suitors. THe Soule is like a Virgin; for whose love Two jealous Suitors strive: Both daily move For Nuptiall favour; Both, with Lovers Art, Plead for the Conquest of the Virgins heart: The first, approaching, knockt, and knockt agin; The Doore being op'ned, at his entring in, He blushd; and (as young bashfull Lovers use) Is more then halfe discouraged, ere he sues: At length, that love, that taught him what to feare, Gave resolution to present her eare With what he hop'd, and in a lovers fashion, He oft repeates the Story of his Passion: He vowes his Faith, and the sincere perfection, Of undissembled, and entyre Affection; He sues for equall mercy from her Eye; And must have love, or else, for love, must dye:
His present meanes were short: He made profession Of a faire Ioynture, though but small possession: And in word, to make his passion good, He offers to deserve her with his Blood: The other boldly enters: with the strong And sweet-lip'd Reth'ricke of a Courtly tongue, Salutes her gentle eares: His lips discover The amorous language of a wanton Lover: He smiles and faunes, and now and then lets flye Imperious glaunces from his sparkling Eye; Bribes her more orient neck with pearl; with charms▪ -Enclosing Bracelets decks her yvory Armes; He boasts th' extent of his Imperiall Power, And offers Wealth and Glory for a Dower: Betwixt them both the Virgin stands perplext; The first Tale pleas'd her well, untill the next Was told: She lik'd the one, the other▪ Loth To make a choyce: She could affect them Both: The one was Iocund, full of sprightly mirth: The other, better borne; of nobler birth: The second su'de in a compleater fashion; I, but the first show'd deeper wounds of Passion: The first was sadly modest: And the last More rudely pleasant: His faire lookes did cast More am'rous flames; But yet the tothers eye Did promise greater Nuptiall Loyalty: The last's more rich; yet Riches, but for life, Make a poore Widow, of a happy Wife: The first's Estate's but small, if not made good By Death: Faire Ioyntures comfort Widow hood: Whō shal this Virgin  Her thoughts approve The last, for present wealth, the first, for love:
Both may not be enjoy'd: Her heart must smother Her love to one, if she affect the other: Ah, silly Virgin, Is the choyce so hard In two extreames? Can thy weake thoughts reward Two so unequall, with a like Respect? Knowst thou not which to slight, & which t'affect? Submit to better judgement, and advise With thy best Friend: O trust not thine owne eyes: This last, that seemes so pleasant, so acute, Is but a Slave, drest in his Lords old Suite: He brags of Glory, and of Princely Power, When he is kickt and baffled every hower: The Treasure that he boasts is not his owne, He basely stole it, and the Theft is knowne; For which, he is arraign'd, condemn'd to th'paines Of death; His sentence is, to hang in Chaines: His plott's to bring thee in as deepe as He; Beleeve't; It is thy Blood he seekes, not Thee: The Bribes he gave thee, are but stolne: Fond Girle, Discard those Bracelets, and disclaime that Pearle: The first, whose oft repeated knocks did crave Admittance, was the Lord to that base slave: His Faith is loyall, and as firme his Vow: To him, his life's not halfe so deare, as thou: That wealth, that honour, that dissembled power, That pleasant Pesant offer'd as a Dower, Is that faire Lords: Nor peace, nor pow'r or wealth Can any challenge from him, but by stealth: Match there, my Soule, and let thy sacred Vowes Plight holy Contracts with so sweet a Spouse: His left hand's full of treasure; And his right; Of peace, and honour, and unknowne delight:
Hee'l give thee wealth; and in that wealth, content, For present meanes; And (when thy Glasse has spent Her latest Sand, that Time untransitory Thy dayes) a Joynture of Eternall Glory. 46. On the old and new Garment. NEw Garments being brought, who is't that would Not scorne to live a Pris'ner to the Old? Yet though our bonteous Saviour, at his cost, Presents us new, we love the old ones most: Alas, they pinch us! O, they sit too strait! They are too combersome! too great a waight! No, no; the old were too too light, too great; So we have ease, we care not to be neat: Like tyred Jades, our better wils repayre To a foule Stable, then t'a Rod that's faire. 47. On Mans co-operation. WE are not Blocks: We must expect the Call; And, being cal'd, must move, and rise withall: The Voyce were needlesse, and as good be dumb, As, with the Call, not give the pow'r to come: Deserves hee food, that thinkes it vaine to gape? Christ takes his Spouse by Contract, not by Rape.
48. On the old and new Tables. THe former Tables of the Law were broken, And left no Monuments of themselves, no token, No Signe that ever such things were: But marke, The later were kept holy in the Arke: Those Tables are our Hearts. Can we be bold To looke for new, and yet not breake the old? Or can the ruines of the old find place In th' Arke of Glory, not repayr'd by Grace? Dismount, O blessed Moses, and renew Those Tables thou hast broken, or make new. 49. On a Crucifixe. WHy not the Picture of our dying Lord, As of a Friend? Nor this, nor that's ador'd: Does not th' eternall Law command, that thou Shalt ev'n as well forbeare to make, as bow? Not to so good an end? T'advance his passion? The Gold being pure, what matter for the Fashion; Take heed: The purest gold does often take Some losse, some prejudice, for the fashions sake: Not to a Civill end? To garnish Halls? To deck our windowes? To adorne our Walls? Shew-bread must not be common: And the Cruse Of holy Oyle admits no Civill use: No, no; the beauty of his Picture lies Within; Tis th'object of our Faith, not Eyes.
50. On praying to Saints. NOt pray to Saints? Is not the Warrant ample, If back't with Scripture? strengthen'd with example? Did not that sweltring Dives make complaint For water? was not Abraham a Saint? Why should reformed Churches then forbid it? 'Tis true: But tell me; what was He, that did it? 51. On Confession. EXperience tels, That Agues are about To weare away, when as our Lips breake out: In Spirituall Fevers, there's the same expression Of Health, when lips breake forth into Confession: But mark: These hopefull Symptomes never doe Confirme the Ague gone, but faire to goe: They doe not alwayes worke, what they portend; Confession profits not, unlesse we mend. 52. On SOLOMONS Rejoyce. YOung man Rejoyce: What jolly mirth is here? Let thy heart cheare thee: What delicious Cheare? In thy young dayes; Thy Cates will relish sweeter. Walk thy owne wayes: Thy Cares will passe the fleeter: Please thine own heart: Carve where it likes thee best: Delight thine eyes: And be a Joyfull Guest:
But know withall, The Day will come, whereon Thy Iudge will doome thee for the deeds th'ast done: O what a Feast! O what a Reckning's here! The Cates are sweet; The Shot's extreamely deare: Lord, I have been, and am a dayly Guest (Too oft invited) at the Young mans Feast: The Reckning's great; Although I cannot pay, I can confesse; Great God, before this Day, I had been dragd to the redeemlesse Iayle, Hadst thou not pleas'd t'accept my Saviours Baile; Lord, he must bear't I doubt: For I can get Nor Coyne to pay, nor labour out the Debt: I cannot digge, my Ioynts are starke and lame, But I can begge, although I beg with shame; I have no Grace in begging; can receive The first repulse: I have no Faith, to crave: If th'entertainments of the Feast be these; Lord give me Famine; take the Feast that please: 53 On Bread. TAke up that bit of Bread: And understand, VVhat 'tis thou holdest in thy carelesse hand: Observe it with thy thoughts, and it will reade thee An usefull Lecture, ev'n as well as feed thee; VVe stirre our Lands, or give directions how; But God must send a season for the Plough: VVe sow our Seede; But sowe our seed in vaine, If Heav'n deny the first, the later Raine; Small proofe in Showrs, if heau'ns pleas'd hand shall cease To blesse those showrs, nor crowne thē with encrease.
The tender Blades appeare, before thine eye, But, uarefresht by heav'n, as soone they die: The infant Eares shoot forth, and now begin To corne: But God must hold his Mildewes in: The Harvest's come: But Clouds conspire together Hands cannot work, til heav'n shall clear the weather: At length 'tis reap'd: Between the Barne and Furrow How many Offices poore Man runs thorow! Now God has done his part: The rest we share To Man: His providence takes now the care: No; yet it is not ours: The use alone, Not bare possession makes the thing our owne: Thy swelling Barnes have crownd thy full desire; But heav'n, when Mows should sweat, can make them I, but the Sheaves are thrasht, & the heap lies In thy full Garnier. He that sent the Flyes fire; To Pharees Court, can, with as great an ease, Send thee more wastfull vermin if he please: Perchance 'tis grounded, kneded: and what though? Gods Curse is often temper'd with the Dough; Beleeve't the fruits of all thy toyle, is mine, Vntill they be enjoy'd, as much as thine: But now t'has fed thee: Is thy soule at rest? Perchance, thy stomack's dainty to digest. No, if heav'ns following favour doe not last From the first Furrow to the very Tast, Thy labour's lost: The Bread of all thy travill, Without that blessing, feeds no more then Gravill: Now wastfull Man, thou mayst repose againe That Modell of Gods Prov'dence and thy paine: That bitt of Bread; And if thy Dog should fawne Vpon thy lappe, let not so deare a Pawne
Of greater plenty be contemn'd and lost; Remember how it came, and what it cost. 54. On Faith and Reason. TRue Faith and Reason, are the Soules two Eyes: Faith evermore lookes upward, and discryes Objects remote; but Reason can discover Things onely neere; sees nothing that's above her; They are not Matches; Often disagree; And sometimes both are clos'd, and neither see: Faith viewes the Sun; and Reason, but the shade; T'one courts the Mistresse; t'other wooes the Maide: That fees the Fire; This, only but the Flint; The true-bred Christian alwayes lookes asquint. 55. On Carnall Mirth. VVHo seeks to quench by help of Carnal frends Those fiery Errants that the consciēce sends, Redeemes his Peace, but with a further spoyle; Drinks in a Fever: quenches Fyre with Oyle. Lord, if thou strike my Conscience; and that, Me: I will expect, and trust no Friend, but Thee.
56. On Prayer. PRayre's like a Vapour fum'd from earth; that flyes To th' Gates of Heav'n: It never rotts ith' Skyes: If Faith and it be joyn'd, it will obtaine, And melt into a first and later Raine; If Faith forsake her, and they part in sunder, It falls in Thunderbolts; at least, in Thunder. 57. On ANNA. VVHat faithfull Anna by her Teares had done Deserv'd the double duty of a Son: She was a double Parent; pleas'd to doe A double Office; bore, and got him too: Thus Samuel was (It was lesse strange then rare) Borne of her Body, gotten by her Prayer. 58. On a Gift. NO losse to give to thee; the gift is more Our owne, being giv'n, great God; then 'twas be∣fore.
59. On my selfe. IF Righteous Ely was not vengeance-free, How shall I scape! He was a Saint, to me: Nay, Lord, how would my heart & comfort faile, If I should weigh thy Mercies in our Scale! 60. On Iustification and Sanctification. LOrd, thou hast promis'd, in and for thy Christ, To sanctifie where ere thou Iustifi'st: Lord, all my Evils are Iustifi'd in thee; Lord, let those Evils be sanctifi'd to me. 61. On Mans Love. WHen think we, Lord: on thee! & when we doe, How feeble are our thoughts, & sinfull too! How basely doe our crooked Soules engage Themselves to heav'n? We make thy Glory, Page To our Salvation: Mans more servile heart Loves what he'd have thee, Lord, not what thou art: This is the very best of Man; wherein W'are apt to think we merit more, then Sin. But there's a baser Love: Our chiefe respects Have meere relation to our owne Defects, Like Dogs we fawne upon our Masters Lapps, With dirty feet, and only love for Scrapps.
But there's a baser yet: We love for feare, Finding, like Kain, more then we can beare, And, were it not for shame, our hearts would be As warme to Sathan, as, great God, to Thee: But there's a baser yet: And baser none: We love thee, to be lov'd of man alone: We force a Zeale; usurpe the name of Pure; That we may sin more closely, more secure, We love thee onely to abuse thee, just As Whores love Husbands, but to cloke their lust: How art thou martyr'd in our lustfull Fyres! How made a Stale to catch our wilde desires! Lord, I will love as farre as lyes in me, Thee for thy selfe, and all things else in Thee: 62. On filiall love and servile. THey'r not alike, although alike appeare: T'one feares for love: The other loves for Feare. 63. On Grapes. IT is receiv'd, That seed of Grapes being sowne, Brings forth degenerate Clusters, or else none: But Stocks being grafted prove a fruitfull Vine, Whose pleasing Berries yeeld a generous wine; We are thy Vineyard, Lord; These Grapes of our, By Nature, are degenerous and sower; But if thou please to graft us, we shall beare Delicious fruit; which being prest, shall cheare
The hearts of Angels, and that blessed Trine Of perfect glory with their sprightly Wine. 64. On Ioy and Griefe. LOrd, if my Griefes were not oppos'd with Ioy, They would destroy: And if my Mirth were not allaid with Sadnesse, It would be Madnesse: While this, with that, or that, with this contends, They're both my Friends: But when these happy Wars doe chance to cease, I have no peace: The more my earthly Passions doe contest, The more my heavenly' Affections are at rest. 65. On Doves and Serpents. WE must have Doves and Serpents in our heart, But how they must be marshall'd there's the Art; They must agree, and not be farre asunder; The Dove must hold the wily Serpent under: Their natures teach what places they must keepe, The Dove can flye, the Serpent onely creepe. 66. On Christ, and our selves. I Wish a greater knowledge, then t'attaine The knowledge of my selfe; A greater Gaine
Then to augment my selfe; A greater Treasure Then to enjoy my selfe; A greater Pleasure Then to content my selfe: How slight, and vaine Is all selfe-Knowledge, Pleasure, Treasure, Gaine; Vnlesse my better knowledge could retrive My Christ; unlesse my better Gaine could thrive In Christ; unlesse my better Wealth grow rich In Christ; unlesse my better Pleasure pitch On Christ; Or else my Knowledge will proclaime To my owne heart how ignorant I am: Or else my Gaine, so ill improv'd, will shame; My Trade, and shew how much declin'd I am: Or else my Treasure will but blurre my name With Bankrupt, and divulge how poore I am; Or else my Pleasures, that so much inflame My thoughts, will blabb how full of fores I am: Lord, keepe me from my selfe; 'Tis best for me, Never to owne my selfe, if not in Thee. 67. On Man. AT our Creation, but the Word was said, And we were made: No sooner were, but our false hearts did swell With Pride, and fell: How slight is Man! At what an easie cost Hee's made and lost!
68. On Death. WE all are going to the selfe same Place, We only differ in our Way, our Pase: One treads the common Roade of Age: Another Travels, directed by the hand os's Brother: Some crosse the Waves, perchance the neerer way; Some by the winged Shaft that flyes by Day; Some ride on Feavers▪ others beat the hoofe, With horses in their hands, and make a proofe Of their owne strrngth; Others more fairely pase On beds of Downe; some ride a speedy race On hot-mouthd Surfeits, emulous for the Cup: Some hotly mounted fiercely gallop up. On spurgal'd Broyles, whose Frantick motions send Their hasty spirits to their Iournies end: Some ride upon the racking Steeds of Treasure; Others false-gallop on the backs of Pleasure: All journey forwards to the selfe-same Place; Some, the next way; and some, the faster pace: All post an end; till beaten out of Breath, They all arrive at the great gates of Death; Lord, in this common Roade, I doe not care What pase I travell, so my Way be faire. 69. On the life of Man. OVr Life is nothing but a Winters Day; Some onely breake their Fast, and so, away:
Others stay Dinner, and depart full fed; The deepest Age but sups, and goes to bed: Hee's most in debt, that lingers out the Day; Who dyes betimes, has lesse; and lesse to pay. 70. On Gods Image. IT was a dainty piece! In every part, Drawne to the life, and full of curious Art: It was as like thee as a shadow could Be like a substance; There was none but would Have known thee by't: There needed then no name, No golden Characters, that might proclaime Whose Picture t'was: the Art was so divine That very Beasts did reverence, as thine: But now, alas, 'tis blurr'd: the best that we Or they can judge, is this, 'twas made for thee: Alas'tis faded, soyl'd with hourely dust, Sullyed, and shadow'd with the smoke of Lust; So swarthy as if that glorious face of thine Were tawnyed underneath the torrid Line: How is thy Picture altred! How ill us'd By our neglects! How slubberd! How abus'd! Her Cedar Frame's disioynted, warp'd and broke; Her curious Tablet's tainted with the smoke: The Objects both offensive, and the savor; Retaining neither Beauty, nor thy Favour: Lord, let not thy displeased eye forsake Thy handy-worke; for the bad keepers sake: Behold it still; and what thou seest amisse, Passe by: Thinke what it was; not what it is:
What though her beauty and her colours fade? Remember; O, 'twas like thee when 'twas made. There is a great Apelles that can lim With thy owne Pencell; we have sought to Him: His skilfull hand will wash off all the soyle, And clense thy Picture with his sacred Oyle: Hee'l mak't more faire then 'twas; at least, the same; Hee'l mend the Tablet, and renew the Frame: Till then; be pleas'd to let thy Picture be Acknowledg'd thine: 'Twas made for none but Thee. 71. On the Penny. HE that endur'd the Tyranny of Heate; The Morning-sorrowes, and the Midday-sweat; The Evening-toyle, and burthen of the Day, Had but his promis'd Penny for his pay: Others, that loyter'd all the Morning; stood Ith' idle Market, whose unpractis'd blood Scarse felt the warmth of labour, nor could show A blush of Action, had his Penny too. What Wages can we merit, as our owne? Slaves that are bought with price, can challeng none, But onely Stripes: alas, if Servants could Doe more, then bid, they doe but what they should▪ When man endeavours, and where heav'n engages Himselfe by promise, they are Gifts, not Wages, He must expect: We must not looke t'obtaine Because we Run; Nor doe we run in vaine: Our Running showes th'effect, produces none: The Penny's giv'n alike to every one,
That works ith' Vinyard: Equall price was shar'd T'unequall workes: Therefore no Reward: Lord, set my hands a worke: I will not serve For Wages, lest thou give what I deserve. 72. On a Christian. THe Generous Christian must as well improve Ith' quality of the Serpent, as the Dve; He must be Innocent; affraid, to doe A wrong; And crafty, to prevent it too: They must be mixt, and temper'd with true love; An Ounce of Serpent, serves a Pound of Dove. 73. On Gods bountie. GOd freely gives; as freely we receive; It is not, Doe; but Ask, and thou shalt have. 74. On Sinnes. MY Sinnes are like to Mountaines, that arise Above the Clouds, & threat the threatning skyes; Lord, give me Faith; and let that Faith be prov'd, In leaving not a Mountaine unremoov'd.
75. On the life of Man. A Thousand yeares, with God (the Scriptures say) Are reckon'd but a Day; By which accompt; this measur'd Life of our Exceeds not much an hower; The halfe whereof Nature does claime and keepe As her owne debt for sleepe: A full sixt part or what remaines, we ryot In more then needfull Dyet: Our Infancy, our Child hood, and the most Of our greene youth is lost: The little that is left, we thus divide; One part to cloathe our Pride; An other Share we lavishly deboyse To vaine, or sinfull joyes; If then, at most, the measur'd life of Man Be counted but a Span, Being half'd and quarter'd, and disquarter'd thus, What, what remaines for us? Lord, if the Totall of our dayes doe come To so-so poore a summe; And if our shares so small, so nothing be, Out of that Nothing, what remaines to Thee? 76. On the Childrens Bread. THy strengthning Graces are the Childrens Bread, Which maks thy thriving Children strong & able
Honour, and Riches are the Crummes that feed The Dggs that lurk beneath their Masters Table: Lord, if thy gracious pleasure will allow But Bread, I'am sure I shall have Crums enow: 77. On Trust and care. OVr Trust in God, for Riches; neither must Exclude our Care; nor Care exceed our Trust. 78. On RVSCVS. ILliterate Ruscus heard Pedantius preach; Admir'd the Church mans learning, & commended Such things alone, that were above his Reach; But meanly slighted what he appprehended: What hinders then to thinke that Ruscus hath At least the twi-light of a Bastard Faith? 79. On the receiving of the Lords Supper. MEn take the Sacred Seales of their Salvation, As some doe Physick, not for health, but fashion: The Day preceding, and the following Day, There's none so strict; none so reform'd as they: They curb the fury of their wanton Ryot, And call their Surfets to a stricter Dyet: The Time expir'd, the first Assault that haps, Prevailes, and strikes them to a worse Relaps;
Like Doggs to vomits they returne agin, As though they'ad past a Patent now to sin: Let such Day-Christians, on the very toppe Of all their mirth, remember Judas Sopp 80. On Faith. TH'oft shaken Tree growes faster at the root; And faith's most firm, that's somtimes urg'd with Doubt. 81. On the Story of Man? THe word was spoke; And what was Nothing, must Be made a Chaos of confused Dust: The word was spoke: The Dust began to thicken To a firme Clay: The Clay began to quicken: The grosser substance of that Clay thought good To turne to Flesh: The moyster turn'd to Blood: Received Organs: and those Organs, Sense; It was imbellisht with the Excellence Of Reason: It became the Height of Nature, Being stampt with th'Image of the great Creator: But, Lord, that glorious Image is defac'd: Her Beautye's blasted, and her Tablet's raz'd: This Height of nature has committed Treason Against it selfe: Declin'd both Sense and Reason; Meere Flesh and Blood, containing but a Day Of painted Pleasure, and but breathing Clay:
Whose Moysture, dry'd with his owne sorrow, must Resolve, and leave him to his former Dust; VVhich Dust, the utter object of our loathing, Small time consumes, & brings to his first Nothing: Thus, from this Nothing, from this Dust, began Thus Something, turnd to Dust, to Nothing; Man. 82. On ANANIAS. THe Land was his: The land was his, alone; 'Twas sold, And now the Money was his owne: The powre remain'd in the Possessors hand, To keepe his money, or have kept his Land: But once devoted to the Churches good, And then conceald, it cost his life, his blood: If those that give, may not resume agin, VVithout a Punishment, without a Sin, VVhat shall become of those, whose unjust power Dispoyles the widdowed Temple of her Dower: VVho take her Profits, and in stead of giving Encrease to her revenues, make a living Vpon her Ruines, growing plump and full Vpon her Wants, being cloathed in her Wooll; VVhile she sustains th'extremes of cold and hunger, To pamper up the fat Advousion-monger; VVho thrust their Flesh-hooks in their thristy Pot, And only leave her what they value not: The whilst her sacred Priests, that dayly tread Their slighted Corne, must begge their early Bread; Or else, be forc'd to purchase easie shares VVith the deare price of their ungranted Prayres:
Let such turne backe their sacrilegious eyes, And see how breathlesse Ananias lyes: Behold the Wages that his sin procures, That was a Mole-hill, to these Alpes of yours: He tooke not from the Church: Did but conceale Some part he gave; But your false fingers steale Her maine Inheritance, her owne Possession; His was but bare deceipt, yours bold Oppression: O, if no lesse then the first death was due To him, what death d'ye think's prepar'd for you? So often as your pamper'd Eyes shall looke On your Estates, thinke on the Flying Booke. 83. On pious Vses. THey that, in life, oppresse, and then bequeath Their Goods to pious uses at their death, Are like those Drunkards, being layd to sleepe, That belch and vomit what they cannot keepe: To Gods and Mans acceptance, I presume Their severall Actions send the like perfume. 84. On SOPHRONIA. THe chast Sophronia knowes not how to scape Th'inevitable danger of a Rape; Cruell Sophronia drawes her hasty knife And would relieve her Chastity with life: Doubtfull Sophronia knowes not what to doe, She cannot keepe the one, and t'other too:
Sophronia's in a strait; One eye is fixt O'th' seventh Commandment; t'other, on the sixt; To what Extreames is poore Sophronia driven! Is not Sophronia left at Sixe and Seaven? 85. On the knowing Man. HEe's like a lusty Soyle, whose Moysture feeds, If not a world of Corne, a world of Weeds. 86. On Romes Pardon. IF Rome could pardon sins, as Romans hold, And if such Pardons might be bought for Gold, An easie Iudgement might determine which To choose: To be religious, or else Rich; Nay Rome does pardon: Pardons may be sold; Wee'l search no Scriptures, but the Mines, for Gold. 87. On the World. THe World, compos'd of heaven & earth,'s the story Of Gods Eternall, and Mans Temp'rall Glory.
88. On formall Devotion. MEn doe God Service with the same devotion, As the soule Body takes his loathed Potion: They stay and stay, then gulp it downe in hast, Not for the pleasure, but to have it past: Whose druggy Tast goes so against their minde; That, oft, the better part is left behind, And what is taken,'s taken but in vaine, It either works not, or comes up againe. 89 On heavenly Manna. O What a world of heav'nly Manna falls Within the Circuit of our happy Walls! With how great Ioy wold neighb'ring lands receive The Fragments of those Fragments, that we leave! Our furnisht Markets flourish all the yeare: We need no Ephaths, nor yet Omers here: We take, unmeasur'd, from the bounteous heape; Thanks never were so deare: not that, so cheape: VVe never hoard, but tosse from hand to hand, As if that Famine had forsworne the Land; Our satiate stomacks are so lavish fed, That we ev'n sleight, and wanton with our Bread: Ah Lord! I feare when carelesse children play VVith their spoyl'd Bread, 'tis time to take away.
90. On naturall Sins. TO murther Parents, or our selves, has bin, Though falsly, counted an unnaturall Sin: By Nature, we are apt to fall into 't; I rather think't unnaturall not to doe't: If heav'n should but forsake us, 'twere agin. The very course of Nature, not to sin. 91. On the Arke. IF Flouds of Teares should drown my world of Sin, Alas, my floating Arke retaines within, A cursed Cham to store the World agin: What then? so long as holy Sem vouchsafeth But to divide a Tent with bashfull Iapheth. 92. On SOPHRONIA. SOphronia chooses rather to commit Selfe Murther, then by violence, to submit Her ventur'd honor to th'injurious trust Of the eye sparkling Tyrants furious Lust: What means Sophronia? Dare her conscience frame, To act a Sin, but to prevent a Shame?
93. On a faire Prospect. LOoke up; And there, I see the faire abode And glorious Mansion of my gracious God: Looke downe; In ev'ry garnisht corner lyes Favours objected to my wondring eyes: Looke on my right hand; There, the sweet encrease Of Joyes present me with a joyfull Peace: Looke on my left hand; There, my Fathers Rod Sublimes my knowledge, from my selfe, to God: Looke forward; There, I see the lively Story Of Faiths improvement and of future Glory: Looke backward: There, my thankfull eye is cast On Sinnes remitted, and on Dangers past: Looke inwards; And mine eye is made partaker Of the faire Image of my glorious Maker: Looke up; or downe; About, above, or under; Nothing but Objects of true Love and wonder. 94. A Resolution. IF thou hast giv'n me Wealth, great God, I crave Content; and Grace to have the goods I have; If otherwise; thy will be done: I crave not So much, to have, as use the goods I have not: Lord, make me Thine: And then I shall appeare, If not thy Almner, yet thy Beads-man, here.
95. On the worlds Welcome. EArths Entertainments are like those of Iael, Her left hand brings me Milke; Her right, a nayle. 96. On our Meditation upon God. VVHen thy ambitious knowledge would attempt So high a Taske as God, she must exempt All carnall sense; Thy Reason must release Her pow'r; Thy Fancy must be bound toth' peace; Thy Spirits must be rapt; They must exile Thy flesh, and keepe a Sabbath for a while; Thou must forget thy selfe, and take strong Bands Of thy owne Thoughts, and shake eternall hands With thy rebellious Lusts; discard and cleare Thy heart of all Idea's; Then, with Feare, And holy Reverence, thou must thinke of One, As though he were not to be thought upon: Conceive a Spirituall, a most perfect Beeing, Pure, simple; At the selfe-same instant, seeing Things Present, Past, and Future; One, whose Might, Whose Wisedome, Iustice, Mercy, (in a height Above Exceeding) is Himselfe, being Great Without a Quantity, and most Compleat Without Degrees; Eternall without space Of time: At all times Present, without Place: Think thus: And whē thy thoughts can sore no higher, Stay there, Stand humbly silent, and admire.
97. On Faith. HE that wants Faith, and apprehends a Griefe Because he wants it, hath a true Beliefe. And he that grieves, because his griefe's so small, H'as a true Griefe, and the best Faith of all. 98. On Mans Folly. IDeots, and Sense-bound Lunaticks discerne 'Twixt Salt and Suger; very Babes will learne To know a Counter from the currant Coyne; Bruit Beasts, by' Instinct of Nature, will decline Th'alluring Bait, and sense-beguiling Snare; Though that seeme ne'r so sweet; this, ne'r so faire: Yet Man, heav'ns greatest Master-piece will chuse, What Fooles, and Mad-men, Beasts, and Babes refuse: Delights in dangerous Pleasures, and beneath The name of Ioyes, pleases himselfe to death. 99. On Glory. THat Saint, in Heav'n, whose Glory is the least, Has ev'n as perfect Glory, as the best: There's no Degrees; but in a finite Treasure: No difference 'twixt Pauls glory & mine, but measure.
100. On Reward. WHen holy Scriptures mention the Rewarding Of works, we read not, For, but stil According. The end of the third Booke.
DIVINE FANCIES. The fourth Booke. 1. A Good Morrow. TIs day: Vnfold thine Armes; Arise, and rouze Thy leaden Spirits, and pay thy Mcrning Vowes; Send up thy Incense; Let her early smoke Renew that League thy very dreames have broke; Then mayst thou worke or play; Nothing shall be Displeasing to thy God, that pleases thee.
2. A Good-night. CLose now thine eyes, and rest secure; Thy Soule is safe enough; thy Body sure; He that loves thee, he that keepes And guards thee, never slumbers, never sleepes. The smiling Conscience in a sleeping brest Has onely peace, has onely rest: The musicke and the mirth of Kings Are all but very Discords, when she sings: Then close thine Eyes and rest secure; No Sleepe so sweet as thine, no rest so sure. 3. On a Printing-House. THe world's a Printing-house: our words, our thoughts Our deeds, are Characters of sev'rall sizes: Each Soule is a Compos'ter; of whose saults The Levits are Correctors: Heav'n revises; Death is the common Press; from whence, being drivē, W'are gathered Sheet by Sheet, & bound for Heaven. 4. A Dialogue betweene GABRIEL and MARY. GABRIEL. HAile blessed Mary: MA, What celestial tongue Cals sinfull Mary blessed? GAB: It is I:
MA. Who art thou? GA. I am Gabriel that belong To the high Quire of Heaven: MA. I faint, I dye. GA. Feare not sweet Virgin; all the Earth shall be Son Made debters to thy Womb, and blest in Thee. MA. How Lord? GA: Thy Virgin womb shal beare a That shal redeem the world. MA. My Lord, how can Such wonders come to passe; such things be done By a poore Virgin, never knowne by Man? GA. The holy Ghost, at his appointed howre, Shall make thee pregnant by his sacred powre: MA. Wonder of wonders! GA. At whose height the Quire Of heav'n stand ravisht, tremble, & admire. MA. O may it be according to thy Word: GA. Before that twice five Moons compleated be Thou shalt be knowne the Mother of our Lord, And thou shalt dance thy Saviour on thy knee. MA. Both heav'n & earth shall triumph; & the frame Of hell shall tremble at Maria's name: GA. All Ages past, and present, and to come, Shall joy in Mary, and in Marye's wombe. 5 On RHEMVS. IF Heav'n would please to purge thy Soule as well As Rome thy purse, thou needst not feare a Hell. 6. On the life of Man. MAns day's a Song, compos'd by th'great Musition, Full of harmonious Ayres and dainty choyce;
But spoyld with Discords, and too much Division; Abus'd and lost for want of skill, and voyce: We misse our Rests, and we neglect our Graces; Our life the Trebble, and our death the Base is: 7. On MARY. FOure Marye's are eterniz'd for their worth; Our Saviour found out three, our Charls, the fourth. 8. On the Church. LEt not thy blacknesse moove thee to despaire, Black Women are belov'd of men that's faire: What if thy hayre, her flaxen brightnes lack? Thy face is comely, though thy Brow be black. 9. On the two Essences. GOds sacred Essence represents the bright And glorious body of the greater light: 'Tis perfect; hath a Being of her owne, Giving to all, receiving light from none: Mans Essence represents the borrowed light And feeble luster of the Lampe of night: Her Rayes are faint, and her Reflection thin, Distain'd with nat'rall blemishes within; Inconstant, various; having, of her owne, No light at all; or light, as good as none:
When too much earth shall interpose, and slipps Betwixt these Lights, our soules are in th' Eclips. 10. On our Saviours Passion. THe earth did tremble; and heav'ns closed eye Was loth to see the Lord of Glory dye; The Skyes were clad in mourning, & the Spheares Forgat their harmony; The Clouds dropt teares: Th'ambitious Dead arose to give him roome; And ev'ry Grave did gape to be his Tombe; Th'affrighted heav'ns sent down elegious Thunder; The Worlds Foundation loos'd, to lose their Founder; Th'impatient Temple rent her Vaile in two, To teach our hearts what our sad hearts should do: Shall senslesse things doe this, and shall not I Melt one poore drop to see my Saviour dye? Drill forth my Teares; and trickle one by one, Till you have pirc'd this heart of mine, this Stone. 11. On PETER. VVHat luck had Peter! For he tooke a Fish That stor'd his purse, as well as fill'd his dish; Whose bounty did inrich, as well as feed him; But they are better Fishers that succeed him: He catcht by chance: These catch the like by skill: He catcht but once: These catch them when they will: They cast their Angles into better Seas; Their bayts are only for such Fish as these:
Brave sport, and full of curious pleasure! Come, There is no Fishing to the Sea—of Rome. 12. On HERODIAS. I'Le tell thee, Light-skirts, whosoever taught Thy feet to dance, thy dancing had a Fault: Thou'lt find it deare, Herodias, if thou do'st Compare thy pen'worth with the price it cost. 13. On Faith and Hope. HOw much the stronger, Hopes on life relye, So much the weaker is my Faith, to dye. 14. On Water and Wine. THe happy diff'rence and sweet change of life, When a chast Virgin turnes a loyall Wife, Our blessed Lord, in Cana did divine, And turnd cold Water into lusty Wine. 15. On Age. HOw fresh blood dotes! O how green Youth delires! It most disdaines the thing it most desires.
16. On a Figg-tree. A Christian's like a Figg-tree, that does beare Fruit, greene, or ripe, or blossomes all the yeare: No wonder then, our Saviour curst that Tree; Figg-trees are alwayes dead, where no Figgs be. 17. On RHEMVS. RHemus, upon a time I heard thee tell, A Wall divideth Purgatory' and Hell; And that a gold-bought Masse will cleare th'offence That brought us thither, and redeeme us thence: Ah Rhemus, what demented Soule would spare To ruine Wife, or to dis-land an Heyre, Rather then feele such torments, you pretend, That equall Hell in all but Time, and end: Ah Rhemus, If the power of Gold be such, How dare you be so bold to dye so rich! 18. On JACOB. NE're boast thy Bargaine, Iacob: For poore wee Have made a better contract far, then thee: We envy not his Land thou didst inherit; Our Brother tooke our Flesh; gave us his Spirit.
19. On SIMON MAGVS. SImon, bring Gold enough; and I will tell thee, Wher thou shalt buy what Peter wold not sl thee: Repaire to his Successors; They are free And frolick Gamsters; not so strict as Hee: Nay, if thy Gold be weake, they will not stand To sell good Pen'worths at the second hand: They'l sell good cheape, but they'l not give to any; No, Pater-noster where there is no Penny: No, if thy purse be like an empty Shell, They will not give, what Peter would not sell. 20. On the Bishop of Rome. ADmit, great Prelat, that thou wert that Rock Wheron the Church was founded; coldst unlock The gates of Heav'n; and, with thy golden Key, Make Hel thy Pris'ner, and the Fiends obey, Thy Papall dignity would far be greater, If thou wert Simon, but as well as Peter. 21. On MILO. DO; strive to enter Milo, though the Gate Be narrow, and the rugged passage straight; Lessen thy selfe, and fast thy carkas thin; Take in thy Flesh, 'twill get thee easier in:
Look up to heav'n, twill raise thy body'uprighter; Give lib'rall alms, twill make thee tread the lighter: Sweat forth thy base corruptions, and inherit Thy promis'd Crowne▪ halfe lost for want of spirit; Let not thy destard, and dull thoughts disdaine Those works which cold despaire mistakes, as vaine; Take heed; Let not thy queazy Soule repine Against those Actions which are none of thine: Heav'n bids thee shine; what if thy Rayes be dim, Doe thou thy best; leave the successe to Him: Follow thy Worke; And when thy Soule shall be Gather'd from hence, thy Works shall follow thee. 22. On Rome. GOod Workes abound in Rome: 'Tis well they doe, 'Tis the best string they chalenge to their Bow: But ev'ry Hee's no Monck, that weares a Hood, 'Tis well, if they'r well done, as well as good: When wandring Passengers have lost their way, No sort of men that ride so fast as they. 23. On three dayes and nights. THou knowst our dying Saviour did repose On Friday; On the Sabbath, he arose; Tell me, by what account can he be said To lodge three dayes and nights among the dead? He dyde for all the World: what wanted here, Was full supply'd in t'other Hemisphere.
24. On TOBITS Dogge. WHat luck had Tobits dog! what grace! what glory Thus to be Kenel'd in th'Eternall Story! Vntill th' Apocrypha and Scripture sever, The mem'ry of Tobits dogg shall live for ever: 25. On the Gospell. VVHen two Evangelists shall seeme to vary In one discourse, they'r divers, not contrary; One Truth doth guide them both; One spirit doth Direct them; doubt not, to beleeve them both. 26. On SERVIO. SErvio, 'Tis scarcely worth thy paines, to smother Or to subdue one Sin, and hugge another: Beleeve it Servio, he that is in thrall To one, is a potentiall Slave to all. 27. On FORMIO. FOrmio will keepe the Sabbath, read and pray, His lips are seal'd from oaths upon that day; Formio is clad in black, and will absent His fleshly thoughts, this holy time of Lent.
Thinkst thou that Formio's shaking hands with Sin? No, tis but giving hands to meet agin. 28. On IOHN and IESVS. IOhn was the Morning-starre that did fore-run The long-wisht rising of our Glorious Sun: The first word that Iohns preaching lips expressed Was this, Repent: Our Saviours first, was, Blessed: Iohn makes th'incision; Iesus makes it sound; Iesus nere cures, where Iohn ne'r made a wound. 29. On dispossessing. VVE read, A broyled Fishes heart will scare A frighted Devil from a troubled brest: We read againe, By Fasting, and by Prayre The fierce Demoniack's only dispossest: What this affirmes, that flatly does deny; With reverence to the Text, The t'one's a Lye. 30. On HERODIAS. I Have a young Herodias lives within me, That never leaves to dance, untill she win me To grant her Suit; will never cease to plead Vntill I give her my Iohn Baptists head: O then my sorrow would be past her date, And I, like Hrod, should repent too late.
31. On MALFIDO. SAthans Injections are like Weeds that fall Into thy Garden, darted ore the Wall, Whose loathsom smel unscent thy sweeter Flow'rs; But grow not there, unles we make them ours: They'l dye, neglected; If thou lend them roome, They'l stink; But eas'ly thrown from whence they come: Feare not, Malfido; those they be that spoyle Thy Flow'rs, that suck their substance from the soyle. 32. On Slanders. WHen undeserv'd report distaines my name, It shames not, but perchāce prevents a Shame. 33. On Law and Gospell. THe Law is rough; The Gospell milde and calme; That launc'd the Bile; & this powres in the Balme. 34. On abosome Sin. THat Sin that finds more credit then the rest, That is thy Darling, leanes upon thy brest; That, in the Bsome of thy heart does lye; That dips within thy dish, Sayes, Is it I?
That gives thee kisses? that's the Sin that slayes thee, O that, O that's the Iudas, that betrayes thee. 35. On the World. THe World's a Booke, writ by th'eternall Art Of the great Maker, printed in Mans heart; 'Tis falsly printed, though divinely pend, And all th' Erratas will appeare at th' end. 36. On my Soule. MY weather-beaten Soule long time has bin Becalm'd, and tiding in the Sea of Sin; But now afflictions Storme does drive and tosse Her batter'd Keele: The wind is loud and crosse: Feare fills her tatterd Sailes, & doubts doe drive her, She knowes not where; and of all hopes deprive her: Thus, thus transported by the troubled Ayre Amongst the swallowing Quick-sands of despaire, If not prevented by a greater power, She looks for wreck and ruine ev'ry hower; O, that mine eyes could raine a Showre of Teares, That, that would lay the Storme of all my Feares. 37. On the Cuckoe. THe idle Cuckoe, having made a Feast On Sparrowes Eggs, layes downe her owne i'th' Nest;
The silly Bird she ownes it, hatches, feeds it; Protects it from the weather, clocks and breeds it; It neither wants repose nor yet repast, And joyes to see her Chicken thrive so fast: But when this gaping Monster has found strength To shift without a helper, she at length Not caring for that tender care that bred her, Forgets her parent, kills the Bird that fed her: The Sin we foster in our bosome, thus Ere we have left to feed it, feeds on us. 38. On TOBIT. WAs it not time to send his sonne to Rages, For mony, whē his wife spun hard for wages? Was't not high time for him to post away, That for an Angell paid a Groat a day? 39. On DAVID. WHo ever sung so high, so rapt an As David prompted by heroick Clio? But when thy more divine Vrania sung, What glorious Angell had so sweet a tongue? But when Melpomene began to sing, Each word's a Rapture, or some higher thing: Sweet were thy triumphs; sweet those ioyes of thine; O, but thy Teares were more then most Divine.
40. On a Monument. SEest thou that Mon'ment? Dost thou see how Art Does polish nature to adorne each part Of that rare Worke, whose glorious Fabrick may Commend her beauty to an after day? Is't not a dainty Pece? And apt to raise A rare advantage to the Makers praise? But knowst thou what this dainty Peece encloses? Beneath this glorious Marble there reposes A noysome putrid Carkas, halfe devour'd By crawling Caniballs, disguiz'd, deflour'd With loath'd Corruption, whose consuming sent Would poyson thoughts, although it have no vent: Ev'n sucha Peece art thou, who ere thou be That readst these Lines: This Monument is Thee: Thy Body is a Fabricke, wherein Nature And Art conspire to heighten up a Creature To summe Perfection, being a living Story And rare Abridgement of his Makers Glory; But full of loathsome Filth, and nasty mire Of lust, uncurb'd Affections, base desire; Curious without, but most corrupt within A glorious Monument of inglorious Sin. 41. On PLAVSVS. PLausus has built a Church: And lest his Glory Should dye, has boasted his vain-glorious Story
Vpon the painted Wall, and built to Fame A large Memoriall of his doubtfull Name: Plausus, 'tis bravely done; Thy Deeds make knowne Thou either seekst Gods glory, or thy owne. 42. On CENSORIO. THou blam'st the Age, condemns the daies of crimes, If thou wouldst mend thy Faults, 'twould mend the Times. 43. On fooles of both kinds. SOme scorne the Crosse, whilst others fall before it: Some sit and take the Bread, and some adore it: Some are too bold, and others too too nice: Fooles act a Sin whilst they decline a Vice. 44. On the name of JESVS. IT is the common course of man to double The name of Iesus in the times of Trouble: The name of Lord is not a stile to please us; Iesu's no Lord with us; if Lord, no Iesus.
45. On the Woman with the Issue. HOw could thy Soule, fond Woman, be assur'd Thy long disease could be so eas'ly cur'd? What? couldst thou think the touch of cloth was good To dry the Fountaine of thy flowing Blood? Or was't because our blessed Saviour wore it? Or why? I read not, that thou didst adore it: He nere so much as ownd thee, Woman: Sure, Thy Faith, and not his Garments wrought the Cure 46. On our Redemption. WE were created at a Word, a Breath; Redeemed with no lesse then Blood & Death: How much greater labour is it, than, To wash a Sinner, then to make a Man! 47. On Gods Arme. TWas not, that he was weake; or thou so strong; He dy'd so soone, or that thou liv'st so long: The head-strong Oxe is haled to the slaughter, When the poore worm crawls many a Summer after: When Heav'ns victorious arme shal please to strike, The Gyant and the Pigmey are alike.
48. On our blessed Saviour. O Thou that wert the King of heav'n and earth, How poorely wert thou attended at thy Birth! A Manger was thy Cradle, And a Stable Thy Privy Chamber, Marye's knees thy Table; Theeves were thy Courtiers, & the Cross, thy Throne; Thy Dyet, Gall; A wreath of Thornes, thy Crowne: All this, the King of Glory endur'd, and more, To make us Kings that were but Slaves before. 49. On CORDVPLO. KEepe in thy Actions, and maintaine the Fences Of thy clos'd lipps, Corduplo, and thy Senses; Thou shalt deceive both Man and Devill too, And mayst be damn'd, and yet they never know; The Devils power of knowledge never delves Into our hearts, till we proclaime our selves. 50. On Dreames. VVHo dreams a Sin, & not his dreams forbid it An entertainment, sins, as if he did it; Which if thy slumbring Soule could not prevent, Th'art safe, if thou hast dreamd thou didst repent.
51. On ADAM. How soon, poore Adam, was thy Freedome lost! Forfeit to death ere thou hadst time to boast; Before thy Triumph, was thy Glory done, Betwixt a rising and a Setting Sun: How soon that ends, that should have ended never! Thine eyes ne'r slept, untill they slept for ever: 52. On Sins and Blessings. VVE write thy common Blessings, Lord, upon A sliding streame; no sooner writ, but gon: Thy more illustrious Favors we entrust To the dry Sand, defac'd with ev'ry Gust: But, Lord, our Scrowle of Sins are written downe On during Marble, or some harder stone; And our extreame mis-doings are thought good To be inscrib'd, like Draco's Lawes, in blood: Lord, let us change our Tables, or our Story, And we shall have more Comfort; Thou, more Glory.
53. On CELIA. CElia complaines, her Heart cannot be well; Nor will not, Celia, till it cease to swell; 'Tis too-too proud with blood, perverse and stout; It must be launc'd to let the humour out: Alas no launce can pierce it; It is growne More hard then Raunce, or th' Adamantine stone. Then Celia, like an Adamant, thou must Make the incision with her owne made dust. 54. On PVSILLVS. PVsillus can be jocund, never whines When he is full, but still, in want, repines; And, like a bad-nos'd ound, that hunts not true, Hee's at a Fault, if not the Game in view: Be well advis'd Pusillus; Heav'n may chance, To pipe no more, if thou give ore to dance. 55. On Beliefe. THe Divels doe beleeve; I know they doe; But their Beleefe does make them tremble too.
57. On CRASTINIO. PAst time is gone, the Future is to be; Crastinio, say, which most belongs to thee? The first, thou further goest and further from; And thou mayst dye before the last shall come: The first, Crastinio's now growne out of date; Perchance the last may come, but come too late: The last's uncertaine, and the first is gone, The present then Crastinio's thine, or none. 58. On an Hower-glasse. MAns life is like an Hower-glasse, wherein Each sev'rall sand that passes is a Sin: And when the latest sand is spent and run, Our Sinnes are finisht, as our lives are done. 59. On KAIN. KAin, 'tis true: It was, and did appeare A Punishment too great for thee to beare: If thou hadst had a Faith, and couldst have bin As much opprest and loaded with thy Sin, Thy greater patience either might out-worne it, Or found more able Shoulders to have borne it.
59 On TICIO. TIcio stands gaping for the clouded Sun To be inform'd how fast the howers run; Ah, foolish Ticio, art thou sound in minde, To lose by seeking, what thou seekst to finde? 60. On SORTIO. SOrtio, that makst a Trade of gaming, know Thou breakst two great command'ments at a throw: The third thou break'st by thy abuse of Lot; Thou breakst the Tenth, that bids thee Covet not: Now tell me, Sortio, whether sins most high, He that playes faire, or he that helps a Die? 61. On RAYMOND SEBVND. HOnour to high-brain'd Raymond, And no lesse To thy renowned Scholler, great Du Plesse: Your high attempts object to our dull Sight The God of Nature, by dull Natures Light: But what has Raymond, and Du Plessis done? They light but two bright Tapers to the Sun.
62. To HENRY Earle of Holland. TIs not the Sun-shine of great Cesars Eye, Nor our Opinion makes thy Honour flye So faire a pitch; Nor need thy Glory claime Assistance from thy Blood, t'enrich thy Name: But what it is that mounts thee up so high, The World shall tell thee, Henry, and not I: Blood gives no Vertue; nor Opinion, Glory; And Princely Favors are but Transitory; Heav'ns Act is mingled with great Cesars Eye: Heav'n gave thee wings, and Cesar bids thee flye. 63. On Drunkards and Idolaters. WHich is the greater Sin, and which the lesse? Which finds the sharper? which the milder Rod? To turne Gods glorious Image to a Beast, Or turne the Image of a Beast to God? Thrice happy is that soule, and more then thrice, That buyes no knowledge at so deare a price. 64. On dying. HE that would dye once well, must often trye; Practice does bring perfection how to dye: The Law's our Tutor; and the World our Schoole, Wherein w'are taught by' example, as by Rule:
The Rods Afliction, which being laid away, The Gospell comes, and begs us leave to play. 65. On Ravens and Lilies. ARe not the Ravens, great God, sustaind by Thee? And wilt thou cloth the Lilyes, and not me? I'le nere distrust my God, for Cloth, and Bread, Whilst Lilyes flourish, and the Ravens be fed. 66. On degrees of Sin. CVrses proportion to the Sins degree: Adam had one; Eve, two; the Serpent, three. 67. A last Will. MY Life's my dying day; wherein I, still, Am making, alter, and correct my Will: My Soule I doe bequeath to God; provided Some smaller Legacies may be divided Among my Friends: Item my Sins I giue To my deare Iesus, whether dye or live: Item, I give the World, that did refresh The tender frailty of my feeble Flesh, My lesser Cares: I doe bequeath moreover, To my poore body, home-spun cloath, to cover And hide her shame, and Food for needfull diet; Some Sleepe, but not immoderate, to quiet
Distemper'd Nature, and in her Vacation, Some lawful Pleasures for her Recreation; My Charity, to my poore helples brother, I give; my Prayers to the true Church my Mother; Whose watchfull eyes I must desier, still, To be the Over-seers of my Will. 68. On our JESVS. HEe's like a Rock, which when we strive to shun We are in danger to be wreckt upon; But when our wide-spred Armes seek Refuge there, It will secure us from the harmes we feare. 69. To King CHARLES. THe Common wealth is like an Instrument; The divers sorts of people represent The strings, all differing in degrees, in places; Some trebles, and some Meanes, and some are Bases: The potent Rulers the Musitians are; The musicke, sometimes peace, and sometimes warre; The Lawes are like the Ruled Bookes that lye Before their eyes, and which they practice by: Play on great Charles; Heav'n make thy strings as strong, And true, as thou art skilfull: Ravish long The worlds wide eares, with thy diviner Ayres, That whosoever to thy Land repayres, May thence returne amazd, and tell the Story Of Brittains Triumph, in great Charles his Glory.
70. A Riddle. THe Goods we spend we keepe; and what we save, We lose, and only what we lose, we have. 71. On GLORIOSO. NEro vaunt Glorioso, that thou oft reliev'st The poore; Glorioso, tis not thine, thou giv'st: Boast what's thy own; Thou art the poor mans Sive; Thy wealth was giv'n thee, with a Clause, to give; Put case it were thy owne thou gav'st; what then? Thy owne Applause hath paid thy own agen. 72. On JVDAS: TWo hundred pence! What's that to thee? But say That so much Oyntment had beene cast away; The coyne that paid for't, Iudas, was not thine; O Iudas, that's the cause thou didst repine. 73. On IMPROPRIATOR. LOrd, how he swells! as if he had, at least, A Common wealth reposed in his brest: A Common-wealth? Twas shrewdly guest, I tell ye; He has a Leash of Churches in his Belly.
74. On the same. PRodigious Stomacke! what a cruell deale It can devoure! whole Churches at a meale: 'Tis very strange that Nature should deliver So good  Stomack to so bad a Liver. 75. On LVCRO. LVcro, it is beleev'd, thy Conscience, either Is very wide, or made of stretching leather: Me thinkes thy Conscience rather seemes too small; So farre from large, I feare th'ast none at all. 76. To GOD. IF thou shouldst strike a blow for every slipp That mortalls make, or spurre for every tripp, Within a moments space, here would be found No place left free t'inflict an other wound: Hackneys and spur-gall'd Iades would happier be, And in condition, better farre, then Wee.
77. On Sleepe and Death. IT is receiv'd, that Sleep's the elder brother; I see no reason for't▪ I thinke, the other: Though Sleepe does now usurp the upper hand, I'am sure that death do's sweepe away the Land. 78. To RHEMVS. THy Conscience tels thee, that to make debate Twixt Prince and People; to subvert a State; To violate a Truce, to murther Kings Are lawfull; nay, are meritorious things: Thou hast a Freedome more then we, wherein To doe against thy Conscience, and not sin. 79. On GLORIOSO. HE that relieves his brother in distresse, And seeks no  Applause, do's nothing lesse Then lend to his Redeemer, laying downe A worthlesse , to take up a Crowne: But if vain-glory prompt thy tongue to boast, It is not lent, Glorioso; 'Tis but lost.
80. To GOD. I Wonder, Lord, thou shouldst so much desire Our yonger dayes, when as the greene-wood fire Of feeble Nature is but newly blowne; When ev'ry Roome's unfurnisht; and not one Fit for the presence of so great a Guest; None trim'd with Art; no, not so much as drest With common sense; when as th'unburnisht print Of thy faire Image, taken from the Mint But now, has not the least imbellishment Of heav'nly knowledge: Lord, what hast thou ment, To make such choyce, to choose a time so ill, When we have neither meanes, nor yet a will To entertaine? Would not our deeper Age, Wherein the Toyes of Child-hood, and the rage, The fire of lustfull Youth shall be abated, Wherein our riper Soules shall be estated In richer Knowledge, and the strength of Reason; O might not, might not this bin thought a season, A time more aptly chosen of the twaine, For thee to come; and us, to entertaine? No; thou, great God, that art our wise Creator, Wert better read in our rebellious Nature: Thou knewst the Bow of our corrupted will Stood bent to mischiefe, would be drawne to ill By every Arme; Thou knewst that every hower Gave new encrease to strength, and double power To draw those sinfull Shafts that shoot at heaven; Thou knewst our easie Nature would be driven
By ev'ry Breath, and that our thoughts would fall From bad to worse; from worse, to worst of all; Thou knowst that growing Time wold more unlevell Our rugged Wills, and tookst the best of evill: Lord, take it, and betimes; that, being possest Of that, thou mayst prescribe for all the rest. 81. On PARTIO. THou sayst thy will is good, and glory'st in it, And yet forgetst thy Maker ev'ry minit: Say Partio, was there ever Will allow'd When the Testators mem'ry was not good? 82. On an evill Conscience. WHat hells of Horror, an evill Conscience brings. What strange Chimera's! what prodigious things! A pregnant womb of wonders! Ev'ry minit We Sin; but least, when most we sin agin it. 83. To MVNDANO. NEre thinke, Mundaeno, that one Roome will hold Thy God, and all thy gold; If ere they chance to meete within a heart, They'l either fight, or part; So long as Earth seemes glorious in thine eyes, Thy thoughts can never rise;
Beleeve't Mundano, by how much more neare Thou getst to Heav'n, the lesse will earth appeare. 84. To my Friend. VVOuld'st thou be prosp'rous, tho the bēded brow Of Fortune threaten thee? He teach thee how: Call home thy dearest wishes, and recall Thy hopes; Expect the worst that can befall: If come; thy heart will be the more secure, The lesse amaz'd, and abler to endure: If it come not, Expectance is no losse; Perchance it armes thee for another Crosse: Thus wisely sheltred under this reliefe, Thy Ioy shall be the lesse; and lesse, thy Griefe. 85. To Malfido. CHeare up Malfido, Lay thy thoughts more level; Make sure of Grace, and ne'r suspect thy Food: He that is Good, can give a thing that's evill No more, then thou, being evill, canst wish a good: He better knowes to give, then thou, to begge; Thou whin'st for Stones, and grumblest at an Egge: O, let his better will suspend thy wish, And thou shalt find no Scorpion; if, no Fish.
86. On CRVCIO. THou stil complainst that sorrowes do attend thee, And that their savours do so much annoy thee: Mistake not; they are weapons, to defend thee; They be not Engins, Crucio, to destroy thee; Wilt thou mislike thy Cropps of swelling Corne, Because th'are trencht, & fenc'd about with thorn? 87. To RHEMVS. TIs true; we are but dust; but wormes; nay men, That are more base then either; And what then? Shall wormes, or dust, or men be well advis'd, To goe in person (where we have despis'd) Before a God, a glorious God? I doe; Who bids thee Come, will bid thee Welcome too: Rhemus, when call'd in person, you appeare By Proxy, tell me where's your manners, there? 'Tis better to be wisely bold, then make Thy selfe unmannerly, for manners sake: Some ill-bred Clownes there be, that, being loath To foule a Napkin, draw a filthy Cloath. 88. To MACIO. DRoope not beneath thy wants, as if forlorne, Thou must be made a Iewell, to be worne
In Abrams bosome: Macio, he that comes To Abrams bosome, finds his way, by Crumms. 89. On Reproofe. TIs not enough to strive agin the Act, Or not to doe't; we must reprove the Fact In others too; The Sin, being once made knowne To us, if not reprov'd, becomes our owne: We must disswade the Vice, we scorne to follow; We must spit out, as well as never swallow. 90. On CVRIO. TWo Eares to let in Knowledge; Nature gave; To entertaine true Faith, one heart we have; Why so? Ile tell thee Curio, in briefe, Our knowledge twice exceeds our halfe beleefe. 91. On ZELVSTVS. ZElustus thinks, his paines are worth his labour If he love God, though he traduce his Neighbour: His hot-mouth'd Zeale false-gallops on so fast In the first Table't tyers in the last: Art thou a faithfull Steward of Gods store, Zelustus, that spendst Sixe, and keepst but Foure?
92. On Philautos. PHilauto's Charity is like a Mouse That keepes at home, and never leaves the house, Till it be fir'd: It stirres for no mans cause, Vnlesse to feed on Crumms of vaine Applause: Take heed, Philautos, lest thou heed too late; The Mouse, in time, will eate up thy Estate. 93. On Dubius. DVbius, Thy eares are two, Thy tongue but one; Heare God and Priest, Confesse to God alone. 94. To Sir Julius Cesar, Master of the Roles. THe high Perfections, wherwith heav'n do's please To crowne our transitory dayes, are these; Goods well possest▪ and not possessing thee: A faithfull Friend; equall in love, degree: Lands fruitfull, and not conscious of a Curse: A boastlesse hand, a Charitable purse: A smiling Conscience, A contented Mind; A sober knowledge, with true Wisedome, jynd: A Brest, well temper'd; Dyet without Art, Surfeit, or want; A wisely-simple Heart.
Pastimes ingenious, lawfull, manly, sparing; A Spirit not contentious rash, but daring: A Body healthfull, found, and fit for labour; A House well order'd, and an equall Neighbour: A prudent wife, and constant to the roofe; Sober, but yet not sad, and faire enough; Sleepe seasonable, moderate, and secure; Actions heroicke, constant, blamelesse, pure, A life, as long as faire; and when expir'd, A glorious Death, unfeard, as undesir'd. 95. On LVCRO. LVcro, how poor thy Tyrant-wealth has made thee! How miserable poore! It has betrayd thee To thy owne seeming selfe; And it is growne As little, thine, or lesse then thou, thy owne: Alas, poore Lucro, how thy fruitfull pawnes Abuse thy Stomacke, that so often yawnes. For a good Morsell, whilst thy Saint does rome, Like a Dcoy, t'entice evill Angels home, Whose more imperious presence must controule And fright the peace of thy perplexed Soule! Lucro, be slave no longer to thy pelse; Sub due thy Gold, and make thy selfe, thy selfe: But if thy Saint be growne too strong for thee, He tell thee Lucro; Turne thy Saint to me.
96. On MENDAX. FAire-spoken Mendax, on the least occasion, Sweares by his Faith, and by his owne Salvation; Is rashbrayne Mendax, well advised, then, To pawne his Faith in God, for Faith with Men? Sure, small's thy Wit or Credit, to be drawne For Wares so poore, to leave so great a Pawne. 97. On BLANDVS. VVHen ere I wish my Blandus a Good morow He is my Servant: If I come to borrow, Or but salute my Blandus passing by, I am your Servant, Blandus does reply: If court my Blandus, I must understand, He is my Servant, and does kisse my hand; Discourse with Blandus, ev'ry Clause shall be I am your Servant: If he drinke to me My Servant does it; I returne his Love, My Servant pledges: If my lips doe move A Suit, he is my Servant; Though I doe Abuse my Blandus, hee's my Servant too: How blest am I, his service should be such To me! He never told his God so much: How much, dear Blandus, hast thou bound me thine, That art his Servant, not so much, as mine!
98. On Rebellio. THe stout Rebellio, scourged by his God, Slights his Correction, and ne'r ownes the Rod; Take heed, Rebellio; Be not stout too long; Neglected Stripes doe oft returne more strong; A stubborne Silence more ill nature showes, Then Sobbs of Stomack, and deserves more blowes. 99. On God and Gold. MY God and Gold cannot possesse one heart: My God and I; or Gold and I must part. 100. To JAMES Archbishop of Armagh. REnowned Prelate, I nor know nor care What secret vertue's in Saint Patricks Chayre; If any; I dare boldly say, 'tis more Since thou satst there, then ere it was before: Goe on, great Patriarck; If thy higher Story (As sure it will) shall drowne S. Patricks Glory: Iërna will, (as now Iërna vaunts) Be knowne, as well as cal'd, The Isle of Saints.
101. On a waking Conscience. THere is a kind of Conscience some men keepe, Is like a Member that's benumb'd with sleepe; Which, as it gathers Blood, and wakes agen, It shoots, and pricks, and feeles as big as ten. 102. On our Affections. O How prepostrous our Affections burne! We serve the world, love God, to serve our turn. 103. On ZELVSTVS. ZElustus weares his clothes, as he were clod To frighten Crowes, and not to serve his God; As if the Symptomes of Regeneration Were nothing but a Christian out of Fashion. 104. On REBELLIO. VVHat? ever whining? Evermore alike, Both when heav'n strikes & whē he leaves to strike? Not stroke thy stomacke downe, when as thy God Is friends with thee, and throwne aside the Rod? Take heed, Rebellio, heaven doe not replye Vpon thy Sobbs, and he that made thee crye
For thy owne Good, reward not thy repining With a new Rod, & scourge thee worse for whining. 105. On ZELVSTVS. NOt thy Geneva Ruffe, nor steeple Hat With flagging Eaves, or Cepresse out of date; Thy nock-shorn Cloake, with a round narrow Cape; Thy Russet hose crosse-garterd with a Tape; Thy Antick Habit, of the old Translation, Made for the purpose in despight of Fashion; Tis none of these, Zelustus, that can bring Thy zeale in credit; none of these can wring The least applause from heav'n: Heav'n never ment A Christians Conscience should be bound or bent To shapes; Zelustus, we can scarce divide An Affectation from a secret Pride. 106. On CONSCIO. ARt thou revil'd, and slandred? and yet whine? I feare th'art guilty: Is that heart of thine So faint (if guiltles) that it cannot stoope Beneath so poore a Burthen, and not droope? He that has fire at home may well refraine To blow his singers, Conscio, or complaine The weather's cold abroad: Make sure within, And let them censure, let them snarle agin: Thou mayst appeare, but not be this, the worse; If Conscience blesse thee, Doe, let Shemei curse.
107 To GOD. THy sacred will be done, great God, To spend, or to suspend thy Rod: If possible, my will's to misse it; If otherwise, to stoope, and kisse it. 108. On Devotion. WE must not onely be to God, but shew To Man; Pauls Cloak must be remembred too 109 On the Christian. TIs not enough that the Kings Daughter should Be faire within; She must be clad in Gold; The curious Needle cloathes her whiter skin; Shee's rich without, and glorious all within: The true borne Christian, must, as well, be clod With lives to men, as lin'd with hearts to God. 110. On Mercy and lustice. GOds Mercy and his Iustice is the same; Tis but the Obiect that divides the Name.
111 On AVLICVS. BEfore that Aulicus was made a Lord, He was my Friend; we might exchange a word, As well as hearts; He could be never weary Of my society; was jocund, merry; Ingenious, and as jealous to offend; He was enjoyd, He could enjoy his friend: But now he swells, looks big, his Favours change, A well as Fortunes: Now his eyes are strange: His thoughts are Councels, curious webs of State; And all his Actions must be wonder'd at; His Speeches must be Lawes, and every word An Oracle, to be admir'd, ador'd: Friendship must now be service: A new mold Must have new Matter, melted from the old: O Aulicus, 'twere well, if thou couldst doe The very same in spirituall honour too. 112. To RHEMVS. FAith must be joynd to works: Rhemus, I wonder, What God has joynd, thou dar'st presume to sunder!
113. On TORTVS. TIs not the bearing of the Crosse, or Cup Of thy Affliction; Thou must take them up: Nor ist the taking up, alone, will doe; Tortus, thou must take up, and follow too. 114. On GRACCHVS. GRacchus so often did repeat a Lye, Past on, with Credit, from his very youth, That now his Conscience has forborne to crye Against it, and perswades him 'tis a Truth: Tis well for Gracchus; He has gaind thereby; He now may tell the same, and never lye. 115. On PHARES. THou sayst, it is a Supper, and is fit To use the Posture of a Meale, to sit: Can thy Discretion, Phares, or thy zeale Give carnall Gestures to a spirituall Meale? A heav'nly Supper and a fleshly Heart? Thy Posture has discover'd what thou art.
116. On the same. YOu'l take it sitting: Pray; and no man know it: You'l doe, and yet you will not seeme to doe it: You'l bow your Heart, although you bend no Knee: 'Tis like your Selfe; You seeme, not what you be. 117. To my BOOKE. SO; Now, 't is time to waine thee from my brest; Thy Teeth grow sharp, my Babe, It will be best For both: Thy hasty Nurse is come to take thee From my fond arms: ne'r whimper; he wil make thee A dainty golden Coate: Let it suffice thee, Thou art mine stil: how ere; Thy Nurse will prize thee For his own sake and thine: When thou art strong, And fure of foot, hee'l let thee sport among Thy fellowchildren; He will let thee see The World, which thou hadst never seene, with me: Thou mayst doe well; if Fortune strike thee lucke, And faire Opinion; Thou didst never sucke But one good Friday, and thou mayst improve As well in Merit, as in pop'ular love: Thou hast sixe Brethren (borne as well as thee Of a free Muse) legitimate and free; Pages to Cesar, and in Cesars Court, Besides an Ishmael, that attends the Port Of a great Lord, an Honourable Peere Of this blest Realme: If ere thou wander, there.
They'l bid thee welcome, at the times of leasure, Perchance, and bring thee to the hand of Cesar: Thou art but young, and tender, (for who knowes The paths of Fate?) perhaps, and one of those Whom Clotho favours not; perchance, thy Twine May be produc'd (for thou art halfe divine) To after Ages, to the utmost date Of Time; who knowes? but we subscribe to Fate: Perchance, thy Fortune's to be bought and sold; Was not young Ioseph serv'd the like of old? Thy Bondage may, like his, be made perchance, A steppe to Honour, and a meanes t'advance Thy higher Fortunes, and prepare thy hand To ease a dearth, if dearth should strike the Land: But I transgresse, my Bbe: 'Tis time to part; The Lawes of Nature breake the Rules of Art; Once more farewel: Let Heav'ns high blessings shine On my poork Babe, as my poore Babe has mine. The end of the fourth and last Booke.
