23316 S113794 99849024 14153
A GENERALL TREATISE AGAINST POPERIE, AND IN DEFENCE OF THE RELIGION BY PVBLIKE AVTHO∣RITIE PROFESSED IN ENGLAND AND OTHER CHƲRCHES REFORMED. VVherein they that either want leisure to read, or that haue not iudgement to conceiue, or that are not able to buie the learned treatises of other con∣cerning particular points of religion, may yet euidently see poperie not to be of God, and our religi∣on to be acceptable in his sight. Ʋery necessarie for these times, for the confirmation and strengthening of men in our religion, that neither by Je∣suits, nor by any other, they may be drawne to pope∣rie, or any other heresie or sect: and likewise for the winning of Papists and Atheists to an vnfained liking and true profession of our re∣ligion. BY THOMAS STOVGHTON minister of the word. PRINTED BY IOHN LEGAT. Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1598.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND MOST TRVLY RELIGIOƲS AND vertuous Lord, Robert Lord Rich, Tho∣mas Stoughton wisheth increase of all true pietie and honour in this life, and eternall glory in the life to come. RIght Honourable, your fauour hauing beene such towards me, as that both either vpon my cō∣mendation before I was by face knowne vnto your Lordship, and especially my selfe sithens that time haue thereby sared the better, I could not but in all dutie thinke of some way, whereby to shew my selfe in some measure thankfull for the same. Hauing therfore taken a litle paines in ga∣thering these generall arguments against the whole masse & lumpe of poperie, as in defence likewise of the generall doctrine publikely, and by publike authoritie professed in England, I thought your Honourable curtesie to be such, that these my labours would be accepted as some testimonie of my gratefull minde. Neither am I bold to offer them vnto your Honour, in re∣spect onely of that your singular fauour towards my selfe, but also because the same your Hono∣rable fauour hath beene extended and is exten∣ded
towardes all, whome your Honour hath seene forward in the profession of that religion, the defence whereof is the chiefe subiect matter of this treatise. Yea so haue you vouchsafed to countenance such persons from time to time not disdaining the meanest, that this your Christian and godly minde is much more worthie this worke, then the worke it selfe any waies worthy to be presented to so great a person. For by this loue towardes the professours of the truth, hath euidently appeared your affection towards the truth it selfe. This affection also towardes the truth it selfe, euen towardes the truth, which in this treatise is commended and iustified, hath in like manner beene most plainely testified vnto this whole countrey of Essex, by your singular care for the placing of godly and sufficient mini∣sters in all places, where the patronage of bene∣fices by the auncient lawes of this realmes hath beene your right. And both these, to wit, your loue vnto the persons professing this religion, and your like affection towards the religion it selfe, haue plētifully declared your true zeale of God himselfe and of Christ Iesus. For Christ accoū∣teth that done to himselfe, that is done to them Math. 25. 40. that belong vnto him. And as the enmitie a∣gainst God his truth and the professours there∣of, endeauouring to suppresse the one and to re∣presse the other, doth testifie the like enmitie against God himselfe and Christ Iesus, so the Mah. 25. 43. Act. 9. 4. contrarie loue towardes both, doth declare the like loue towards God himselfe and Christ Ie∣sus. Further your honourable care (before men∣tioned)
for the furthering of this religion, shew∣ed by prouiding such sufficient ministers for in∣struction of the people in the true knowledge thereof and obedience thereunto, hath also wit∣nessed and doth daily witnesse your vnfained loue vnto men. For what greater worke can there be for the benefits of their soules? yea both of their soules and of their bodies, of this life and of the life to come. For who knoweth not but that as the Gospell is the power of God vnto salua∣tion, Rom. 1. 16. Iam. 1. 21. 2. Tim. 3. 15. Psal. 19. 7. Frov. 1. 4. and the word conteined in the holy Scrip∣tures (which also containe this religion here commended) is able to make men wise vnto the same saluation: so also that that wisdome which the gospel and word of God teacheth, hath in Prov. 3. 16. her right hand length of daies, and in her left hand riches and glorie? As therefore to hinder the go∣spel and word of God, doth plainly bewray the hatred of men, which cannot be saued by any o∣ther meanes without it, (for which cause the A∣postle speaking of the Iewes saith first, that they 1. Thess. 2. 15, 16. were contrarie or aduersaries vnto all men, & then immediatly addeth as a reason or confirmation of the former, that they had forbidden them to preach the word vnto the Gentiles, vvhereby they might be saued) so to promote the same word, can not but witnes the contrarie. Finally this your godly care, hath in like sort the better witnessed, & doth witnes your faithful heart, both towards her most excellent Maiestie, and also towardes the whole realme. For it cannot be but that the more the true knowledge and feare of God a∣boundeth,
by the more plentiful preaching of the word also will abound true obedience vnto her Highnes, and vnfained loue betwixt subiect and subiect: by both which the barres of the gates of the whole kingdome, must necessarily be the stronger against all fortaine aduersaries. Sith therefore (Right honourable) it hath plea∣sed God, of his aboundant goodnes and rich grace, besides your great earthly honour, thus more highly to honour and aduance you in hea∣uenly things, as I doe in this respect the more boldly dedicate this treatise of religion to your Honour so zealous of religion, so in all humilitie I desire the same to accept therof, and to vouch∣safe your honourable protection therunto. And because your former zeale perswadeth me the same of your Honour, that the like perswaded the Apostle of the Philippians, namely, that he Philip. 1. 6. that hath begun this good worke, will also finish the same: therefore that vse of this treatise, which in the ende I wish generally to all great persons al∣readie called to the fellowship of this true reli∣gion, I doe more specially commend vnto your Honour, namely that you will yet be zealous thereof, as hitherto you haue beene and are. Yea let not your zeale onely continue, but let it be such also as Salomon describeth the loue of the Church to be, strong as death, cruell (or hard, or Cantic. 8. 6, 7. inuincible) as the graue, whose coales are fierie coales, and as a vehement flame, (or as the flame of God) and the which much water cannot quench. Yea because the Lord Iesus reprehendeth the
slaking of the first loue of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5. threatning also to come against her, and to remooue her candlesticke out of her place, except shee repen∣ted and did her first works: therefore also your loue abound more and more, as the Apostle writeth vnto the Philippians: and as our Sauiour him∣selfe Phil. 1. 9. commendeth the loue of the Church of Thyatira, saying, that her workes were more at the Rev. 2. 19. last then at the first. This the Lord requireth of all, but especially of such as himselfe hath most highly aduanced, and made the sonnes of the Psal. 29. 1. mightie: yea this is the ende for which he doth thus aduance them, and make them so migh∣tie. Ester 4. 14. Neither neede any man to feare any dis∣grace or dishonour by such forwardnes in zeale: yea rather euery man is to hope the contrarie. For God himselfe hath expressely promised, to 1. Sam. 2. 3. honour them that shall honour him. Therefore the Apostle hoped and fully assured himselfe, that in Phil. 1. 40. nothing he should be ashamed, but that Christ should be magnified in his bodie: where by opposing his owne shame to the magnifying of Christ, and the magnifying likewise of Christ to his owne shame, he plainely teacheth, that they that stu∣die and bend their endeauours most to magni∣fie and exalt Christ, neede not to feare any shame and disgrace of themselues. Moreouer they that continue the honouring of him, with that honour and according to that honour whereunto he hath exalted them, shall build vp the surer house to their owne posteritie. For as the Prophet speaking generally of the man that
feareth the Lord and delighteth greatly in his com∣mandements, Psal. 112. 1. 2. that his seede shall be mightie vpon the earth: so more particularly the Lord promi∣sed to Dauid, to set vp his seede after him, which 2. Sam. 7. 12. should proceede out of his bodie, and to establish his kingdome. And this promise all men knowe to haue beene most amply performed. Yea to Iehu (a man not so according to God his owne heart as Dauid was) did the Lord promise, that because he had diligently executed that which was right in 1. King. 10. 30. God his eyes, &c. (though not with a perfect heart) therfore his sonnes vnto the fourth generati∣on, should sit vpon the throne of Israel. This pro∣mise also was performed vnto the full. For Iehu himselfe beeing reckoned for one, Zecharia the sonne of Ieroboam king of Israel, was the fifth discent from Iehu. And this honour was more then the honour of any other king of Israel, after the diuision of the kingdome. For no other king of Israel besides Iehu, had aboue one or two at the most (as seuerall generàtions) of their owne stocke and line, to succeede them in the king∣dome. Three indeede are said to haue succeeded Homri, to wit, Ahab, Ahazia, and Iehoram: but this last was not the sonne of the middle, but both Ahazia and Iehoram were brethren, and the sonnes of Ahab and Iezabel. Now to re∣turne to the fruit of beeing zealous in honouring 2. King. 3.  and 9. 22. the Lord, when the threede of all earthly ho∣nour shall be drawne to an ende, so as that it can not possibly be lengthened one inch more,
then shall beginne the honour that is without ende. Then shall Christ confesse them before the Mat. 10. 22. cō∣pared with Luke 12. 8. Father, and before his Angels in heaeuen, that haue confessed him before men in the earth. He will not commit the proclaiming of their praise to any other, as Ahashuerosh did the praise Ester 6. 11. of Mordecai vnto Haman, but euen himselfe will be as it were the Herauld thereof. Nei∣ther will he whisper the praise of such in se∣cret, but he will publish and proclaime it in the greatest and most honourable assemblie that e∣uer was. Yea this Iesus the king of glorie shall Math. 23. 35. Dan. 12. 3. Math. 22. 30. Philip. 3. 21. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. place them at his right hande, and shall make them like to the starres, yea to the sonne in fir∣mament, yea to the angels, yea euen vnto him∣selfe. Verily (Right honourable) this glorie, though it should continue but one daie, is more then all earthly glorie, though it should conti∣nue a thousand yeares. If Dauid saide the like of the courts of God vpon earth, what may be Psal. 84. 10. saide of the highest court of God in the high∣est heauen? what heart therefore would not be enflamed and set on fire with the know∣ledge and certen assurance of these things? when Peter, Iames, and Iohn, did see Christ Iesus in the mountaine with Moses and Elias in that glorious apparell for a while, which one day they should put on for euer, how were they affected there with? Truly so that although they themselues were not one whit transfigu∣red with Christ, yet they could haue bin cōtent for euer to haue dwelt in that mountaine, onely
to haue enioyed this glorious sight of Christ, Moses, and Elias. For what said they? Peter spea∣keth for the rest, as oftentimes he did for all (not as beeing the head of all, but as hauing the bol∣dest spirit) and said, Master, it is good for vs to be heare: if thou wilt let vs make three tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias. Were these thus rauished with the bodily sight of the glorie onely of Christ and of two other, and that vpon the earth, and but for a time? How then should the heart of euery Christian be rauished with the spiritual sight by faith of the euerlasting glorie of Christ Iesus, of all the Saints general∣ly, and of himselfe particularly, which one day they and himselfe shall haue for euer in the hea∣uens, and whereof in the meane time by the same faith, they and he are as certenly assured, as if they were alreadie in possession thereof? How zealous also should euery the like Christi∣an heart be of this our religion, whereto onely this glorie is promised, and whereby onely it is to be attained? So great was the glorie of Moses, hauing talked but a while with the Lord in the mountaine at the receiuing of the law, that with∣out a vaile the Israelites could not looke vpon him. Exod. 34. 33. Was glorie so great at the giuing of the law vnto Moses? How great then shall it be at the finall rewarding of the perfect obseruation and full satisfaction of the law by Christ Iesus? was glo∣rie so great after a while talking with the Lord? how great then shall it be when we shall haue our whole conuersation and liue with God for
euer? was glorie so great in an earthly moun∣taine? how great then shall it be in the high hea∣uens? was glorie so great vpon corruption? how great then shall it be, when that that is sowen in dishonour, shall be raised altogether in glorie? was glorie so great vpon weaknes? how great then shall it be, when that that is sowen in weaknes, shall be applied in power? Finally was glorie so great vpon a naturall bodie? how great then shall it be, when that that is sowen a naturall bo∣die, shall be raised in a spirituall bodie? I write not these things (Right Honourable) so much for the enlarging of your zeale towards the religion in this treatise following commended, as for the better prouoking also and quickning of this zeale in all other the like noble persons. The ra∣ther also and the more plentifully haue I beene bold to deale herein in this my epistle Dedica∣torie, because I thought it might be, that some would read this epistle, which would read but little else of this booke: and that othersome would hereby be the more excited to the rea∣ding of the whole treatise. Now what shall I say more? The same God that hath begun this noble worke of zeale in your noble heart towards this religion, make the same perfect. The same God that hath so highly aduanced you vpon the earth, that sometime you sit with most noble Queene Elizabeth cloathed with Parliament roabes in great dignitie, so also exalt you, that you may walke with his sonne Christ Iesus in heart clothed in white, yea and that you may Rev. 3. 4. ad 2.
sit with him in his throne for euer, as himselfe sitteth in the throne of his Father. Thus most humblie crauing pardon of my boldnesse, I doe also humbly take my leaue of your Honor. At Billerim in Essex, the 7. of March, in the yeare of our Lord, according to the computation of the Church of England. 1597. almost expired. Your Honours most humble to command in the Lord, Thomas Stoughton.
To the Christian readers, espe∣cially to my VVorshipfull and other lo∣uing friends in Kent, London, Essex, Suffolke, and elswhere. BEloved I am not ignorant, howe dangerous a thing it is to write bookes in these daies, partly in respect of the greate varietie of all learning in many, vvhich thereby are able more ea∣silie to finde a fault in any man his vvritings, then the author (for the most part) himselfe, and partly of the great curiosity of other vvhich are readie to reprehend the best, and to finde a knot in a rush; yea not onely to carpe at that vvhich deserueth no blame, but often∣times to condemne that vvhich they ought ra∣ther to commend, or vvhich at the least they cannot amende. The consideration of this, did at the first make me for a long time to vvish this labour that I haue novve taken, to haue beene set vpon by some other, more able to haue gone (as we say) through-stitch therewith then my selfe, before I durst once beginne to set my penne to paper for the writing my medita∣tions
thereof. After also that I had begun ana finished this treatise, in such sort as novv it commeth forth (some smale things onely ex∣cepted) I staied the publishing thereof, to see if any other vvould haue preuented me in this argument, that so I might not haue laide my selfe open to those reprehensions and censures, vvhich nowe perhaps I may incurre and su∣staine. At the last seeing none other to deale therein, and thinking it to be a thing very profitable, yea beeing persvvaded of the profit thereof by some other, whome I desired to read the same written; (as vvhose iudgements I did much better trust vnto then to my ovvne) I laid aside all such feare: and respecting the cō∣mon good of many, more then mine owne pri∣uate credit and estimation vvith a few, I haue boldly committed it (as ye see) vnto the print, and doe novve exhibite it vnto your reading. Although therefore it may be, that it shall passe through the fierie and sharpe purgatorie of many such quicke heads & nimble tongues, as to vvhich almost nothing will be welcome: yet I hope that it shall also finde courteous and fauurable entertainment with many, which will make such profitable vse thereof, as I haue commended in the ende, and in regard where∣of, I regard not all the obloquie of the other. I
craue also yea and trust, that what faultes so∣euer haue escaped me herein, they may be the more fauourably interpteted, and the more e∣silie pardoned, because this treatise is not onely the first fruites of my labours thus published, but also such an argument, as wherein I doe not remember any other professedly to haue taken the like paines. If hereafter any man of great learning generally and particular∣ly of much reading and deepe iudgement in diuinitie, shall thinke this worke to be insuffi∣cient in this kinde, and shall therefore take the same theame in hand, and handle it more substantially and sufficiently: I shall not onely not enuy the same or be grieued therevvith, but I will also vvillingly accept it, reuerently esteemē it, and be hartely glad of it. In the meane time I entreat all Christian readers of this booke, thankfully to looke, and charitably to peruse the same, euen as they would haue o∣thers to accept the like trauell of themselues. Neither let them be offended vvith my plaine manner of handling these arguments, but ra∣ther let them seriously vvaie the matter and substance it selfe. For it is not finenesse of vvordes but pith of matter that must edifie to the vvorking, confirming, or increasing of true faith and godlines. Good and whole some
meate is not the vvorse to be liked, for beeing serued to the table in a earthen or wodden ves∣sell. If also one argument please not, yet let no man be discouraged, but let him proceede to the next, and so to them that followe. Where there is varietie of dishes, there men not li∣king of one vvill tast of an other. The like fa∣uour I entreat in the reading of these argu∣ments, hoping that the further men proceede in reading this treatise, the better sauour they will finde therein. Nowe as I entreat all Chri∣stian readers generally to accept courteously of my paines in this booke, so more specially I pray the same of such, as are my friends dwelling in the places before mentioned, or elswhere. For beeing specially bound vnto them, either by kindnes or by kinred, and beeing not able to doe that good to these that nature it selfe requi∣reth, I was the more willing to publish this trea∣tise, as a testimonie of my thankefulnes to the one, and of my welwishing mind vnto the other. As therefore in this speciall respect, I doe offer this generall treatise vnto them both, that they may make the more speciall vse thereof vnto themselues, so I doe desire them especially to ac∣cept it. Touching the addition of the dainties of po∣perie annexed to the treatise, partly to shew the
vnlearned learning of their popish great clarks in diuinitie, when poperie it selfe was at her top and top gallant; and partly to discouer the a∣bominable blasphemies, and blasphemous abo∣minations of their religion: (vvhich to many perhaps were before secret and altogether vn∣knowne) touching this addition (I say) of the se things I doe also desire that it may find the like courteous entertainment. And least any man should thinke that these things thus added, were gathered out of such authors as were of no ac∣count in their church, (as likewise many slender things might be collected out of the bookes of some simple writers amongst vs, that are of no reputation in our church) least also touching those things that I haue gathered out of their seruice bookes, any should imagine them to be such, as they themselues should now disclaime, I haue sufficiently preuented these obiections in the addition it selfe, shewing that the authors by me here trauced, had great allowance from the Popes owne vnholines, and were of high e∣stimation in their churches, and likewise proo∣uing their ancient seruice books in the things here expressed, not to differ frō their new books newly reformed by the coūcil of Trēt, neither yet to be any whit in a manner now reuoked. Much other the like popish trash I might haue noted
out of other the like popish bookes, but to avoid tediousnes vnto other, I did the more willingly spare my owne paines. Thus committing your selues with the successe of these my labours vn∣to the Lord (who worke both in you and in me more perfect hatred of popery and all other er∣rours, and more vnfained loue of his truth, that we may the better continue therein, and be the more plentiful in all the fruits thereof,) I do lo∣uingly take my leaue of you, frō Billerim in Es∣sex the seuenth of March in the yeere of our Lord according to the cōputation of the church of England 1597. almost nowe ended. Yours in the Lord vnfainedly Thomas Stoughton.
The generall summe of all all things comprehended in this trea∣tise following. The reasons why this worke was taken in hand and the state of this cause beeing first breefly decla∣red, then followe these generall arguments against popery and for our religion. 1 All true religion and acceptable to God, is wrought in the hearts of men by the ministerie of God his word conteiued in holy scripture. Popery is not wrought by the ministerie of that worde in as much as where that word is most plentifully & sin∣cerely taught, there popery most falleth, and where that word is wanting there popery most abounde, as also because papists will neither voluntarily come, nor by authority be drawne, either to the preaching or reading thereof in our Churches, neither doe de∣light in the priuate reading thereof at home, ergo Popery is not true religion &c. 2 All true religion is vpheld and maintained by good and lawefull meanes, needing no euill & vn∣lavvefull meanes to vphold it. But popery is vpheld
and maintained by all vnlawfull meanes, as by force and violence, by fire and fagot, corrupting, adding vnto, and diminishing the text of scriptures, by false alleadging the authorities of men, by clipping and mangling the works of the auncient fathers, both in citing their testimonies, and also in printing of the bookes themselues by authority of the popish church, by lying miracles, and such other indirect meanes, ergo, &c. 3 The subiect matter of true religion is con∣tained in the written word of God. The subiect mat▪ of poperie is not comprised in that written worde of God, but is directly contrarie therevnto in all, the principall points thereof. ergo &c. 4 The forme of true religion is also compre∣hended in the canonicall Scripture. The forme of poperis is not there comprehended, but is altogether diuers from the forme of God his worship in that word prescribed, yea rather poperie hath in a man∣ner no worship of God at all. ergo. 5 All true religion referreth all things to God his glorie. Poperie referreth not all things to God his glorie, but so aduanceth the Pope, saints, and man himselfe, that it spoileth God of all his glorie. ergo. 6 True religion bringeth forth obedience to the orall law of God contained in the tenne comman∣dements. Poperie (and not Papists onely) baingeth
forth no such obedience, but transgresseth euery one of these commaundements, and that in the highest degree. ergo. 7 True religion worketh true ioy and sound com∣fort in euery heart where it taketh true place, as cer∣tifying she same both of the present fauour of God, and also of the continuance thereof. Poperie worketh no such ioy and comfort, as the which depriueth men of the Scriptures, whereby their eyes are to be opened and their mindes instructed in true wisdome, as the which teacheth likewise that it is presumption for a man to say that he is perswaded of God his fauour, and of his owne saluation, and wherein no man euer knoweth whither he receiueth the true sacrament or not. ergo. 8 All true religion is wise as he that is the au∣thor thereof. Poperie is not wise, but most foolish and ridiculous, grossely worshipping many homely relikes, absurdly baptizing bells and Churches, &c. and without all wit and reason (much more without di∣uinitie) citing, condemning, and excommunicating them that are dead. ergo. 9 All true religion is vnsauorie and vnpleasant to the nature of man. But poperie is most pleasant thereunto, because it teacheth men not to take any paines in the scriptures, yea forbiddeth all such paines, because it affirmeth that the worke done is sufficient howsoeuer it be done, and that therefore
men neede not to be carefull about their hearts, be∣cause also it commendeth especially the commande∣ments of men, giuing all libertie vnto men from the commaundements of God: and teaching that what good soeuer is neglected, or what euill soeuer is by a∣ny committed, yet by confession of all this with the mouth, by a little voluntarie afflicting of the bodie, and especially▪ by a peece of money, a man may haue forgiuenes of all. ergo. The contrarie of all the former arguments is prooued of our religion, from whence it follovveth that it is true and acceptable vnto God. 10 Both the former conclusions, the one against poperie, the other for our religion, are prooued by a∣ctuall testimonies of God. These are shewed to be 1 The gifts of God promised to the latter times for the commendation of the Gospel. 2 The works of God. The gifts of God are shewed to haue beene 1 Excedingly decaied, and almost dead and buried in the chiefe times of poperie. 2 Repaired, reuiued, raised vp, and greatly to haue flourished, &c. at the breaking forth of our religion out of the darknes of poperie. The works of Godare either single against poperie. against our religion. or mixt both against poperie and for our religion.
All these former arguments beeing plentifully handled, then followeth the conclusion, wherein are exemplified the manifold vse of the whole treatise. Concerning them which are of our re∣ligion all generally vveake and strong. more particularly great persons, and those also either generally all, or specially Dauids Worthies. not ofour religion Atheists and all of no re∣ligion. Papists 1 weake & er∣ring onely of ignorance. 2 obstinate and wilfull.
A GENERAL TREATISE AGAINST PO∣PERIE, AND IN DEFENCE OF the religion by publike authoritie pro∣fessed in England, and in other Churches reformed. THE PREFACE. IT cannot be denied but that many excellent, learned, and godly men, haue both plenti∣fully and soundly, and also profitably and fruitfully writ∣ten, most worthie treatises for confutation of all particular points of poperie, and like wise for confirmation of all particular points of our religion. In this treatise also the mysterie of iniquitie in poperie is so fully discouered, and the truth of our religi∣on from point to point particularly so euidently declared, that all men of any iudgement, exerci∣sed in those treatises may easily see both the one & the other: yea many haue seene & doe see both the one & the other. Notwithstanding as many haue seene & doe see it, so also Satan the god of this world doth stil detaine many in their former blindnes and ignorance. Yea the nearer that his kingdome is to an ende, the more diligently he goeth about like a roaring lyon seeking still whome he may deuoure. Therefore he ceaseth not by his chiefe instrument the man of sinne,
and child of perdition (I meane the Bishop and Pope of Rome) continually to send forth into all corners of the realme swarmes of Iesuits and Se∣minarie priests, as to harden those in poperie that haue not yet renounced that profession, so also to infect other there with that are either of no religion, or that hauing embraced ours are not yet sufficiently setled and grounded there∣in. And truly both waies he doth the more pre∣uaile, partly because many haue not abilitie to buie the bookes of particular controuersies be∣twixt vs and the Papists they beeing some what costly, partly because they haue no leisure to read them beeing many and large, and partly because they haue no iudgement to conceiue of them beeing matters of learning and lear∣nedly handled. Where he cannot effect that which he would for the hardening of men in po∣perie, or drawing them to poperie, there he go∣eth another waie to worke, either corrupting them with some other heresie, or making them altogether profane, and working in them a con∣tempt of all religion. Because all is one to him, whether men be Papists, or other heretikes, or of no religion at all. 2 Thus therefore seeing true religion euery where to decay, & the kingdome of Satan more and more daily to be enlarged partly by poperie, partly by other heresies, and partly by profane∣nes, and contempt of all religion, I haue thought good an other waie to trie the conuersion both of the ignorant Papists that are yet perswaded
their religion to be sound and true, and that wherein they please God, and also of other heretikes and profane persons themselues, if it be possible, and likewise the confirmation and strengthening of such as professing our re∣ligion in shewe, are notwithstanding vnstaied and wauering, and therefore readie to be drawne any other waie. To all these therefore I doe here offer these generall arguments fol∣lowing, in defence of our religion, and against poperie, so briefly and plainely set downe, that euen all that are not able to goe to the price of bookes of particular controuersies, or that cannot intende the reading of them to waigh and conceiue them, may yet generally see the truth of our religion, and the falshood of poperie, and seeing these things, may likewise more seriously consider of our religion: and contrarily of the most daungerous, fearefull, and wretched estate of all Papists, and likewise of all other that are not as yet of our religion; that so the one sort may not forsake our holy fel∣lowship, and the other may ioyne with vs: and that both ioyned together in one truth, may zealously professe it, bringing forth plentifull fruits thereof. Neither would I haue men whol∣ly to content them-selues with these generall reasons, neglecting particular treatises of parti∣cular controuersies, but rather by this treatise to be the more encouraged to the reading of the other, and to be made the fitter, and euery waie the more able to iudge of them.
3 That all men may the better see my mea∣ning in this whole treatise, and know the state of the whole cause: by our religion, I doe here vnderstand the religion now established & pub∣likely by publike authoritie professed in Eng∣land; and such other Churches as haue iustly for∣saken Rome, and are in good measure well re∣formed according to the word of God contai∣ned in holy Scripture. To speake more plainly, I meane by our religion that substance & doctrine of faith, wherein we dissent from the Church of Rome, and doe all of vs consent among our selues, both we with those other Churches, and those other Churches with vs in this land. By po∣perie like wise I vnderstand, all that doctrine of the church of Rome, which differeth and dissen∣teth from this our religion, & the doctrine held and professed publikely here in England, & o∣ther Churches in like manner reformed. In this treatise therefore I doe vndertake by plaine and euident argumēts fit for the capacitie of all sorts both poore and rich, both learned & vnlearned, though they can read or vnderstand onely the english tongue, to prooue that this our religion is of God, and that which God as touching the substance and doctrine thereof, doth well ac∣cept and like of: and contrarily, by like argu∣ments as plainely to shew that poperie is not of God, and therefore also not in any account with him, but abominable and detestable in in his sight.
THE FIRST ARGVMENT TOVCHING THE breeding and begetting of true religion. THVS hauing declared both the reasons that moued me to this work, and likewise the state of the whole cause hādled herein, I will now enter into the arguments thē∣selues. Here therefore first of al, let vs consider the chiefe and principall meanes: whereby both that religion that is of God, and acceptable vnto God is at the first be∣gunne and framed, and afterward further built and perfected in them that atteine vnto it, and also of the like meanes, whereby poperie is at the first hatched, and afterward brooded & fur∣ther strengthoned. Touching the former, it is most certaine that it is alwayes begunne by the word of God. For the Apostle S. Paule expressly teacheth vs. Rom. 10. 17. That faith is by hearing
the word of god preached. S. Iames also chap. 1. 18. saith, that we are begotten againe by the word of truth. Our Sauiour likewise in the parable of the seede. Matth. 13. plainely sheweth that, that onely is good ground into the which the seede of god his word falling bringeth forth good fruite, and so likewise that, that onely is to be accounted good fruite which springeth from the seede of the word. As the word of god is the only ordinary meanes whereby faith and regeneration are begunne in euerie man whome God will haue to be sa∣ued: so also it is the especiall meanes, whereby they are to be further built till they be finished. S. Peter exhorteth the Christians to whome he wrote, that as they were allreadie borne a new by the word of God. 1. Pet. 1. 23. So also as new borne babes they should desire the sincere milke of the word, that they might grow thereby, chap. 2. verse. 2. Saint Paule likewise hauing first exhorted the Thessalonians, not to quench the spirit, which they had receiued, that is to cherish the spirite, mea∣ning the worke of faith & regeneration wrought by the spirit (a Metonymy, of the cause for the effect) presently admonisheth them, not to despise prophecying. 1. Thess. 5. 20. Where by prophecy∣ing (by a Synecdoche, of the speciall for the gene∣rall,) he meaneth the preaching onely of the same word by the which before they had recei∣ued the Spirite. Our Sauiour Christ also in his E∣pistles to the seuen Churches of Asia, Reuelat. 2. and 3. Exhorting those Churches to repentance, constancie, keeping of the thinges they had re∣ceiued,
& the encreasing of them, addeth in the ende of those Epistles this generall admonition, Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirite saith to the Churches, whereby he giueth all men to vnderstand, that hearing of that which the spirite said to the Churches, was the especiall meanes for the working and encreasing of the thinges commended in those Epistles to the Churches. 2 All this hitherto spoken of the word of God, is to be vnderstood onely of the word of God written and conteined in the holy Scrip∣tures. For whatsoeuer the Papistes say of their vnwritten verities, as equiualent to the doctrine of the Scriptures, yet that there are no such vn∣written verities of such authoritie, and so to be esteemed as it hath beene sufficiētly prooued by that worthy man, & of holy memorie M. Whi∣taker, and other learned men that haue particu∣larly delt in that cause, so is it also euidēt by that generall admonition before spoken of, giuen to the seuen Churches, because in it by hearing that which the spirit saith, is not meant any vn∣written veritie, but that which before Christ Ie∣sus had commanded Iohn to write to the seuen Churches. 3 These thinges beeing thus euident tou∣ching that religion that is of God, and accepta∣ble vnto God, let vs now see by what meanes Poperie is hatched and brooded. Here let a view be taken of the Papists within our owne land and abroad, yea of all whatsoeuer, wheresoeuer and
whensoeuer; which of all them may be said to be begotten and wonne to that religion, by the preaching of the word of God comprehended in the Scriptures? which of all these can be said to haue beene confirmed and strengthened in that same religion by the same worde? Verelie it is most certaine that poperie is begunne, encrea∣sed and perfected not by that word, but by tra∣ditions onely and doctrines of men. The more men are purelie instructed in the word of God, the more they heare & consider of the doctrine of the Scriptures, the further are they from all poperie; the more they dislike and abhorre the same. Againe, the lesse men are acquainted with the word of God, the seeldomer they heare it, or reade it, the more capable certainlie are they of all poperie, the more also are they confirmed and strengthened, yea rather hardened in all poperie. This is most euident; First, because as the pure preaching of the word of God decayed in the world, so poperie grew and encreased; Se∣condly, because sithence the sincere preaching of this word hath beene againe reuiued in these latter times: the more hath poperie wasted and pined according to the prophecy of the Apostle who hath said, that the Lord should consume An∣tichrist with the spirite of his mouth. 2. Thess. 2. 8. Thirdly, the same is manifest by diuers examples of places and persons in our owne land. For where the Gospell is most plentifully and truely preached, there are fewest Papistes, and where the Gospel is least preached, there is the greatest
number of papistes. Some places which were most popish of all the cuntrey where they are, before they had the preaching of the word, are now sithence that god in mercie hath vouchsafed the same vnto them, most free of poperie & pa∣pistes. My selfe as young as I am, did know the time long sithence the happie Reigne of her Ma∣iestie, when we in Kent was most accounted & also was indeede the most popish place of all that countrie. But sithence it hath pleased God to send vnto them the ministerie of his word, poperie hath there vanished as the mist before the Sunne: and now I thinke it is lesse noted for popery, then any other place, especially then any place which hath not had the word, as that hath had it. Yea few places are more forward thē that in true profession of our religion. The like may be said of many other places, both in the South, and also in the North partes of England. Again, who are the most obstinate papists in the lād? are they not those that neuer haue heard the word of god preached vnto thē? or that hauing heard it, are fallen away from it? and what is the cause why manie are so obstinate in poperie? Is it not because they will not be dravven to heare that word of God neither yet to reade it? Truelie I doubt not but that if it might please God to giue vnto them willing mindes to heare or read the Scriptures, with a true desire indeede to keepe and embrace the doctrine in them con∣teined, how contrarie soeuer to that which in times past they haue held or doe yet hold, then
the more they should heare or reade, the more they would dislike of their former religion. In the meane time whilst they care not for hearing or reading, whilest they despise the Scriptures, whilest they raile of the hearing and reading of them (as many of the most learned papistes do) what do they else but be wray, that they are not yet begotten vnto God by them, neither the children of God, & that therefore their religion is not of God. For if they were begotten vnto god, and that by the doctrine of the Scriptures, if they were the children of God, as they ima∣gine and boast of them selues, would they not delight to heare his word? at least would they not delight to reade the word by whomesoeuer brought vnto them? what louing child is not glad to heare the voyce of his louing father, or to read at least his letters sent by others vnto him from the place where him selfe is? He that is of God, heareth God his word. Ioh. 8. 47. If they were, the sheepe of Christ, they would heare his voyce. Iohn. 10. 27. If they suspect our preaching of the word, yet they would at the least come to those places, where the worde is read, or they would reade it at home by themselues, in such a tongue as wherein they might vnderstand it. Sith therefore they care not for the hearing or rea∣ding it, they shewe they are not begotten to God by it. 4 As touching our religion it is begotten by the word of god, it is confirmed & strengthe∣ned by the word of God. As mens traditions
grew in request with men, so our religion at the first decaied. As the vanitie of mens traditions began to be discerned & abolished by the brea∣king forth of the glorious light of the Scriptures out of the cloude of poperie, so our religion was againe renewed and encreased. The more com∣mon that the Scriptures are, or haue beene, the more doth our religion flourish, and hath flou∣rished from time to time. The more men heare the Scriptures, search the Scriptures, meditate the Scriptures, and pray vnto God for the true vnderstanding of the Scriptures: the more also do men mislike of poperie, and grow into loue of our religion. The Papistes themselues see this to be so, and can not denie it, therefore doe they by all meanes they can, not onely accuse the Scrip∣tures of such difficultie & obscuritie, as whereby they discourage the vnlearned sort from reading of them, but also they vtterly denie them to the common people in their vulgar tongue. On the contrarie, they care not how common their vn∣written verities be. If they feared not the ouer∣throw of their religion, and the growing of ours by the vse of the Scriptures, why should they so streightly restraine the common people from it? if they thought as they speake and write, that their vnwritten verities were of God, aswell as the Scriptures: why should they make thē more common then the Scriptures? Is it because they thinke them more easie, and therefore fitter for the capacitie of the common people then the Scriptures? This will not stand with that, which
they make the ground of them, and which they pretend for their speciall warranr: namely with the wordes of our Sauiour to his disciples, Other thinges haue I to say vnto you, but yee cannot beare them now &c. Iohn. 16. 12. For by these wordes it is manifest, that those things which Christ had further to say vnto his disciples, were harder thē those that then he did speake, & are now writtē, otherwise he would not haue added as a reason, why he did for a time conceale them, but yee can not beare them now. 5 Now to finish this point, forasmuch as that religion which God accepteth and liketh of, is wrought by the preaching of his owne word, forasmuch as Poperie hath not such be∣ginning, but is onely engendred by the slyme of traditions, and doctrines of men. Finally for∣asmuch as the religion now publikelie professed in England is both begotten by that immortall seede, and doth also grow to further perfection, by that pure milke of the word of God, therefore I conclude for my first argument that poperie is onely such as those slimie traditions & doctrines are, whereof it is ingēdred, and that our religion is not of man, but of God, and acceptable vnto God.
THE SECOND ARGVMENT TOVCHING THE PRE∣seruing and maintayning of true religion. THE same is also manifest by the second meanes whereby poperie hath bine from time to time, and yet is vpholden and mainteined. For as touching this, what shall we say of the impudencie of the Papistes, I meane such as account themselues the learned Papistes, both in falsifying the aun∣cient Fathers, & also in alleadging patches onely of their writinges, as making against vs, but lea∣uing out some part of the same sentēces or some sentence going before or following after: where∣by both that Father his minde is made euident, and also our doctrine approoued? Is not this to deale with the Fathers, as the deuill doth with the Scripture against our Sauiour. Mat. 4. 6. And that the Papists doe thus abuse the readers by ci∣ting the Fathers in such sort is sufficiently shew∣ed, by those that haue written in particular con∣trouersies. To proue the APOCRYPHA bookes Canonicall Scriptures, they alleadge the testimonie of Augustin lib. 2. de doctrina Chri∣stiana.
cap. 8. Yet that Augustin did not so vn∣derstand the word Canonicall, as they applie his testimonie is manifest in the same place, let the learned reader see Whitak. Controuers. 1. quest. 1. Cap. 4. Pag. 15. In like manner they deale with Ambrose, whose testimonie they alleadge for proofe of this: that manie things are hard in the Scriptures, thereby indeed to discourage all vn∣learned, from reading of the Scriptures, as though all things were hard in them: and yet in the verie same place, Ambrose also saith, that in the Scriptures is matter fitt for all persons to drinke first, second, and last; where by he also teacheth that as there are some things to be drunke last in the riuers of the Scriptures, that is, not till men be well grounded in knowledge and iudgement, so also there is for yong beginners & such as haue not entred, or that haue made but litle entrance. So they deale with Augustin oftentimes in the same question of the perspicuity of the Scripture, as also the learned reader may see Whitak. quest. 4. pag. 276. In like manner they deale with the Fathers almost in all other questions and con∣trouersies; Sometime also they alleadge the testi∣monies of the Fathers out of some of their books not regarding how they haue either opened their minde or retracted their former errors in other of their bookes. Sometime againe they pleade the authoritie of some Fathers in citing testimo∣nies of their bookes, which they wrote after that they were fallen into some heresie. So they al∣leadge the testimonie of Tertullian out of such
workes as he made after that he was a Monta∣nist. Whitaker. quest. 6. pag. 449. Finallie often∣times they are not ashamed to name the Fathers in particular questions as if they were on their side, whereas the cleane contrarie is manifestlie prooued and shewed by our writers, and is like∣wise euident to them that are acquainted with the writings of the Fathers. For proofe hereof let the reader looke their preface to the translation of the new testament into English by thēselues, and likewise reade M. Fulke his aunswer to the same. 2 For their first reason, why they translate the new Testament according to the vulgar la∣tine translation, and not according to the greeke originall is this. It is so auncient (say they) that it was vsed in the Church of God aboue 1300. yeares agoe as appeareth by the Fathers of those times. But M. Fulke sheweth: first that no one translation was in those daies commonly rèceiued; Secondly, by many examples that Tertullian, Cyprian, the Cler∣gie it selfe of Rome in Cyprian his time, Hierome, Arnobius, Hilarie, and Ambrose, did not followe this vulgar translation, but did reade the text farre diuersly from the same. In their fourth reason they commend it as that which for the most part euer since Hierom his time hath beene vsed in the Chur∣ches seruice, expounded in Sermons, alleadged and interpreted in the Commentaries and writings of auncient fathers of the latine Church. But M. Fulk prooueth and sheweth, First, that their Church seruice is not so auncient as Augustine his time,
many of their Church lessons beeing taken out of Beda and other writers liuing many hundred yeares after Saint Augustine his age. Secondly, that such parts of the Scripture as seeme to haue beene of most auncient times vsed in the church of Rome are not taken out of their vulgar text; and thirdly, that since Ierome his time Optatus Melevitanus, Fuigentius, Primasius, Prosper, Aquitanicus, and Leo likewise himselfe Bishop of Rome did alleadge and interpret the texts of Scripture much differing from this vulgar translation. 3 The like may be said of their belying the Fathers in their notes afterward vpon the text it selfe. Vpon the first petition of the Lords praier, Matth. 6. 12. for their olde distinction of sinnes veniall and mortall, they quote certaine places of Augustine to beare the vnlearned rea∣der in hand, that Augustine was the author or a fauourer thereof. Notwithstanding Augustine in those places quoted by them, vseth no such distinction, but onely speaketh of small sinnes, which no man denieth. Vpon 1. Cor. 13. 10. they saie that S. Augustine, lib. 22. de Civit. cap. 29. prooueth that the Saints in heauen haue more perfect knowledge of our affaires here, then they had when they liued here. And yet S. Augustine in that place speaketh not of the knowledge of the Saints now in heauen touching our present af∣faires here in earth, but onely speaketh generally of the perfect knowledge which all Saints both dead and yet liuing shall haue in the resurrecti∣on. Aboue all other places I wish the reader to
see how foully they falsifie Chrysostome for de∣fence of Peters supremacie vpon Ioh. 21. 17 yea how common this fault of falsifying the fathers is with them by the iudgement of themselues, euen of the Vniuersitie of Doway approoued by the Censors according to the decree of the Coū∣cell of Trent, concerning the book of Bertrame. For this Vniuersitie acknowledgeth how they doe oftentimes excuse auncient writers, beeing by Protestants opposed vnto them in disputati∣on, and how by deuising some pretie stifts they denie them, and doe faigne some commodious sense vnto them: and therefore whereas it see∣meth there had beene some consultation for the vtter suppressing of the saide booke of Bertram, the said Vniuersitie concludeth that the foresaid booke of Bertram should rather beeing amen∣ded (that is, clipped and mangled at their plea∣sure) be tolerated, then altogether forbidden. See this more largely in the answer of M. Fulke to their note vpon the place of Ioh. 21. 17. but e∣specially let the learned see the same in their Index expurgatorius, pag. 11. and 12. where also the reader shall see what they commaund to be cleane put out in that booke of Bertram, and what also to be changed or expounded accor∣ding to such sense as they imagine or would haue to be of his words. All this their iuggling with the people in crying out, all the Fathers, all the Fathers, are on our side, might be shewed more plentifully, but that it is not fit for this treatise. In like manner they are not ashamed
to belie our owne writers, and to charge them with such wordes, as they neuer vsed. So they deale with that worthie, and reuerend man D. Fulke, as himselfe sheweth in his Defence of English translations of the Bible, in his answer to the 49. section of the preface, and of the 18. and 37. sections of the first chapter, and in ma∣ny other places. The like may be saide of their fathering new things vpon ancient writers: see Calvins instit. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 20. Doth truth neede to be vpholden by such notorious lies? 4 But all this is nothing to their intollerable impietie both in adding vnto, and also in detra∣cting from the writings of the Fathers what they list, to make the Fathers to speake nothing but that which they will haue thē for to speake. Yea thus to deale with the writings and works of the Fathers euen in the printing of them: that their whole volumes beeing so printed, the rea∣ders may thinke, that the Fathers did speake and write as now their bookes are printed. In like manner they deale with such notes as are by some new writers added to the margent of the Fathers writings for the better directing of the reader in reading those writings. So also deale they with such tables as by late writers are ga∣thered and set in the beginning or ending of the Fathers works, for helping the reader more ea∣sily to find that which he desireth in the Fathers. Whatsoeuer in such marginall notes or in such tables, may any waie helpe the reader to finde any thing, or the better to vnderstand any thing
in the Fathers either against their errours, or for the truth receiued by vs, that haue they by pub∣lique authoritie and act of the Tridentine Coū∣cell, and of the King of Spaines Edict, comman∣ded to be blotted and rased out of the books of the Fathers in the new printing of them. And for the better doing thereof, they haue set forth a table of all such things as they will haue so ra∣sed out by the authoritie aforesaide. This table they call Index expurgatorius. And this table though they kept from vs a while, yet now we haue by the industrie and paines of Junius: who also in his preface thereunto testifieth, that at Lyons in the yeare 1559. he beeing familiarly acquainted with a printer, whose name he saith was Lodovicus Sauarius, did there see Ambrose his works most fairely and exquisitely printed: so that he could not but admire the artificiall and beautifull countenance thereof. But the printer seeing him so well to like thereof, and so much to be delighted there with, told him not∣withstanding that if he were to buie Ambrose his workes, he would rather buie of any other edition then of that. Iunius maruailing at that speach demanded the reason thereof. The prin∣ter therefore shewed him from vnder his table certaine leaues of the auncient copies of Am∣brose, some cancelled wholly, some other in part onely rased, telling him also that those were the patternes of those leaues which but fewe daies before he had truly printed, according to the ex∣ample of the auncient and certen patterne. But
said he further, two Franciscan Fryers by autho∣ritie haue put out all these leaues, and comman∣ded these to be put into their places, contrarie to all truth of the former bookes. What they haue commaunded to be rased out of the marginall notes and tables of the Fathers doth plentifully and particularly appeare by the Index it selfe so set forth by Iunius. Nowe let any indifferent reader iudge of their religion, the which by these meanes they are forced to vphold and maintain. Certenly if their religion were of God, it would not neede any such proppes of falshood and wickednes. Yea if thēselus or at least the chiefest of them, thought it to be of God, they would neuer set such rotten shores to keepe it vp. 5 Neither ought men much to maruel at their clipping of the writings of men in such sort, sith they deale in like sort with the pretious come of god his owne scriptures. For first of al they haue beene bould to take away the whole second commandement out of the decalogue, that so they might beare the common people in hand that there is nothing in the scriptures against i∣mages, or at the least nothing in the morall law to binde vs now as well as the Iewes in former time: and that this their dealing might not be espied by any defect in the number of the commaundements, they haue deuided the tenth commaundement into two. Both these things are manifest by their commō primmers. The like they doe with the Scriptures in many other places, as appeareth by their vulgar tran∣slation
& edition of the Scriptures in latine: the which although it were not theirs at the first, yet because they condemne all other, and do onelie commaund this as authenticall, forbidding also anie man to appeale from the same to the origi∣nall text in the Hebrew and Greeke, therefore it is to be accepted theirs. In that translation and edition many things are wanting that are in the originall text, and manie things also corrupted. In the 9. of Matth. verse. 13. Our Sauiour saith. I came not to call the righteous but the sinners to re∣pentance. In their trāslation are these two words to repentāce left out. Rom. 11. 6. All these words are wanting in their translation. If of workes then not of grace, or else were worke no more worke. Ioh. 14. 26. For these words, he shal teach you al things, and bringe all things to your remembrance which I haue told you. For these words I saie which I haue told you, their translation saith which I shall tell you. Thus they reade for help of their traditions to make the common people beleeue, that Christ speaketh in this place of some thinges, which he would speak afterward, that he had nor spoken before. Manie other places there are in like man∣ner either clipped or corrupted. If their cause were good, why should they susteine it by such vile meanes? 6 Let vs here further remember their excee∣ding crueltie, and most bloudie dealing, for the continuall maintenance of their religion. If fire & faggot had not better holpen them, then prea∣ching & disputing, their religion had neuer been
so vniuersall as it is. For although the blood of the Martires be called the seed of the Church, and haue been a notable meanes to confirme many in the profession of the Gospell. Yet other also haue thereby been drawne from it, and for feare haue receiued poperie. As therefore the Priestes, Scribes, & Pharises, and other Iewes, when they were not able by the Scriptures to resist the wise∣dome of our Sauiour, of Stephan, of the Apo∣stles, & the spirit that spake in them, did vse force and violence for their last & chiefest argument: euen so haue the Priestes, Scribes, and Pharises of the Church of Rome alwaies done. Such al∣waies hath bin their crueltie, that as diuers wild beasts and birdes make the flesh and blood of o∣ther to be their nourishment and life, so also the blood of the Protestants hath been their speciall releefe. The crueltie exercised here in our owne lād, as sometime before, so especially in the late time of Queene Marie doth plētifully witnesse the same. The like may be said of the Spanish in∣quisitiō the chiefe meanes of vpholding pope∣rie, not onely in Spaine it selfe, but also in manie other countries. The crueltie thereof is so great and barbarous, that the crueltie of Nero, Domi∣tian, and all other the like professed enemies vn∣to Christ Iesus and his Gospell is nothing to be compared thereto. The copies thereof are to be seene printed in english for iustifying that which I write. A man would thinke that all the deuills in hell should neuer haue deuised such tortures and most exquisite punishments, except it were
thus manifest. Here also is to be considered the most bloodie massaker in Fraunce Anno 1572. in the which of noble men, gentlemen, lear∣ned men, & cōmon persons thought to be prote∣stants in Paris were slaine and most violently & cruellie murthered without anie proceeding by order of law, the number at the least of ten thou∣sand within three daies, and within lesse then one moneth presently after in manie other cities & townes of France, were in like sort slaine & mur∣thered 20000. more. So that as it should haue bin with the Iewes through all the prouinces of Ahashuerosh, if the cursed purpose of Hamā had proceeded to effect; so also was it with all the knowne or suspected protestants in Fraunce, v∣pon whom the merciles Papists could lay hāds: what doth this else witnesse but that the religion of the Papists is like vnto that wicked decree of Ahashuerosh & from the same fountaine? Nei∣ther may this be said to haue bin a fault onely of that nation. For the great ioye of the Pope, with all his Cardinalls at Rome, their procession, their gunshott, and singing Te Deum in honor of the bloody act, doe euidently shew both the appro∣bation of the thing done by the whole Church of Rome, and also that the said Pope and Cardi∣nalls were acquainted with the matter before, and had an hand & stroke in it. I confesse I note this out of the booke of Martires, but no Papist is therefore to suspect the truth of the matter: for this historie there reported is but briefly gathe∣red out of the French Chronicles and Histories,
which do more largely describe the same. Besids this act is so late & was so notorious at the first committing thereof, that there needeth not the testimony of anie writer to be suspected therein. Thus we see that a piller of blood is the chiefe piller of the Romish Church such as now it is. 7 The like obiection made against our reli∣gion from the execution of manie Seminarie priestes and Iesuites in our owne land hath bin sufficiently aunswered by others. For they haue not been executed to maintaine and vphold our religion, but for their haynous treasons whereby they haue sought the sacred life of her Maiestie in bringing in of forreyners here to vsurpe the kingdome, and the ouerthrow of the whole land their owne naturall cūtrey. Therefore this horri∣ble treason against both their Prince and coun∣trey, beeing especially authorized by the Pope himself, and his Clergie, not onely for the sedu∣cing of the subiects from all obedience to her highnes, but also for the shedding of her blood, as also the like treasons of manie other to the same intent, attēpted by the same authoritie doe plainely disclaime their religion as not beeing of God neither acceptable vnto God. For truth seeketh no corners, truth requireth no such stilts to goe by. Neither did our Sauiour vse such meanes to commend himselfe & his doctrine, though he might haue commaunded more then twelue le∣gions of Angels, neither after his ascension did the Apostles or anie of thē so further the gospel. 8 To these meanes before mentioned I may
add their foule abusing of the simple people with pretended reuelations & lying miracles, thereby to make them to account their religion to be as diuine and from heauen, as by the same meanes well looked into, it doth manifestlie appeare to be altogether diuolish and from hell it self. Such was the practise of certaine Monkes & Friers with Elizabeth Barton a Nunne in Kent whom they called by the name of the holie maid of Kent. This holie maide by the deuice of the foresaid Monkes and Fryers, fained her selfe to liue with no other food then that which was brought vnto her immediately by the Angells of heauen, shee made also as though oftentimes shee laie in a traunce wherein shee did straungly alter her coū∣tenance with the other partes of her bodie, and spake manie things in commendation of Idola∣trie, pilgrimage, and other like points of popery, and likewise in derogation of the Gospell, & in disallowance of King Henrie his diuorce from the Ladie Katherine the late wife of his elder brother Prince Arthur, threatning as it were by way of prophecying that if he proceeded there∣in, he should not be king one moneth after. This knauerie beeing found out both shee and her a∣bettors, namely certen Munks, Fryers, & Priests, were executed for it. See the booke of Martyres, printed 1583. p. 1054. And other histories thereof. The like is reported in the same booke. p. 1291. out of the ninth booke of Sleydan his commen∣taries, of certaine fryers of Orleance in Fraunce, who because the Maiors wife of the citie vpon
her death bed had desired her husband that shee might be buried without the solemnities then commonlie vsed at the funeralls of such persons, whereby their noses were wiped of a great part of their accustomed gaine, caused a boye in the time of their night seruice to make a straunge noyse in one of the vaults of the church where shee was buried as if he had been a spirit. This boyish spirit, or spirituall boye thus inspired by the deuill and the fryers, and coniured like wise after their popish and deuelish manner, hauing signified that he was a dumb spirit by signes al∣so shewed that he was the soule of the said Ma∣iors wife before buried, now condemned in hell, for the heresie of Martin Luther. This frierlie prancke being found out, the fryers by authority of the King were committed to prison where they continued a long time before they were re∣leased. Let the reader see this more largelie in the booke of Martirs & Sleidan his commentaries. As these and such like meanes continuallie applied to shore vp popery, do shew the rottēnes there∣of, so our religion continuing and standing right notwithstanding manie stormes and tempests against it, doth shew it selfe to be sound and vp∣holden by him onely whose power none is able to resist. But of this more shallbe spoken after∣ward vpon other occasion.
THE THIRD ARGVMENT TOVCHING THE SVB∣iect matter of true religion. AS these meanes hitherto spoken of doe mightelie speake against poperie, and teach the verie sim∣plest that are, that it is not of God: so also doth the matter & substāce of popery speake as much. For it is partly directlie contratie vnto, and part∣lie farre differing from the matter and substance of that religion which God himselfe hath com∣mended in his Scriptures, and the which no mā can denie to be acceptable vnto god. This is ma∣nifest, first of all, because that religion, which the Scriptures commend, is true knowledge of God, of Christ Iesus, of the truth. The Lord saith by the Prophet Ose. I desire mercie and not sacrifice and the knowledge of god more then burnt offrings. Ose. 6. 6. Oftentimes also the Lord reproueth and complaineth of the ignorance, & want of know∣ledge in his people, as the cause of all euills both which they committed, & also which came vpō
them, as Ier. 9. 3. and in many other places. S. Peter also saith in the name of all the Apostles, We beleeue and know that thou art the Christ, the Sonne of the liuing God, Ioh. 6. 69. Our Sauiour Christ saith, This is life eternall that they knovve thee to be the onely very God, and him whome thou hast sent Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. 3. He like wise pro∣miseth the knowledge of the truth to all his true disciples, Ioh. 8. 32. The Apostle saith, God will haue all men to be saued, and come to the know∣ledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2. 4. And againe he de∣scribeth faith to be the knowledge of the truth ac∣cording to godlines, Tit. 1. 1. He forbiddeth also the Corinthians, not to be children in vnderstan∣ding, 1. Cor. 14. 20. The Ephesians also not to be vnwise, but to vnderstand what the will of the Lord is, Eph. 5. 17. Finally, the Apostle S. Peter bid∣deth the Christians to whome he wrote, to ioyne vertue with faith, and with vertue knowledge. 2. Pet. 1. 5. By these and many other the like pla∣ces we see, that the Scriptures commend know∣ledge, as the first matter of faith and religion. We see also what knowledge they doe com∣mend, namely of God, of Christ, of the truth according to godlines, of the will of God, of the Scriptures themselues, and that to all sorts of men. Now what shall we saie is the matter of Poperie? Truly to speake according to the na∣ture of things, poperie hath indeede no matter at all, but is a meere vacuitie or emptines for the most part. For may it be saide that poperie is knowledge, and that of these things? No cer∣tenly:
but it is a principle of poperie, that igno∣rance is the mother of deuotion. Therefore the whole popish Church generally condemneth all knowledge of God, and of the scriptures in the common people: prohibiting them the vse of any part of the scriptures (as we haue heard before) and teaching and commaunding them onely to beleeue as the Church beleeueth. This they saie is sufficient faith and sufficient religi∣on. And indeede touching deuotion to their re∣ligion, they speake most truly. For no man will haue any deuotion vnto it, that knowerh ought of God in the scriptures. But to beleeue as the Church, that is, as their Church beleeueth, is nei∣ther true faith nor the shadow of true faith, but rather of faith in the deuills. The most part also of them when they teach this faith, haue it not, but can onely say that they haue it, and that they doe beleeue as the Church beleeueth. The most (I saie) doe onely saie that they doe so beleeue. They doe not in deede beleeue, as the Church beleeueth. For how can they, sith they knowe not what the Church beleeueth? Yet are their bare words taken & allowed for currant, good, lawfull faith of Rome. I graunt with griefe, that many amongst vs know not the principles of our religion: yet no man alloweth such igno∣rance, but euery godly man condemneth it, and is grieued for it. But be it that they did in deede beleeue as their Romish Church beleeueth, and that they knew as much as the best Doctour and all their Romish Doctours know touching their
religion, yet this is not ynough. For now to enter into the particular matter of their religiō. First the Scripture teacheth vs oftē∣times, that there is but one God, one Lord, one Mediatour betweene God & man, Christ Iesus▪ but poperie teacheth that there are many gods, & many mediatours. For doth it not cōmunicate the peculiar properties of God, the vbiquitie or vniuersall presence, and such like vnto the body of Christ? and doe they not so make an other god thereof? doe they not attribute the doing thereof to seuerall saints for seuerall countries, diseases, and other seuerall affaires, which is onely proper to God, whereby they make so many seuerall gods, as their are saints in their Kalender? doe they not also ascribe power to forgiue sinnes vnto the Pope, and to euery sha∣uen priest, which yet God challengeth onely to himselfe, and which also their forefathers ac∣knowledged to be God his owne due? Yea doe they not in their Decretals, Distinctions, Canons, and such other bookes allowed by generall au∣thoritie of their Church, in most plaine words write that of him which is a so the onely prero∣gatiue-royall of God? verely it can not be deni∣ed. For proofe hereof to the reader, I will set downe some of their owne words, that no man may challenge me of a slander, neither the pope himselfe bring any action against me for belying his holines. These therefore are the words of the glosse vpon the distinction. Jn canone Quanto de translatione episcopi, titulo 7o. Papa dicitur ha∣sere
cleste arbitrium, & ideo etiam naturam re∣sum immutat, substantialia vnius rei applicando a∣ij: Et de nihilo potest aliquid facere, & sententiam quae nulla est aliquam facere, quia in his, quae vult, cest proratione voluntas. Nec est qui ei dicat, curitafacis? Ipse enim potest supra ius dispensare, & de iniustitia facere iustitiam, corrigendo iura & mu∣tando: Nam plenitudinem obtinet potestatis. That is (that I may interpret these wordes, to let the most ignorāt see what blasphemies popery tea∣cheth.) The Pope is said to haue ā heauēly power: & therefore he changeth the nature of things by apply∣ing the substantiall properties of one thing to an o∣ther. And he can make something of nothing: and that sentence which was none (or nothing worth) to be somewhat (or of force) because in those thinges that he will, to him will is for reason. Neither is there anie man that may say, why doest thou so? For he can dispense aboue right, and of that which is in∣iustice make iustice, correcting and changing lawes, because he hath full authoritie. Who doth not see by these wordes that they make the Pope ano∣ther God? for to change the nature of thinges, as God turned Lott his wife into a pillar of salt, made Baalam his asse to speake, and gaue Ne∣buchadnezzar the heart or qualities of a beast, to make something of nothing, to make iustice of iniustice, as God is said to ferch light out of darknes, to make his owne will sufficient rea∣son, to dispense aboue right, to correct & change lawes, to haue ful authority to do al these things, is it not proper vnto God? An other also of their
doctors saith, Excepto peccato, Papapotest quasi omnia facere quae Deus potest. Sinne excepted, the pope can doe in manner all things thai God can doe. Iohannes also Capistranus (a fit name for one so well worthie of an halter) of the authoritie of the Pope, and of the Church. p. 93. B. writeth to the same effect, Vbi quaeritur ad quid protenditur au∣thorit as Papae, respondeo breuiter, quòd ad omne bo∣num & nullū malum; est enim quas. Deus in terris, maior homine, minor Deo, plenitudinem obtinens potestatis. That is, If it be asked, how farre the pope his authoritie extendeth, I aunswer briefly, that it extendeth to all that is good, to nothing that is euill, for he is as God in the earth, greater then man, and lesse then God, hauing full authoritie. Marke good reader, how they are not ashamed euen to attri∣bute these words vnto him, whereby the Apo∣stle doth describe Antechrist. 2. Thess. 2. 4. say∣ing that he should sitt as God &c. So God will haue themselues to acknowlenge the Pope to be Antichrist, though they intend no such thing, but rather to make him God, or at the least pew∣fellow with God. In their Decretalls also they write, that the Pope is neither god nor man, but the Viccar of God, and mixt or compounded of God and man. Oftentimes also they ascribe vnto him all power aswell in heauen and hell, as in earth. But for further view of the monstrous blasphemies of the Pope, I refer the reader to the large descrip∣tion of him which is in the booke of Martyrs, in the verie end of King Henrie the 7. his reigne, & in the verie ende also of the first volume, where
plentifully are laid downe both their wordes of him, and also the places of their owne bookes quoted, in which any man may finde them. By these things it is euidēt that although they think great scorne to be charged, to teach that there are many Gods, yet in truth by communicating that vnto other, which is God his onely due, they teach as much. God himself hath said, that he will not giue his glorie to any other, but they scotch not, they feare not to giue it to manie other. 3 The like do they touching the Mediatour: For they teach that there are manie Mediators, yea so many as there are Saints, and a great many more. Yea they teach that the Virgine Marie is not onely a Mediatour, but also a Mediatour a∣boue Christ himselfe. For proofe I will note their owne words, but yet onely in English for breui∣ties sake. Thus therefore they speake to the Vir∣gine Marie as I do faithfully trāslate their words in a certaine horarie &c. Reioyce O celestiall ma∣tron, triumphantly praise God thy Sauiour, which hath made thee singular. Thou wast content to be called the handmaid of Iesus Christ; but as the di∣uine law teacheth, thou art his Ladie; For right and reason requireth that the mother should be aboue the Sonne. Therefore aske humblie and commaund loftilie that he guide vs, that are here in the euening or twilight of the world vnto the supreame kingdom; And againe in the same place. Thou alone art without example, whome god hath chosen to be Me∣diat our betweene God and man, the repairer of the
world, the end of destruction, the washing away from sinnes, the way of counsell, the trust of reward, the ladder of hèauen, the gate of paradise. In their com∣mon praiers also they call her the mother of grac the mother of mercie, and they pray her to defend them from their enemies, and to receiue them in the houre of death. Againe they call her the certai hope of them that are in miserie, the mother of Or∣phanes, the Sauiour of the oppressed, the phisick of the sicke, all to all. What can be more contrarie to the doctrine and matter of religion? for this is not onely to make her another Mediatour, but also another God: and indeed if she be another Me∣diatour, shee must also of necessitie be another god: because there cā be no Mediatour, which is not also god. Neither▪ is this much to be marue∣led at, for they also pray to god to be heard, not onely for the blood of Christ, but also for the blood of the Martyres. Yea of Thomas Becket, which was no Martyr, but iustlie put to death for his insolēctreason. Yea they teach that euery mā must also be his owne Sauiour, that is, merit his saluatiō by his own good works, so that whereas the Scripture teacheth vs, that a man is onelie iustified and saued by a true and liuelie faith in Christ Iesus, Poperie teacheth that a man is iustified not by such a faith alone, but also by workes partlie of himselfe, and partly of other. 4 So the Scripture teacheth that Christ Ie∣sus is a perfect Sauiour, which hath redeemed vs from all iniquitie, and that with once offring vp of himselfe, once I say for all and for euer, but
popery teacheth, that he hath onely satisfied for sinnes before Baptisme, and that he must dailie be offred vp, by the hands of some greasie priest. The Scripture teacheth, that there is certainely no cōdemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, that they that loue the brethren are of the truth, and shal before him assure their hearts, that they shall neuer perish out of the handes of Christ Iesus, &c, but poperie teacheth that it is presūp∣tion for any mā to say that he is assured of these things. The Scripture teacheth vs that Christ his humanitie is in heauen, and shalbe in heauen till his second cōming vnto iudgement, but popery teacheth vs that it is euen now vpon the earth, & that in manie places at one and the same time. The Scripture teacheth vs, that Christ his bodie glorified doth so retaine the essentiall qualities of a true bodie, that it may be discerned to haue both flesh & bones by our outward senses. Luk. 24. 39. But poperie teacheth that it is so altered and chaunged, that neither by sight nor by taste nor by touching and feeling it can be discerned to haue any more flesh and bone, then a peece of bread, yea then a wafer cake, as thinne as a paper. The Scripture forbiddeth all grauen or painted Images of any thing whatsoeuer and wheresoeuer to be made and worshiped, or anie waies religiously to be bowed vnto, but popery commaundeth the making and worshipping of Images of things in heauen, and in earth, mate∣riall and spirituall, visible and inuisible, knowne and vnknowne, liuing, and without life, euen of
the materiall and woodden crosse of Christ▪ The Scripture forbiddeth all detraction from, and all addition vnto it selfe, binding this prohibition with a commination of a fearefull curse, to anie that shall so doe: but poperie hath not feared to cut of the whole second commaundement, and many other thinges, neither to adde whole bookes to the Cannon of the Scriptures. The Scripture condemneth all praiers of the mouth in anie vnknowne tongue without vnderstan∣ding and affection: but poperie teacheth that in praier, and all other things opus operatum, the worke done, howsoeuer it be done, with affection or without affection, is meritorious: and that all praiers of all persons, and in al places must be in the latine tongue, albeit they that pray vnder∣stand neuer a word and may as well be taught to say O Deuill which art in hell, as Our father which art in heauen, yea and so they oftentimes pray for ought they knowe to the contrary. For howsoeuer the Pope hath canonized Thomas Becket, & (as it is said) Edmund Campian, & o∣ther of that traiterous nest for Saints: yet their treasons for which they were iustly cut off by the sword of the ciuill magistrate and their damnable heresies, and horrible blasphemies whereof they shewed no repentance, doe rather condemne them for diuells in hell, then com∣mend them for Saints in heauen. The Scriptures commend the obseruation of the Lord his day aboue all other daies, condemning also the ob∣seruation of any other day in like sort perpetu∣allie,
but poperie commandeth more holidaies now then were euer commanded by God him∣selfe in the time of the law, and that to be kept as strictly as the Lords daie it selfe. The scripture teacheth, that al things are cleane to the cleane, but poperie maketh such difference of meates, drinkes, apparell, &c. and teacheth that at some times all flesh is polluted, that it defileth who∣soeuer eateth thereof, more then swearing, for∣nication, and such like things, as God himselfe hath expressely forbidden. The Scripture com∣maundeth to gather vp the basest of God his creatures, that nothing be lost: but poperie commandeth vpon Shoue-tuseday, that what∣soeuer of the best flesh be left, it should be cast vnto the dogges, and o vtterly lost, rather then saued for the good of any man. The Scripture teacheth vs onely to call vpon God in the dare of our trouble, and to praie onely to him when we may call, Our Father which art in heauen: but poperie teacheth vs to pray to the virgin Marie, Saint Peter, Saint Iohn, Saint Swithin, &c. yea to the eyes, nose, mouth, &c. to the necker∣chiffe, girdle, &c. of the virgin Marie; as is ma∣nifest by some of their olde printed praier bookes. The Scripture teacheth by sentence, and example of Priests, Leuites, Prophets, A∣postles, &c. that marriage is honourable in all men, though as holy as Adam was before his fall: but poperie teacheth vs that at sometimes of the yeare marriage is vnlawfull for all men, and at all times for the ministers of the word in
regard of their holy function. The Scripture tea∣cheth vs that euery soule ought to be subiect to the higher power, and to honour the King, &c, and that whosoeuer resisteth such power, resi∣steth the ordinance of God: but poperie teach∣eth vs that the cleargie is exempted from all ci∣uill power, and may not be called before any such magistrates, neither be punished by any ci∣uill laws. To finish this argument drawne from the repugnancie of the matter of poperie to the Scriptures and that religion which they com∣mend, I must euen say as the Apostle saith, Heb. 11. 23. What shall I say more? the time would be to short to tell of Gedeon, Baruch, &c. so, I say, must I say, what shal I say more▪ long time would be too short, and much paper too little to set down all the repugnancies and contrarieties of the matter of Poperie, and of the matter of that reli∣gion, which is commended vnto vs in the scrip∣tures. Can both therefore be of God, and ac∣ceptable vnto God, that is, alvvaies the same, and in whome there is no chaunge, nor shadow of chaunge?
THE FOVRTH ARGVMENT touching the forme of true religion. THat which hath beene said of the matter of poperie in respect of the matter of that religion, which is commended in the scriptures may be said of the forme. God is a Spirit, and therefore to be vvor∣shipped in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24. But poperie prescribeth such a carnall and fleshly forme and manner of worship, as if God were all flesh and no spirit. God oftentimes commaundeth him∣selfe to be worshipped onely according to his owne word. And truly if Princes may lawfully require obedience and seruice of their subiects according to their owne lawes, with much more equitie may God the Prince of princes require seruice according to his owne statutes and ordi∣nances. Therefore he doth iustly refuse the tra∣ditions, precepts, and doctrines of men in his worship, Isa. 29. 13. Math. 15. 3. and in many o∣ther places doth he also condemne wil worship, and such as is forged onely in the forge of man his wit: but poperie prescribeth a forme of God his worshippe principally according to the do∣ctrines of men, and least of all according to the doctrine of God himselfe. Yea to speake accor∣ding to truth, they haue brought such a darke cloud of the precepts of men into the worship of God, that a man can hardly discerne whether
they worship God according to any of his owne precepts. Yea to speake yet more plaine, they make so many images, crosses, reliques of saints, they make so many praiers to Saints, and offer so many gifts vnto them, they haue so many pil∣grimages in their honour, they repose so much trust and confidence in all these things, they be∣stow so much cost vpon them, they so precisely and superstitiously obserue daies consecrated vnto them, &c. that a man cannot well saie that they worship God in any manner at all. As for their foolish distinction digged onely out of that colepit, from whence they haue digged their Images, reliques, and inuocation of Saints, &c. as none of their learned sort haue euer bene able to defend it, so not one of fiue thousand of the vulgar people doe know or vnderstand it. How then can they regard it, or tell when they giue that vnto God, which they giue vnto saints, and images, &c. or that to these things, which they should by their owne doctrine onely giue vnto God. 2 Neither doe they onely worshippe these things, but also a peece of bread, which as soone as they haue adored, goeth into the mouth, from their mouth into the stomacke, from the stomacke into the paunch, and from the paunch out againe of the bodie, all men know whither. That this is so (whatsoeuer the ignorant are per∣swaded to the contrarie) is manifest, because that if a man were driuen to that necessitie, that he had no other meate to eate then their conse∣crated
host (as they call it,) as sometime Dauid was forced to eate of the shewbread, I am sure they could not denie, but that their host so ea∣ten for a weeke or a moneth together would nourish the naturall man as well as other bread; so as that their should be as good digestion, and egestion of that, as also of other bread or meate: if it be so, can the nature of it be so altered ac∣cording to their doctrine, and by their inchan∣ting sorceries, as that there should remaine no∣thing but accidents of bread? It is most absurd, it is most ridiculous. For how can meere acci∣dents nourish a materiall substance, and make a materiall egestion? If they saie that all this is done by the substance of Christ his very bodie, they speake the more grossely, in making that foode for this natural life, and the more blasphe∣mously in saying that that goes into the draught. Againe, in such a case I demand also, whether a man forced to liue onely by such meanes for a time, or so liuing voluntarily by getting some way or other all the Hosts to himselfe in a cun∣trie, could liue by them alone without drinke? Certenly by their doctrine, for the administring of the sacramēt in one kind onely, it should be so. For they say that one kind onely is sufficient, be∣cause the blood of Christ is alwaies with the bo∣die per concomitantiam. So then, by this reason a man that should haue nothing but their host for a weeke or moneth, or longer time to liue vpon, should not onely haue meate, but also drinke. For they must as wel grāt the blood of Christ to
be sufficient to quench thirst, as his flesh to satis∣fie hunger. Yet for all this, let one of them trie but so litle a time to liue in this manner, I meane onely feeding vpon nothing but vpon breade consecrated by some Papist, and I doubt not but that he will be glad to aske his neighbour a cup of some other drinke beside that spiritual drinke which he hath by concomitance (as they speak) of his foode. Yea if some Papist would trie this way, to liue but a little while, he should quickly finde the knauerie of transubstantiation, and consequently also the impietie of all poperie. 3 Nowe to returne from whence we haue made this digression, the Papists doe not onely worship the crosse, reliques, and such like things; but such as are no reliques of the Saints, & pee∣ces of woode in stead of peeces of the crosse whereon Christ was nailed. For if so many Churches should haue such large thongs of the very crosse of Christ as the Papists say they haue, all gathered together would load the best shippe in England: then no maruaile indeede though Christ were wearie of bearing his crosse, & what a gyant was Simon of Syrene whom they com∣pelled to beare such a burthen? O, say they, you doe not vnderstand the mysterie. For the crosse of Christ was not so heauie, as al the peeces now laid together would be. How so? because euer as one peece was cut off, the remainder did grow to the former greatnes, and was neuer a whit lesse then at the first, but notwithstanding all the peeces cut off, it still remaineth whole. Let him
that list beleeue this; my name is Thomas, and I will not beleeue it, till I see it, therefore I shall neuer beleeue it. Touching their worship of re∣liques, he that will haue sport, let him read M. Caluin of that matter; I meane his little booke of reliques: where amongst other reliques, he shall finde Christ his foreskinne cut off when he was circumcised, his shooes, the earth that laie vnder his feete, when he raised vp Lazarus from the dead, the title set ouer his head at his cruci∣fying, his thornie crowne, the dish wherein he did eate the paschall lambe, the napkin about his head when he was buried; yea the very taile of the asse whereon he rode, and many such morsels. 4 By these things hitherto spoken, we see how contrarie poperie is vnto the religion com∣mended in the Scriptures, both in matter and also in forme. Who therefore that knoweth the constant, immutable, and spirituall nature of God can be perswaded in any reason, that po∣perie should be acceptable vnto God? If out of one fountaine cannot come both sweete and sowre waters, can two religions so contrarie come from one and the same God? If God ap∣prooue that religion which is commended in the Scriptures, then he must needes disalow of that which is contrarie thereunto: or if he allow of that religion which is contrarie to the Scrip∣tures, then he must also disallow of the religion commended in the Scriptures. If therefore no man dare thinke that God disalloweth of the re∣ligion
commended in the scriptures, let no man dare to thinke that he alloweth poperie so con∣trarie thereunto. Now as touching our religion, both matter and forme agree with the Scrip∣tures. We commend knowledge, we commend and teach all that the scriptures commend and teach, we saie also and prooue by most suffici∣ent arguments that the Scriptures are sufficient of themselues, and conteine all things pertai∣ning to the worshippe of God and saluation of men. Therefore also so nigh as we can, we frame the manner of our worship of God according onely to the Scriptures. If therefore the matter of the Scriptures, if the forme of God his worship, prescribed in the scriptures be acceptable vnto God, then also is our religion: but the former cannot be denied, therefore also the latter must be graunted. THE FIFTH ARGVMENT touching the ende of true religion. THat that we haue saide of the contrarietie and difference be∣twixt popery in the former things and betwixt that religion which the Scriptures commend, may also be said touching the end of that religion which the scriptures commende, and the ende of poperie. For the scriptures com∣mend
that religion, wherein all things are re∣ferred to the glorie of God. The Prophet saith, Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue the glorie, Psal. 115. 1. And againe, Helpe vs, O God, of our saluation, for the glorie of thy name, deliuer vs and be mercifull vnto vs for thy names sake, Psal. 79. 9. Our Sauiour begin∣neth his praier which he commendeth vnto all men, with this petition, Hallowed be thy name, and concludeth it with these words, For thine is the kingdome, the power, and the glorie. The Apo∣stle commaundeth whether ye eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer ye doe, doe all to the glorie of God. 1. Cor. 10. 30. All the Apostles say▪ Vnto him (that is, vnto God) be praise in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all generations for euer. Eph. 3. 20, 21. And againe, Vnto God euen our father be praise for euermore, Amen. Phil. 4. 20. And a∣gaine, Now vnto the King euerlasting, immortall, inuisible, vnto God onely wise be honour and glorie for euer and euer, Amen. 1. Tim. 1. 7. And again, To God onely wise our Sauiour be glorie and maie∣stie. Iud. 25. So also the Angels gaue glorie and honour and thankes to him that sate vpon the throne, Rev. 4. 9. All creatures also in hea∣uen and on earth, and vnder the earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them did Iohn heare to say, Praise, and honour, and glorie, and power, be vnto him that sitteth vpon the throne, which liueth for euer and euer. Revel. 5. 13. Many o∣ther the like testimonies of scripture there are in the same booke, in the psalmes and elswhere,
teaching that all things are to be referred to the glorie of God, and that this glorie of God should be the principall ende of all things, and that nothing should be done but that whereby God might be glorified. Matth. 5. 16. This is likewise manifest by reason: because God hath made all things, ruleth all things, and all things hold of him, and serue vnder him: therefore it followeth that all things should seeke his praise and glorie aboue all things, and referre all things thereunto. 2 Now what doth poperie? doth it thus re∣spect God his glorie in all things? doth it referre all things thereunto? Nothing lesse: what with inuocation of Saints, and trusting in them, what with making images and worshipping of them, what with giuing of the Pope the name of god, the headship of the Church, power to forgiue sinnes, to let out of purgatorie, to command the deuills in hell, to open heauen gates, and mag∣nifying him accordingly, what with turning of bread into the bodie of Christ, and adoring the same, what with commending the free will of man, and teaching his abilitie and strength to keepe the commandements of God, what with the doctrine of the blood of Martyrs, of merits, and of works supererogatorie, what (I say) with these, and other the like things, they ascribe so much to these things, and so much respect the praise, honour, and glorie of these things, that they doe nothing almost for the glorie of God. Therefore they may say, if they would speake
truly and according to their doctrine, and all their practise. Not vnto thy name, O Lord, not vnto thy name, yea they may adde the third time, Not vnto thy name giue the glorie, but unto saints, vnto Pope, vnto bread, vnto Martyrs, vnto vs. If they will yet say, that all these things make to the glorie of God, let them shew how & which waies, and what glorie God hath by them. Our Sauiour Christ, Ioh. 7. 18. saith thus of and for himselfe, He that speaketh of himselfe, seeketh his owne glorie: but he that seeketh the glorie of him that sent him is true, and no vnrighteousnes is in him. In these words he prooueth himselfe to be true and free from vnrighteousnes, because he sought the glorie of God that had sent him: and on the contrarie, that he that seeketh his owne glorie speaketh of himselfe, and is not sent of God. This may be well applied against Pope and poperie. For our Sauiour speaketh as well generally, as of himselfe. The Pope therefore seeking his owne glorie and not the glorie of him by whome he saith he is sent, doth mani∣festly condemne himselfe to speake of himselfe, and not to be sent by him of whom he boasteth. Poperie likewise seeking the glorie of it selfe, and of other things not of God, doth also be∣wraie it selfe not to be of God, nor acceptable vnto God. 3 As for our religion it ascribeth nothing to Saints or any other thing, neither to our selues, but all to God. Our doctrine and whole religion abaseth all things, yea our selues also, and all
that is in vs, acknowledging that we haue no power in our selues, and of our selues, to doe, speake, or thinke any thing that is good, confes∣sing also our selues to be full of all euill naturally, and prone to all sinne and wickednes; teaching that what good soeuer is in vs, it is onely of God, and that no good thing is euer perfect whilst here we liue: further also professing that whatsoeuer good we doe, we merite nothing thereby at God his hands: but that God for all that, if he would deale with vs according to our vnworthines, might most iustly cast vs out of his presence for euer. Thus, I saie, doth our re∣ligion teach, and thus we freely confesse, and with heart and tongue we saie, Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue the glory. Therefore as this was a good argument for Christ, thereby to approoue himselfe to be sent from God; so also it is as good and firme for iu∣stifying and approouing of our religion to be of God, because it seeketh the glorie of God. Thus much for the ende of Poperie.
THE SIXTH ARGVMENT touching the effects of true religion. IN the next place let vs con∣sider of the fruits of poperie, and see whether they helpe vs not also with some armor against poperie. As therfore Poperie teacheth doctrine contrarie to the scriptures, so the fruits of poperie cannot be agreeable to them. Such as their doctrine is, such must be their fruits: because their doctrine is euill and contrarie to scriptures, therefore their fruits can not be good and sutable to the scriptures. Many indeede teach good doctrine, that beare not fruits agreeable, but where the doctrine is euill, there are neuer any other then euill fruits. To begin with the practise of the commandements of the first table, it is certaine that they make no conscience or account at all of them. Their strait obseruation of the precepts of men in their di∣uine worship, hath iustled all care of the com∣maundements of God cleane out of the dores. Neither can it be otherwise. For euen as when a wife openeth the dore of her heart, and giues entrance vnto the loue of a straunger, this new loue iustleth out the old towards her former hus∣band: so is it in the loue and worship of God. We haue heard before how many other the pa∣pists doe inuocate, worship, offer gifts, obs daies vnto, and such like, and therfore also how many they trust in, loue, and feare besides the
Lord, (for it cannot be that the performance of those outward duties can be without the in∣ward things.) We haue also heard touching those duties which they performe vnto God, how repugnant they are to his word, which re∣quireth no such things, or at the least in no such manner. Now besides these things, their other fruits doe further bewraie that they haue no re∣garde at all of any thing, that God himselfe in his first table concerning his worshippe doth command. For what Papist careth for the pub∣lique hearing or priuate reading of the word of God, except it be onely to gather some colour of matter, either for the confirming and harde∣ning themselues in their errours, as also the ani∣mating themselues the more boldly to trans∣gresse the word in other things (as all the wic∣ked doe:) or for the railing on our religion? So also, which of them maketh any conscience at all of swearing either falsly, or at the least idlely or vainely by the name of God, and by euerie part of Christ Iesus; or prophanely also and wic∣kedly by the names of their Saints, masse, and such other their abominable idols? yea, which of them thinketh not him a foole, and suspecteth him not to be of our religion (though otherwise they know him not) that is sparing of such oathes, or that at least sheweth any dislike of such oathes in others. 2 Yea and here not to speake onely of the breach of the third commandement by particu∣lar persons; let vs also adde something of the vi∣olating
of the same by the blasphemous praiers of their whole Church. Something hath beene noted before of this point, in shewing the con∣trarietie of the matter of their religion to the matter of the religion cōmended in the scrip∣tures, where we haue seene how derogatorie their praiers to the virgin Marie are vnto the Me∣diation of Iesus Christ. Notwithstanding in this place also it shall not be amisse further to shew howe blasphemous both to God and also to Christ their praiers are to the virgine Marie, to other whome they account as Saints, and final∣ly to the woodden crosse of Christ. To the vir∣gin Marie thus they praie: Te laudamus & rogamus mater Iesu Christi Ʋt intendas & defendas nos à morte tristi. Here they praie vnto her to be kept from sor∣rowfull death, and so ascribe vnto her power of life and death. Againe, Threnosa compassio dulcissimae dei matris Perducat nos ad gaudia summi Dei patris.  that is, Let the pitifull compassion of God his most sweete mother, bring vs to the ioyes of the most high God the father. These praiers are full of blasphemie, yet behold greater blasphemie then this. For thus also they pray vnto her, Ʋirgo singularis inter omnes mitis, nos culpis solutos mites fac & castos, vitam praesta puram, iter para tutum, vt videntes Iesum semper collaetemur. Here they pray vnto her that they beeing released from their sinnes shee would
make their life pure, and their iourney safe, that they seeing Iesus might reioyce together. A∣gaine, Dele culpas miserorum, terge sordes peccato∣rum, dona nobis beatorum vitam tuis precibus. In these wordes they intreat her to blotte out the faults of them that are in miserie, to wype out the staines of sinners, and by her praiers to giue vnto them the life of the blessed. In another prai∣er they speake more blasphemously, calling her Mairem orphanorum, the mother of orphans: consolationem desolatorum, the consolation of the desolate: viam errantium, the way of them that straie: salutem & spem in se sperantiū, the health and hope of such as trust in her: fontem consolati∣onis & indulgentiae, that is, the fountaine of mer∣cie, of health and grace, of godlines and ioy, of consolation and fauour. Are not all these petiti∣ons blasphemous to the Deitie? It is here also to be obserued, that although these and most of their praiers in their seruice books (from whence I haue verbatim, word for word borrowed these fragments) be in latine, yet that all ignorant mē may thinke the more highly of that praier, and vtter the wordes with more deuotion wherein are these last attributes proper onely to God, communicated to the virgin Marie, they haue prefixed this inscription and commendation in English with redde letters ouer the head of the praier: To all them that be in the state of grace, that deuoutly say this praier before our blessed La∣die of pitie, shee will shew them her blessed visage, and warne them the day and houre of death, and in
their last ende the Angels of God shall yeelde their soules to heauen, and he shall obtaine fiue hundred yeares, and so many Lents of pardon, graunted by fiue holy fathers Popes of Rome. In an other prai∣er next to the former as they praie vnto Christ to be defended from the wrath of the Saints and of his holy mother. so also they desire him to giue them health of bodie, and power to liue well, &c. by the intercession of his holy mother. So they make Christ a Mediatour betweene thē and the Saints and his mother, and yet they pray vnto him for the intercession of his mother, &c. In an other not long after the former they call her sororem angelorum, the sister of angels: re∣giam patriarcharum, the queene of patriarks: magistram euangelistarum, the mistris of Euan∣gelists: doctricem apostolorum, the teacher of the Apostles: confortatricem martyrum, the comforter or strengthener of the Martyrs: fon∣tem & plenitudmem confessorum, the fountaine and fulnesse of confessours. And before this praier is set a redde lettered preface promising to euery one that shall read it deuoutly, not to depart out of this world without penance, and ad∣ministration of the holy sacraments. In the next praier also they call her the bottomlesse pit of all grace and mercie, &c. This praier likewise hath a redde promise prefixed of an hundred daies of pardon graunted by Pope Goodface, I should sale Pope Boniface. In the next praier they call her the Queene of heauen, the gate of paradise, the La∣die of the world, &c. The head likewise of this
praier is crowned with a promise of eleuen thou∣sand yeares of pardon graunted by the munificence of the holy Father Sixtus Quartus Pope, &c. In an other praier they call her rerum omnium im∣peratricem, the Empresse or commandreesse of all things. Their other blasphemies in their o∣ther praiers vnto the Virgin are infinite, and al∣most without number. 3 To such as they account Saints in the same their printed portuus, thus they praie as followeth. To one S. Erkenwald Bishop (as they thought of London) they praie that he would make them with himselfe partaker of life with∣out ende. To S. Armigil, they praie to be relea∣sed from all griefe of sicknes. To Sitha a holy virgin (as they call her) they praie for the glorie which shee had merited, and to be released frō all euills in this life. To S. Sebastian, that they may merit to goe free and vnhurt of the plague. To S. Christopher, to be comforted in mind and released of all griefe. To S. George, that beeing washed from all their filthines, they might with all ioy be with him in all glorie. To William the Confessour, to haue the spotts of their life taken away, and the ioyes of the heauenly crowne gi∣uen vnta them. To Apollonia a virgin, general∣ly against all things hurtfull; and particularly to be kept from the toothach. To one King Hen∣rie (what king Henrie I think themselues know not) that they might not die with sweate and griefe, but liue and clappe their hands in heauen without ende, and by him ouercome all their e∣nemies.
In all these things doe we not see how they aske those things of their Saints, which be∣long onely to God to worke, and to bestow? And what greater blasphemie can there be then this? I might adde a thousand other like blas∣phemous petitions in their praiers, were not the labour too great both to the reader and also for my selfe. 4 For the praiers to the crosse or the simili∣tude thereof, though I might onely referre the reader to the Beehiue of the Romish Church in English, booke the 4. chap. the third, yet because it may be that euery one that readeth this my trea∣tise shall not haue the booke at hand, therefore I will heare expresse some of their praiers both in latine and english, which that booke hath ga∣thered out of the popish writings. First of all therefore he setteth downe this praier to God himselfe touching the crosse, Oramus te Domine sancte pater, &c. vt digneris benedicere hoc lignum crucis tuoe, vt sit remedium salutare generi huma∣no, sit soliditas fidei, bonorum operum profectus & redemptio animarum: sit solamen & protectio ac tutela contra saeua iaculainimicorum: that is, We beseech thee, O Lord heauenly father, that thou wilt so blesse this woode of the crosse, that it may be a heathfull helpe to mankinde, a strengthning to faith, a furtherance to good works, and a redemption of soules, that it may be our comfort, our safegard, our defendour against the noysome darts of the ene∣mies. Againe, thus they commend the crosse and praie vnto it:
Ista suos fortiores, Semper facit & victores, Morbos sanat & languores, Reprimit daemonia. Dat captivis libertatem, Ʋitae confert novitatem, Ad antiquam dignitatem Crux reduxit omnia. O crux lignum triumphale, Mundi vera salus vale, Inter ligna nullumtale Fronde, flore, germine. Medicina Christiana, Salva sanos, aegros sana. Quod non valet vis humana Fit in tuo nomine. that is, It maketh her soldiers excellent, And crowneth them with victorie. Restores the lame and impotent, And healeth euery maladie. The deuills of hell it conquereth, Releaseth from imprisonment, Newnes of life it offereth, It hath all at commandement. O crosse of wood incomparable, To all the world most wholesome. No woode is halfe so honourable, In branch, in budde, or blossome. O medicine which Christ did ordaine, The sound saue euery houre, The sicke and sore make whole againe By vertue of thy power.
And that which mans vnablenes Hath neuer comprehended. Graunt by the name of holines It may be fully ended. In these words although the English might haue beene translated somewhat more aptly to haue answered the Latin, yet the difference beeing not great, I thought not good to alter any thing because I would haue the reader to see both in the booke it selfe, from whence I borrow these things. Thus also they sing, and prouoke all to praise the crosse in this manner: Servi crucis, crucem laudent Qui per crucem sibi gaudent Ʋitae dari munera. Dicant omnes, dicant singult Ave salus totius sacli Arbor salutifera. that is, as it is here translated, The seruants of the holy crosse, Her praise to heauen let them to see, And they which in the crosse reioyce, And of the gifts of life haue choice: Let this of all both old and yong, In solemne sort be said and sung. O holy crosse, which canst preuaile, O tree of life, all hayle, all hayle. And againe, Ecce lignum crucis venite adoremus. Behold, here is the wood of the crosse, come let vs worship. And also, O cruxspes vnica, auge pijs justitam, donareis veniam. O holy crosse our onely helpe, encrease righteousnes to the godly,
and pardon the offences of the wicked. What man that hath any pietie or sparke of true god∣lines, wil not tremble to see and vnderstand such things so proper to God and his sonne Christ Iesus thus blasphemously ascribed to a tottring and rotten peece of woode? Nay verely I am perswaded that if many that haue ignorantly with great deuotion said and sung these words, had vnderstoode the meaning of them, they would haue abhorred both them and all pope∣rie for them long ere this time. This shall be sufficient touching their blasphemies, whereby they haue most deepely transgressed the thirde commandement. Concerning the fourth com∣mandement, how can they sanctifie the sabbath according thereunto, sith (as we haue shewed before) they haue not onely made many other holidaies equall vnto it, but also aduanced and magnified many aboue it. 5 This shall suffice touching their fruits of the first table. Now because the second table is so ioyned with the first, that the one cannot be neglected or contemned without neglect and contempt of the other: because the obseruation of the duties of the second is also sometime cal∣led by the name of religion, Iam. 1. 17. and be∣cause the Papists doe most of all boast of their good workes in obseruation of some things be∣longing to the second table, I will therefore also take a suruey, and giue the reader a sight of their obedience thereunto, that thereby he may the better iudge of their religion.
Here in the first place let be considered the intollerable pride of him whome poperie and Papists account the Head of their church: let, I saie, his pride be considered against men, as be∣fore it hath beene noted against God. For how can he that lifteth himselfe aboue God, or at the least matcheth himselfe in all things with God, make any account of men? This pride of his a∣gainst men is so well knowne to all, that fewe words thereof will suffice. For how doth he en∣tertaine the ambassadours of all Princes sent vn∣to him, or any other that goe to see his holines? what curtesie doth he shew them? Forsooth he vouchsafeth nothing vnto them, but onely the kissing of his filthie foote. Therefore if the Earle of Wylshire his dogge at the holding forth of the Pope his foote to be kissed of some there pre∣sent, had bitten it cleane off, as he ranne & took it into his mouth, had he not beene as worthie thereof as Iezabel was to be wholly eaten and deuoured of dogges? How also doth his pride appeare in riding vpon mens shoulders, as thin∣king the earth too base for his princely foote to tread thereon, and all other creatures almost too vyle to beare his diuine person? What shall we say also of his triple crowne of most pure golde set with all pretious stones, not like to the thor∣nie crowne that Christ did weare, but farre pas∣sing all the diademes of all other Princes? yea what further shall we say of his monstrous abu∣sing of the Emperours from time to time, when they were greater then now they are? Hath he
not made them with their wiues and children to waite many daies togither at his court gates, as if they had beene beggers at some rich man his dore, crauing an almes of some small peece of siluer, or of bread and cheese? Hath he not sent them whither it pleased himselfe, to doe their penance inioyned by him? Hath he not commanded them what seruice he would, as if they had not onely beene his pages, but also his lackies? Hath he not commanded them to hold his syrrop, and rewarded them with a blow on the eare for holding the wrong styrrop? Hath he not troad on their necks? hath he not crowned them with his feete? will any doubt of these things because they are reported by M. Fox in the booke of Martyrs? Let him knowe that M. Fox hath these things out of the bookes of o∣ther, euen of their owne religion, which haue written more largely of these things then M. Fox could do. So it pleased God to haue the memoriall of his intollerable pride preserued by his owne brood, that the posteritie might make the lesse doubt thereof. Againe, what shall I saie of the right which he chalengeth to himselfe for aduancing and deposing, for setting vp and put∣ting downe Kings and Princes at his pleasure? what shall I saie of those bulls, excommunica∣tions, and hellish (but yet foolish) thunder bolts against the Lord his annointed ouer vs, for the cursing of her Maiesties owne person, and dis∣charging all her subiects of all obedience vnto her? what shall I saie of the continuall debate,
contention, strife, and warres which alwaies he hath made betwixt Princes? May this fellow truly saie as our Sauiour saith, Matth. 11. 29. Learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in heart? Nay rather he may truly saie, Take heede of me, for I am proud and haughtie in heart. May he also saie as the Prophet Dauid saith, Psal. 131. Lord, mine eyes are not haughtie, neither are mine eyes loftie, &c? Nay rather also he may make a cleane contrarie hymne to be sung in a contra∣rie tune. Saint Peter whose successour he vaun∣teth himselfe, commaunded all men to submit themselues to Kings and to honour them, 1. Pet. 2. 13, and 17. But he commandeth all Kings to submit themselues to him, and to honour him. Saint Peter beeing iustly reprehended by Saint Paul, Galat. 2. 14. did patiently take the same reprehension, and after that wrote neuerthelesse of Saint Paul, 2. Pet. 3. 15. But the Pope to preuent all such reprehensions, and to stoppe the mouthes of all men, that no man may dare to finde any fault with him, chalengeth this as a speciall prerogatiue (as we haue heard before) that no man may saie vnto him, Why dost thou so? 6 That which hath bin said of him, may also be said of his Cardinalls, Bishops, & other of his traine, Like master, like man. They are all of one broode, of the same nature, of the same spirite. Such also as the Pope himselfe is, such haue bin many of his whelps here in England. From whom haue all treasons come, all insurrections,
all rebellions, all conspiracies against her Maie∣sties person, & the whole state of the land? Haue they not come from Iesuits, Seminary priests, and (as they call them) catholique noble-men and gentlemen? It cannot be denied. What also shall we say of the murther of the late French king by a Iacobine fryer, and of other like practises of the Papists against their Soueraignes in other countries? Can the Protestant be iustly charged with any such things against their princes though popish? As for that of the Duke of Suffolke a∣gainst Queene Marie, as it was before the title of Queene Marie was thoroughly knowne, so all men know what colour of reason he had to doe as he did, by the will and testament of that no∣ble Prince king Edward the sixth. Besides it is also knowne how soone and willingly he yeel∣ded himselfe. As for the Ladie Iane how inno∣cent shee was in that action, the Chronicles of our land doe testifie. Touching Sir Thomas Wyat, he intended no hurt against the person of Queene Marie, but by his oath to the will and testament of king Henrie the eight, thinking himselfe bound to doe whatsoeuer he could for the hindring of all forraine gouernment, he did therefore withstand the comming in of the Spanyard. Concerning the late tumult of Hac∣ket and his two associates, as Hacket himselfe was iustly executed, so the other two were con∣demned of all men in that behalfe: and therefore all men see how farre this differeth from the continuall practises and heynous treasons of the
Papists, allowed and iustified in their open wri∣tings, as appeareth by Cardinall Allin his booke of that matter, and likewise approoued & war∣ranted by the Pope himselfe, the head (as they say) of their Church. 7 To leaue this 5. cōmandement, let vs come to the next, wherein the Lord forbiddeth all cru∣eltie, and commandeth all mercie, as likewise he doth in many other places. Doe they therefore (I meane the Pope and Papists as they are Pa∣pists) behaue themselues any better in obserua∣tion of this commaundement, then all the for∣mer? No certenly: but such as their pride is, such is their crueltie. As the Scripture oftentimes ioy∣neth these two euills togither, so also they con∣curre in them. For it may be truly saide of them as the Prophet writeth of his time, psal. 73. 6. Pride is as a chayne vnto them, and crueltie coue∣reth them as a garment. This is manifest by that which hath beene before spoken of the perse∣quution of the Protestants in our owne land, of the Massacre in France, of the Spanish inquisi∣tion, of the dispensations graunted by the Pope for the murthering of her Maiestie, and of the villanous killing of the French king. For further proofe also of the crueltie of the Catholike Prince the king of Spayne, in all those places where he raigneth by right or wrong, by inheritance or violence and vsurpation, I referre the reader to the late booke of the intertainment of English fugitiues by the Spanyard. In this booke the Spanish crueltie is both largely described, and
also exactly penned. Therefore this booke bee∣ing so lately come forth, and handling this matter so well, I doe onely referre the reader hereunto. Yea the Papists haue not onely beene cruell to the liuing but also to the deade. For doe not all men know that they digged vp the bones of Bucer and Paulus Phagius, sommoned them beeing dead long before, to appeare in their Court, and condemned them, and at last buried their bones solemnely at Cambridge? Did they not also digge vp the bodie of one Margaret Elyot that had died in prison, did they not (I saie) digge vp her bodie, after that it was buried three or foure daies, and so burnt the same? Is such crueltie a note of that religion that is acceptable to him that hath commaun∣ded his children to be mercifull as himselfe is mercifull? Touching the seauenth commandement, not to speake of the filthie adulteries, fornications, incests, and such like abominations of particu∣lar persons, euen of their Cardinalls & Bishops, whereof some haue beene taken in adulterie, the next night after they haue much inueighed against the marriage of ministers; others haue beene taken in ginnes as they haue climed win∣dowes, to defile other mens wiues: yea not to speake of the like filthines of the Pope his owne holines, that hath beene taken in the very acte of adulterie, and slaine at that very instant. Not (I saie) to speake of these and other the like things, all the world knoweth that their whole
Church doth allowe Stewes, and houses of bawdrie, where any man may haue his whore according to his abilitie to giue for them, some for twentie shillings, some for tenne shillings, some for tenne groates, yea for sixe pence. Any olde men that knew the Stewes here in our owne lande at London, and all trauellers into other countreies, can witnesse these thinges. I feate also that ma∣ny trauellers knowe the trueth of these things too much. The Apostles condemne all for∣nication and wantonnesse: yea they com∣maund the Church not to suffer one such filthie person amongst them, least by one many be de∣filed and made to fall from the grace of God, 1. Cor. 5. 4, &c. Hebr. 12. 16. How much lesse then should the Church suffer whole houses, and great companies of many harlots? Hither also appertaine the abhominable dispensations that the Pope hath graunted for vnlawefull & incestuous marriages, contrarie to the written worde of God, yea and to very nature it selfe: the which also he might as well haue graunted for the marriage of a man with a beast. Can all these things so contrarie to the expresse Scrip∣tures, be saide to be done by that spirit, by inspiration whereof the Scriptures were gi∣uen? 9 To come to the eight commandement a∣gainst theft & all iniustice against our neighbour in his goods, they offend as much herein as in the former. For by what authoritie or right
doth the Pope himselfe, his Cardinalls, Bishops, Abbots, Pryors, Monks, Fryers, Priests, Canons, Peticanons, and other of his generation, gather such great masses and infinite summes of money of all sorts of people as they doe? For what doe they either for soule or bodie worthy any thank? much lesse worthie so great and ample reward. The King of Spayne also the Pope his eldest sonne, yet not his heyre, though his fellow heyre of the blacke and darke kingdome, by what au∣thoritie or right or colour of either, or of both, hath he by his force and violence gotten all those forraigne kingdomes which he hath got∣ten, and which he holdeth as vniustly as he hath got them? But what neede I thus to accuse the persons of the Pope and papists of the transgres∣sion of this commaundement? their religion it selfe especially at the wel-spring thereof, is alto∣gether couetousnes. It is an olde saying, that Omnia venalia Romae: and this saying though it be old, yet is it not moldie or cast away by them, but fresh, and as it were new baked, and therfore as much set by, and as much fedde vpon by the daintiest mouthes amongst them as euer it was: yea many of them that thinke scorne of much other good and daintie meate, doe feede of this as sauourly and hungerly as if they had not had a good meales meat an whole yeare before. But I forget my selfe to speake of their persons, whē I charged their religion of couetousnes. I saie therefore that couetousnes is the foode and the very life of poperie. For in poperie what is not
to be bought for money? To omit the common sale of all their preferments, euen of the pope∣dome it selfe, who knoweth not that masses, dirges, trentalls, forgiuenes of sinnes, release from Purgatorie, and heauen it selfe, (as poperie maketh men beleeue) may be had for money? Hence it is that the former generall prouerbe, All things are to be sold at Rome, hath brought forth another in wordes more particular, but in sense and meaning as large and generall, No penie, no pater noster: whereby is signified, that in poperie the very least thing is not to be had gra∣iis, that is, freely and without money: and no maruaile, for sith they teach, that God himselfe giueth not heauen freely, and without merits, why should their religion giue the commodity it hath without siluer? Neither in poperie may a man haue onely pardon for any sinne commit∣ted, but also a dispensation and license for the committing and doing of any thing, how wic∣ked and vniust soeuer it be, as hath bin touched before. How contrarie is this manner of dea∣ling as well to the practise of holy men in the scriptures, as to the other doctrine of the scrip∣tures? Elisha refused the gift of Naaman, offered and vrged vpon him, though Naaman had first recouered his health by the meanes of Elisha. The Pope taketh where nothing is offered, and for which nothing is performed. S. Peter also beeing offered money by Simon the sorcerer, for power that on whome soeuer he did laie his hand, he might receiue the holy Ghost, answe∣red
with great indignation, Thy money perish with thee, &c. Act. 8. 20. The Pope is not onely readie to sell greater matters for money, then those gifts of the holy Ghost, or at the least to take money for words onely of greater matters; but also is so greedie to sell them, that he will rage and roare like a lyon, if money be not offe∣red vnasked, or not presently paide as soone as it is demanded. Can we therefore thinke that the Pope taketh all such things by the same spi∣rit, wherby Elisha and Peter refused that which they might haue had with very good will? Nay, but most fitly may he be compared to the true daughters of the horseleach, which crie, Giue, giue: as also to the three things that will not be satisfied, and to the fourth, that saie not it is e∣nough, &c. Prov. 30. 15, and 16. The great Almes that houses of popish religion doe giue, are but sleights of the Deuill to bleare mens eies withall, that they may not see the miserable co∣uetousnes of such houses in other matters, nei∣ther their other wickednes, but that they should rather thinke them to be liberall and good, how couetous and wicked soeuer they be. Further such almes are falsly called by the name of libe∣ralitie, because they are without difference of a∣ny person, whither needie or not needie, whi∣ther able to get their liuing by labour or not a∣ble: and so are they the mothers of idlenes, and the grandmothers of many other wickednesses. The theefe also that robbeth on the high waie, or that breaketh vp mens houses by such means
getting many rich booties, and that after∣warde also franckly spendeth that which he hath so lewdly gotten at ale-houses and ta∣uernes, vpon harlots, vpon good fellowes, or vpon some poore persons; may as well bragge of his francknesse, and boast of his li∣beralitie, thereby to iustifie his theft, as these may obiect their almes for defence of their co∣uetousnes. 10 Touching the ninth commaundement, first popery accounteth them for heretikes, that hold nothing but the word of God. The Papists also (I meane the learned papists) sticke not to belie the dead, as well as the liuing, boasting all the Fathers to be on their side, that are more against them then for them, making them also to saie that which they neuer spake, as hath beene before shewed. Haue they not also cast out libells against the most worthie seruants of God: Luther, Calvin, Beza, and such like, full of all notorious slaunders, for the better disgracing of their doctrine and religion? Yea in such li∣bells they haue not spared Nobles and Princes themselues. As for the last commaundement, we shall not neede to labour the detecting them therein. For howe can they haue any regard thereof, that flatly denie concupiscence to be a∣ny sinne? 11 These things and many other doe plain∣ly shew the fruits of poperie to be such, as that they flatly bewraie poperie not to be of God, if wee had no holy Scripture at all to direct our
iudgements, the light onely of nature would descrie poperie to be nothing agreeable to a di∣uine nature. He also that had seene no further into the inuisible things of God then the works onely of God, doe shew them vnto him, Rom. 1. 20. He that had beheld no more of the glorie of God then the heauens and firmament shew forth the same: he that had heard no more then daie vnto daie and night vnto night doth vtter, Psal. 19. 1, and 2. Finally, he that had learned no more of the power and goodnes of God then the beasts can teach, then the foules of the ayre can tell, then the earth it selfe can shewe, and then the fishes of the sea can declare vnto him, Iob 12. 7. and 8. may easily by these fruits iudge the tree that beareth them to be an euill tree, and such as the Lord will one daie cut vp by the rootes, and cast into the fire. M. Fox in the booke of Acts and Monuments reporteth, that one Rulmar and some other beeing Papists, seeing the extreame crueltie of other Papists in perse∣quuting the Protestants in the daies of Queene Marie, did thereby conceiue great dislike of po∣perie, and became likewise from that time lo∣uers and professours of the Gospel. If one fruit of poperie were so effectuall in them, what shall be saide of those that notwithstanding the eui∣dent demonstration of all those fruits of poperie before mentioned, (more differing from the fruits of that religion which God commandeth in his word, then the sourest crabbe doth from the daintiest apple) doe not yet see the abomination
of poperie, neither haue any better affection to our religion then at the first. 12 If against this that I haue written of these fruits, it be obiected, that all papists are not such, but that some of them are modest, humble, loy∣all to their Princes, gentle and mercifull, sober and chast, iust and righteous touching the goods of their neighbours, yea remitting some part of their owne right, and if they be great per∣sons dealing fauourably and kindly with their tenants, and such as belong vnto them or hold of them: yea sometimes better then such as haue the name of Protestants, that they are also wise and circumspect in their speach of other: I acknowledge that these things are so indeede, and by some experience I speake this to their commendation, and if I should not so speake, I should doe them wrong: yet I answer first that such examples are very rare, secondly that some of them of whome I speake by experience are rather suspected Papists, then perfect Papists, because they refuse not to heare the preaching of the word, from the which I trust, that they learne these vertues, whereby I also hope, that a waie will be prepared for a better entrance of the Gospell into their hearts, to the expelling of all dregges of poperie, if any remaine: and lastly though all Papists bring not forth such fruits, that yet some of them, doe but conceale them, & force themselues to the shew of these vertues to merit heauen by, and that all of them may be such as before by those fruits I haue described,
for all poperie, or any thing taught by poperie to the contrarie. For if they be such, poperie it selfe will not condemne them, but beare them out as well as it hath borne those out, of whom before we haue spoken. 13 But some man will yet further saie, if ye iudge according to this rule, then likewise may your religion be also condemned. For are here not amongst you, O ye Protestants (that haue the Gospell in your mouthes) many blasphe∣mers, many contemners of your owne sermons and sacraments, many proude, many cruell per∣sons, many adulterers and fornicatouts, many oppressours and extortioners, many backbiters and slanderers, &c. To this I must needs say, that my heart grieueth, my bowells ake, mine eyes weepeth, my face blusheth, my countenance changeth, my tongue stuttereth, and my hande trembleth, and I would my whole man were more troubled to speake, and write the answer. For I must confesse and doe ingeniously ac∣knowledge to Gods glorie, & our owne shame, that we haue many such as of whome the ob∣iection is made. But as yet, O ye Papists and Ro∣manists, ye also O ye Atheists, and that are of no religion, but deride all, (for I know that this is the common obiection of both sorts of aduer∣saries) know ye that this neither excuseth pope∣rie, nor condemneth our religion. The reason in one worde is this, because although many a∣mongst vs are of these sinnes, expressely con∣demned in the scriptures, and contrarie also to
our profession, yet doth not our religion main∣taine and allow them in their sinnes: but contra∣rily it condemneth such hypocrites, and teach∣eth that their iudgement in the latter daie shall be greater then the iudgement of Papists, and the heathen themselues for the same sinnes. But as for the like amongst, O ye you Papists, you religion it selfe, and the head and pillars of your Church doe allow, approoue, and iustifie them: yea also commend some of these manifest trans∣gressions of God his laws, as excellent vertues, and such as whereby the transgressours shall merit heauen. THE SEAVENTH ARGVMENT touching one necessarie effect, or fruit of true religion, which is, true ioy and sound comfort of heart. I Might adde many other ef∣fects and fruits of poperie, whereby more plentifully to prooue it not to be of God, but because I haue written much alreadie, and yet haue diuers other arguments of as good moment as the former remaining, I will adde one fruit more, or at the least one fruit which that religion that is commended in the Scriptures doth alwaies bring forth, but beeing not to be found vpon the whole tree of poperie, doth therefore prooue the same
neuer to be planted or grafted by the Lord. This fruit is the great ioy and sound comfort of con∣science that alwaies groweth vpon the religion commended in the scriptures. The statutes of the Lord (saith Dauid) are right, and reioyce the heart, Psal. 19. 8. They are also sweeter then honie, or the honie combe, v. 10. He saith also that the promise of God had beene his comfort in his trouble, and had quickned him, psal. 119. 50. and that he remembred the ancient iudgements of God and so was comforted, v. 52. and againe, v. 92. that except the law of God had beene his delight he should haue perished in his affliction. S. Peter also ioyneth these two religions toge∣ther, beleeuing in him whome we see not, and reioycing with ioy vnspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 1. 8. And indeede how can this religion be without such ioy and comfort? For it teacheth that the sinnes of such as doe beleeue according to the scriptures are forgiuen, Matth. 9. 2. that they are iustified and haue peace with God, Rom. 5. 1. that they shall neuer be cast awaie, Joh. 6. 37. but raised vp at the latter daie, v. 44. that they are in the hands of Christ, and that no man shall take them out, but that they shall cer∣tenly haue eternall life, Ioh. 10. 28. which eternal life is kept for them in heauen, as likewise they are kept for it in earth, not by men or angels, but by the mightie power of God, 1. Pet. 1 4, and 5. that they are translated from death to life, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. and are of the truth, and doe as certenly know themselues to be of the truth, and that
therfore they shall before him assure their hearts, as God himselfe greater then their hearts know∣eth all things, v. 19, and 20. that they are borne of God, 1. Ioh. 4. 7. and therefore are the chil∣dren of God, and heyres of God, and coheyres with Christ, Rom. 8. 17. and that nothing shall separate them from the loue of God, v. 38. that they are so built vpon a rocke, that no stormes or tempests shall ouerthrow them, Math. 7. 25. but stand fast for euer like vnto mount Zion, psal. 125. 1. that they may no more doubt that God will forget the worke and labour of their loue, then they may doubt of the righteousnesse of God himselfe, Heb. 6. 10. not in respect of their works, but in respect of his promise, 1. Ioh. 2. 25. and the price wherewith they are bought by Christ Iesus. 1. Cor. 7. 23. and 1. Pet. 1. 9. and of the earnest of their inheritance, euen the spirit, Eph. 1. 14. and of the continuall intercession of Christ for them at the right hand of God his fa∣ther. Rom. 8. 34. These and such like things doth the Scripture assure all them of, that by the fruits of a true faith and religion both inward and outward, know that they haue true faith and religion. How therefore can they be heauie? yea how can they not reioyce with ioy vnspeakable and glorious? 2 But what ioy and comfort can there be in poperie? doth not poperie denie the first foun∣dation of sound comfort, namely the doctrine of particular election, whereby a man is taught, that God loued him, and predestinated him to
eternall saluation before the world was made? doth not poperie take awaie the word of God that giueth wisdome to the simple, sight to the blinde, light to them that sit in darknes, and life to them that are dead in their sinnes? and doth it not therefore leaue men foolish and blinde, in darknes and in death it selfe? Can there be any comfort in such an estate? Doth not poperie teach that saluation is to be had partly, yea chiefely by our owne works and merits? And who knoweth when he hath wrought and me∣rited enough? Doth not poperie teach that the efficacie of the sacrament, dependeth vpon the intention of the priest? Who knoweth the in∣tention of any man his heart but his owne? 1. Cor. 2. 11. who therefore knoweth when he re∣ceiueth the sacrament, and when he doth not? Doth not poperie teach, that it is presumption for any man to saie that he is certen and sure of the fauour of God, and his continuance therein, and of his saluation? What sound and certen comfort can there be without assurance of these things? 3 I graunt that the Papists reioyce and are merrie as other wicked men reioyce and are merrie. But such ioy is fleshly, superficiall and vncertaine, the ground thereof beeing not in God but in themselues, in Saints, in reliques of Saints, in the bloode of Martyrs, in the pardon and indulgences of the Pope, and such like sandie stuffe, and therefore not certaine. The ioy of the Papists is like the ioy of the Israelites
at the making and worshipping of the calfe. Exod. 32. 6, 17, 18, and 19. The ioye of the Papists is the ioye of Nabal in his great feast, 1. Sam. 25. 36. The ioye of the Papists is like the ioye of Belshazzar, when he made the great feast to a thousand of his Princes, and dranke wine before the thousand, commaunding the holy vessells of the Temple of the Lord to be brought forth vnto that feast, and polluting them at his pleasure. Dan. 5. 1. Euen such, (I saie) and no other is the ioye of the Papists be∣fore their Calfe, that is, before their innume∣rable idols and grauen images, and at their solemne feastes which they dedicate to the honour and worshippe of them and of their Saints. 4 Contrariwise our religion teacheth all these thinges which before wee heard to be taught in the Scriptures, it teacheth men to applie them to themselues, and by them to as∣sure themselues of God his loue and fauour, as certenly as if the angel Gabriel were sent to thē as he was to the Virgin Marie, euen to speake to them particularly, as he spake to her and saide, Luk. 1. 28. Hayle, or (according also to the naturall signification of the word) reioyce and be merrie, as one that is freely beloued; and a∣gaine whatsoeuer thy sinnes be, &c. yet feare not, for thou hast found fauour with God, v. 30. as if also another should saie as he did to the shepheards, Luk. 2. 10. Be not afraid: for behold, I bring you tidings of great ioye, that shall be to all
people, &c. This comfort and this ioy doth our re∣ligion teach and commend, and offer, yea also bring vnto all them that truly embrace the same. Yea certenly they that by the powerful working of our religion in their hearts, and in their out∣ward conuersation, doe know themselues not to be hypocrites, but truly to haue embraced our religion and the doctrine thereof, they (I say) may better cast away all feare, and more certenly assure themselues of God his fauour, and therefore also more truly reioyce then all the Papists in the world, or any one of them, re∣maining in his poperie may or might, not onely if one angel, but if all the angels in heauen should come and speake vnto them in like man∣ner. This is a great word, but it is a true word: how so? verily because one greater then all the angels doth speake it, and biddeth all such not to feare, but to reioyce. God himselfe generally thus speaketh in all the Scriptures, to all such ge∣nerally: and the holy Ghost his effectuall wor∣king of true faith and true godlines in euery par∣ticular person, that is, truly of our religion spea∣keth also the same thing. Therefore the greater and more credible that the master is then the seruant, and so also God himselfe, then the an∣gels, which are but the worke of his hands, and therefore his seruants, and ministring spirits: the more certen also may euery one be assured of God his fauour, to whome God and his spirit by their effectuall working doe testifie the same, then if the angels of heauen should speake as
much to one in whome were not the effects of the spirit. Further also the reason of that com∣fortable speach of the angels to Marie and the shepheards beeing well obserued, doth con∣firme that which I haue said of the applying of the same comfort to all those that are truly of our religion. For why will the angel haue the virgin Marie not to feare? because shee was freely beloued, and had found fauour with God: but how doth the angel prooue this? because (saith he) thou shalt conceiue in thy vvombe, and beare a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Jesus. If therefore to conceiue in her wombe and beare this sonne onely, were a sufficient argument to perswade her to cast away feare, to reioyce, and assure her selfe that shee had found fauour with God, how much more may he cast away feare, reioyce, and assure himselfe of God his fauour, whose soule and whole man hath embraced whole Christ, & is likewise embraced of Christ, and is made one with Christ, euen flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and which knoweth this by the death of sinne, and the life of righte∣ousnes in him, through the death and resurre∣ction of Christ? If shee were so blessed whose wombe should beare Christ according to the flesh, and whose pappes should giue him sucke, how much more blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it? Luc. 11. 28. 5 The like may be saide of the argument of the angel to the shepheards, for be not afraid, saith the angel: but why? I bring you trdings of great
ioye, that shall be to all people. What are these ty∣dings, and what is this great ioye? Ʋnto you is borne this day in the city of Dauid, a Sauiour which is Christ the Lord, &c. Now if this were such ioye to heare onely of the birth of Christ Iesus, how much greater is it to heare of the birth of the whole life, of the death, of the resurrection, of the ascension, and of the sitting of Christ Iesus at the right hand of God, there making intercession for all his members? yea not onely to heare, but also to be assured of these things by the effects of them in our consciences. Neither doth our reli∣gion onely bid men thus to reioyce for a time, and at a start, but we saie also with the Apostle, Reioyce in the Lord alwaies: and againe I say re∣ioyce, Phil. 4. 4. But vpon what ground doth our religion bid men thus to reioyce? because it as∣sureth them not onely of the present fauour of God, but also of the continuance thereof for e∣uer to them that are once truly incorporated into Christ Iesus. For whome God loueth, he loueth to the ende, Ioh. 13. 1. and, the gifts of God are without repentance, Rom. 11. 29. and, in God is no change nor shadow of change, Iam. 1. 17. Neither is he as man, that he should repent: hath he saide, and shall he not doe it? hath he spoken and shall he not accomplish it? Num. 23. 19. And againe, Hea∣uen and earth shall passe, but the word of the Lord shall not passe, till all things be done. Luk. chap. 21. vers. 33. 6 Vpon these and many other the like grounds, we bidde them that truly haue embra∣ced
our religion to reioyce alwaies, and doe as∣sure them vpon the immutable nature of God, and of his word, that they shall neuer be cast out of his fauour: yea that it is as possible for the power of hell to take away from Christ one of the members of his materiall bodie now glo∣rified and raigning in heauen, as to plucke away or cut off any member of his mysticall and spi∣rituall bodie here in earth. Therefore of all such & euery such we saie, that God speaketh as Isaac spake of Iaacob, after that he had one blessed him, I haue blessed him, therefore he shall be bles∣sed, Gen. 27. 33. As Pilate also saith of the title and superscription, which he had set vpon the head of Iesus Christ crucified, when the high Priests laboured him to alter the same, What I haue written, that I haue written, Ioh. 19. 22. So saie we of all them, whose names God hath once written and registred in the booke of life; that (the decree of God, beeing like the decree of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not, Dan. 6. 8.) though all the deuills in hell should labour God for the rasing of any out of the booke of life, whose names are written therein, yea if it were possible, that all the blessed angels should indeauour and intreat any such thing, that God would alwaies keepe his purpose, and answer them, Him that I haue written, I haue written. This is the ioye and comfort of God his children, and this ioye and comfort is in our re∣ligion, and neuer to be found in poperie or to be attained vnto thereby.
7 If any obiect that many sometime of our religion doe vtterly fall away, and sometime also despaire for euer of the goodnes and fauour of God, I answer with S. Iohn, They went our from, vs, but they were not of vs, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. They pro∣fessed our religion, but they neuer truly embra∣ced the same, neither did euer truly feele the power of godlines in their soules; yea though it may be that they had some ioy in our religion, yet it was but the ioy of the stony ground, wher∣in the seede of the word hath no sound rooting, Math. 13. 20. and like vnto the ioy of Herod at the preaching of Iohn Baptist, Mark. 6. 20. Yea but some perhaps will obiect further, that many of the best of our religion are often in great hea∣uines of minde, and doe much doubt of God his fauour, &c. yea that most part of their life they continue in this pensiuenes. To this I answer, that although this fruit of ioy and sound com∣fort do alwaies grow vpon the tree of our religi∣on, yet sometime the twigges of our olde crab∣stocke into which this religion is grafted, doe grow out so farre through our euill husbandrie, and not pruning them in time, that the leaues thereof beeing very thicke, according to the nature of the crabbe, doe so shadowe this fruit, that euen he that is grafted with the impes and sciences of our religion, can hardly finde this fruit without narow search and diligent turning ouer, and remoouing the leaues as it were one by one with his hand. As also we read that al∣though Christ were in the presence of the two
disciples that were going to Emaus and talked with them, and yet was not discerned by them, because their eyes were holden, that they could not know him, Luk. 24. 16. as also that Marie Mag∣dalene saw Iesus and talked with him, but yet knew him not, Ioh. 20. 14. So also the children of God that by a true and liuely faith are parta∣kers of Christ, do not yet see Christ, nor the great comfort which they haue by Christ, because their eyes are holden, that is, their sight is dim∣med by the sight of sinne partly, and partly also by the sleights of Satan, that they can neither see nor feele that matter of ioy and comfort which they haue and carrie daily about within their breasts. 8 Finally touching this comfort, it is with the children of God, and such as are truly of our re∣ligion, as it is with many simple men in the world touching their earthly possessions and inheritances. For although they haue neuer so good right vnto them, and neuer so good assu∣rance of them, euen as good as possibly they can haue, and as all the lawyers by all the law in the world can make them, yet for all that, they oftentimes meete with some pettifogger and cousening mate, that telleth them their title is naught and not worth a straw, & so forth. Now by such wordes the simple man is halfe perswa∣ded, and beginneth something to doubt, yea sometime almost to feare: and thus he continu∣eth till he meete with his learned counsaile, that doe againe declare vnto him and assure him of
the contrarie: so, Isaie, is it with the children of God, and such as are truly seasoned with our re∣ligion. By Christ Iesus they haue as good right to the kingdome of heauen as is possible, and their estate is so good as that all the enemies they haue either carnal or spirituall, cannot pos∣sibly defeat them thereof; notwithstanding such is their simplicitie in heauenly things (as oftentimes it is greater in earthly things) that their enemie and the enemie of God meeting with them, and reasoning the case, either by his outward instruments, or by those secret friends which he hath in a man his owne heart, doth at the last by his subtiltie make them to doubt, and filleth them with feare, till they meete againe with their old counseller the spirit of God (who sometime keepeth himselfe close, and for a time will not (as it were) be spoken withall, to trie what his clyents will or can doe without him) but when they meete and conferre with him, by the time that he hath a little repeated their assu∣rance, and declared their right from point to point by his seuerall effects in their hearts, and how also Christ Iesus purchased saluation for them, and bestowed it vpon them, and therefore also gaue him vnto them as an earnest pennie thereof, to seale and confirme the whole gift; then doe they cast away their former feare, and recouer their ancient comfort. So is it from time to time with them, whilst Satan talketh with them, and the spirit of God hideth himselfe, they doubt: but when the spirit of God talketh
with them, by his liuely and sensible operation in their hearts, then are they of good cheere and comfort; yet euen whilst they feare, they haue no cause of feare, but their right is alwaies one and the same: onely sometime by their simpli∣citie they see not their right. This shall suffice to haue spoken both of the abundance of all hea∣uenly comfort in our religion, and also of the want thereof in poperie. Wherefore I doe againe conclude, both that our religion is most plea∣sant and acceptable vnto the God of all com∣fort, and also that poperie is altogether abomi∣nable in his sight. THE EIGHT ARGVMENT touching the wisdome of true religion, an infallible note and signe thereof. I May here also not vnfitly, nor out of place adde the foolishnes of poperie. For what can be more foolish or ridiculous, then the worship of such reliques as they doe both worship, and also take great paines and trauaile many myles, & defray great charges for the worship of thē: especially most foolish, absurd, and grosse is it to worship such as before haue beene named, as the verie ayle of the asse wheron Christ rode, & such like. I aske here no pardō as speaking grossely, the ho∣lines of the thing must take away the homelines
of the word. But I maruaile they could get n better and sweeter morsell then the taile: it may be they came too late to market, and so all the better peeces being taken vp before by dogges, kytes, ravens, and such other customers as doe vse to resort to such markets, this onely was left, and so it was bought for the Pope his owne tooth; but he of his meere holie conscience would not eate meate of so great a price, and of his great liberalitie bestowed it vpon the church for euer. If they make so much account of the taile, they would much more haue honoured the head, if they had come time enough to the mar∣ket: what then would they haue done with the whole bodie, if they could haue gotten it? and if they make such reckoning of a peece of a dead asse, I suppose that if they had the liuing asse, and could keepe him aliue (and yet what a foole am I to make a question of their power in such a thing, when as euerie man knoweth that their Pope and euery Priest of his begetting, can make God himselfe, and we heard also before that the Pope himselfe can make something of no∣thing?) I suppose, I saie, that if they had the li∣uing asse (now I make no doubt of their keeping him aliue, yet for all that why doe they not make▪ him aliue againe?) they would gather a coun∣saile for determining what new honour should be done vnto him. 2 The like may be said of their admonitions, citations, and excommunications, against them that haue beene dead and buried a long time: as
against Bucer, Paulus Phagius, Tooly, Iohn Glo∣uer, and many other, whome beeing dead, they haue condemned, digged vp againe out of the earth, at least their bones, or the bones of some other for theirs, and burned them. Is it not a toie for men to excommunicate them out of the vi∣sible Church, that God hath called out of the world? And are not these two speciall endes of excommunication, one to keepe the Church from infection by the companie of such as de∣serue excommunication; the other to draw the persons excommunicated to repentance? when death hath first taken them awaie, what feare is there of the first? what hope or possibilitie of the second? 3 As they doe thus abuse excommunicati∣on, so much more foolishly doe they abuse and blasphemously profane the holy sacrament of baptisme, in applying the same to churches, bels, and such like. Christ biddeth nations to be bap∣tized, not churches or bells: Christ biddeth his disciples teach and baptize; therefore also they may as well teach the gospell to churches and bells, as baptize them. Neither haue churches and bells any sinnes to be forgiuen, or whereof they can repent: therefore churches and bells neede not the sacrament of these things, espe∣cially no other part of God his righteousnes be∣longing vnto them, the which they cāperforme. The same may be said of ringing the bell in any great tempest, as though that could make faire weather. As foolishly also did they, and do they
make boyes and little children Bishops and Cardinals. Many and infinite other the like fol∣lies there are in poperie, worthie to be laughed at by little children, more worthie to be derided by Eliiah and the Prophets of God: and alto∣gether vnworthie of the wisdome of the most wise God. Certenly I meruaile why plaies, in∣terludes, and comedies, were in such request in the time of poperie, sith in their golden legend they might daily read or heare, and in their ex∣ercises of their religion they did daily see such pleasant things, as would make better sport then all the plaies in the world. 4 Well, to conclude this argument seriously, drawne from their follies. When Dauid coun∣terfaited himselfe a foole, and behaued himselfe as a foole, by letting his spittle fall vpon his beard, and scrabbling vpon the walls before A∣chish King of Gath, 1. Sam. 21. 13. how doth this King (in whome as there was no feare of God, so there could be no good wisdome) like thereof? the scripture answereth that he did sharply rebuke his seruants for bringing such a person in his court, and that he saide vnto them: Loe, ye see this man is beside himselfe: wherefore haue ye brought him to me? haue I neede of madde men, that ye haue brought this fellow to plaie the madde man in my presence? shall he come to mine house? In like sort, yea and much more will the God of all wisdome, rebuke those that shall plead for poperie, or present Papists vnto his court. He shall saie to any that shall commend
Papists vnto his Maiestie in this sort: Loe, ye see these men are beside themselues, wherefore doe ye bring them to me? haue I neede of madde or foolish men, that ye haue brought them to play the madde men or fooles in my presence? shall they come into my house? Thus will the Lord rebuke and checke such as shall speake for the justifying of Papists vnto him. Great men of this world take much and too much delight in fooles, and laugh at their follies (though they should make better vse of them:) but the onely wise God is delighted onely with true wisdome, and such as are truly wise. Therefore all the fol∣lies of the Papists, and the foolish Papists them∣selues, so long as they continue such, are abo∣mination vnto him. As for our religion, as it is no other then the Scripture commendeth, so it hath nothing but that which well beseemeth the wisdome of God, and therefore it cannot but be acceptable vnto him.
THE NINTH ARGVMENT touching the opposition and enmitie of true religion to the nature of man. THe same that hitherto hath bi concluded of poperie is further euident, because poperie is so a∣greeable and well-pleasing the nature of man. This reason is ve∣ry firme and good, because that in our flesh naturally dwelleth no good, Rom. 7. 18. and, the flesh lusteth against the spirit: and, the wis∣dome of the flesh is death and enmitie against God, neither subiect to the law, neither can be: and, they that are of the flesh cannot please God, Rom. 8. 6, 7, 8. and, the naturall man doth not somuch as per∣ceiue the things of God: for they are foolishnes vnto him, neither can be know them, 1. Cor. 2. 14. and, no man can so much as say (that is, in any good and true meaning) that Iesus is the Lord, but by the oly Ghost, 1. Cor. 12. 13. For to confesse that Iesus is Christ the sonne of the liuing God, is not reuealed to flesh and blood, but by the Father in heauen, Math. 16. 17. 2 Yea, but how is it prooued, that poperie is agreeable vnto and wel▪ pleasing the naturall man? surely because it requireth nothing but that which the naturall man may wel performe, and doth performe without any speciall grace of God, and without any nevv worke of regene∣ration, as both beene sufficiently shewed by o∣ther
in larger treatises specially spent in that theame. And who seeth it not to be so? For doth not poperie teach (as we haue heard before) that ignorance is the mother of deuotion? and doth it not from hence follow that men neither neede, nor ought to take paines in the studie of the word of God? doth not the naturall man well like of this? Doth not poperie bidde men onely to beleeue as the Church beleeueth? can any thing be more easie? and doth not ease please the naturall man? doth not poperie extoll and magnifie the meere naturall disposition of man, both denying it to be so throughly corrupt as we teach, and commending it to be willing and a∣ble to conceiue, and to practise much good of it selfe? Is not this a pleasant song for the eares of a naturall man? and is not his heart tickled with such commendation? Againe poperie offereth forgiuenes of sinnes, release from hell, the whole kingdome of heauen, &c. to sale for money. What naturall man will higgle to giue any mo∣ney for purchase of such things? What shal I say more? Poperie biddeth men not to take to much paines about their hearts, neither to be at all carefull for resisting the first thoughts and mo∣tions vnto euill, for that these by popish doctrine are no sinnes: it teacheth that God looketh not so much to the inward man, but regardeth the worke wrought, howsoeuer it be done, and that he in iustice cannot deny a good reward to such merits. Can the naturall man dislike of all this? Further, what naturall man is not readie, & apt
to worship images, to inuocate Saints, to sweare, to profane the Lord his daie, or at least to ob∣serue any holiday appointed onely by man more exactly, to be proud, to resist magistrates, &c. what naturall man, I saie, is not willing e∣nough to these and the like? 3 Yea but it is obiected, that our religion tea∣cheth faith onely to iustifie without works, and that therefore our religion is a doctrine of ease and libertie, and so consequently more pleasing the naturall man then poperie, which requireth many numbers of praiers, no to God onely, but also to Saints, many great iournies in pilgrima∣ges, many offerings to the church, many almes, many good works, many merits, &c. I answer, first acknowledging that we teach indeede that faith onely iustifieth euen without any workes whatsoeuer: yet is this faith more hard to the na∣turall man then all before mentioned, to be taught and required by poperie. For this saith that we teach, must haue knowledge of God, & of him whome he hath sent, as also of the holy Ghost, and that as they are reuealed in the word, and likewise of the promises of God in his word particularly taught: it must also applie these things particularly to euery man his particular selfe. Secondly, though we say that good works are not necessarie as causes of iustification, yet we doe vtge true good workes (not such as the Papists commend) more straitly then they doe, & teach them to be more necessarie, as effects & fruits of iustification, and such as without which
there is no saluation. For we say that he that hath not eternall life begunne in him heare, that is, in whome the olde man is not crucified, and sinne mortified, in whome the new man is not resto∣red, and the life of godlines wrought, that man shal neuer haue eternal life in the world to come, neither shal euer enter into the kingdome of hea∣uen. This the Apostle saith, and this we saie, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdō of God, nei∣ther corruption inherit incorruptio. 1. Cor. 15. 50. 4 As for all other things required by pope∣rie, the naturall man can well brooke and beare so long as the inward may be dispensed withal; yea what is there so costly, though it come to the plucking off the earings, and giuing the or∣dinarie iewells and ornaments that men vse to weare, though it be the offering thousands of bullocks and rammes, or ten thousand riuers of oyle, what is so pretious though it be the first fruits of a man his owne bodie? what is so labo∣rious & painful, though it be the cutting of him∣selfe with knives & lancres as the priests of Baal did, or the whipping of himself til the blood fol∣low, or the pining of himselfe by long fasting, or at least by liuing onely of bread & water, and by lying in woollen & vpon bare boards, or taking no rest many years togither, but onely standing as many old Monks mentioned by Socrates and Sozomen were wont to doe, & some foolish pa∣pists yet doe: what, I saie of all these is such, that a natural man wil not willingly vndergo, so it be repugnāt to Gods word & deuised only by mā?
Againe, what though poperie require all these things? what also though nothing thereof be per∣formed whilst a man liueth here? shall he there∣fore to hell? No, saie the Papists, there is reme∣die for that. When he dieth, and needeth no more to vse his goods himselfe, let him but giue liberally to the poore, especially to the Church, and to priests for singing and saying of masses, dirges, trentalls, and other such pleasant songs for his soule, and then all shall be well enough. He shall not go to hell, but onely to purgatorie∣kitchin, and there either to be a rafter, or a little to turne the spit, and then after a few yeares he shall be remooued from thence, and preferred euen to God his owne parlour in heauen. In the meane time who seeth not that the hope of this maketh any man, especially of wealth and abi∣litie, to giue liberally, if all the daies of his life he may liue in all licentious manner? 5 But as for our religion it is farre otherwise therewith. For by abasing the whole man and all that is in him, and teaching those things which before haue bin spoken of, and shall not neede now to be repeated, it is altogether vn∣pleasant and vnsauorie to the naturall man, euen as smoke vnto the eyes, and vineger to the teeth: yet to God, yea therefore to God it is sweete & pleasant. Certenly in this respect there is such difference betwixt our religion and poperie, that if both were offered vnto the naturall man, he would make much sooner choise of poperie then of ours. And this indeede is the cause why
of long tim,e and of most parts in the world, po∣perie hath beene so generally receiued; & why there haue beene more Papists then Protestants, namely because our religion is altogether re∣pugnant to nature, and poperie altogether a∣greeable thereunto. Further let euery man exa∣mine his owne heart, how it standeth naturally affected, and he shall finde himselfe rather in∣clined to poperie, wherein he may for a money matter, haue both pardon of any sinne alreadie committed, and also a dispensation to commit what he will, though it be incest with his owne sister, then to our religion which condemneth all such pardons and dispensations. Sith therfore this is now so euident, that poperie is so sutable to our corrupt nature, and that our religion is al∣together so harsh thereunto, why may I not a∣gaine conclude as before I haue done, both a∣gainst poperie and also in behalfe of our religion? THE TENTH ARGVMENT: the first part, touching the great decaie of Gods gifts in these times of Poperie. MY last argument touching the maine conclusion, both against poperie and also for our religion, shall be from the testimonies of God himselfe in this matter. By the testimonies of God, I meane not here the testimonies of his written word, but
reall and actuall testimonies (if I may so speak) that is, such things as whereby indeede God himselfe hath iustified our, and condemned the Romish religion vnto the eyes of men, as by his written word he hath done the same vnto their eares. Neither let any man be offended, that I call such things by the name of God his testi∣monies, for so the like arguments are called in the scripture it selfe. Ioh. 5. 36. our Sauiour Christ calleth the workes that he did, the witnesses or testimonies of his Father in his behalfe: I haue (saith he) greater witnes then the witnes of Iohn: for the works which the Father hath giuen me to fi∣nish, the same works that I doe, beare witnes of me that the Father hath sent me. In like manner speaketh the Apostle, Hebr. 2. 4. where he saith that God did beare witnes vnto his gospel, both with signes and wonders, and diuerse miracles, & gifts of the Highost, according to his own wil. 2 These actuall testimonies of God, wherof I purpose now to speak, are especially two. The first are the gifts of the spirit, which God hath promised to these last times of the world, for the commendation of the gospell: the second, are his other works, whereby likewise he doth beare witnes thereunto. Touching the first, let vs first of all consider of God his promise for those gifts; secondly of the performance of that promise. The promises are either made in the olde testa∣ment by the Prophets, or in the new by Christ himselfe. The promises of the old testament are many. First of all, the Prophet Dauid psal. 68. 18.
insinuateth a promise of the gifts of the spirit in these words: Thou art (saith he) gone vp on high, thou hast led captiuitie captiue, and receiued gifts for men: where the Prophet, by receiuing gifts for men, meaneth the gifts wherewith Christ as the Mediatour was furnished without measure, to bestow vpon the Church after that he should vanquish his enemies, & triumphing ouer them should ascende into heauen, there to sit at the right hand of God in all glorie and authoritie. This interpretatiō is manifest, both by the words immediately following, Praised be the Lord, the God of our saluation, which loadeth vs daily with be∣nefits; and also by the application thereof, Eph. 4. 8. where although the Apostle doe name one∣ly the callings of the Church, yet doth it not therefore follow that the place in the psalme is of such gifts onely to be vnderstoode, because that euery generall may be applied not onely to some, but also to all particulars comprehended in the generall. The second promise is, Isa. 44. 3. where the Lord speaking of the latter times of the church, saith thus, I will poure water vpon the thirstie, and floods vpon the drie ground: I will poure my spirit vpon thy seede, and my blessing vpon thy budds, &c. And least any should thinke, that this promise was onely made to the Iewes or Israe∣lites according to the flesh, he addeth in the 5. v. One shal say I am the Lords, another shalbe called by the name of Iacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand vnto the Lord, and name himselfe by the came of Israel: which words doe testifie, that the
promise before made was as wel to the Gentile as to the Iewes, because the Iewes were alreadie of the house of Israel & called by his name. The promise of the same gifts of the spirit is likewise signified, by leading or driuing of them to the springs of waters, Esa. 49. 10. He renueth also the same promise, Ioel 2. 28. Afterward (saith the Lord in that place) will I poure out my spirit vpon all flesh, and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophesie: your olde men shall dreame dreames, and your young men shall see visions: and also vpon the seruants and vpon the maidens in those daies will I poure my spirit: so the same Prophet chap. 3. 18. expresseth the same promise in other words saying, In that date shal the mountaines drop downe new wine, and the hills shall flow with milke, and al the riuers of Iuda shall runne vvith vvaters, and a fountaine shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shithim. By all these words he meaneth nothing else but the plenti∣full gifts of God his spirit, calling them by the name of wine, milke, and waters, both because of the varietie of them, and also because of their diuers effects, according to the diuers necessities of the diuers members of the Church. And least this promise also should be restrained onely to the Iewes, he addeth in the 21. v. this effect of the spirit, that he would clense their bloode whome he had not yet clensed, meaning by those whome he had not clensed, the Gentiles, that till the com∣ming of Christ were without Christ, aliens from the common-wealth of Israel, straungers from the
couenant of promise, hauing no hope, and being with∣out God in the world, Eph. 2. 12. Finally the Pro∣phet Zacharie, chap. 14. &c. hath this promise, In that daie shall the waters of life goe out of Jeru∣salem, halfe of them toward the East, and halfe of them tovvards the vtmost sea, and shall be both in sommer and winter. These and such like are the promises in the old testament, which to belong to the new testament, and to be made for the credit and commendation of the gospel, ap∣peares by the application of the promise in Joel made by Saint Peter. Act. 2. 16. And although that Prophet speake of seeing visions, dreaming dreames, and prophesying, &c. yet by these are not onely to be vnderstoode the same, but be∣cause these serued then the good of the church, therefore by them the Prophet meaneth all such gifts as should make for the good of the church, vnder the gospel the which is manifest, because Saint Peter applieth this prophecie to the gift of tongues, bestowed vpon the church at the feast of Pentecost. 3 Touching the New Testament first our Sauiour alluding vnto, and indeede plainly mea∣ning these promises of the olde Testament be∣fore mentioned, saith thus, Ioh. 7. 38. He that beleeueth in me (as saith the Scripture) out of his belle shall flow riuers of water of life. Where the Euangelist himselfe interpreteth our Sauiour to speake of the spirit, which they that beleeue should afterward receiue. The like promise is made so often as he speaketh of the Comfor∣ter,
Ioh. 14. 26. and 15. 26. 16. 7. and elswhere. So also after his resurrection, Act. 1. 5. Iohn indeed baptized with water, but ye shalbe baptised with the holy Ghost within these few dates. All these promi∣ses doe teach and assure the Church that the go∣spel should not come forth in the latter daies poore and desolate, but rich and accompanied with an honourable traine of all necessarie gifts and graces of God his spirit: and that the more the gospel should flourish, the more plentifull also should these gifts and graces flowe in the Church. Thus much for the promises of the gifts of the spirit. 4 Touching the performance thereof, it is certen that it was especially accomplished in the time of the Apostles: and fit it was it should be so, because the gospel was then first to be cō∣municated vnto the Gentiles, who before that had neuer heard any such doctrine: and because also, as the Lord did then giue extraordinarie callings of the Apostles, Euangelists, and Pro∣phets, so it was also meere that they should haue gifts sutable to their callings. Notwithstanding it is not to be doubted, but that the promise should remaine, and doth yet remaine in force, euen vnto the ende of the world, as touching the generall substance thereof; and that therefore although those times are now past, and those reasons now ceased, when and why the Lord gaue such gifts of his spirit, in such extraordina∣rie measure and manner, yet he will neuer leaue his gospel without such a traine of the graces of
the graces of his spirit as shall be somewhat an∣swerable to the flourishing thereof, and meete likewise to commend the same the better vnto the world. 5 Sith this is so, I demaund whether this promise were performed to the church of Rome, holding the same doctrine that now it hath held for the space of seauen or eight hundred yeares, and enioying that outward glorie and magni∣ficence, the which also these yeares it hath en∣ioyed? Certenly to this my demaund, it cannot be affirmatiuely answered with any truth. For all men know (or may know) the contrarie: yea the Papists themselues, if they be not past all shame and grace will acknowledge the contra∣sie. For when the Pope beganne to set his foote vpon the staires, and to ascende towardes that dignitie whereunto he is now mounted, then began the holy Ghost also, as it were, to take the wings of an Eagle or doue, and to flie a∣waie, and returne againe towardes the heauens, from whence before he came. Euer since that time also, as the Pope hath climed the ladder of his magnificences, so the spirit of God hath mounted more and more towards heauen, and hath gone further and further out of the sight of men. The more that the Pope and po∣petie haue growne and flourished, the more haue all the gifts and graces of God his spirit decaied and ithered. At the last when the Pope was reuealed to be the man of sinne, the sonne of perdition, &c. and the verie
Antichrist, that is, when he was come to the toppe and perfection of his pride, then also did the holy Ghost in a manner take his leaue and bidde all the world almost farewell, at the least touching his visible presence. When all Kings and Princes had receiued and drunken the cup of his fornications, whereby beeing intoxicated and depriued of all true knowledge of God and common sense, they abiected themselues vnto him and put their necks vnder his girdle, yea a∣based themselues in most slauish manner to hold his stiroop, and kisse his filthie feete: when also they had receiued his marke in their foreheads, that is, themselues had embraced his damnable doctrines, and stooped vnto his abominable i∣dols, and commanded also their people to doe the like: when, I say, the Pope and poperie vvere thus aduanced, and had iustled both the true re∣ligion of God and also all authoritie of Princes out of the throne, and most proudly did sit in it themselues, as it were booted and spurred: when (I say againe) the Pope with all his abominati∣ons did thus sit in the chaire of estate, both of Princes and also of God himselfe, then what true knowledge was there, I wil not say of God, but euen of arts, of tongues, and almost of any good humanitie? 6 For triall of these things, if any thinke I slaunder them, let the rolles and Chronicles of those times be searched: let the bookes of those ages be perused, let their matter, their phrase and style be examined. Was not the knowledge
of the Greeke so rare, that it was a common prouerb, Graecum est, legi non potest: It is Greeke, it cannot be read? And could the Hebrew tongue be more plentifull? No verily, but much rarer. What also shall I say of the Latin tongue? was the knowledge of that in those times any better? very little. Euery boie indeede learned their primmer, and to say his praiers, and to helpe the Priest to saie Masse in latin, yet could he not tell whether he praied to God or the deuill: whether he asked bread or a stone, fish or a scorpion, yea not one Priest of an hundreth did vnderstand the Mattins, that he continually said, or the masses that he daily sung; Rome was wont to be the mother of this tongue, and the Vniuersitie and house of the eloquent oratours, but hauing once entertained the deepe mysterie of transubstanti∣ation of bread into the bodie of Christ, all the former eloquence of this place was also tran∣substantiated into barbarisme. This tongue in∣deede was the common tongue of their religion at Rome and elswhere, yet when their religion was at the full, then also was the knowledge of this tongue in the wane, yea in the very last quarter halfe spent. For it would make any man of knowledge to laugh, to reade or heare the words, phrase, & style of those books that were then written. In their praiers indeede, (in which is least neede of eloquence) especially in their praiers to the Saints, and chiefly to the virgine Marie, by two or three figures they affected a kinde of eloquence to please the eares of men,
and to make the praiers goe the more roundly, that o men might take the more delight in say∣ing or singing of them: but in most of their other writings there is nothing but plaine dunstable latin, yea nothing for the most part but barba∣risme. 7 If any man yet desire further proofe of this ignorance, wherewith I charge the chiefe times of Poperie, let them read what M. Lambert re∣porteth touching the same in his perambulation of Kent, writing of the place called Cliffe; what (I saie) he reporteth in that place of that matter out of William Malmesburie, de rebus gestis pontificum Anglorum: namely, that Curbert the eleuenth Archbishop of Canterburie, in a great Synode of all or most of the Bishops of his Pro∣uince, assembled by himselfe to the foresaide Cliffe (then called Cloueshoo,) did there decree that the Priests themselues should first learne, and then teach their parishioners the Lord his praier, and the articles of his beleefe in the Eng∣lish tongue. In the same place also he noteth, that king Alfred in his preface vpon the pastoral of Gregorie which he translated, saith that when he came first to his kingdome, he knew not one priest of the south side of Humber that vnder∣stood his seruice in latin, or that could translate an epistle into English. Further, he addeth that Alfric in his proeme to the grammer, saith that a little before the time of Dunstan the Archbi∣shop, there was neuer an English priest that could either indite or vnderstande a latine epi∣stle:
and lastly that William Malmesburie himselfe saith, that at the time of the Conquest almost all the Bishops of England were vnlear∣ned. 8 This is not to be vnderstood of the know∣ledge of the latin tongue onely, but also of the very matter it selfe, and that not onely of books of diumitie, but also of bookes of philosophie and humanitie. Their absurd and grosse defini∣tions, their infinite, intricate, foolish, and vnlear∣ned distinctions, (wherein notwithstanding con∣sisteth all their learning and deepenes, as they of Thyatira saide, Revel. 2. 24) will not onely wearie and tyre any young scholler, but also make a learned man sicke at the very heart. Eue∣ry man that is any thing acquainted with Peter Lombard, Gratian, Scotus, Durandus, Thomas Aquinas, Occam, Gerson, Haymo, and such like Diuines of those times, can testifie that which I saie of the bookes of Diuinitie. For proofe not∣withstanding thereof, I referre the reader to that which that reuerende father and worthie man Master Iuel answereth to a vaine boast of Master Harding, touching the learning of their side. First hee biddeth him remember that their prouinciall constitutions doe be∣ginne with these wordes: Ignorantia socerdo∣tum. Then hee addeth as followeth, It were no great masterie to charge the chiefe doctours of your side vvith some vvant of learning. Ludouicus Vives saith, Ʋt quidque his supertoribus secu∣lis mins tritum fuit studentium manibus, it a
purius ad nos peruenit. For the space of certaine hundred yeares, the lesse any bookes came into students handes, the purer and better they came to vs: meaning thereby, that euery thing was the worse for your learned handling. Of Thomas, Scotus, Hugo, and others of whom you seeme to make so great account, your owne friend Ca∣tharinus saith, Scholastics multa inerudite commi∣niscuntur. These schoole-doctours imagine matters vnlearnedly. Erasmus saith, Portenta quae nunc passino legimus in commentarijs recenti∣um interpretum, tam impudentia & insulta sunt; vt videantur suibus ea scripsisse non hominibus. The monstrous follies that we commonly read in the commentaries of late interpreters (wher∣by he meaneth the very croppe and the wor∣thiest of all your scholasticall doctours) are so farre without shame and so peeuish, as if they had beene written for swine and not for men. One of your doctors saith, Apostolus dicitur ab a∣pos quod est argumentum vel praeeminentia, & sto∣lon quod est missio, quasi praeeminenter missus. Ano∣ther saith, Apocrisarij dicuntur nuntij Domini pap: Nam crisis dicitur secretum, & apos dicitur nuntius. Another saith, Cathedra est nomen Grae∣cum, & componitur à Cathos, quod est ides & edra quod est sponda. Another saith, Eleemosyna dicitur ab eleis quod est misereri, & mors quod est aequ. More followeth to the same purpose in Iuel his defence of the apologie 5. part, 12. chap. 2. diui∣sion. where the learned reader may see the quo∣tation of those writers out of whome he borow∣eth
these things. By these things we sufficiently see the profaned diuinitie of the chiefe times of poperie. 9 Touching philosophie, the workes of Pe∣trus de Bruxellis, Iohannes de monte, de ponte, Dorbella, Duns, Toletus, Titleman, and many such like, doe euidently confirme that which I haue saide. Yea such is the rudenesse of these bookes, that many young schollers in Cam∣bridge and Oxenford, for want of good dire∣ction too much addicting themselues to the rea∣ding of them, can neuer afterward attaine vnto any true eloquence or knowledge of the Latin tongue, neither yet to sound philosophie. So al∣so may it be saide of such Diuines as take too much delight in reading the works of those be∣fore mentioned. Many distinctions in these bookes seeme wittie, and haue shewe of some depth in those things whereof they intreat, but if they be thoroughly with iudgement exami∣ned, and (as it were) sifted or rather bolted, they will be found but meere trifles, more curious and troublesome, then sound and profitable: so farre also from illustrating and making light∣some the things whereto they are applied, that rather they obscure and darken them. Sometime perhaps a man may hitte vpon, or by the waie meete with something somewhat worthie the obseruation, but it is so rare that more time will be lost whilst a man sinde it out, then the bene∣fit of the thing will counteruaile when he mee∣teth with it.
10 As those bookes before spoken of doe witnes the learning or rather ignorance of those times when they were written, so many men al∣so now liuing can testifie as much of the later times of poperie, both touching all the learned tongues, and also touching diuinitie, and philo∣sophie. Notwithstanding I charge not all of those times, and of that religion with such ignorance, but onely the most: some there were more lear∣ned, but very few. The greatest part of those that were brought vp in learning, and which profes∣sed learning, were as ignorant and vnlearned as I haue saide. And how could it be otherwise, so long as they taught that principle before spoken of, that ignorance is the mother of deuotion? And albeit they meant the ignorance of God and diuinitie, yet therupon followeth that the know∣ledge of other things is also vnnecessarie. For all other knowledge is especially to be referred to diuinitie, as to the chiefe and principall ende thereof. This beeing taken away, what neede in a manner is there of other knowledge? And in∣deede they desired that men should haue had no good learning at al (as it is among the Turks) that so they might neuer discerne the wicked∣nes of their religion. For they knew and feared, that the true knowledge of tongues, and arts, and humanitie, would quickly haue detected all the wickednesses and abominations of their religion. Therefore also when they could no longer keepe vnder the knowledge of these tongues and arts, but did see men to growe
and flourish therein in despight of them, they made a solemne and common law amongst them, that the vulgar corrupt translation in la∣tine of the Bible should onely be authenticall, and that also no man should in any wise ap∣peale from thence to the Hebrewe or Greeke text. By this canon they prouided, that although men grew to skill and knowledge of those ton∣gues, yet this skill and knowledge should little helpe them to any further learning of the holy Scriptures, then before they might haue attai∣ned vnto by the latin tongue. Yea so also they cunningly endeauoured to stoppe the course of such knowledge. For who could haue any great heart to those studies, whereby he should haue no helpe in diuinitie, the Queene of all studies? Againe, touching that learning that was in the chiefe time or poperie, for the most part it was greatest in them that inclined to our religion, and that did not a little dislike of many grosse points of poperie, and of many foule corrupti∣ons amongst the other Papists. 11 Now to conclude this part of the argu∣ment touching the generall ignorance that was in the pride of poperie, how will it stande with the rich and ample promises of God, before mentioned, for the powring out of water vpon the ground, and his spirit vpon all flesh? If po∣perie were the religion that came from God, would God haue so pilled it and poulled it of all the gifts and graces of his holy spirit so often promised? If it had beene the same religion
which the Apostles taught after the ascension of Christ, and the primitiue Church receiued from them, would not the Lord haue commended it with his spirit as he then did? If the Church of Rome were the onely daughter of God, and spouse of Christ (as she boasteth her selfe) would the Lord haue left her so naked of all ornaments? chiefly and principally beseeming her estate, and most answerable to her royall discent? will any earthly Prince sende forth his onely daugh∣ter, or let his wife goe abroad, without such princely ornaments as her princely estate requi∣reth, and whereby she may be knowne and re∣uerenced with the reuerence of a Prince? much lesse therefore may we dreame, that the Lord God of heauen, the Prince of all princes, would so rawly send forth his onely daughter, or Christ Iesus his onely sonne and heyre suffer his onely spouse (whome he loueth as himselfe) so poore and naked, as the Church of Rome was in her highest prosperitie. 12 I graunt that the Pope and his Cardinals had their rich ornaments and costly apparell, of siluer, gold, pretious stones, &c. that also the rest of that generation euen to the very hedge priest, had a gaie coate to weare in their holy busines, that likewise all their Churches had great riches: I graunt that in all these things the Pope and poperie did farre excell Saint Peter with all the rest of the Apostles, and likewise all the churches of their time, but these are not the spirituall or∣naments that the spirituall nature of the daugh∣ter
of God and spouse of Christ requireth. The Church of God is indeede described, psal. 45. 9. &c. as a Queene standing at the right hand of her husband Christ Iesus, in a vesture of gold of Ophir, and as hauing apparel of broidered gold, and likewise that shee hath rayment of needle∣worke, but the Prophet describeth here the Church onely after the manner of an earthly Queene, meaning notwithstanding by these things all manner of spirituall and heauenly or∣naments, and therefore euen in the same place, and the beginning of the 13. verse, shee is said to be all glorious within. It is therefore certen that the chiefe ornaments of the Church, are inward and spirituall: the which wanting, whatsoeuer outward ornaments and riches shee hath, yet shee may be called wretched, miserable, poore, blinde, & naked, as Christ Iesus calleth the church of the Laodiceans. Rev. 3. 17. 13 Now then, forasmuch as the Church of Rome wanted those spirituall ornaments which the Lord hath promised, and doth alwaies be∣stowe vpon his daughter, I conclude therefore that shee is not the daughter of God, neither the spouse of Christ. If it be said that the true church hath not alwaies the like gifts, I freely acknow∣ledge it; yet this is certen, that the more the Church flourisheth, the richer shee is in the gifts of God his spirite. But contrariwise the more the Church of Rome flourished, the poo∣rer shee was in the graces of God his spirit. And here by the flourishing of the Church, I meane
not onely an outwarde flourishing in earthly things: for so I graunt that as the graces of God are many times choaked in particular member of the Church by outward prosperitie, so it may be also in the whole bodie of the visible church: but by the flourishing of the church, I meane her flourishing in sound doctrine, and her enioying of such authoritie as of right belongeth vnto her. Now in this sense, when the doctrine which the church of Rome accounteth onely sound do∣ctrine, and the contrarie whereof shee accoun∣teth heresie; when, I saie, this Romish doctrine most flourished with least gaine saying of any thereunto, when also that authoritie which the church of Rome chalengeth to her selfe, as her right was in such regard, that neither Princes nor people made any resistance, thē were those gifts of the holy Ghost promised to the true Church, in the latter times most rare and scarse; when it was sommer with the church of Rome touching all her prerogatiues which shee cha∣lengeth, then it was the dead of winter touch∣ing those graces of God his spirit; so that scarse any leaues of them did hang vpon any tree. Thus we see that those promises were not per∣formed to the church of Rome in that estate wherein now it standeth, and whereof it vaun∣teth.
THE SECOND BRANCH OF the tenth argument, touching the reuiuing of Gods gifts at the breaking forth of our religion out of the darknes of Poperie. MAy the like be saide of our Chur∣ches in England, Scotland, &c. sithence the religion now esta∣blished brake forth of that dark∣nes wherein before it laie? No ve∣ily. All the worlde seeth what knowledge of arts, of tongues, of philosophie and all humanitie hath beene, yet is, and doth daily encrease. Now many children sixteene or seauenteene yeares old are better Grecians, and more learned Hebritians, then were the great doctours in the height of poperie. Now I may truly saie that Cambridge alone, or Oxenford alone (if not some one Colledge in either of both) hath more skilfull Grecians and learned Hebritians then all Christendome had, whilst poperie sate vpon the thone. The like may be said of the true knowledge of the Latin. Philo∣sophie also and all arts since our religion haue beene reuiued, haue beene much polished, and farre more perfected then they were before. 2 Let it not here be said, that there are some Papists now euery waie in these things as lear∣ned as the Protestants. For first of all the que∣stion is not whether Papists or Protestants be nowe more learned in the tongues or liberall
sciences, but when this learning, hauing beene along time as it were banished out of the world, returned againe. This present learning there∣fore of the Papists, neither much helpeth them, neither a whitte weakneth this mine argument, except they could prooue, that when their reli∣gion was at the highest, then also they had bin as learned as now they are. Secondly, although that many of them haue indeede now attained vnto much knowledge of arts and tongues, yet this knowledge begā first to be reuiued amongst vs. Afterward they seeing vs by those gifts tha God had bestowed vpon vs, for commending of our religion to the world, to be so able to maintaine our doctrine, and so mightie to op∣pugne theirs, they (I saie) seeing this, were pro∣uoked and whetted to take the more paines in studie, that they might the better defend their errours against vs, which now they saw to be falling to the earth from whence they sprung. Many also of the learned amongst them attai∣ned vnto their learning euen against vs and by vs, beeing brought vp in our schooles, and after∣ward better nourished and more strengthened in our Vniuersities. But as vnnaturall children doe sometime forsake their naturall parents, and runne they cannot tell whether; so haue they forsaken our Vniuersities: and as many roagish boies beeing entertained by some master, and vnder him hauing learned some good trade, doe oftentimes when they haue been a while there, forsake such masters, and goe to any other that
will giue them but a little more wages yearely, vnthankfully forgetting all that their former masters did for them, when no man els would regard or pitie them: euen so many Papists ha∣uing gotten their learning amongst vs, and in our Vniuersities, yet seeing afterward they can not haue such outward preferrements as they looked for (which is a thing that they especially yme at) haue vnnaturally forsaken vs, and asso∣ciated themselues with the Papists, who wan∣ing such studdes to vphold their rotten and tot∣ering religion, haue beene glad to entertaine them with great promises, but many times not performing them, but rather bringing them, or sending them at the least to the gallowes. Such oftentimes is the iudgement of God vpon them, hat too much respect outward preferrements, and so doth God in his iustice harden many of them that will not beleeue his truth, whilst they liue where and when they may haue it, that he giueth them ouer to beleeue lies so strongly that they care not what danger they incurre against themselues, both soule and bodie, for defence and furthering of those lyes which they haue embraced. 2. Thess. 2. 11, 12. 3 Well, to returne from where we haue di∣ressed, we see by this that I haue now spoken, that in these respects thus mentioned, the Church of Rome may thanke vs for that lear∣ning which nowe they haue, and for many of those learned men which are now in great and igh estimation amongst them. Further it is no
new thing that those gifts of Gods spirit, which God at the first giueth to beare witnes vnto  truth, should be afterward communicated bo to such as doe not greatly fauour Christ and his gospel, and also to such as are wicked and re∣probate. In the time of Christ himselfe the pow∣er of casting out diuells first giuen to the twel Apostles Math. 10. 1. for the commendation  their ministerie, was afterward communicated to other that would not ioyne with the Apo∣stles nor follow Christ. Our Sauiour also saith that many that should plead for themselues the casting of diuells out of other, should notwith∣standing be reiected by him as refuse persons Math. 7. 22. And thus hath the Lord dealt in these latter times. As at the first preaching of the gospel by the Apostles after the ascension of Christ, he bestowed vpon them the gift of tongues for the better magnifying of the go∣spell, and furnished them likewise with other ex∣traordinarie gifts; which gifts notwithstanding afterward were also communicated vnto many other, yea to many of the wicked: so in these latter times also at the first breaking forth of his truth (which we professe) through the blacke, the thicke, and darke cloudes of poperie, that  long time had ouershadowed and drouped the whole earth, the Lord according to his ancient promises gaue gifts vnto men, in respect of the former great want of them, very extraordinarie these gifts (I say) he gaue at the first breaking forth of our religion through poperie, to the first
preachers of our religion, for the commen∣ding thereof vnto the world, and so encreased them afterwarde more and more in those that embraced our religion: but after that by such gifts he had sufficiently renewed and recoue∣red the credite of his truth which we doe now hold, and likewise by beautifying our religion with the first fruits of these gifts, had sufficient∣ly disgraced poperie, then he communicated these gifts vnto other euen vnto the Papists themselues. 4 And truly in verie great wisdom hath God done so, that he might teach men to esteeme of his truth, not for those gifts onely but also for the truths sake it selfe. So also he would haue the Papists themselues, yea and all the world to see, that all the learning in the world is not a∣ble to vphold poperie, and that our religion is as well able to stand against, and to beat downe poperie into the pitte of hell, from whence it came, as well when poperie hath the same ar∣mour on that our religion hath, as when it was naked and had almost none at all. Therefore to conclude this part also of this my last argument, touching the performance of those promises of God to the Church, that were neuer in such manner performed to the Church of Rome. As the more the darke cloudes of poperie couered the whole earth, and the more violently also the boisterous winds therof did blow vpon the earth, making the very cedars of Lebanō both to bēd and to breake, the more dead were all the gifts
of the spirit, as we see all things to be in the depth of winter: so like wise sithence our religi∣on hath come about towards the sommer point, and by the strength and power thereof hath scat∣tered and dispersed these cloudes, and pacified those boisterous winds of popery in many king∣domes, the more haue those gifts of God his spi∣rit before promised, budded and flourished e∣uen as we see after an hard winter, the more the sunne commeth about toward Cancer, the more all trees and hearbs before seare and dead, doe reuiue and spring out. I conclude therefore, that as by the springing and flourishing of hearbs and other plants, we know sommer to be come; so also by these gifts of God his spirit which haue sprung and flourished, euen sithence that our religion hath beene reuiued & againe quick∣ned: we know the same gospell to be againe returned about, the which in former times God according to the righteousnesse of his promise, did beautifie and commēd with the like graces. 5 Will any Papist now obiect the times of Tertullian, Gregorie Nazianzen, Cyprian, Chrysostome, Ambrose, Ierome, Augustine, Bar∣nard, and such like? let him first remember, that most of them were before the time whereof we spake. They were (I say) before any stone al∣most laide of the foundation of the church of Rome in that state wherein now it is: all of them also liued before that Church was built to that perfection whereunto it was reared, vntill the re∣pairing of our religion. Againe these auncient:
Fathers so many of them as did see the building of this church begun, or any matter prepared owards the same, laboured by might & maine (as we speake) and to the vtmost of their power, he hindring and staying thereof: therefore haue they plainly written against images, iustificati∣on by works, inuocation of Saints, freewill, and many other the like principles of poperie, as is lentifully shewed by our late writers in parti∣ular controuersies. Especially both they and al∣so many other, yea some of the Papists them∣elues, and of the learnedst of them haue migh∣ly declaimed, and sharply inuaied against all uch proud and arrogant titles, as now the Pope laimeth and vsurpeth. Further although these ere excellent persons for learning and godli∣es, and worthie of honourable remembrance  all ages, yet liued they not altogether. Nay ther one age had almost but one such, or at the ast but verie fewe such, as these were that I ue named: but our ages and the ages before s, euer sithence the returne of our religion, haue  all times and in euerie kingdome had many ch. Yea I doubt not to sale, and that truly, that although it be not yet two hundred yeares since u religion came out into the open field, and ncountered with poperie in such publique anner as now it doth, yet there haue beene in is little time as many great learned men as ptaines of the Lord on our side, as can be ooued to haue beene with vs or against vs, in welue hundred yeares before.
6 Further I doubt not but that I may say, and that also truly, that we haue had and yet haue many in good respects comparable to those before named, as in the exact knowledge of all learned tongues, arts, and humanitie, so also in sound and deepe iudgement of diuinitie. vz. Luther, Zuinglius, Melancton, Oecolampadius, Erasmus, Paulus Phagius, Bucer, P. Martyr, Cal∣vin, Marlorat, Musculus, Cranmer, Ridly, Hoo∣per, Bradford, Bullinger, Bez, Zanchius, Iul, Ramus, Vrsinus, Sadeel, Daneus, Pilkington, Fulke, Humfrey, VVhitaker, and infinite other, partly dead, and partly yet liuing, whose name I doe not well remember, or in some respect thinke not conuenient to expresse. I may here also name Flaccius, Illyricus, Hemingius, and many other of that sort: because although they haue some errours, yet which almost of the auncient Fathers had not as many and  great? 7 To this argument I may further adde, that the Lord hath not onely commended our reli∣gion by the encrease of all learning according to the encrease of our religion, but also by the repairing almost of all other knowledge in cō∣mon things and matters of this life. For what trade and science is there so meane and base, which is not much amended and brought to further perfection sithence the late time of out religion, then it had before in the depth of po∣perit? yea who knoweth not that there is great varietie of knowledge sithence the flourishing
of our religion, which neuer almost was heard of before? Especially most admirable is the gift of printing, which neuer was in the world till within these hundred and three score yeares at the most, about which time it pleased God to broch new vessells of his gospell with our reli∣gion. This gift of printing is not vnfitly by some compared to the extraordinarie gift of tongues in the Apostles time; because the Lord did not onely prepare a waie for the gospel thereby, but also hath made it as a mightie voyce of a crier in the wildernesse of poperie, to proclaime the grace of God in Christ Iesus, and to further and inlarge our religion, by opening the hearts of many Princes and more people, many noble and more base, many rich and more poore, and many learned and more vnlearned persons, for the entertainment of Christ Iesus, and submit∣ting themselues to his kingdome and gouerne∣ment. Certenly by this new benefit of printing the Gospel hath beene more sounded out to the eares of all nations, then it could haue beene by the voice of many preachers. For by the means hereof wee that liue in England, haue easily heard the sermons and readings of Calvin and Beza in Geneva, and of other in other places: and they likewise that liue in Geneva and in o∣ther places, haue easily heard the readings of Doctour VVhitakers in Cambridge, and like∣wise of Doctour Reynolds in Oxenford. This printing also is not onely as a quicke post ri∣ding vpon a swift and speedie horse, but also as
an angel of the Lord with sixe wings, for the most speedie conueying of the doctrine of the gospel out of one countrie into an other. Who also knoweth not, that a man may haue more now for sixe pence, then before printing, he could haue had written for fourtie shillings? who seeth not also that bookes printed, are more ea∣sily both read and also preserued, then the like onely written? Now although the deuill abuse this gift of God also for the furthering of popery, (as what gifts be there that he quickly doth not abuse?) yet sith it was neuer heard of whilst po∣peie was at the highest, but then onely appea∣red and came forth into the light of the sunne, when our religion was raised out of the graue where before it laie buried, and when poperie began to fall sicke, and to encline vnto a con∣sumption, who seeth not that it was a speciall and an extraordinarie gift of God for the ho∣nouring and furthering of our religion? Thus much for the first sort of God his actuall testi∣monies, namely for the gifts of his spirit which before he promised, and according to his pro∣mise hath bestowed vpon his Church, not onely in the time of the Apostles, but also in these lat∣ter times for the commendation of the gospe then, and of our religion now, as being the same with the gospel, and therefore in like manner acceptable vnto him.
THE THIRD BRANCH OF the tenth argument, touching the works of God against Poperie. NOw followeth the second sort of God his actuall testimonies, namely the workes of God, wherby God hath testified both his dislike of poperie, and also the approbation of our religion seueraly and ioyntly, as euidently as if in ex∣presse wordes, and in his owne person, he should haue spoken against poperie in this manner: This is the religion that I hate, and which my soule aborreth: and contrarily of our religion as he spake of his Sonne: This is the Gospell and that glad dings which bringeth saluation vnto all men, and in vvhich I am vvell pleased, therefore re∣ceiue it. 2 Here first of all let vs consider the great iudgements of God against many of the Papists, especially such as haue beene special aduersaries to our religion and to the professours thereof. For truely there haue beene fewe such speciall aduersaries to vs and our religion, whome God hath not in some speciall manner so punished here in this life, or at least so prosecuted that their malice in their posteritie, that all the worlde might thereby clearely see, that he vtterly disli∣ked of them and of their course, as also approo∣ued and allowed of them & their cause, against whome they opposed and set themselues. Tou∣ching
these iudgements, although I might ease my selfe and the reader of much labour, by re∣ferring him onely to the latter ende of the booke of Martyrs, where is a speciall treatise of such things; yet because that booke is of so great price that many are not able to buie it, I will therefore cull out some few of the principall ex∣amples there and elsewhere in that booke mentioned, and for the rest referre such as haue that booke to that speciall treatise. First of all let here be remembered the historie of one Pa∣uier or Paie, in the daies of King Henrie the eight: this Pauier or Pauie beeing towne clarke of the citie of London, and a notable enemie to the gospel, vpon some report that the gospel should be in English, saide with a great ath, that if he thought the King would in deede set forth the Scripture in English, and let it be read to the common people by his authoritie, he would cut his owne throat. And so indeede he did not much lesse. For though he cut not his throat with a knife, yet he hanged himselfe with an haltar, anno Dom. 1533. This is re∣ported by Master Fox, page 1055. of his booke printed 1583. but borrowed from Hall his Chronicle, who wrote the same not vpon the report of other, but vpon his owne knowledge, who both heard him sweare that he would cut his owne throat, and also knew how he brake promise by hanging himselfe. In the same yeare also, that is 1533 one Doctour Foxford chan∣celour to the Bishop of London, and a cruell
persecutor and butcher of God his Saints vnder Bishop Stokesly, died suddenly and fearefully  in his chaire, his bellie breaking and his guttes falling out before his owne eyes. 3 Next to these let be considered that of William Gardiner an English marchant, most cruelly martyred at Lishbone in Portugal, for snarching the host with one hand, and beating the chalice with the other out of both the hands of a Cardinoll, before the King and all his nobles, the Lords daie after a solemne marri∣age of the saide King his sonne with the daugh∣ter of the King of Spayne, anno Dom. 1552. and in the raigne of King Edward the sixt of most blessed memorie. Let, I say, be here also re∣membered the iudgement of God following the execution of that most holy martyr by the Portugalls at Lishbone for the cause before mentioned. For how did they, by whose autho∣ritie he was so executed, escape? The same night he was burned, one of the sparkes of the fire where with he was burned, by God his pro∣uidence beeing conueied amongst the King his shippes lying in the hauen, fired one of them and burned it within halfe a yeare after the young Prince then married, died: and the King him∣selfe also within another halfe yeare after that, and so within one yeare both the king and his sonne died. 4 An other example we haue of one Alexan∣der the keeper of Newgate, not much vnlike to Alexander the coppersmith, of whō the Apostle
complaineth; this Alexander dealt most cruelly with those that were committed to his custodie in new gate for the gospel. But what became of him he died most miserably being both swolne more like a monster then a man, & so eaten also within, that no man could abide the smell of him. Yea further, the Lord his wrath was kind∣led also against his sonne: for he being left very rich, was giuen ouer to such a iotous mind, that he wasted all within three yeares: and beeing sometime asked how he could spend so much in so little time, he would answer, that euill gotten must be as euill spent. Shortly after also as he wal∣ked in newgate market, he fell downe sudden∣ly, and so died fearefully. 5 Another example there is also registred of a Sheriffe of Suffolke his man, that attending vp∣on his master at the martyrdome of one Iames Abbes at S. Edmonds Burie, and hearing the fald Iames Abbes exhort the people to stande in the gospell which he would in their presence seale with his blood, bad the people not beleeue him, because he was a madde man & spake he knew not what. But marke good reader: This rayling and rauing Papist, as soone as fire was put to Iames Abbes, was immediately before all the people stricken with madnes, so that he cried out as much in commendation of Iames Abbes, as before he railed on him: condemning also himselfe, and saying, Iames Abbes is a good ser∣uant of God and saued, but I am damned. This note he sung vntill his dying daie, railing also on
the priest that his master sent for to housle him a little before his ende; yea not onely railing on the priest, but also on papists and poperic, char∣ging them to be the cause of his damnation. Another example we haue of God his iudge∣ment vpon Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Syr Thomas More knight: these had beene persecu∣tors of the Protestants, especially they had pro∣cured the death of Iohn Frith, Bayfield, and Baynham. Therefore the Lord cried also quit with them, for themselues also were publikely executed at Tower hill. 6 Worthie also of remembrance is that which M. Fox likewise writeth of one Vanderwarfe of Antwerp, who as he was of great place and au∣thoritie in that citie, so also was he of great ma∣lice against the Protestants, most cruelly perse∣cuting all, and drowning many men and wo∣men to his great praise among other of that cruell generation. For this also he was called a blood-hound, or bloodie dogge. But God in whose eyes the death of all his Saints is alwaies right pretious, forgot not his crueltie: for this Vanderwarfe hauing gotten great riches, and therefore left Antwerp, liuing in the countrey at his case, at a certaine time came in a waggon with his wife, and some other to make merrie at Antwerp, where hauing recreated himselfe, he returned againe towarde the countrie. As soone as he was out of the citie, beeing to goe o∣uer a wooden bridge, built (as should seeme) but for a shift and for a time, hauing barres and
rayles on both sides, the horse in the waggon stoode still, and would not goe forwarde by any meanes of the waggoner. Vanderwarfe his bloode beeing vp, and prouoked against the waggoner, bad him driue forward in a thousand deuills names. Immediately vpon this there a∣rose suddenly a mightie whirle winde (all being calme before) which tost the waggon with this gentleman & other passengers ouer the bridge, and so they fell into the water. The rest beeing saued, and takē vp aliue for the present, (though his wife died within three daies after) himselfe onely was drowned, as he had drowned many before. What also shall I say of the miserable & desperate death of Steuen Gardiner the great blood-sucker of this land? for at his death ano∣ther Bishop cōming vnto him, & (as it seemeth) finding him in a desperate minde; put him in re∣membrance of Peter his denying Christ. But he sauouring no comfort therein, answered that he had denied Christ with Peter, but neuer repen∣ted with Peter. 7 What also shal I saie of Henrie the second of that name King of France? had he not com∣mitted certaine great persons to prison for reli∣gion, and threatned one of them to see him burnt with his owne eyes? yet behold the worke of God herein. Shortly after he had not eyes to see it: for the very same daie that the King was in the greatest rage against the foresaide priso∣ners, and had examined the Presidents & coun∣sellers of the Parliament against them, after
dinner addressing himselfe to runne at the tilt, and indeede performing that acte very honou∣rably with the breaking of many staues, to his great commendation by all the beholders. He not satisfied with that which he had done, but tickled with the former commendation, and de∣sirous of more according to the nature of am∣bition (which thinketh no praise sufficient) vr∣ged the Countie of Mountgommer to runne an other course with him. This Countie had before receiued the former prisoners from the Consta∣ble of France vpon the Kings commandement, and carried them to prison. Notwithstanding now when the King vrged him to runne an o∣ther course; he kneeled downe and craue par∣don, as thinking the king to haue done inough for one daie; but the King preuailing more by commanding, then the other could doe by in∣treating, at the last this Countie addressed him∣selfe to this last course, which indeede was the last course of that daie and for cuer to the king: for the staues beeing broken, and the King his vizzard suddenly falling off (so doth the Lord worke to bring his iudgements to pasle) one of the shiuers pearsed his head vnto the braines, and suddenly so festered that no surgeons could cure the same. Thus the King lost one of those eyes, where with he threatned to haue seene the burning of those persōs, & died also of that hurt. 8 Neither may we here well omit the death of Charles the ninth of that name King of France, in whose time & by whose meanes that
bloodie massacre, before mentioned was done in Paris, and in many other cities of France. For as the King had delighted himselfe in the blood of his Saints, so himselfe also in his youth at the age of 25. yeares died of a most grieuous blee∣ding. Many other the like examples are recor∣ded by M. Fox, both of our owne countrie and also of other nations, of some that were stricken with madnes, of some that did hang or drowne themselues, and of other that died in despaire most fearefully, and that in such manner as that all the world might see the iust iudgement of God against them, both for their religion and also their malicious persecuting of such as were of our religion. 9 To these will I adde an other example not yet written by any, but yet as trew as any of the former, (whereof not with standing some are knowne to all the world) and also no lesse wor∣thie the writing then the former. At great Wenham in Suffolke, in the daies of King Hen∣rie the eight, there dwelt one M. Cardinal, whose wife hauing heard one M. Worthe a godly man & good preacher, preach at Hadley about some three myles from thence, at her returne home entreated her husbande one daie to request M. Worthe to come and preach with them. Master Cardinall though at the first fearing some dan∣ger of law, yet at the last yeelded, and indeede proceeded and procured M. Worth to come thi∣ther. The parson of the saide Wenham beeing popish, withstood M. VVorth beeing come, say∣ing
that no such should preach there; M. Cardi∣nal intreated but the parson denied, beeing like o the dogge in the manger that wil neither eate aie himselfe, nor suffer the horse at the racke to eate any. So, I saie, this parson (as some also doe n these daies) neither would nor could doe good himselfe, neither would suffer any other o doe any. At length M. Cardinall seeing the parson so wilfull and obstinate, saide that M. VVorth should preach doe the parson what he could to the contrarie, and come what daunger would come. In fine they went all to Church, and many other vpon knowledge of M. VVorth his preaching were assembled. Now when M. VVorth should begin his sermon, the parson according to his froward word for the distur∣bing of him, went toward the high altar to saie, masle. VVhat followed? a most worthie ex∣ample of God his iustice. For presently before all the people assembled, the Lord smote this po∣pish parson for dead for the time, drawing his mouth vp to his eare, and so made him past say∣ing of masse. Notwithstanding beeing carried out of the church for auoiding further trouble of the congregation, he was within little time re∣couered of his life, yet neuer recouered his witts and senses, but liuing long after, continued a foole all the daies of his life, and turned the spit,  was imploied vpon some other seruice in the saide M. Cardinall his house euer after. I haue heard this of many very credible persons, who had often heard it from M. VVorth, long time
after (euen in this Queenes daies) viccar of Ded∣ham in Essex, and of many other that were pre∣sent at that sermon, and were eye witnesses of the iudgement. Some also are yet liuing about VVenham aforesaid that knew it. 10 I might adde many other examples of God his iudgements against like persons for like cause: but these shall be sufficient. For by these who seeth not (that hath any eyes at all to see) in what account poperie is with the Lord? Let all men therefore by these examples take heede that they deceiue not themselues. Let not them blindfold their owne eyes that they may not see the things thus manifest. Let them not disgrace the reports of M. Fox, sith many things written by him are also written by other before him, from whome he borrowed that which he did write. Some things of his are sa∣mous, and knowne to all men. I am not igno∣rant that M. Fox in writing some things vpon the report of others might sometime erre. And although his slippe in such things be taken great hold of by the Papists, who there by take occasion to disgrace all the truth he hath writ∣ten, to couer their owne crueltie, to conceale God his iudgements, & to harden themselues in poperie, and the more easily to draw other to be of this minde; yet let the wise and true Chri∣stian consider, that it was by the deuills great policie, to mooue some (no doubt) in colour of synceritie, and pretending a minde of helping M. Fox in that worthie worke, to informe him
with some vntruths, that by his writing of them vpon such information, all the rest of his wri∣ting might be in disgrace, as being in like man∣ner vntrue. This no doubt, was the subtiltie of the old serpent, and of his viperous litter, so to disgrace that noble worke, and so to obscure those euident examples of Gods disalowance of their religion, as though he had written no truth, when the most of the things by him chro∣nicled, are as cleare as the sunne is in the midst of the brightest sommer day. But albeit some be giuen ouer in the iust iudgement of God, to beleeue truthes to be lies, because they haue em∣braced lies for truthes; yet I hope that such as belong vnto the Lord, though perhaps by such deuises they haue beene abused, will now make better vse of these examples that I haue set downe, and the like. Thus much for those works of God against poperie and Papists, whereby he hath (as it were) immediately testified his dislike of both. THE FOƲRTH BRANCH OF the tenth argument, touching the workes of God for our religion. NOwe although by the former workes, God hath also testified his approbation of our religion; yet let vs nowe further consi∣der and marke diligently, what
he hath directly done for our religion & the pro∣fessours thereof. Truly such haue beene the great and mightie works of God for our religion, that as the Prophet saith, God is knowne in Iudah, his name is great in Israel. psal. 76. And againe, The Lord loueth the gates of Sion aboue all the habita∣tion of Iacob, glorious things are spoken of the citi of God. psal. 87. 2, 3. So also it may be said of ma∣ny particular persons that haue boldly profes∣sed, and stoutly maintained our religion, and chiefly of those cities, countries, and kingdoms where it hath bin in like māner maintained, de∣fended, and established. To begin with Luther, when it pleased God first to open his eyes to see both the abominations of poperie, and also the truth of the gospell, and likewise to deliuer him from the miserable darknes and bondage of the one, and to translate him to the glorious light and libertie of the other, yea to giue him an heart, courage, and tongue, boldly (as the Lords herault) to condemne, and disclaime the former, and to preach and proclaime the other; how many, how diuers, how great, and how mightie aduersaries had he? How few also, how simple, and how weake were those that tooke his part? yet how mightily and how miraculously did God preserue & vphold him, yea also blesse and prosper the worke of his ministerie, almost to all Christendome? The like might be saide of many other, who although they had not so great, nor so many enemies as Luther had: yet had more greater then they had beene able to
haue resisted, had not the Lord mightily taken their part. 2 What shall we saie of little Geneua? doth it not stand in the very mouth of the aduersarie there of the Duke of Sauoie? doth this aduersa∣rie want either power or malice? Is it not there∣fore manifest that the Lord which neither sleepeth nor slumbereth, psal. 121. 4. is the keeper there of, and that he doth protect and defende it by his mightie power and outstretched arme? What shall we saie of the towne of Rochel, besieged for the gospels sake, and for harbouring the pro∣fessours thereof, by all the power of France for seauen whol monethes together? were there not during that siege many conflicts & skirmishes? did not the whole power of France make sea∣uen principall assaults thereunto, in all which the Pope his side & greater power had the grea∣ter losse? doe not the French histories them∣selues testifie, that in the first assault, within lesse then one moneth there were discharged against the walls and houses thereof, the num∣ber of thirtie thousand great shotte? Doe not the same also write that in the second assault there were two thousand fielde peeces laide a∣gainst the towne? yet what successe had these and the other assaults? The King was forced in the ende to withdrawe his forces, and still to graunt them continuance of their former priui∣ledges, and specially to the griefe of his heart, the libertie of the gospel. What also shall we saie of God his prouidence toward the said ci∣tie,
during all the time of the former siege? for the poorer sort wanting corne, the Lord sent e∣uery daie into the riuer a multitude of such fish, as the which they vsed in stead of bread: and that this was the speciall and extraordinarie worke of God it appeareth in that, that so soone as the siege was remooued, the supplie also of the fishes did cease. 3 Aboue all what shall we saie of our owne little Iland, and of our most dread soueraigne and gracious Queene? Hath not the whole land, and especially her Highnes, had many and mightie enemies continually? Before shee came to the crowne in the daies of Queene Marie, were not Queene and Councell (for fiue yeares togi∣ther) her mortall enemies? did they not translate her from place to place, by night and by daie, whether in health or sicke? were not sometime her owne seruants remooued from her, and straungers appointed to attend vpon her? was not the place directly vnder her, one night fired to her great daunger if it had not beene preuen∣ted? did shee not sometime in the euening feare death before the morning? did shee not in the heauines of her heart and agonie of her soule, write, Much suspected by me, nothing prooued can be? Did shee not sende these words to some of her seruants, that came and attended to see her. Tanquam ovis? who kept her in all those great and deepe daungers? who restrained her ene∣mies, especially the bloodie and butcherly Bi∣shops, Bonner and Gardiner, who deliuered her
in the ende? who aduaunced her vnto the crowne? did not the Lord all this, and that most wonderfully? And may it not be saide in some sort of her preseruation, deliuerance, and aduauncement, as it is saide of Christ him∣selfe, especially considering that all her daun∣ger was for Christ his cause: This is the Lord his doing and it is vvonderfull in our eyes? psal. 118. 32. 4 Sithence shee hath beene placed in the throne of Maiestie, haue her daungers bin lesse or fewer? No verily: but as her place hath beene higher, so the deuill and all his whelpes haue more sought her vtter ruine and ouerthrow. To omit forraine assaults, many home rebellions, many secret conspiracies and priuie treasons, many open insurrections, haue beene against her Highnes from time to time. Many haue beene sent partly from the Pope, partly from the King of Spayne, first adjured by their sa∣crament of the altar, secretly or openly most traiterously to murther her. Many here within the realme haue conspired and attempted the same. Neither haue they beene such as haue wanted opportunitie to haue effected their pur∣pose, but euen such as haue beene continuall courtyers, waiting daily vpon her person; yea as haue had all their aduancement and honour from her: such also as haue had familiar ac∣cesse vnto her, and with whome likewise shee of her princely curtesie and kindenes towards them hath vouchsafed verie often priuately
to confer: yea euen then, when they haue come with full purpose and resolution to haue defiled their hands with shedding of her sacred blood, haue they beene admitted to her priuate and secret conference. Who then bridled them? who tooke away all heart and courage from them? Is it not euident to all men, and must not all men acknowledge, that the secret power of the Al∣mightie did both withhold them, and also pre∣serue her? And may not shee truly saie with the Prophet, psal. 94. 17. If the Lord had not holpen me, my soule had almost dwelt in silence? But is this all? No verily: the Lord hath not onely thus mi∣raculously kept her, but also highly honoured her in the eyes of all nations. As shee maintai∣neth the cause of Christ Iesus, so God hath per∣formed to her in some sort, the promises made vnto Christ Iesus. As shee is a principall mem∣ber of the spouse of Christ Iesus, so hath God honoured her with those honours that he hath promised to the same spouse. All Princes almost haue brought presents vnto her, and all people haue beene in admiration of her. Search all hi∣stories, turne ouer all Chronicles, sacred or pro∣fane, diuine or humane, ecclesiasticall or ciuill, yet shall ye neuer finde a woman prince, a mai∣den Queene, whose preseruation hath beene so mightie, whose glorie so great, whose gouerne∣ment so long, so prosperous and so happie. 5 All this hath beene the more admirable, and is the more to be considered, by how much the more and oftner shee hath beene cursed with
bell, booke, and candle, by him that arrogateth to himselfe plenitudinem potestatis, all authoritie in heauen, in earth, and in hell it selfe. This ad∣deth no small force vnto my argument against him and all his religion. For if he were he whom he vaunteth himselfe to be: if he were Peter his successour, and Christ his viccar-generall vpon earth: if he were the head of the Church, if he had the keies of heauen, if he could not erre; how could he haue erred in sending forth so many curses causeles? or if the cause of his curses were iust (the which he rather pretendeth) how could he so often haue cursed without successe? Christ hath said and promised to Peter and his succes∣sour (as they teach) that whatsoeuer, or whom∣soeuer he should binde or loose in earth, the same should be bound or loosed in heauen. Haue his curses beene such? verily they neuer came halfe waie to heauen, or els when they came there, Saint Peter was so fast asleepe that they could not awake him to let them in: or els when they were let in or crouded in, they were nipped in the head, and by the regents there re∣tained with a Nescio, or Non placet. But I will not speake too much of this, least I prouoke his holines to commence an action against Christ himselfe, for not keeping promise, yea to sende out a bull and excommunication against him. For then what should become of vs poore Pro∣testants, if our head should be thus hardly dealt withall? 6 Notwithstanding I feare him not greatly,
sith I haue seene by so much experience, that his bulls are but bubbles; yea that the high court of heauen, hath alwaies turned his cursings into blessings. For I doubt not, but that the more he hath cursed her Maiestie and this lande, the more God hath blessed both. Elisha cursed the two captaines with their fifties, which were sent to apprehend him and carrie him to the King, and presently fire came downe from hea∣uen and consumed them. 2. King. 1. 11. Elisha cursed those vnhappie hangmans and wicked boyes that mocked him, and presently came two Beares out of the forrest which deuoured them. 2. King. 2. 29. The same Prophet likewise cursed his seruant Gehazi, for that sinne which before we haue heard to be the life of the Pope, and presently the leprosie of Naaman did fasten on him and cleaue vnto him. 2. King. 5. 27. Da∣uid cursed Ioab, praying the Lord to remember him according to his wickednes, 2. Sam. 3. 39. & so it fell out to Ioab, 1. King. 2. 34. Paul cursed Elimas the sorcerer with blindnes, and immedi∣ately there fell on him a myst & darknes, so that he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand, Act. 13. 11. If therefore this bonus senex and holy father, had cursed with the same spirit wherewith they cursed, and in the same name in whose also they cursed, his curses also would haue had the same effect. But sithence they had the cleane contrarie, may we not safely con∣clude, that he is not the Vickar of Christ, but rather the deputie of the deuill; and that the
vickar of Saint fooles is his ghostly father? yea that he is the aduersarie of Christ and childe of perdition, in taking vpon him to curse the an∣nointed of the Lord, who is also the blessed of the Lord. Certenly forasmuch as his curses are no more effectuall, but alwaies turned into such blessings, I wish he would likewise curse me; for then I thinke I should both liue the longer, notwithstanding my present infirmities of bo∣die, which daily threaten death vnto me, and also euerie other way be the more blessed. Dauid hoped of some good from the Lord, for cursing of Shimei after another manner, 2. Sam. 16. 12. so if the Pope would also curse me, I should hope to fare likewise the better thereby. 7 To end this argument therfore drawne frō such examples: if Nabuchadnezzer seeing the mightie deliuerance of Shadrack, Meshach, and Abednego, in the fierie ouen, did acknowledge their God to be the only God, Dan. 3. 29. If Da∣rius seeing the straunge preseruation of Daniel from the mouth of the Lyons, when he was cast into their denne to haue bin deuoured of them, did likewise confesse the God of Daniel to be the liuing God which remaineth for euer, Dan. 6. 26. shall any that professe themselues, and would be accounted Christians, see so many and so great mercies of God towardes other professing our religion, and so miraculously be∣stowed: shal any, I say, that would be accounted Christians, seeing all these things done by God himselfe, for the vpholding and maintaining of
our religion and the professours thereof, yet make doubt of our God whither he be the li∣uing God, and of our religion whither it be the true religion? 8 Yea but me thinketh, I heare one obiect the great plentie that was in the time of poperie, when one might buie 24. egges for a pennie, a good cowe for a noble, or eight shillings, an oxe for a marke, a sheepe for twentie pence, a bushell of wheat for foure or sixe pence. And that sithence this new religion (for which I now plead) came vp, there was neuer such plentie, neither was it euer so merrie with vs. This is an old obiection, and worne in a manner with of∣ten handling cleane through: yea it is so olde that it is euen rotten and consumed, so that if it be but touched, it will fall to dust or pouder. It was vsed by the Iewes to Ieremie against the word of God that he preached, and for defence of their former idolatrie: When, say they, we wor∣shipped the Queene of heauen (or as some doe read more generally, the things of heauen) then we had plentie of victualls, and were well, and felt no euill; but sithence we left such idolatrie, we haue beene consumed by the sword, and by famine. Ier. 44. 17, 18. To this obiection I returne a threefold an∣swer briefly. First I saie that this plenty of things in former time of poperie, is not easily prooued as spoken. For although a man might then buie so much for so little as hath beene spoken of, yet this prooueth not such plentie, except there had beene as great plentie also of money, to haue
bought the other things so cheape. Then a penie was as hard to come by, as a tester is now: for then a labouring man had but a penie a daie for his worke, but now he hath sixe pence or a groat at the least. Therefore it skilleth not though things be now dearer then they were then, as long as money is more plentifull and easie to be come by. So likewise it may be saide as well of the commodities which the poore man hath to sell, as which the rich man hath. When therefore a man may haue a groat nowe or sixe pence as easily as then he could haue a penie, may he not as well giue a groat or sixe pence for that which he buieth now, as then he did giue a penie? Se∣condly, the number of people beeing now so encreased aboue that it was then, as we see it to be, and compared with the small number of those times, doth prooue that there was no grea∣ter plentie in those times then is now. Yea ra∣ther doth not this commend the mercie and li∣beralitie of God the more, in prouiding as well for the great multitude that is nowe, by the meanes of the long and great peace we haue had, as he did then for that small number of people that was then? If it be obiected, that ma∣ny townes & cities were greater then, then now they be, and that this prooueth as great a multi∣tude to haue bin then, as is now: I answer that as some townes and cities are decaied, so also many more both townes, cities, and villages, are mightily encreased. Thirdly, though the former plentie of former times should be graunted, yet
it is not to be ascribed to poperie. For then now also where poperie is, there should be like plen∣tie. But we see the contrarie. For in Spayne and other countries of poperie, there is farre greater dearth at all times, then where our religion is receiued. THE FIFTH PART OF THE tenth argument, touching the workes of God both against Po∣perie and for our re∣ligion. NOw then let vs proceede, and to the former exāples both of God his iust iudgement against pope∣rie and Papists, and also of his mercies for our religion and the professours thereof; let vs adde an other sort of mixt workes of God, that is, of such things as God hath done both for one and also against the other, and whereby at one and the same time he hath signified both his liking of the one, and also his disliking of the other. Here I will not referre the reader to the histories and bookes of other, but doe onely intreat him wisely and in the feare of God to consider such things as haue beene so lately done in the eyes of the whole worlde, as that euery childe of twelue yeares age knoweth them and talketh of them. 2 First therefore let the great Navie of the
king of Spayne, sent forth anno Dom. 1588. for the inuasion of this kingdome, and captiua∣ting of the people (if it had beene possible) be considered, with the successe which it had. This Navie was so great, as that the seas neuer be∣fore did beare the like, and therefore also them∣selues did call it the inuincible Navie. Neither was it sent forth onely by the King of Spayne himselfe, but also with all the blessings that might be of the Pope and the whole Church of Rome. As the whole popish holy cleargie in England in Queene Maries daies, made many earnest and loude praiers, went many solemne processions, and sang many deuote Masses for the childe-birth and safe deliuerance of Queene Marie; so in like manner did the Pope and colledge of Cardinalls, and the whole ho∣ly Synagogue of Rome, in Rome, in Spayne, and in many other places, make the like supplica∣tions, goe the like processions and sing the like masses, for the good and happie successe of the saide Navie. Therefore came this great ar∣mie, not onely intending all violence and cru∣eltie, but also fully perswaded (in their owne hearts) of all victorie. They made the like ac∣count of preuailing against Englande, that sometime Senacherib King of Ashur with his Captaine Rabshakeh made of preuailing a∣gainst Ierusalem, and therefore saide (no doubt) in their hearts secretly, the same that Rab∣shakeh spake in words openly, 2. King. 18. 25. Am I now come vp without the Lord to this place
to destroy it? The Lord hath saide vnto me, goe vp against this land and destroie it. They thought it had beene impossible for vs to haue escaped their hands, as sometimes Benhadad king of Aram did thinke it impossible for the Israelites to escape out of his hands, and therefore hearing that men were come out of Samaria against him, he made not reckoning of it, but said, Whe∣ther they be come out for peace, take them aliue, or whether they be come ought to fight, take them yet aliue. 1. King. 20. 18. Finally they so presumed vpon the vertue of the Popes blessing and vpon their great forces, that they made reckoning before of deuiding the spoile amongst them, as sometime Sisera and his mother with her wise ladies did, of deuiding the spoile of the Israe∣lites. Iudg. 5. 29. 3 But what came of all this? Truly, as there neuer had beene sent forth the like power by sea against any people, so was there neuer the like ouerthrow. They had not cried loud ynough vnto their gods, therefore they did not helpe them: they set themselues against the God of heauen, therefore he confounded them. They said as the Egyptians saide, Exod. 15. 9. We will pursue, we will ouertake them, we will deuide the spoyle, our lust shall be satisfied vpon them, we will draw our sword, our hand shall destroy them: but we may truly sing and say as Moses and the Is∣raelites in that place sung and said, vers. 6, 7, 10. Thy right hand, O Lord, is glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, hath bruised the enemie. And
in thy great glorie hast thou ouer throwne them that rose against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them as the stubble. Thou blewest with thy winde, the sea couered them, they sanke as lead in the mightie waters. All this may we truly say, because the Lord, the Lord onely did ouer∣throw Pharao and his people in the redde sea. He gaue their flesh to be meate to the fishes, as before he had giuen the flesh of the Egyptians. Yea he did this in a maner without any strēgth of men, he commanded both winde and sea a∣gainst them, and they both obeyed, that so him∣selfe might haue all the glorie, and none might giue any part thereof to vs, neither we take any part thereof vnto our selues: yea that so he might make it knowne to all the world, that Pope and Spanyard had not onely opposed themselues vnto the Queene of England and her religion, but also to the God of heauen and his truth. So that as all the praiers, processions, and masses here in England for Queene Marie her safe de∣liuerance, & for the yong Prince in her wombe, came to nothing: in like maner did all the works of like deuotion, by the Pope himselfe and the rest of the Church of Rome, in Rome and else∣where, come to lesse then nothing. For as be∣fore his curses of our Queene and land were tur∣ned into blessings: so now also his blessings of the Spanyard and his forces, were turned into curses. Who seeth not by this, that he that dwel∣leth in the heauens did laugh them to scorne, and that that the Lord had them in derision? as
it is said and threatned vnto all such as assemble togither against the Lord and against his an∣nointed. psal. 2. 2. &c. As the prophets & priests of Baal cried vnto their gods, so did the Spanyard vnto his gods, both which he imagineth to be in heauen, and also before which he falleth downe and worshippeth in the earth, I meane both vnto all his Saints, and also to all his gra∣uen images made of woode, stone, siluer, and gold, &c. As Elisha cried vnto the true God, so also did we in the daie of our trouble. We fasted and praied lifting vp our hearts and our handes vnto God in the heauens, commending our selues and all our forces onely to him. Therefore as the priests of Baal laboured in vaine: so also did the Spanyard. As Elija, Iehosaphat, Morde∣chaie, and Ester, and many other the good ser∣uants of God, were heard in that they praied; so also were we. Wherefore, as Elija by this argu∣ment confounded the priests of Baal, proouing their god to be no god, their worship to be false worship, and contrarily did approoue himselfe to worship the true God, in true manner: so also why may not we by the like argument, con∣demne the god of the Pope and the Spanyards to be no god, and their religion likewise to be no religion: and on the contrarie conclude and boldly affirme our God only to be the true God, and our religion to be that religion which this our true God hath once commanded, doth dai∣ly commaund, and euer accepteth? Truly so great was our daunger in that expedition of the
Spanyard against vs, that sithence our deliuerāce from the same we may truly say as the Church saith, psal. 124. If the Lord had not bin on our side, may England now say, if the Lord had not bin on our side, they had then swallowed vs vp quicke, when their wrath was kindled against vs: then the waters had drowned vs, the streame had gone ouer our soule, then had the swelling waters gone ouer our soule. Praised be the Lord, which hath not giuen vs as a praie vnto their teeth. Our soule is esca∣ped, euen as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the snare is broken, and we are deliuered. Our helpe is in the name of the Lord, which hath made heauen and earth. This whole psalme in respect of our migh∣tie deliuerance, may we as truly applie vnto our selues, as before we shewed that we might applie part of the song of Moses and the Israe∣lites, when they were newly deliuered from their slauerie and bondage out of the lande of Egypt. 4. The second example of these mixt workes of God against Pope and poperie, and also for vs and our religion, is the honourable and hap∣pie successe of our forces last yeare sent forth a∣gainst the Spanyards vnder the conduct of the right honourable and most worthie Earle of Es∣sex, and the Lord Admiral: especially if it be compared with the former successe of the Span∣yard against vs. For the Spanyard comming against vs (as before is said) with such huge and mightie forces as he thought inexpugnable, and finding vs as it were in a manner altoge∣ther
vnprepared to meete him so suddenly, and indeede of our selues not able then to haue resisted him, yet could not so much as set any footing of any one man within any part of our land; but by the mightie hand of God stretched out from heauen against him, was forced to re∣turne in vain, yea with losse (at the least) of halfe his forces both shippes and men by the waie, to the euerlasting shame and dishonour of him and of his religion. But on the contrarie our for∣ces beeing nothing so great as his were, neither comming vpon him on the suddaine without his great preparation for them, did yet so migh∣tily preuaile, by the power of God going before them and with them, and the feare of God fal∣ling vpon the Spanyards (as sometime vpon the Shechemites and their neighbour nations, Gen. 35. 5.) that comming not into any obscure ri∣uer, but to one of the most famous hauens in all Spayne, and finding the same furnished with a mightie Navie of the king his greatest shippes, did not withstanding both foile all the foresaide Navie, and also land, not some, but as many of their men as themselues would: and within few daies did both take and sacke, not some little village, but one of the chiefest, richest, and stron∣gest townes in all his kingdome, strongly forti∣fied with men, and plentifully furnished with victuall, and whereof (by report of them that were there, & that know the place) euery house was built of stone, and in forme and strength like vnto a castle. Thus did our God blesse and
prosper our forces against him, with losse of no man of reckoning but onely one, and of no more of the common soldiours, then is most likely in so great a multitude would haue died at home. So did our armies returne, as with a sufficient spoyle and bootie, so with exceeding great ho∣nour and renowne. What shall we say of these things? that by our hand and strength we haue gotten the victorie? God forbid that we should so robbe God of his honour. But let vs more truly answer as the Apostle answereth the like question of admiration with these wordes, If God be with vs, who can be against vs? Rom. 8. 31. Euen so let vs, touching the confusion of the Spanish forces, and the gracious successe of our owne, likewise answer and say, God hath beene with vs, therefore it skilleth not who hath beene a∣gainst vs: and on the contrarie, God hath beene a∣gainst the Spanyard, and therefore it hath not hol∣pen him against vs, whomsoeuer he hath had with him. 5 A third example also of like mixt workes of God, against Pope and poperie, and for vs and our religion, is that ouerthrow which the last winter the Lord himselfe, without any meanes of man, gaue to a great power of Spa∣nish shippes, sent towards Ireland for aide and strengthening of the rebells against vs. This power of shippes, beeing not so much as exspe∣cted of vs, did the Lord by his mightie power so graciously confound in our behalfe, that we ne∣uer heard of their comming, till tidings came of
their drowning. And may we not here also adde the happie successe of our last voyage this present yeare against the Spanyard, as likewise the contrarie of the Spanish Navie againe sent hither against vs? yes verily. These doe no lesse deserue the registring, then the former: these are as well worthie the obseruation, as the for∣mer: finally these speake as plainely for our religion and against poperie, as the former. For as touching this second voyage of that most worthie and honourable Earle, albeit at the first God himselfe seemed as it were to froune vpon vs and to resist vs, (for the triall of the courage, and proouing the patience, and like∣wise the better humiliation of the saide Earle and his forces) and finally for instructing of vs as well as the Spanyard, that the proceeding in any voyage must not be according to the will and pleasure of man, but according to his will and pleasure, that ruleth and gouerneth as well by sea as by lād:) yet afterward (all things consi∣dered) the Lord hath not much lesse (if any whit lesse at all) magnified his great mercies towards vs and his gospel, and his iustice against Spayne and poperie, then he did the last yeare, at the taking and sacking of Cales. For first of all, how honourably to the great reproch of the great King, hath our little Fleete discontinued from home, partly before, and partly about the dominions of Spayne, and that in the very face of the Spanyard? yet what hath all the Spanish power done vnto them? yea rather how cow∣ardly
haue they kept themselues within their safe hauens and harbours, not daring so much as once to looke our forces in the faces? did we so in the yeare 1588? doth not this speake to the renowne of our little Iland, and especially to the glorie of the religion therein professed? doth it not in like manner as euidently dis∣grace both the Spanyards themselues, and also their Romane religion? As touching the finall successe of this voyage, although it were not such as it might haue beene (because God well seeth that so rich a bootie as the whole Indian sleete had beene, would perhaps haue made vs too proud) yet such was it, that we haue no losse, neither they any gaine thereby. Concerning the Spanish Navie, this yeare also sent against vs, first how cowardly was it sent, when they thought our strength to haue beene from home? will not euery man vtterly condemne him for a cowarde, that taketh the aduantage priuily of his aduersarie, when he thinketh him to be vnarmed? why therefore may not the like be saide of the like practise of a King and kingdome? especially of such a king and king∣dome, as in their high pride thinke they should commaund the whole world. Secondly what successe had this Fleete, so priuily and closely thinking to haue stolne vpon vs? verily as he that kept England heretofore, hath neither slept nor slumbred, so now also whē the Spāyards thought to haue founde vs asleepe, they founde him waking. When they thought to haue found vs
vnarmed, they found him as a man of warre, with his sword girded to his thigh, yea rather readie drawne in his hand, and euery way pre∣pared for the battaile. For this man of warre fought for vs againe this yeare, as he did the last yeare: and did partly confound them, and partly force them to recule home with all dishonour; and that before that we did so much as once (almost) dreame of any such power comming towardes vs. The more did God reueale his wrath against them and their errours; as also testifie his loue vnto vs, and to his owne truth. 6 In writing thus of these things, I boast not of our selues and our owne worthines, as if the Lord for our righteousnesse had done all these things forvs: I labour not to commend our per∣sons, but onely to iustifie our religion. As touch∣ing our selues, we cānot deny but that although we haue the gospel, yet our contempt of his go∣spel and his other mercies, our securitie by thē, & our other manifold and heinous sinnes which we daily commit against his maiestie, are such, that we haue beene and are altogether vnwor∣thie of so mightie protection, and of so prospe∣rous successe. It hath not beene therefore in re∣spect of our selues, that God hath thus dealt with vs and for vs: but onely for his owne great names sake, and that he might yet further com∣mend his gospell professed amongst vs (but in∣deede not so practised and obeied by vs as it ought to be) vnto those that yet regard it not,
and that (if it be possible) he might winne there∣unto both Atheists, and Papists, and also all other that yet are enemies thereof. Thus we condemne our selues, and thus we magnifie onely the pow∣er and goodnes of God, in regard whereof we wish as the Prophet often wisheth in the 107, psalme, that men would therefore confesse before the Lord, his louing kindnes, and his wonderfull workes that he doth before the sonnes of men: we wish also as the Prophet doth again in the same psalme, vers. 22. that, men would offer sacrifice of praise, and declare his works with reioycing. Let no man or woman therefore, how zealous soeuer of poperie they haue beene hitherto, and yet are: or how obstinate and hard hearted soeuer a∣gainst our religion, so lightly passe by this argu∣ment, or so basely thinke of our religion, as they haue done or doe. Though we doe not honour it as we ought to doe, but rather disho∣nour it by our wicked liues and conuersations, altogether vnbeseeming the holines thereof: yet let them more seriously consider these argu∣ments, whereby God himselfe from heauen hath graced and commended and doth grace and commend the same vnto them. 7 Let no man here say, that by these last ar∣guments from the works of God, the religion of the Turks might be iustified. For albeit it cannot be denied, that the Turke hath had mightie vi∣ctories, and doth flow in great prosperitie, yet is their great difference betweene our victories, and his: betweene our prosperitie and his. All
that he hath gotten hath beene by exceeding force and power: but our victories haue beene obtained almost without force, against great force. His victories haue neuer beene gotten without great losse of his owne side: but as the Iewes and Israelites oftentimes preuailed with∣out any fight at all, Iudg. 7. 20. 2. Chron. 20. 17. and 23. &c. so in a manner haue we done. The Lord onely hath fought for vs, we almost haue not fought for our selues or for him, but onely haue shewed our faces to the enemie. As the Turke hath thus gotten that which he hath, so also he maintaineth his estate wholly by vio∣lence: but as the Lord hath fought for vs from heauen, so also he miraculously maintaineth vs. The like may be said of the other prosperitie of the Turke, because he hath not those mightie enemies to oppugne and envie it, which we haue had and yet haue, to enuie and oppugne ours. The same, and more also, may be saide of all the victories of the Spanyard himselfe against other: he hath gotten all, he holdeth and keepeth all, partly by violence and crueltie, partly by fals∣hoode and treacherie. Therefore as the former great victories of Senacherib against other na∣tions, whereof Rabshekah boasteth, 2. King. 18. 34, 35, &c. did the more iustifie and commend Hezekia, and the worship of God repaired and established by him: so the great victories of the Spanyards against other nations either heathen or popish, maketh the more for vs and for our re∣ligion, sith the Spanyard cannot by those means
preuaile against vs, by which he hath preuailed against others, as great people as we are if not much greater. For what els doth this teach, but that the Lord himselfe is our light and saluation, our strength, our rocke and fortresse, and he that de∣liuereth Psal. 27. 1. Psal. 18. 1. 2. vs. Surely the Lord is our strength, and he that teacheth our hands to fight, and our fingers to battell, he is our goodnes & for tresse, our tower, and Psal. 144. 1, 2. deliuerer, our shield, and he in whome we trust: euen he that subdueth our people vnder vs. It is the Lord that pleadeth for vs & for our religion, yea rather for our religion onely; because that we ourselues are so wicked and sinneful, that we are altogether vnworthie of his aide and defence. 8 Yea but the Spanyard himselfe hath also had great victories against the Turke, when the Turkish forces haue perhaps beene twise or thrise so great as the Spanish. Let this be graun∣ted, yet doth not this simply iustifie the Spa∣nish religion, but onely in respect of the Turks, who are professed enemies of Christ and of all that is called by the name of Christ. The Israe∣lites after the death of Ioshua fell often to most grieuous idolatrie, the Lord gaue them not∣withstanding mightie victories against their e∣nemies. Yea the tenne Tribes after they were reuolted, not onely from Iuda, but also from the Lord himselfe and his worship, and so continu∣ed: in their battels notwithstanding with those that professed enmity both to thē, & also to god whome they sometime had truly worshipped, and of whose worship they retained some small
remnants, had very great and happie successe, though sometimes their enemies were tenne times as many and as strong as themselues. Yet doe not these victories simply iustifie the Israe∣lites, or their present religion, but onely in re∣spect of their enemies, which did vtterly denie God and his religion. The Lord notwithstan∣ding their falling in most things, had regard to the remnants of his worship amongst them, and to his formet couenant, euen for his owne names sake, as Ezekiel teacheth, chap. 20. In like sort the Spanyards professing the name of Christ, and hauing some remnants of Christian religion amongst them, but the Turks vtterly denying and defying Christ, and the very name of all christianitie: no maruaile though Christ Iesus in the warres of the Spanyards against them, doe rather fight the battels of the Spanyards, as ha∣uing respect vnto his name so blasphemed by the Turke. But hereby doth not Christ Iesus simply approoue of the Spanish religion, but onely in respect of the Turkish. 9 If it be further obiected, that the most wic∣ked that are, doe sometime preuaile against the godly themselues, as the men of Ai against Isra∣el, &c. and that they flow also in much, yea al∣most in all outward prosperitie, and that there∣fore this argument is not sound and firme e∣nough, to inferre that which I inferre thereof, I answer that the Lord indeede giueth sometime such victorie vnto the wicked against his owne people, but it is for some speciall sinne of his
people, as appeareth by the example before al∣leadged. For Israel fell before the men of Ai for the sinne of Achan, yea the Lord saith they could not stand before their enemies, Iosh. 7. 12. because of that sinne. Againe, though the Lord sometimes giue his people ouer into the hands of his and their enemies, yet he doth it not in such miraculous manner without the force of the enemie against them, himselfe figh∣ting from heauen for the enemie, as he hath done for vs against the Spanyards, but alwaies the enemie hath preuailed against the Lord his people, by greater strength of flesh then the Lords people had against them, and by fighting in their owne person. For touching the former example of Ai, Ioshua sent but about 3000. of the Israelites against it, Iosh. 7. 4. but it is most like that they were repelled by a farre more greater force. For although they whome Ioshua first sent to view Ai, returned and saide it was but a small people, yet it is certen that they were able to make a greater force then three thou∣sand, because when Israel preuailed against Ai to the number of twelue thousand, Iosh. 8. 26. The same may be saide of the other prosperitie of the wicked, they prosper, they flourish, they waxe rich, &c. but it is by ordinarie meanes: sometime also, yea most commonly by vnlaw∣full meanes, by hooke and by crooke (as the prouerbe is:) but our prosperitie and the prospe∣ritie of other kingdomes, countries, and cities, &c. professing our religion, haue so prospered
and flourished in outward things, aboue that which they did whilst they were ouergrowne with poperie, that euery man may euidently see, that it is the speciall blessing of God euen for the honour of our religion, that hath made vs rich and thus to prosper. Againe we haue thus prospered, though the wicked Papists haue seene our prosperitie, and beene angrie; yea though they haue practised against vs and gnashed their teeth. Psal. 37. 12. and 112. 10. THE CONCLƲSION, WITH the vse of the treatise. 1SIth therefore that poperie is not wrought in men by the word of God, but by traditions of men: sith it is vpheld and maintained chiefly by wicked and vnlawfull meanes: sith the proper substance and matter thereof is not one∣ly diuers from the written word of God, but al∣so directly contrarie thereunto: sith the forme of Gods worship in poperie is not that which god hath prescribed, but that which men haue de∣uised and forged: sith the principall ende of po∣perie whereunto it referreth all things, is not the glorie of God, but the glorie of Saints, of ima∣ges, of Pope, and generally of man himselfe: sith the fruites of poperie are such as God hath ex∣pressely condemned in the decalogue and tenne commandements giuen to all nations, and for all times euen vnto the ende of the world: sith there is no sound ioy and comfort growing vpon
the tree of poperie, but double feare and despe∣ration: sith poperie is a foolish and absurd reli∣gion: sith poperie agreeable, sutable, and well pleasing to the naturall man, which sauoureth not the things which are of God: sith the gifts of God his spirit (promised to the Church in the latter age thereof, are bestowed vpon the church whilst it swarued not from the pure doctrine of the gospell, deliuered by Christ and his Apo∣stles,), were at an ebbe and dead low water when poperie was full sea: sith God hath infli∣cted from time to time, manifest and straunge iudgements and punishments vpon Papists, and such especially as haue most maligned our reli∣gion and the professours thereof: sith God hath not regarded the sacrifices of the Pope and po∣pish church, neither hath made their curses effe∣ctuall against them whome they haue cursed, neither hath giuen any good successe to thē for whome they haue made many praiers, but haue turned his curses into blessings, & his blessings into curses: therefore I doe conclude that pope∣rie is not of God, neither acceptable vnto God. Againe, sith our religion is wrought by the prea∣ching of that word of God, which is contained in the scriptures: sith it standeth without all vn∣lawfull meanes to vphold and maintaine it: sith the matter thereof is altogether consonant with the written word: sith the forme of God his wor∣ship therein touching the essence thereof is the same that god himselfe hath prescribed: sith it re∣ferreth all things onely to the glorie of God:
sith the fruits that it alloweth and beareth, are such as God hath commāded in the decalogue and morall law: sith it alwaies beare the sound and most sweete ioy and comfort: sith in wis∣dome it well beseemeth the wisdome of God: sith it is altogether vnsauorie and vnpleasant vn∣to the naturall man: sith from the breaking thereof through the Sodomiticall and Egyptia∣call darknesse of poperie, it hath most brightly shined in those gifts of God his spirit, which were vniuersally and almost wholly eclipsed when poperie was spread ouer the face of the earth: sith God hath auenged the hatred there∣of vpon the heads of the Papists that especially hated it: sith God hath mightily vpheld, blessed, and prospered such persons and places, as haue most boldly and constantly professed and em∣braced it: finally since God hath openly plea∣ded the cause thereof against such as haue op∣pugned it, miraculously preseruing the profes∣sours thereof, so oppugned by their aduersaries; & fearefully confounding the aduersaries, I doe therefore againe conclude in behalfe of our re∣ligion, that it is of God and acceptable vnto him. The generall arguments vsed by the Pa∣pists for defence of poperie, drawne from anti∣quitie, vniuersalitie, and vnitie, are now stale, yea battered in peeces by those that haue often sub∣stantially and plentifully confuted them. There∣fore I meane not to encrease this treatise, and so to make further worke for the reader, by setting downe any answer vnto them.
THE FIRST VSE CONCER∣ning generally all of our religion, both weake and strong. THese things now written, and whereby I haue prooued the falshood of poperie, and likewise shewed the truth of our religion, I wish profitable vnto all: both to those that professe themselues of our religion, and also to those that neither are, nor professe themselues to be. Of those that professe themselues to be of our reli∣gion, some are faint, weake, and wauering: o∣thers are strong, and well grounded, or at the least such as haue neuer doubted our religion to be of God. The first sort I doe now wish to be as the second, that is, by these things that now I haue written, so confirmed and established in the loue, liking, and constant profession of our re∣ligion, so keeping (as it were by force against all force whereby they shall be assaulted) this profession of their hope, Hebr. 10. 23. without wauering, that hereafter they be neuer carried about with diuers and strange doctrines, Hebr. 13. 9. yea both these sorts of professours of our religion, I wish to be much stronger in this pro∣fession, assuring themselues that so long as this religion abideth in them, so long they them∣selues shall continue in the sonne, and in the fa∣ther, Hebr. 2. 24. and so long as they walke ac∣cording to this religion, so long they walke with God as Enoch did, Gen. 5. 22. But foras∣much as our religion is of God and acceptable
vnto him, therefore they that fall away from it, doe also depart from the liuing God, and fall away from the grace of the same God, Hebr. 3. 12. and 12. 15. and then doth there remaine no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking for of iudgement and violent fire, which shall deuoure the aduersaries, Heb. 10. 26, 27. Let no man therefore that hath giuen his name to our religion deceiue himselfe, neither suffer himselfe to be deceiued by any other, either Papist or Atheist, or of any other sect or heresie: for surely it is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God, Heb. 10. 31. it had beene better for such neuer to haue knowne the way of righte∣ousnes, then after they haue knowne it to turne from the holy commādements giuen vnto them, 2. Pet. 2. 21. for the ende of such men shall be worse then the beginning. 2 Neither would I haue this to be vnder∣stood onely of the soundnes and constancie of iudgement in our religion, but also of the con∣tinuall abounding in the workes of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 58. and the prouoking of our selues more and more to all loue and good workes, Heb. 10. 24. such as our religion commendeth: the despising whereof is the despising of God his commandements, and the doing whereof is o∣bedience, not vnto man, but vnto God himselfe. Further I wish this that I haue written against poperie and for our religion, may so confirme and strengthen all professours of our religion therein, that if any of them haue wife or other
friends yet remaining Papists, they would praie more often and earnestly, and euery other way, by themselues and by other (perhaps better a∣ble then themselues) labour more diligently the conuersion of them, then euer they haue done. How doe all louing husbands and friends la∣bour the health of their wiues or other friends beeing but bodily sicke, the daunger whereof is nothing but this present death? O then howe much more ought such husbands and friends to labour the recouerie of their wiues or other friends out of poperie, a most grieuous sicknes of the soule, the daunger whereof is eternall condemnation both of bodie and soule? The like may be said touching those that are sicke of any errours or heresies, contrarie or not agreeing to our religion; as likewise of Atheists, and such as are of no religion. THE SECOND VSE CONCER∣ning all great persons of our religion. AS I wish this good generally to all of our religion, so more espe∣cially such as are in any speciall place of honour and authoritie in church or common weale, & by such special place are able to doe some speciall good for the aduancemēt of our re∣ligion, and the helping and countenancing the professours thereof, as also for the weakning and repressing of poperie, atheisme, and such
like: such, I say, as are in any such special place, I wish, yea (as it were) vpō my knees most hum∣bly beseech, and yet also boldly exhort in the name of this God, whose religion I haue iusti∣fied vnto them, all such (I say againe) I doe be∣seech and exhort to be of all Christian courage and boldnes, for speaking and doing whatso∣euer lieth in them, whereby to promote this re∣ligion, and comfort and countenance the pro∣fessours thereof. To omit the famous and most worthie examples of many most zealous kings of Iuda, of Ester a Queene by marriage, yet as touching authoritie, but (as it were) a ladie of honour, of Iehoida likewise and Ihoshua high priests, of Ezra a scribe or inferiour priest: to o∣mit (I say) these and many other the like exam∣ples of zeale, let them onely consider how bold∣ly Ioseph an honourable counseller of Arima∣thea went vnto Pilate (but an heathen deputie of an heathen Emperour) and begged the bo∣die of Christ beeing dead, that he might honou∣rably burie the same, Mark. 15. 43. If he were so bold for the honouring of Christ, as to goe to an heathen man, how much more boldly ought men to goe to Christian Princes, in causes wher∣by Christ Iesus and his gospel may haue any ho∣nour? If he feared nothing, wherein all likeli∣hoode much was to be feared, what shal be said of them that feare where there is no feare? If he made no bones to speake for Christ, to one that had before condemned Christ, why should any sticke at speaking likewise for Christ to such
Princes, as haue done and doe daily speake and doe so much for Christ in his gospel and in his members, that they giue great incouragement to all persons of place fitte to haue accesse vnto them, without feare to put them in continuall remembrance of further honouring of Christ? If he were so bold for Christ Iesus beeing deade, how much bolder ought all men to be for Christ Iesus raised vp from the dead? yea verily he is twise risen againe: once touching his bodie out of the sepulchre, into which the same Ioseph did honourably lay him: and againe touching his gospel out of the graue of poperie, wherein it had lien twise so many hundred yeares (at the least) as his bodie had lien daies and nights in the former sepulchre. How zealous therefore ought men to be for the honouring of the gos∣pel of Christ Iesus with true honour, wherein Christ Iesus himselfe thus raised vp and glorifi∣ed cannot but be likewise honoured? As such men ought to be thus zealous, in speaking for Christ and his gospel at all times, so especially then ought they to be most zealous, when any speciall occasion requireth the same, or when a∣ny speciall opportunitie is offered thereunto. Salomon saith, How good is a word spoken in due season? Prov. 5. 25. He speaketh this by question and admiration, and thereby teacheth, that he himselfe, the wisest that euer was (Christ onely excepted) could not well expresse, how good a word was spoken in due season. Therefore he saith againe, A word spoken in his place, is like ap∣ples
of gold, with pictures of siluer, Prov. 25. 11. Such therefore as the Lord hath aduaunced to such place either in Church or in commonwealth, as wherein at any time by word or deede, they may further this religion in this booke thus cō∣mended, I wish to watch all opportunitie of doing further good, and any beeing offered, not to neglect the same, but wisely to take and fol∣low it to the vtmost of their power. Where any noble, honourable, or other great person, seeth any conuenient time where his word may doe good to further religion, & thereby to aduance God his glorie, let him thinke with himselfe as Mordecaie spake vnto Ester, Ester 4. 14. who knoweth whither the Lord hath thus aduanced me for this time? 2 Neither let any such person feare the losse of their labour touching themselues, in spea∣king in such causes. God whose religion ours is, hath saide by his Prophet, 1. Sam. 2. 30. Them that honour me I will honour: and, he is faithfull that hath promised, Hebr. 10. 23. This is manifest by many of the examples before mentioned. The fruit indeede of such labour, doth not al∣waies appeare presently: yet God is not vn∣righteous that he should forget the worke and labour of such loue towardes his name, &c. Hebr. 6. 10. but he taketh such a note thereof, yea of the least word spoken this waie, that it shall most certenly be remembred to such per∣sons themselues or to their posteritie euen in this life, and touching the benefites thereof,
when all the world shall thinke it buried, and euen (as it were) wholly consumed to ashes in the graue of obliuion. It was not much that Iethro the father in law of Moses did, called al∣so Keni, Iudg. 1. 16. and of whome descended the Kenites: it was not much (I say) that this Iethro or Keni did for the Israelites. For he did but onely giue counsaile to Moses his sonne in law for the better gouernement of the Israelites, Exod. 18. 19. yet note what note the Lord kept of this small matter. After the death of Moses, after the death of Ioshua, and the elders that o∣uerliued Ioshua, after the death of Othniel, E∣hud, Shamgar, Debora, Gedeon, and the rest of the Iudges that iudged Israel mentioned in the whole booke of Iudges, after the death of Eli and his sonnes, after the gouernment of Samuel resigned into the hands of Saul: after all this, euen foure hundred yeares after the former counsell giuen by Iethro to Moses, did the Lord thinke vpon this kindnes, and recompenced it tenne fold to the Kenites the posteritie of Ie∣thro. Yea rather then it should not be recom∣penced, he raised vp Saul to recompence the same, euen vnnaturall, vnthankfull, and most cruell Saul, that had sworne the death of his owne sonne Ionathan, 1. Sam. 14. 44. who had saued Israel, and would indeede haue killed him, had not the people rescued him, that af∣terward did daily hunt for the life of Dauid as for a partridge in the mountaines, 1. Sam. 26. 20. (who had notwithstanding killed the
great Goliah whome all Israel durst not looke in the face, 1. Sam. 17. 24. and gotten many o∣ther victories of the Philistims, and married Saul his owne daughter:) that also killed all the Lord his priests at once, 1. Sam, 22. 18. euen this bloo∣die man did the Lord raise vp to recompense the kindnes of Iethro, and to saue the liues of all the Kenites. Yea though this Saul were a man most vnmercifull vnto them, to whome he ow∣ed much mercie and other loue, yet the Lord so wrought his heart, for the recompencing of that that Iethro had done to Moses and for Israel, that he was very earnest with the Kenites for the withdrawing themselues from the Amala∣kites, that he might not destroy them with the Amalakites. Therefore he saith not onely Goe, but also depart, yea also he addeth, Get ye downe from, among the Amalakites, least I destroy you with them. And why is he thus mercifull vnto them? for (saith he) ye shewed mercy to all the chil∣dren of Israel, when they came vp from Egypt, 1. Sam. 15. 6. Certenly this mercie whereof such a streame did flow from Saul towards the Ke∣nites, was onely of the Lord, not of Saul him∣selfe. Saul of himselfe (as we haue heard) was as the stonie rocke in the wildernes, which not∣withstanding the Lord made to giue drinke plē∣tifully to the Israelites and their cattell, Numb. 20. 8. Saul of himselfe had neither the religion nor the manners, to consider greater things done by those that were of his owne blood, for himselfe and for the present generation of the
Israelites. Shall we then thinke that he had reli∣gion or manners to remember such olde good turnes, done so many yeares before for the old forefathers of the Israelites? Nowe what doth this example teach vs, but that the Lord is iust to remember the like kindnes, when all men shall thinke it vtterly forgotten? yea & to make such to consider the same, as from whome in respect of their contrarie disposition, no such matter can in reason be hoped for, but rather the contrarie feared? 3 But what shall I neede to call (as it were) so loud vnto antiquitie so farre off, for an ex∣ample whereby to iustifie the righteousnesse of God in honouring them that honour him? Is not Queene Elizabeth yet liuing (and many yeares more, O blessed God, may shee liue and raigne to thy glorie) is not, is not this our most noble, gracious, and Christian Queene, a most liuely and bright example of God his righteousnes in this behalfe? As her Maiestie hoth honoured God in exalting, establishing, and maintaining this religion, in comforting and countenancing the professours thereof of her owne people, and in harbouring, releeuing, and succouring them of other nations: so who seeth not but that God hath many waies as much honoured her aboue all her noble auncetours, as shee hath excelled them in zeale towards this religion?
THE THIRD VSE CONCER∣ning the militarie Nobles that are of our religion. AS I doe wish zeale daily to grow in all great persons generally, for the better vpholding and fur∣ther aduancing of this religion, so more particularly I doe also wish all Dauids Worthies, that is, the principall captaines and men of warre of Queene Elizabeth, to fight not onely the bat∣tailes of our Queene, countrey, and people, and of themselues, their wiues and children, &c. but also of the Lord in defence of our religion a∣gainst the Spanyard, or any other champion of the Pope: these I wish, by this that I haue writ∣ten, to be the more valiant and couragious in this cause of our religion, against such and other enemies. Why so? because ye fight not for men, but God himselfe. Excellent is that speech of Ioab, and worthie to be in euery ensigne that goeth against the Romish Ammonites & Mo∣abites, &c. euen written in great letters, that e∣uery souldiour might see a farre off, read, and be encouraged thereby, Be strong and let vs be valt∣ant for our people, and for the countries of God, and let the Lord doe that which is good in his eyes, 2. Sam. 10. 13. Excellent also and worthie in like sort to be written, are the words of Iehaziel the sonne of Zechariah, &c. vnto Jehoshaphat and all Iuda, for the encouragement of them against the mightie forces of the Ammonites and Mo∣abites
that came vp against them, as the Span∣yards haue come vp and doe yet daily threaten to come vp against vs, Feare ye not, neither be ye afraid for this great multitude, for the battell is not yours but Gods, 2. Chron. 20. 15. I wish also such Worthies of our land, by the former experience that we haue had of God his mightie working and fighting for vs, to be the better encouraged for the time, warres, and dangers to come, as we read Dauid to haue bin animated against Go∣liah, by the former successe he had against a ly∣on and a beare. 1. Sam. 17. 35. Notwithstanding as the cause is not their owne but the Lords, so I wish and exhort them not to seeke their owne praise and glorie, but the praise and glorie of him whose cause they handle, & whose battels they fight. Ioab in fighting against Rabbah a citie of the Ammonites, did more respect the honour of Dauid then of himselfe: and therefore though he might haue taken it without Dauid, yet he would not, but sent first for Dauid, that the vi∣ctorie might not be attributed to himselfe but vnto Dauid. 2. Sam. 12. 28. If Ioab a wicked man, did so notwithstanding respect the honour of Dauid aboue his owne honour (and yet Da∣uid though he were his soueraigne was but a mortall man, & but a type of Christ Iesus) how much more ought our Christian worthies and nobles to respect the praise, the honour, and the glorie of Christ Jesus himselfe, aboue their owne praise, honour, & glorie? Further besides this re∣gard of Christ his glorie, let them also goe forth
not trusting in their owne forces (for after this sort goe forth the heathen vnto their battailes) but let them trust in the power and helpe of the mightie Lord Christ Iesus. And therefore as it hath beene christianly prouided by our most christian Prince & the gouernours of our church vnder her, that there should be publike praiers in behalfe of such expeditions against the com∣mon aduersaries, so I wish also our noble Wor∣thies most highly to esteeme of such praiers: yea themselues also before their going forth, and whilst they shall be forth, alwaies to commend all their enterprizes vnto the Lord by most ear∣nest praier, yea to make also all the friends they can at home in like manuer to remember them priuately, as by publique authoritie they are re∣membred publiquely. For certenly as hitherto we are not to doubt, but that our chiefe successe hath beene more by these meanes, then by any strength of our owne arme, so also let them as∣sure themselues, that if they goe forth in this sort, then the Lord will not onely send his an∣gel with them, as he offered to doe for the Israe∣lites, Exod. 33. 2. but will also goe with them himselfe as it were in proper person: not onely to looke on how they fight for him, but also to teach their handes to fight and their fingers to battell: yea the Lord will be as a man of warre to goe before them, in the middes of them, be∣hinde them, and round about them in complete harnesse, both to couer their heads in the dai of battell, and likewise to fight for them, and to
deliuer his owne and their enemies into their hands, as he hath done. Now if the Lord be thus with them, who can be against them? But yet one thing more remaineth, concerning both such Worthies themselues, and also all common soldiers, namely that as they haue heard and seene by this that hath beene written, that all warre in behalfe of our religion is God his warre, and in his cause: so also they take heede, that whilst they fight one way for our religion and for God, they fight not an other way a∣gainst religion and against God himselfe. How is this? verily by transgressing, violating, or neg∣lecting the precepts of this religion, and that way sinning against God. For he that doth so, fighteth more against religion, & against God, then for religion and for God. Therefore the Scripture plentifully teacheth vs, that God hath oftentimes giuen ouer his owne people for their sinnes, yea once also his Arke to captiuitie of the common enemie: yea his temple where his name was called vpon to be destroied, and all the holy vessells and other ornaments of the temple, which sometime had serued for his worship, to be polluted and defiled by the wic∣ked heathen. Let all such Worthies therefore as before I haue spoken of, as likewise all com∣mon soldiers, which shall hereafter be emploi∣ed against the common enemie, diligently take heede and beware of all sinne generally, and more specially of such sinnes as are most common in warriours (what these are I neede
not to speake) because otherwise, though their cause be good, and commended likewise in some sort by praier vnto God by themselues and by other, yet may they feare the successe of the battell. This is manifest by the double ouer∣throw the other Israelites had before the Ben∣iamits in a cause very iust, and commended al∣so to God, and that with weeping the second time: and wherein at the first they also preuai∣led hauing humbled themselues in praier and fasting and true repentance before the Lord, Iudg. 20. 26. Now the sinne of the Israelites, for which they receiuing such a double foyle, appea∣reth by the text to haue beene, first too much confidence of the victorie, in regard partly of the goodnes of their cause, partly of their great multitude; and secondly that although they sought vnto god in that behalfe, yet they sought not in such humble and earnest manner as they should haue done, and also did at the last, when they had not onely warrant from God to goe againe to battell, but also a promise of victorie. Now if these sinnes be so dangerous to a good and iust cause, what may be feared of great sinnes? Thus much shall suffice to haue spoken concerning them that are of our religion.
THE FOVRTH VSE CONCER∣ning Atheists, and all those that are of no religion. TOuching them that are not of our religion, they are especially either Atheists and such as are of no religion, or Papists. By Atheists, I meane not onely such as in deede and openly professe thēselues to be such, not fearing plain∣ly to denie God and all religion (of which sort we hauee too many euen in our lande) but also such as doe beare men in hand that they are of our religion, but in truth are not. For albeit they will goe to Church, and performe o∣ther outward duties that our religion requireth, yea & will also sometime speake and doe some∣thing for our religion; yet all is but in pollicie: they practise onely the precepts of cursed Ma∣chiuel, and therfore if any change should come (which the God of heauen keepe from vs) they are as readie for any religion as for this. To this sort of Atheists, I doe also referre many ciuill men that neuer knew or heard of Machiuel him∣selfe, neither of his precepts, which come also to Church, &c. and liue likewise vprightly as tou∣ching ciuill righteousnes and outward equitie amongst their neighbours, which will also some∣times talke of religion both ours and poperie, and yet in truth also are of no religion at all, nei∣ther Protestants nor Papists. Moreouer hitherto belongeth a great multitude of poore soules in this land, that for want of instruction are so ig∣norant,
that they know not what religion is, or any point of religion, and which therefore make no difference betwixt our religion and poperie. All these I wish seriously to consider of my for∣mer arguments, and thereby to prouoke them∣selues to make more account of religion gene∣rally, and secondly of our religion onely, then e∣uer they haue done. As they haue heard our re∣ligion to be of God and acceptable vnto him, so let them know, that they cannot please God in any other waie but onely in our religion. How miserable therefore, wretched, and fearefull is their estate and condition? Let all such therefore lament this their miserie, heartily thanking God that they vnderstood it before their ende, and whilst it is called to daie let them not harden their hearts, but heare the voice of God yet cal∣ling them to his true religion, and knocking at the dore of their consciences to be entertained with his truth. Let them seeke the Lord whilst he may be found, and call vpon him whilst he is neare, Esa. 55. 6. least neglecting his grace offered vnto them, the Lord remooue his kingdome, and depart himselfe (as it were) out of their hearing, and so withdraw his mercies from them, and poure out his iudgements vpon them, that they stretch out their hands, and the Lord hide his eyes: they make many praiers, and the Lord heare not, Esa. 1. 15. they seeke and there be none to be found to helpe them, Ioh. 7. 34. yea least notwithstanding their seeking they die for all that in their sinnes, Ioh. 8. 21. Let such as
now laugh at, and make (as it were) a Maie∣game of all religion and the professours there∣of, weepe & mourne in time for their such laugh∣ing, least the Lord also doe laugh them to scorne in their miserie, Psal. 73. 13. and doe mocke thē when their feare commeth, Prov. 1. 26. bringing such heauines vpon them, that they cannot laugh though they would; yea and in the ende casting them into the place of vtter darknes, feare, & horrour, where is nothing but weeping and gashing of teeth, Math. 8. 12. that is, in hel fire that neuer shall be quenched, where their worme dieth not, and their fire neuer goeth out, Mark. 9. 43, 44. Those also that hitherto haue beene secure and careles regarding no religion, let them likewise in time better regard such meanes, as whereby they may be drawne to our religion. THE FIFTH ƲSE CONCER∣ning weake and ignorant Papists. TO Papists also I saie the same, especially to such as are Papists in a kind of conscience, that is, to such as are not of that religion of any obstinate and wilfull minde, but because in ig∣norance they are perswaded their religion to be the right waie, and ours to be a wrong or by∣waie. I doubt not but that there are many such in the land. Yea I hope that many Papists are such. This I doe hope of such Papists, as bring not forth those fruits that poperie approoueth of, whereof I haue spoken in my sixt argument
before, which are also mercifull and readie to doe good, not to them onely of their owne reli∣gion, but also to other. These I hope to be rather ignorant then wilfull Papists: therefore I haue also some good hope of their conuersion in time, especially if it might please God to mooue their hearts, to haue regard of the perfect law of god which conuerteth the soule, Psal. 19. 7. And truly in the Christian loue that I beare vnto these, and in the pittie and compassion I haue of their soules (as I see them full of pittie and compassion towards the bodies of other, and likewise to haue many other excellent & com∣mendable things in them) I haue the rather set penne to paper for the writing of this treatise, to trie if it might please my good God to blesse my labour vnto their good, euen to the winning of them to our religion. For I protest vnto them (and God knoweth I speake the truth of my heart, and lie not neither dissemble) that I so de∣sire their saluation, that I would be gladder thereof then of all worldly wealth and good whatsoeuer. In the meane time me thinketh, that howsoeuer they be commended for many excellent things indeede not very common, yet all their commendation is very defectiue and lame, for want of commendation touching true religion. Yea certenly when a man hath saide all that he can in commending such persons, and then saith that these were excellent men, or worthie women, were it not for one thing, that is, for their religion, this one thing wanting is
more then all they haue. For this one thing con∣cerneth God, & all the other for which Papists are commonly cōmended, concerne but men. And our Sauiour saith, that the great and first or chiefest commandement, is to loue the Lord our God, &c. Math. 22. 38. yea this is so great, that the other without this concerning men, not being grounded vpon this, are not onely litle, but in truth touching themselues, nothing at all. For Christ calleth this not onely the greater, but also the first commandement. Now where there is no first, there can be no second. Notwithstan∣ding I hoping this want of true religion in them, to be (as I saide) especially of ignorance, doe therefore the better hope of their more easie conuersion, and doe the more heartily wish the same, that there may be no such defect in their commendation as there is, but that it may be more full and perfect. Such therefore hauing vouchsafed to reade my former arguments, I doe also most heartily desire according to right to iudge of them. Some I haue heard to haue renounced poperie, vpon the sight of the great ouerthrow of the great Spanish Navie in our narrow seas, anno 1588. by the mightie pow∣er of God in our behalfe: as Rahab hearing of the great and mightie works of God for the Israelites, renounced her owne people, and was incorporated into the bodie of Israel, Ios. 2. 11. If that one argument before more large∣ly handled in this treatise, did so greatly pre∣uaile to the conuersion of some, howe much
more ought all the arguments before ap∣plied to this purpose, preuaile with other in like sort? Let none therefore so lightly regard all such things, as whereby our religion is so commen∣ded, and poperie so euidently euicted. 2 Let none oppose the religion of their fa∣thers and forefathers, &c. to all other contrarie arguments. Indeede Dauid exhorteth Salomon to know the God of his father, and to serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde, &c. 1. Chron. 28. 9. and this is an excellent in∣struction for all fathers to giue vnto their chil∣dren, and likewise for all children to learne of their fathers, when as the fathers haue knowne & serued the same God that Dauid had knowne and serued, and that according to his word, as Dauid had done: but if so be the fathers know not, neither serue that God, or not in that man∣ner that God requireth; then it is a foolish and wicked instruction to be vrged to the children by the fathers, or to be obeied by the children, namely to know and serue the God of their fa∣thers. 3 For when fathers haue rebelled against God, & not walked in his statutes and ordinan∣ces, then the Lord oftentimes complaineth of the children that haue walked in such steppes of their fathers, and therefore also threatneth the greater and heauier iudgement against them. In the 78. psal. v. 57. the Prophet complaineth of the wickednes of the Israelites, and amplifi∣eth the same by like example of their fathers,
They turned backe (saith the Prophet) and dealt falsly like their fathers, they turned backe like a de∣ceitfull bowe. So Christ also speaketh vnto the Iewes, as to a people past hope, & therefore bid∣deth them to fulfill also the measure of their fa∣thers, Math. 23. 32. So likewise Steuen amplifi∣eth the sinne of the Iewes by the like example of their fathers, Ye stiffnecked and vncircumcised hearts and eares, ye haue alwaies resisted the holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so doe ye, &c. Act. 7. 51. Therefore also the Lord many times admoni∣sheth the Israelites and Iewes not to walke in the waies, neither to doe the works of their fa∣thers. Harden not your hearts (saith one Prophet) as in the daie of contention (or tentation) in the wildernes, where your fathers tempted me, &c. psal. 59. 8. By an other Prophet God speaketh thus, I saide vnto their children in the wildernes, walke ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, nei∣ther obserue their manners, neither defile your selues with their idolls, Ezech. 20. 18. So the mes∣sengers that Hezekiah sent forth to inuite the Israelites to the Passeouer at Ierusalem, bidde them not to be like their fathers, &c. neither stiffnecked like their fathers, &c. 2. Chron. 30. 7, 8. In like sort speaketh Zachariah, Be ye not like your fathers, &c. Zachar. 1. 4. Many other the like places are in the scriptures, whereby we see this argument not to be good; This was the re∣ligion of our fathers, therefore it shall be ours. 4 Yea certenly this is the very argument of many obstinate Iewes, for the defence of their
idolatrie, The word that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lord we will not heare it of thee, but we will doe whatsoeuer thing goeth out of our owne mouth, to burne incense vnto the Queene of heauen, and to poure out drinke offerings vnto her, as we haue done, both we & our forefathers, Ier. 44. 16, 17. Thus answered the wicked Iewes, and thus answered many Papists, saying, they will not heare the word of God, but will praie to the virgin Marie (whō they call indeed the Queene of heauen, as hath bin shewed before) and to o∣ther such heauenly things, for no other reason; but because they and their fathers haue done so. But such Papists as loue their owne saluation, I exhort in the Lord, not to be so wedded to the religion of their fathers. Will any of you say thus, My father was a ttaytour to his Prince, and was therefore executed, therefore I also will be a traytour to my Prince, that I may beheaded, drawne, hanged, and quartered, as my father was? Some it may be, will not sticke to say so: but all that are wise, will take heede of such words and thoughts. Therefore why also will you say, My father was a Papist, and idolatour, and of that religion that God hath condem∣ned, and so consequently a traytour vnto God, therefore also will I be so? will any of you say, especially such as God hath aduanced to great honour, or worship, and wealth in the land, My father or grandfather was a sadler, or butcher, or grasier, or husbandman, or of some other the like meane trade, therefore also I will be so? I
thinke none so foolish: why then will ye say the like and ten times worse in religion? will any of you saie, My father, or my mother, or both, had this or that bodily disease, and died thereof for want of remedie, therefore also I feeling the like in my selfe, will not be cured of it though I may? I thinke none so madde. Why then will ye say the like, touching such a grieuous spirituall sicknesse of your soules, as poperie is? why will ye die in your sinnes, and not be saued, O ye Papists, and many other that are not yet of our religion? 5 Neither doe I say these things, as con∣demning yours and my forefathers. I con∣demne not them, but I condemne their reli∣gion. As for themselues I leaue them vnto the Lord, as not knowing whither they secretly repented or no of their poperie before their end. If they did not repent, it is farre more better to condemne them, then to condemne the worde of God of any vntruth, and God himselfe of any vnrighteousnesse. Be ye not therefore like the adder that stoppeth his eares, refusing to heare the voice of the charmer, charme he ne∣uer so wisely. Be ye not vnlike vnto the first world, that seeing how miraculously and con∣trarie to nature, the lyons, beares, woolfes, ty∣gers, elephants, vnicomes, hares, conies, and such like cruell and wilde beasts: the swallows also, kytes, rauens, ostriches, eagles, and many other the like wilde and rauening birdes, came willingly and gently without any outwarde
force compelling them to Noah, to goe in∣to the arke with him and with his familie, Gen. chap. 7 vers. 7. would not yet beleeue, and therefore were drowned in the waters. Be ye not like the Egyptians, and many also of the Is∣raelites, that seeing the great works of God a∣gainst Egypt, and for the land of Zoan, would not yet beleeue, and therefore perished; the one in the redde sea, the other in the wildernes. Be ye not like the Iewes, that did see the great and mightie workes done by our Sauiour and his Apostles for commending his gospell, and yet would not beleeue, and are therefore scattered vpon the face of the earth, out of their owne countrey vnto this day; and that which is worse, are giuē ouer also to hardnes of heart, & wil not yet beleeue that the Christ and Messias is come. 6 Verily God hath commended our religi∣on (as we haue before shewed) to your eares, to your eies, to your vnderstāding, to your inward, to your outward, to your whole man. Take heed, take heede therefore that ye harden your hearts no longer. Ye haue heard many arguments drawne from the word of God, ye haue seene and doe daily see his workes against your owne religion and for ours: O therefore stop not your eares, shut not your eyes. Yea, ye your selues, (O ye that will be called Catholiques) haue fa∣red and doe fare the better for our religion in England. Ye your selues are partakers of the be∣nefites, whereby the Lord hath graced it and doth grace it: ye liue in much peace for our reli∣gions
sake, ye enioy your honours and dignities by our religion: yea, ye keepe and encrease your liuings the better for our religion. For though some of you perhaps will say, that ye pay two hundred and fourtie pound a yeare for your reli∣gion, yet if ye were throughly examined, and would truly answer, ye could not denie, but that vnder pretense of this payment, ye saue twise so much an other waie. For this is certen, that none doe purchase more lands, build goodlier houses, and hoard vp more money, then some of them that paie the foresaid summe yearely. Thinke not that it should be better with you if the Spanyard might here preuaile: ye are wise e∣nough to see how vaine such thoughts are, by his dealing in other places, where he hath wonne the goale. Doe ye also hope of some better e∣state, if poperie were againe here reuiued with∣out the Spanyard? perhaps ye should be decei∣ued, partly by the old greedines of the Pope, the rather beeing now like an hungerstarued curre, that for his long want of the crummes, bones, yea and good gobbets of meat that were wont to fall from the tables of England to his share, would now be insatiable: partly and especially by some other iudgements of God that would follow poperie. Sith therefore ye enioy such benefits by vs and our religion, as Laban fared the better for Iacob, Gen. 30, 30. and Potiphar for Ioseph, Gen. 39. 5. be not so vnrighteous, as any longer to condemne that which God doth iustifie. Be not so vnthankfull, as any longer to
refuse his great mercie, in calling you by such commendations of our religion to the embra∣cing thereof. Now I say vnto you as Paul saith vnto Timothie, 2. Tim. 2. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord giue you vnderstanding in all things. Yea such vnderstanding, as that I and all other that desire your saluation may reioyce, that the angels in heauen may reioyce, and especially that your selues may reioyce with ioy vnspeak∣able and glorious. THE SIXT VSE CONCERNING obstinate and wilfull Papists. TOuching those that be obstinate, whither they be Papists or Atheists, professed or not professed, but rather according to Machiuel his counsell (too much now esteemed and follow∣ed) making a shew for the present time towards our religion: to such, I saie, as will not be reclai∣med and called backe from their poperie or profanenes, I giue this counsell, that although they will not ioyne handes with vs in the true embracing and profession of our religion, yet they take heede alwaies, that they neither speak nor doe any thing against our religion, or the professours thereof. This counsell I giue them in regard of themselues, because certenly the Lord will not forget the least opposition vnto his name, or iniurie vnto his seruas. Though many times he let thē runne their race a while, so as they thinke all is forgotten, yet (as I haue said before of recompensing any kindnesse in
word or deede shewed to his people) at the last, though it seeme to belong, certenly the Lord euen in this life will meete with them or theirs, for their sinne against his name, and wrong a∣gainst any of his seruants. In the 8. of Amos, v. 7. the Prophet telleth them that had deuoured and swallowed the poore, by their extreame dealing with them in selling their corne at an vnreasonable price vnto them (as too too many doe in this time of dearth amongst vs) that the Lord had sworne by the excellencie of Jaacob (that is, euen by himselfe) that he would neuer forget that crueltie. Obserue, good reader, orrather let such obserue as of whome I speake, that he saith not, that the Lord had said onely he would not forget, but that the Lord had sworne it by him∣selfe, teaching therby, that except they did spee∣dily repent, the Lord would most certenly pu∣nish that their great sinne, because euery word of God is certen, much more that word the which he confirmeth by an oath. If the Lord did threa∣ten and sweare the punishment of hard dealing with the common sort of the people, that for the most part are as poore in heauenly things, as in earthly, that is, whose wickednes is as great as their pouertie, can any man hope of immuni∣tie and to goe free, that speaketh or doth any thing directly or indirectly against that religion which he seeth to be acceptable vnto God, or against those persons that professe the same, both which are as deare vnto God as the apple of his eye.
2 Neither let this be vnderstood onely of re∣ligion and the professours thereof generally, but also more particularly of euery branch of religi∣on, of euery good cause, and of euery one dea∣ling in such causes. The example of God his iudgements vpon diuers malicious Papists be∣fore mentioned, doe testifie the same. So also doe many examples in the scriptures. Though the sinnes generally of Ahab and Iezebel his wife were many, yet the Lord threatned ruine vnto them both and to all their posteritie, chief∣ly for their sinne against righteous Naboth, 1. King. 21. 20. the which was so fully executed by Iehu according to the word of the Lord, that they paid most deerely for Naboth his vineyard, 2. King. 9. 27, 33. & 10. 6. Though Ioash king of Iuda committed many sinnes after the death of good Iehoiada the high priest, yet his putting to death of the Prophet Zechariah the sonne of the same Iehoiada, is onely mentioned as the chiefe cause why his owne seruants conspired against him and murthered him, 2. Chron. 24. 25. Though Haman had not fully effected his bloodie purpose against Mordecai and the other Iewes, yet we know that the same measure by the righteous iudgement of God was measured vnto him, that he had onely intended to haue measured vnto Mordecai, Est. 7. 10. 3 Here especially let vs remember how God dealt with the Amalekites, onely for withstan∣ding the Israelites as they came out of the land of Egypt, Exod. 17. 8. First although the Lord
did discomfort them before the Israelites at the praier of Moses, whē they first came out against Israel, yet did not the Lord satisfie himselfe with their ouerthrow of that daie, but presently he spake further against them vnto Moses, vers. 14. saying, Write for a remembrance in the booke, and rehearse it to Ioshua, for I will vtterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from vnder heauen▪ and again, v. 16. The Lord hath sworn, that he will haue warre with Amalek from generation to genera∣tion. Afterward also the Lord opened the mouth of Balaam (whome Balak sent for to curse Isra∣el) the Lord, I saie, opened his mouth with a curse of destruction against the Amalekites. Nomb. 24. 20. Yea but perhaps these were but words. Words indeede they were, but yet after∣ward when that generation of the Amalekites which then liued, and foure other at the least were dead and rotten, those words were fulfil∣led. For as long after this, as before we heard that God remembred the kindnes of the Ke∣nites for their good, the same God also remem∣bred that sinne of the Amalekites to their ouer∣throw. For he sendeth Samuel with this man∣date and commission to Saul against Amalek, 1. Sam. 15. 2. I remember what Amalek did to Is∣rael, how they laide waite for them in the way, as they came vp from Egypt: now therefore goe and smite Amalek, and destroy all that pertaineth vnto them, and haue no compassion on them, but stay both man and woman, both infant and suckling, both oxe and sheepe, both camell and asse. This was
foure hundred yeares after the former sinne committed. A man therefore would haue thought, that God had not nowe any more thought vpon it, for all his former note of re∣membrance. But the Lord remembereth when men forget, and thinke also all to be forgotten. Yea the Lord did so remember this sinne, and doth so remember other the like sinnes, as that if he forbeare the punishment for a time, yet at the last he commeth in also for arrearages. For in the former commission giuen to Saul, we see with what seueritie the Lord will haue Saul to proceede against the Amalekites. Yea after∣ward in the same chapter, when Saul had beene too remisse in the execution of that commission, the Lord raised vp Samuel to doe or see that to be done against Agag the king of Amalek, that Saul had neglected. 4 If therefore there shall be any such Pa∣pists or Atheists, as by no meanes will be reclai∣med and drawne to our religion, in this treatise commended and prooued to be of God and ac∣ceptable vnto him, yet at the least let them take heede and beware of speaking the least word, and doing the least deede against it, or against any that loue and maintaine the same, for lo∣uing and maintaining thereof. Let them not flatter themselues. God is the same now that e∣uer he was. And the more himselfe hath spoken or done for commendation and iustifying this religion, the more that others raised vp and also directed by him, haue spoken,
written, or done in the same behalfe, the greater shall be the iudgement in the ende of all such, as shall not regard the same. 5 Now the successe of all that I haue writ∣ten in this cause, I commit to him that is onely able to giue a blessing thereunto. The Lord therefore make vs all that doe alreadie professe this religion, thankfull vnto him, for that he hath in his abundant mercie vouchsafed vs the glori∣ous light, the rich benefit, and the sweete com∣fort thereof. The Lord confirme and strengthen vs to continue therein vnto the ende. The Lord enrich vs more and more daily, with the faith, knowledge, loue, and feare of God, with the righteousnes, mercie, and all other vertues tou∣ching God or men, that it commendeth. The Lord fill the hearts of all great persons with more zeale to speake and doe more for the ad∣uancing it, especially any speciall opportunitie beeing offered. The Lord thereunto animate, incourage, and inable all his owne Worthies, to defend it against all aduersaries thereunto, with all honourable successe. The Lord preserue, ad∣uance, and honour them, that haue aduanced and honoured it. Especially, O Lord, preserue, aduance, and honour thy seruant our dread So∣ueraigne Queene Elizabeth: yea, O Lord, as thou hast set her higher then all other in her kingdomes, so stil magnifie thy mercy towards this Church and other Churches (which as it were sucke of her breasts that neuer gaue suck) in making her elder then any of her owne peo∣ple,
especially then any of thine and he aduer∣saries. The Lord open both the eyes of such as haue not regarded our religion, to see the glorie of it, and also their hearts to embrace it. Finally touching such as be incurable, the Lord re∣straine them from doing that to the hindrance thereof, which Satan by them endeauou∣reth, and in the ende doe with them and to them that which shall be right in his owne eyes. Amen.
AN ADDITI∣ON OF CERTAINE DAIN∣ties of Poperie, collected partly out of their popish seruice bookes, and partly out of the writings of some princi∣pall Doctours of speciall account in the popish church, when poperie it selfe was at the highest. HAuing in my former gene∣rall treatise against poperie, and in defence of our reli∣gion, charged poperie to be a religion maintained and vpheld by vnlawfull means, and whereof both matter and forme are contrarie to that religion which the Scriptures commend to be acceptable vn∣to God; yea to be a religion maintaining open blasphemies against God and Christ Iesus, and wherein there is scarse any worship of God at all. Hauing also charged it to be a religion wherein nothing is done to God his glorie, but all things almost referred to the glorie of the Pope, of Saints, of the woodden, stonie, golden,
or painted crosse, &c. of reliques of saints, of men, &c. Hauing affirmed it to be a religion that teacheth no obedience to the ten commande∣ments of almightie God, but that alloweth dis∣obedience vnto euery one of them, and that therefore it is a religion altogether licentious, loose, and full of carnall libertie. Hauing shewed it to be a religion without all found ioy & com∣fort: hauing blamed it as a ridiculous and foolish religion, nothing sauouring the excellent wis∣dome of God: hauing likewise added, that it is plausible and well liking to the naturall and vn∣regenerate man, and therefore altogether disli∣king and vnpleasant vnto God: and finally ha∣uing obiected to the chiefe times of poperie, great blindnes and ignorance, as touching the sound and true knowledge of God, so also tou∣ching other good learning in the learned tōgues, and in all learned arts; and hauing in the saide treatise firmely, though but briefly, prooued all these things (that so I might not therein be ouer∣tedious to the reader) sithence the finishing of the former worke, I haue thought good to make this addition following, for the more euident and plentifull demonstration of all those thing before mentioned. Such therefore as desire to see all things before touched and obiected to poperie more largely opened and prooued, such (I saie) I call to this addition, wherein they shall see the words of the popish Church it selfe, more amply to iustifie all my former words: yea they shall here see not onely their owne wordes, bu
also their owne syllables, their owne letters, their owne points. For as nigh as I could (& yet in some things I may slippe, because I found it an harder matter to set downe their false manner of writing, then if all things had beene truly penned by them) as nigh, I say, as I could, I haue written all things in this addition (abbreuiations onely excepted) in the very same sort that I finde them writ∣ten in their owne bookes. Let not therefore the Christian and learned teader be here of∣fended, either with the rudenes of the latine it selfe, or with the false manner of writing thereof, without obseruation of any rules of orthographie. For as sentences are written here without any true points, as I haue set downe the words themselues, without dip∣thongs, without great letters for the most part at the beginning of sentences, and espe∣cially of proper names one letter also some∣times for an other, as K for C, Y for I, and such like, and aduerbs that should be accented without any accents, as (I say) these things are set downe by me; so did I finde them, & so shall the reader finde them in auncient books out of which I haue taken them. And thus I haue the rather done, that thereby their ignorance, their blindnes, and rudenes, euen in the latine tongue (whereof notwith∣standing they made most profession) might the more euidently appeare euen to the chil∣dren, that haue learned any rules of gram∣mar.
Touching the matter it selfe of these things here added, it is either so blasphe∣mous, that it will make any christian heart to tremble at the reading or hearing thereof; or so foolish and ridiculous, that any man of reason, will think it more fit for a stage, then for the Church, the place of God his wor∣ship, and to make sport withall, rather then to haue the name of religion. In this additi∣on, for the most part I haue set downe the latine it selfe, that so all men may the lesse suspect my faithfulnesse in reporting their wordes. Notwithstanding sometime, when there is no speciall thing in the latin, either for phrase, or for manner of writing, worthie the noting, and especially when the latin is very long, I haue for breuities sake, either altogether omitted the latin, or onely set downe the beginning thereof, sometimes also noting some special words in the mar∣gent. Now although this addition may at the first seeme somewhat large, yet to the reader it neede not be very painfull, for that one halfe is in a manner the whole: because if the reader be learned, vnderstanding the latin tongue, then he may read the latin onely, omitting the english. If the rea∣der know no other tongue then the eng∣lish, then the reading onely of the english will be sufficiēt. Now to come to the things themselues, which here I purpose to adde, I will first beginne with their popish seruice
bookes, and proceede from them to the wri∣tings of some of their chiefe Doctours, and finally conclude this whole addition with some of the miracles of the virgin Marie. Now because their seruice bookes are full of many blasphemies, as wherein they giue so many of God his peculiar attributes vnto the Saints, especially to the virgin Mare, and to the crosse, yea to the bare signe of the crosse, that in truth, they leaue nothing to God himselfe: I will onely select the princi∣pal of them wherein are the highest blasphe∣mies, and omit the other, as beeing of more labour to be written, then of vse to be read. These that follow are such, that it may be many did neuer thinke so foolish and abo∣minable stuffe had beene in their bookes, vntill they did see their owne wordes. 2 Therefore, out of a booke, intituled (in some impressions) horae beate virginis Marie ad legitimum sarisburiensis ecclesie ritum, &c. I haue gathered these things following: These praiers following ought to be said, ere ye depart out of your chamber at your vprising. The Apostle tea∣cheth to praie with vnderstan∣ding, but of thes praiers follow∣ing, as the lan∣guage was vn∣knowne to the common people, so the sentences of them doe not agree one with an other. leafe 7. first side. Auxiliatrix sis mihi irinitas sancta deus in nomine tuo, leuabo manu meas. Crux triumphalis passionis domini nostri Ies Christ. Jesus Nazarenus rex Iudeorm: filt dei miserere mei, In nomine patris & filij & spiritus sancti. Amen. per signum sancte cru∣cix X, libera nos deus salutaris noster: that is in english. Helpe me O holy trinitie. O God in
thy name will I lift vp my hands. The tri∣umphant These sentences agree like light and darknes. Note that here and many other places, they say not by the crosse it selfe, but by the signe of the crosse. crosse of the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ. Iesus of Nazareth the king of the Iewes: O sonne of God haue mercie on me. In the name of the Father, the Sonne, & the holy Ghost. Amen. By the signe of the holy crosse, deliuer vs O God of our salua∣tion. Againe in the same leafe: When thou goest first out of thy house blisse thee, saying thus, Crux triumphatnis domini nostri Iesu Christ, ecce viuifiee crucis dominicum sanctum, fugite partes adverse. The triumphant crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. Behold the Lords signe of the quickning crosse. Avoide ye that are my aduersaries. When thou takest holy water say thus. Aqua benedicta, sit mihi salus & vita: presta mihi domine per hanc creaturam asper∣sionis aque, sanitatem mentis, integritatem corporis, tutelam salutis, securitatem spei, cor∣roborationem fidei, nunc & in futuro, Pater no∣ster. Aue Maria. This blessed water be vn∣to me health and life, worke in me O Lord, What warrant haue they thus to pray. by this creature of sprinkling of water, soūd∣nes of minde, hailenes of bodie, preseruation of health, securitie of hope, strength of faith now and for the time to come. Our father Hayle marie. leafe 8. B. 3 In the 16. leafe B. there is a goodly picture of an old man with a long beard, and a flashing woodknife hanging by his side, wantonly kissing a woman: the mysterie whereof passeth my capacitie, but vnder∣neath
are written these english verses, or ra∣ther rith me doggel. How Marie the mother and virgin Visited Elizabeth wife of Zaehary Foure sweete and artificiall verses. Which said blessed be thou cousin. And blessed be the fruit of thy bodie. 4 In the 20. lease B. is a blasphemous picture of the trinitie, hauing three faces in one head and within one bodie. This picture is in many other places, both of that booke and also of many other. This shall be suffici∣ent to haue spoken thereof once for all. In the leaues following follow a multitude of idolatrous and blasphemous praiers, some to Saints, named in the Scripture, some to o∣ther. I know not what, neither I thinke doe they well know what they were. These prai∣ers I will here omit, partly that I may not be too tedious, partly because I haue touch∣ed the summe of some of them in my trea∣tise before named. Notwithstanding I will here expresse some of the most speciall prai∣ers, and many of the titles set ouer the prai∣ers in english, for the commendation of the latin praiers following such titles. To omit many titles wherein are pardons of sinne graunted onely for many daies to all that shal deuoutly say the praiers annexed to such titles, I will especially set downe such titles as haue the largest pardons, or wherein be∣sides the pardon is some especiall folly wor∣thie the obseruation.
5 o the 55 leafe B this title, This prai∣er was shewea to S. Barnard, by the messenger of As gold is better then all other mettals, so prai∣ers to the virgin Marie are better then praiers to God. To the saying of the like praier is promised, that he shall not die without penance and ministration of the holy sa∣craments. fol. 51. A. of the same booke. Gog (this word perhaps should be God, yet in truth Gog were fitter) saying, that as gold is the most pretious of all other mettall, so ex∣ceedeth this praier all other praiers: and who that deuoutly saith it, shall haue a singular re∣ward of our blessed Ladie and her sweete sonne Iesus. hen followeth the praier it selfe to the virgin Marie, wherein are those epithits which I haue noted in my former treatise. Ancil Trinitatis, gloriosissima regina patri∣arcbarum, magistra euangelistarum, veracissi∣ma, and such like. 6 In the 59. leafe B. according to some impressions, but according to some other in the 50. leafe there is this title. These be Let the Papists trie the truth of the first promise here made, and likewise of the last, by the con∣uersion of 15. of their next kin∣dred, and the strengthening of other 15. alreadie righteous. the 15. os, the vvhich the holy virgin saint Brigita was wont to say daily before the holy roode in S Pauls church at Rome, who so say this a whole yeare, he shall deliuer 15. soules out of Purgtorie of his next kindred, and con∣uert other 15. sinners to good life, and other 15 righteous mē of his kind shall perseuere in good life. And whitye desire of God ye shall haue it, if  be to the saluation of your soule. After that great title follow the 15.00s themselues, as O Domine Iesu. &c. 7 In the 62. leafe B. according to some other impressions 54. leafe B. followeth this title ouer a praier to Christ himselfe. To all them that before this image of pitie deuoutly
say 5. pater noster, and 5. aue and a credo, pite∣ously The Papists in praier must look oure as the hy∣pocrites, Math. 6. 16. beholdig these armes of Christs passion, are graunted 32755. reares of pardon. And Sixtus the 4. pope of Rome hath made the 4. and the 5. praier, and hath doubled his foresaid pardon. 8 In the 65. leafe A. is this title follow∣ing ouer an epistle of the crosse, the which e∣pistle also I haue annexed, excepting onely the signe of the crosse so often made therein with redde incke as the word crosse is vsed. The title followeth. This epistle of our sauiour A beggerly par∣don for the Popes magnifi∣cence to send to an Emperour. sendeth our holy Father pope Leo to the Empe∣rour Carolo magno, of the which we findest writ∣ten, who that heareth this blessing vpon hi, and saith it once a day shall obtaine xl. yeares of pardon and lxxx. lenige, and he shall not perish with soden death. The epistle it selfe as they call it: Crux christs sit mecum. crux est quam semper adoro. crux christi est verasalus. crux christ super at omnē gladium. crux christi sol∣vit vincula mortis. crux christi invincibilis per arma. crux christi immobile signum. crux christi sit michi via virtutum & virtus. per crucem diuinam aggrediar iter. crux christi pandit omne bonum. crux christi fugat omne malum. crux christi abstulit penam eternam. crux christs salua me, sis{que} super me ante me & post me, quia antiquus hostis fugit vbicun{que} te viderit. O altitudo crucis, quam nūquam alti∣tudo tetigit & profunditas quam nunquam pro∣funditas vallauit, & latitudo, quamnūquam la∣titudo
comprehendit, libera me simulum tuum ab omnibus diabolicis artibus, & pessimis cogi∣tationibus, quae in me manent. Tu diabole fuge ame vt nesciam te, & sicut tues abscissus a celo, sic te abscidat spiritus sanctus a me,  sicut tu es alienus ab omnifelicitate, sic tu sis alienu a me: & sicut nunquam desideras deum, sic nun∣quam desideres ad me venire. Fuge diabole a me famule dei per signum sancto crucis. ecce cru∣cem domini fugite partes aduerse, vicit leo de tribu Iuda, radix, Dauid, alleluia & benedicti dei patris omnipotentis & spiritus sancti. Cru Christi descendat super me & mecum maneat semper. Amen. pater noster, aue Maria. The same in english. The crosse of Christ be with me. It is the crosse which I doe alwaies worshippe. The crosse of Christ is true saluation. The crosse of Christ ouer commeth euery sword. The crosse of Christ looseth the bonds of death. The crosse of Christ cannot be ouer come by any armour. The crosse of Christ is an immooueable signe. The crosse of Christ to me the waie of vertues and vertue it selfe. By the diuine crosse I will take my iourney vpon me. The crosse of Christ laieth open e∣uery good thing. The crosse of Christ chaseth away euerie euill thing. The crosse of Christ hath taken awaie eternall punishment. The crosse of Christ saue me and be vpon me before me and behinde me, because the old enimie fleeth wheresoeuer he seeth thee, O
height of the crosse, which neuer height touched. and O depth, which neuer depth vndermined. and O breadth which neuer breadth did containe, deliuer me thy seruāt from all the sleights of the deuill, and from the euill things which remaine in me. Auoid thou deuill from me, that I may not know thee. And as thou art cut off from heauen, so the holy Ghost cut thee off me: and as thou art farre from all felicitie, so be farre from me And as thou neuer desirest God, so neuer desire to come to me. Auoid deuill from me the seruant of God, by the signe of the holy crosse. Behold the lion of the tribe of Iuda, & the root of Dauid hath gottē the victorie. Praise the Lord. And the blessing of God the father almightie, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. The crosse of Christ des∣cend vpon me and abide with me for euer. Amen. Our Father. Haile Marie. 9 To this epistle let me adde a praier to the crosse, out of the houres of the virgin Ma∣ri, according to the custome of the church of Yorke, in the 165. leafe, in manner and forme following. Signum sancte crucis defen∣dat e a mortis preteritis, presentibus & futu∣ris, interioribus & exterioribus. Signum sancte crucis a persecutione diaboli & omnium inimi∣corum meorum liberet me. hoc signaculo per∣sternantur omnes aduersarij mei & fugiant. per hoc signum sancte crucis a periculis mundi liberet me dominus▪ that is, The signe of the
holy crosse defende me from euills past, pre∣sent, and to come, inward and outward▪ the O forgetfull S. Paul which in∣treating of chri∣stian armour, didst neuer think vpon the signe of the crosse. signe of the holy crosse deliuer me from per∣sequution of the deuil and all mine enemies. By this little signe let all mine aduersaries be laid prostrate and put to flight. By this signe of the holy crosse, the Lord saue me from the perills of the world. 10 In the former houres of the virgin ac∣cording to the vse of Salisburie, in the 69. leafe B. there is this title ouer the head of a praier to God. This prayer was shewed to S. Augustine by reuelation of the holy Ghost, and Make much of this praier, for it is something worth, if all be true that is pro∣mised in the title. who that deuoutly say this praier, or hyre red, or bereth about them, shall not perish in fire or wa∣ter, neither in battell nor iudgement, and he shall not die of sodden death, and no venym shall poi∣son him that day: and what he asketh of God hi shall obtaine, if it be to the saluation of his soule: and when thy soule shall depare from thy body, it shall not enter to hell. 11 In the same booke the 71. leafe A there is this title ouer a praier to Christ. This praier made the worshipfull SBeda of the 7. last wordes which our saeuour Jesus Christ spake hanging on the crosse, who that saith it kneeling deuoutly neither the deuill, nor wicked men shall not hurt him, and he shall not die without con∣fession. 12 In the next leafe A. there is this title and praier following. These 5. petitions and praiers made saint Gregorie, and hath graunted
to all them that deuoutly say these 5. praiers with 5. pater noster, 5. aue Maria, and acredo in deum, 500. yeares of pardon. oratio. Aue manus dextra Christi perforataplaga tristi nos ad dextram iube sisti quos per crucem redemisti: pater noster, Aue Maria. Aue plaga Jesu leua, sic confixa manu sua, nos ab eo malo leu, quos perduxit mater Eua. pater noster. Aue Maria. Aue latus lanceaium, vnde fluxit flumen gratum prebe nobis conducatum ad eterne vite statum. pater noster. Au Maria. Aue vulnus dextri pedis cellam mentis pietedis Dum adeum sepe redis esto nobis spes mercedis. pater noster. A. e Maria. Aueplaga, leue plante qua virtutum crescunt plante nos ab hoste supplantante contuere post & ante. pater noster. In all this rithme they doe nothing but sa∣lute the right and left hand, as also the right and left foote of Christ pierced with nailes, and likewise his side thrust through with a speare. They doe onely (I say) salute these
members of Christ thus wounded for vs, with an All haile. Then which what can be more ridiculous? For not to speake how childish a thing it is, to speake any thing vn∣to these members of Christ his materiall bodie, thus seuerally considered, and that without any the like examples of the Apo∣stles, euen when they did see Christ bodily present after his resurrection, both whilst he was conuersant and also when he ascended vp into the heauens before them; it is also a very toye to bidde all haile, either vnto them, or vnto any other thing in the hea∣uen. For what is the meaning of All haile? truly either it is a phrase of wishing well vnto that whereunto it is spoken, or it ex∣horteth to reioyce and be▪ merrie. In which therefore of the significations shall it be ap∣plied to those members of Christ, or to any other thing alreadie aduanced vnto hea∣uen? 13. In the same leafe B. there is this title following ouer a praier to all the members of Christ. This praier shall ye say in the wor∣ship of all the members of Christ deuoutly, and ye shall haue 300. daies of pardon for euery salue. Then followeth the praier it selfe in latin. But because I finde it somewhat enlar∣ged in a new manuell seruice booke preten∣ded to be reformed by the authoritie of the late councell of Trent, and published by the commandement of Pope Pius the fift, anno
dom. 1580. I will therefore here set it downe in that ample manner in which there I finde it. The inscription of the praier in that book page 318. the volume beeing in 16o is this. Salutationes ad omnia membra Christi, & sui∣ipsius adeum commendatio. that is. The saluta∣tion of all the members of Christ and the commendation of himselfe vnto him, The praier it selfe in latin. Salve tremendum cun∣ctis potestatibus caput Domini Iesu Christi saluatoris nostri, pro nobis spinis coronatum & arundine percussum. Salue speciocissima salua∣toris nostri Iesu Christi facies pro nobis sputis & alapis caesa. Saluete benignissimi Iesu Christi saluatoris nostri oculi pro nobis lacrymis perfusi. Salue mellifluum os guttur{que} suauissimum Do∣mini nostri Iesu Christipro nobis felle & aceto potatum. saluete aures nobilissime Domine Ie∣su Christi saluatoris nostri pro nobis contume∣liis & opprobrijs affectae. salue collum humile Iesu Christi pro nobis colophizatum, dorsum{que} sanctissimum pronobis flagellatum. Saluete ve∣nerabiles Domini nostri Iesu Christi manus & brachia pro nobis in cruce extensa. salue pectus mitissimum domini nostri Iesu Christi saluate∣ris nostri pro nobis in passione conturbatum. sal∣ue latus gloriosum Domini nostri Iesu Chri∣sti pro nobis lancea perforatum. Saluete Domi∣ni Iesu Christi saluatoris nostri, sacra miseri∣cordia genua pro nobis in orationibus flexa sal∣uete Domini Iesu Christi saluatoris nostri pe∣des adorandi pro nobis clauis affixi. salue totum
corpus Iesu Christ pro nobis in cruce suspen∣sum vlneratum, mortuum & sepultum▪ salue sanguis preciocissime de Corpore Domini Iesu Christi saluatoris nostri pro nobis effuse▪ salue sanctissima Domini nostri Iesu Christi anima in cruce pro nobis in manus patris commenda∣ta. In eadem commendatione tibi commendo hodie ac quotidie animam meam, cor & cor∣pus meum, omnes sensus & actus meos, omnes amicos, benefactores, filios & consanguineos meos, animas parentum, fratrum, sororum, & omnium amicorum ac inimicorum meorum, vt nos protegere liberare & defendere digneris ab omnibus insidis inimicorum nostrorum, visibi∣lium & inuisibilium nunc & in perpetuum. Amen. The same in English. Good morrow, O head of the Lord Iesus Salve. is a word of salutation v∣sed especially in the mornings, & therefore I haue translated it Good morrow, rather then o∣therwise. Christ our Sauiour, which art to be feared of all powers, hauing beene crowned with thornes for vs and smitten with a reede. Good morrow most beautifull face of our Lord Iesus Christ, spit vpon and beaten for our sakes. Good morrow most benigne eies of the Lord Iesus Christ our Sauiour, wa∣shed with teares for vs. Good morrow hony sweete mouth and most pleasant throat of our Lord Iesus Christ, filled with gall and vineger for vs. Good morrow most noble eares of the Lord Iesus Christ our Sauiour, contumeliously and opprobriously handled for vs. Good morrow most humble necke of Iesus Christ buffeted for vs, and most ho∣ly
backe scourged for vs. good morrow ve∣nerable hands and armes of our Lord Iesus Christ, stretched out vpon the crosse for vs. good morrow most gentle breast of the L. No salutation of the bellie of our Sauiour often pinched with hunger for vs, Math. 2. & 20. 18. Iesus Christ our Sauiour, greatly disquieted for vs in thy passion▪ good morrow glorious side of our Lord Iesus Christ, thrust through with a speare of a soldiour for vs. good mor∣row sacred knees of mercie of the Lord Ie∣sus Christ our Sauiour, bowed in praiers for vs. good morrow, O feete to be worshipped of the Lord Iesus Christ our Sauiour pier∣ced Nothing is here for the thighes and legges of Christ, though often by walking wearied for vs. through with nayles for vs. good mor∣row O whole bodie of Christ hanged on the crosse, wounded, dead, and buried for vs. good morrow most pretious blood shed for vs out of the bodie of the Lord Iesus Christ our Sauiour. good morrow most holy soule of our Lord Iesus Christ commended vpon This whole salu∣tation is but a plaine mockerie of Christ, there beeing no war∣rant thereof, or of the like in all the Scriptures. the crosse into the hands of the father for vs. In the same commendation I commende vnto thee to day and euery daie, my soule, my life, my heart and bodie, all my senses and actions, all my friends, benefactours, children and kinsfolke, the soules of my pa∣rents, brethren, sisters, and of all my friends and foes, that thou wouldest vouchsafe to protect, deliuer, & defend vs from all snares of our enemies, visible, and inuisible, now and for euer. Amen. This salutation of the members of Christ, I haue the rather taken out of their seruice booke lately reformed,
that no man might thinke it to be of those follies whereof some of the Papists them∣selues begin to be ashamed. 14 In the very next praier in the same booke made to the virgin Marie, they giue her the same titles which before in the trea∣tise I haue collected out of their more aun∣cient bookes. For they call her matrem or∣phanorum, the mother of orphans: consolatio∣nem desolatorum, the consolation of the de∣solate: viam errantium, the waie of them that straie: salutem omnium in se sperantium, the health of all that trust in her: fontem miseri∣cordiae, fontem salutis & gratiae, &c. the foun∣taine of mercie, health, and grace, and so forth as before we haue heard. In the same booke, page 327. they commend vnto her faith and custodie, and into the bosome of her mercie, to day, euery daie, and in the houre of death themselues, their soules and bodies, yea omnem spem & consolationem, omnes angustias & miserias, vitam & finem vitae: all their hope and consolation, all their afflictions & miseries, their life and the ende of their life, &c. Sith therefore they commend all these things into the hands of the virgin, what doe they leaue to be com∣mended into the hands of God? In the very next praier in the same booke, besides other blasphemies, they praie vnto her to be their comforter, and thereunto they adde these words, & apud eundem tuum & dei natum v
igenitum in die novissimo, quando cum omnia & corpore sum resurrecturus, & de singulis meis factis rationem redditurus, me digneris iuvare, vt perpetue damnationis sententiam per te pia mater & virgo valeam euadere, & cum electis ei omnibus adeterna gaudia feliciter peruenire: that is, that with the same thy sonne and the onely sonne of God, thou wilt vouchsafe so to helpe me, that when I shal rise again with soule & bodie, & giue account of euery thing that I haue done, by thee O godly mother & virgin, I may auoide the sentence of eternall damnation, & with all the elect of God hap∣pily come to euerlasting ioyes. These things haue I taken out of their new and best refor∣med seruice bookes, that no Papist should make any simple man beleeue that although their olde bookes of seruice had some such blasphemies, yet their new books were alto∣gether purged of thē. For by these few things, it is euident, that albeit they haue ministred some physicke to their old seruice, yet hath it not so wrought, but that it hath left the grossest humour vnmooued, so that the sub∣stāce of the chiefest impieties doe yet remain. 15 Now to returne a little to the former old booke according to the custome of Salis∣burie, in a praier to the virgin leafe 51. B. in some books, in some leafe 42. A. they cal the virgin dominam gloriae, reginam letitie, fontem piesatis, venam misericordiae, sanctitatis liber∣tatem, iocunditatis amenitatem, splendorem celi,
dulcedinem paradisi, domiuum angelorum, san∣ctorum letitiam, virginum gemmam, felicem & beatam dominam. that is: The Ladie of glo∣rie, the queene of ioy, the fountaine of pietie, the vaine of mercie, the freedome of holines, the pleasure of sport, the brightnes of heauen, the sweetnes of paradise, the ladie of angels, the reioycing of saints, the pearle of virgins, the happie and blessed ladie. Then they com∣mend vnto her, totum corpus & animam, to∣tam vitam, quinque sensus corporis, omnia fa∣cta & mortem: that is, the whole bodie and soule, their whole life, the fiue senses of their bodie, all their works and their death: then they adde, cum sis benedicta in eternum & vltra: that is, forasmuch as thou art blessed The Papists haue a time longer h exernitie. for euer and beyond. 16 In the 73. leafe A. of the same booke, there is a pardon of tenne hundred thousand yeares for deadly sinnes, graunted by the holy father Iohn 22. pope of Rome, to all them that shall deuoutly saie three praiers to Christ there following, which were found written in the chappell of the holy crosse in Rome, o∣therwise called sacellum sancto crucis septem Romanorum. 17 In the 75. leafe there is this title to a praier vnto Christ. Who that deuoutly behol∣deth The Papists ob∣taine pardons not onely by praier but also by bare looking. this armes of our Lord Iesus Christ, shall obtaine sixe thousand yeares of pardon of our ho∣ly father S. Peter first pope of Rome, and 30. o∣ther popes of the church of Rome successours af∣ter.
And our holy father pope Iohn 22. hath O that this pope Iohn had still li∣ued: for he was of good nature and full of par∣dons. graunted to all then very contrite and truly con∣fessed that saie these deuout praiers following in the cōmendation of the bitter passion of our Lord Iesu Christ, 3000 yeares of pardon for deadly sinnes, and other 3000. for veniall sinnes, and saie first a pater noster and Aue Maria. 18 In the 78. and 79. leafe there is a long luxurius title of a praier, wherin to euery one that shall saie the praier to Iesus deuoutly, with a contrite heart daily, is made this pro∣mise: Note that by po∣perie, one in the state of damnati∣on, and therfore altogether with∣out faith, may merit God his fauour for his discharge. that if he that saith that praier be in the state of eternall damnation, his eternall paine shalbe changed him in temprall paine of purga∣torie, or if he hath deserued the paine of purgato∣rie, it shalbe forgotten and forgiuen through the infinite mercie of God. 19 In the 125. leafe of some bookes, of some other the 123. leafe, there are these wordes ouer certaine verses of the psalmes. When S. Barnard was in his praiers, the deuill It seemeth to be no small honour for S. Barnard to be the deuill his scholler: yet Bar∣nardus non vi omnia. said vnto him, I know that there be certaine ver∣ses in the sawter, who that say them daily shal not perish, and he shall haue knowledge of the daie that he shall die, but the fend would not shevve them to S. Barnard▪ then said S. Barnard, I shall saie daily the whole sawter. The fend considering that S. Barnard should doe so much profit to la∣bour so, he shewed him these verses. Then fol∣low these verses, intituled, versus sancti Ber∣uardi. By these praiers and pardons annexed vnto them, such libertie is graunted, as that
poperie seemeth to commend nothing but praier. For what good soeuer a man omitteth, or euil soeuer he committeth, pardon (ye see) may be obtained for the same, by saying de∣uoutly their prescribed praiers. It is likewise to be obserued, that if a man may haue so large a pardon of all his sinnes (as before we haue heard) for saying some one praier, then for saying all the praiers, what letteth but that he may haue all the pardons before men∣tioned? And then also what followeth? for∣sooth either that Christ shal not need to come vnto iudgement; or that he shall not come till all that time for which all those pardons are graunted be expired; or that purgatorie shall continue after his comming. Otherwise what needed pardons for so many hundred, so many thousands, yea so many millions of yeares? THE SECOND PART. 1 IN an other popish seruice booke, like vnto the former, called Portiforium se Breuiarium ad vsum ecclesie Sarisburien∣ss, castigatum, suppletum, marginalibus quota∣tionibus This booke was printed at Paris, anno 1555. adornatum: that is, A Portus or breui∣arie, for the vse of the Church of Salisburie corrected, supplied, and adorned with mar∣ginall quorations, &c. In this booke I say to omit the like blasphemous praiers to the vir∣gin Marie as before haue beene noted. I finde these speciall things following, not mentio∣ned in the former. For the translation of Saint
Martin, there are these things read for the se∣cond and third lesson. Lectio secunda. Anno sexagessimo quarto post transitum beati Martini, beatus Perpetuus predicte sedis epis∣copus: corpus beati Martini, transferre disposu∣it, conuocatis{que} vicinis Abbatibus & clericis, & cum hoc in kalendis ulij agere vellent, vigilata prius vna nocte, per totam diem laborantes, ni∣hil proficiebant. Tunc quidā ex clericis ait. Sci∣tis quod post tridu, natalis episcopatus eius est: & forte in hac die nos transferrse admonet. Lectio tertia. Quarta autem die accedentes non valebant mo∣uere sepulchrum. Pauore autem omnes exterri∣ti vasculum terra cooperire cogit abant. Tunc apparuit eis veneranda canitie senex, dicens se abbatem: & ait quid turbamini & tardatis? Nonne videtis beatum Martinum astantē vo∣bis iuvare paratum: simanus apponatis, & ia∣ctans pallium posuit manum cum alijs ad sarco∣phagim. Quod pratinus cum summa leuitate commotum: in locum quo nunc honoratur tu hymnis domino annuente perducitur. Post haec requiritur senex, nec exite visus est, nec ibi inue∣nitur. The second lesson. In the 64. yeare after the death of blessed Martin, blessed Perpetuus bishop of the sea A tale of Saint Martin read in the Church for a lesson. aforesaid (that is, of Toures in France) deter∣mined to translate the bodie of blessed Mar∣tin. And hauing called together the neigh∣bour abbots and learned men, when they
would haue done it the first daie of Iuly, ha∣uing first watched a whole night, they did also labour a whole daie and did no good. Then one of the learned men saide, Ye know that after three daies, is the birthday of his bishopricke, and peraduenture on that day he admonisheth vs to translate him. The third lesson. But when they came the fourth daie, they could not remooue the sepulchre. Now bee∣ing stricken with feare, they thought to coue the vessell with earth. Then appeared vnto them an old man with a reuerence, hore hea∣ded, that called himselfe an abbot: and he he said, Why are ye troubled, and why pro∣long ye the time? doe ye not see blessed Mar∣tin standing by you readie to helpe, if ye put to your hands? And throwing away his clocke he put to his hand with other vnto the sepul∣chre; the which presently with very great case beeing remooued, was by the fauour of God, brought to the place, where now it is honoured with hymnes. After this they sought for the olde man: but neither was he seene to goe forth, neither did they finde him there. 2 In the translation of Thomas Becket, many blasphemous praiers, and some other Many blasphe∣mous praiers in the translation of Thomas Becket. thinges are in the same booke mentioned. First of all thus they pray vnto God, Deus qui nobis translationem beati Thome martyris tui atque pontificis celebrare concedis: te supplic
exoramus, vt eius meritis & precibus a vitijs ad virtutes, & a carcere transferamur adregnum: that is, O God which grauntest vs to cele∣brate the translation of blessed Thomas thy This Thomas (as our Chronicles testifie) was put to death for trea∣son, yet see how they honour him. martyr and bishop, we humbly beseech thee that by his merits and praiers, we may be translated from vice to vertue, and from pri∣son to a kingdome. After that they saie, appa∣ruit ei dominus & dixit, Thoma, Thoma glorifi∣cabitur in sanguine tuo ecclesia mea: that is, the Lord appeared vnto him, and said, Thomas, Thomas, my church shall be glorified in thy blood. In the sixt lesson for his translation, they S. Thomas  miracles. speake of many miracles that he did, namely that he restored sight to the blinde, hearing to the deafe, speach to the dumbe, and life to the dead. Then they praie againe, Iesus Christe per Thome vulnera quae no ligant relaxa scelera, &c. Iesus Christ by the wounds of Thomas loose the sinnes which doe binde vs. Then they say in further commendation of him, Fe∣lix locus, felix ecclesia in qua Thome viget me∣moria: felix terra que dedit presulem: felix illa que fouet exulem. Happie is the place, happie is the church wherein remaineth any memo∣rie of Thomas: happie is that land which gaue him for a bishop, and that likewise entertai∣ned him a banished man. Againe, Thome ce∣dunt & parent omnia: pestes, morbi, mors, & de∣monia, ignes, aer, tellus & maria. Thomas mun∣dum All things obe Thomas and he filleth the world with glorie. repleuit gloria: Thome mundus prestat ob∣sequia. All things giue place and obedience
vnto Thomas: pestilences, sicknesses, death and the deuills. The fire, the ayre, the earth and the seas. Thomas hath filled the world with glorie. The world yeeldeth humble ser∣uice vnto Thomas. Then follow the eight & nine lessons for the said Thomas Bckets day; the summe of which lessons is this. A certaine man desirous to visit his shrine, for praiers sake, meeting with a carre vpon Kainford . Thomas sa∣eth a man frō drowning. bridge by London, was throwne into the wa∣ter. He remembred therefore Thomas, and praied vnto him, that he might not be drow∣ned. Now although he suncke fiue times to the bottome, and still came vp againe, yet he did earnestly protest, that he felt no griefe ei∣ther in his mouth, or in his nostrills, but that onely in his falling, he tooke a little salt wa∣ter He also added, that when he began to be drowned, a certaine bishop supported him, that he could not be drowned. Then they note that the translation of Thomas was cō∣summated ann. 1220. in the nones of Iuly, a∣bout three of the clocke, but whether in the morning or euening they tell vs not, in the 40. yeare after his suffering. After they say, Aqua Thome quinquie varians calorem (that perhaps should be colorem) in lac smel tran∣st & quater in cruorem. The water of Tho∣mas fiue times changing the heat (or rather S. Thomas his water turned in∣to milke and blood. the colour) was turned once into milke, and foure times into blood. Then they adde. Ad Thome memoriam quater lux descendit, & in
sancti gloriam, cereos accendit. For the remem∣brance of Thomas light descended foure times, and lighted the waxe candles vnto the glorie of the saint. Then they praie. Tu pro Thome sanguine, quem prote impendit, fac nos Christe scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. For the blood of Thomas which for thee he did spend, cause some of vs, O Christ to clime thither, where Thomas did ascend. And after that to Thomas himselfe they praie thus: Opem nobis O Thoma porrige, rege stantes, iacentes erige, mores, actus & vitam crrige, & in pacis nos vi∣am dirige. Reach forth thy helpe, O Tho∣mas vnto vs, gouernevs standing, raise vs vp lying, correct our manners, our workes, our life, and direct vs into the way of peace. Af∣terward they salute Thomas, thus: Salve Thoma virga iustitie, mundi iubar, robur ec∣clesiae, plebis amor, cleri delitie, salue gre∣gis tutor ecclesiae: salue tue gadentes glorie. Good morrow Thomas the rodde of iustice, the sunne-beame of the world, the strength of the Church, the loue of the common peo∣ple, the delight of the cleargie. Good mor∣row O gouernour of the flocke thy Church: saue them that reioyce in thy glorie. Besides many foolish and ridiculous things in these wordes that I haue noted concerning the foresaide Thomas, who seeth not also many horrible and outragious blasphemies, in that that many thinges proper onely to God and his Sonne Christ Iesus, are attributed
vnto him whereby he is made euen equall with God and with Christ Iesus. In the feast of relikes, first reading these wordes, Matth. 5. at that tim Iesus seeing the mul∣titude, went vp into a mountaine, and when he was set his disciples came vnto him. Then they make this glose vpon them: Mons in quo sedit dominus mystice significat, maiora precepta iustitiae, quia minora erant queiudeis data sunt, &c. Mystice etiam sessio domini incarnatio eius est, &c. that is, the moū∣taine in which the Lord did sit, doth mysti∣cally signifie the great precept of iustice, be∣cause they were the lesse which were giuen vnto the Iewes. The sitting also of the Lord is mystically his incarnation. Is not this clerkly done? 3 In the fift and sixt lessons of S. Margarets day there is this historie in effect. S. Marga∣ret being in close prison for the christian faith, praied vnto God that cum inimico latente fa∣cie ad faciem haberet conflictum, that is, shee A notable fight of S. Margaret. might fight face to face with the secret ene∣mie. Arising therefore from praiers shee saw a terrible dragon, readie to swallow her vp with his iawes: but by making the signe of the crosse, he brake in the middes. After shee saw an other deuill sitting like a blacke man, and hauing his handes bound to his knees: but shee tooke him by the haire and laid him all along vpon the earth, and set her right foote vpon the crowne of his head. Then shee
praied, and suddenly light shined from heauen in the prison: and the crosse of Christ was seene euen to heauen, and a doue sitting vp∣on it, say, Blessed art thou, O Margaret, the gates of paradise doe looke for thee. Then giuing thanks to God, shee said to the deuill, enarra mihi naturam tuam. Tell me thy nature. The deuill saide, Take away thy foote from the crowne of my head that I may tell thee. This beeing done, the deuill saide, I am as one of them whome Salomon shut vp in a brasen Salomon a con∣iurer. Diuels may be locked vp in vessels. vessell: and when the Babylonians came, they thought that it had beene full of golde and brake it open, and by this meanes we flew out, and euer sithence we haue laid snares for the iust. After these and many other things the virgin said vnto him, Auoide O tempter Sathan. Then the earth opened her mouth and receiued him. 4 In the seauenth and eight lesson next An other tale of the said Marga∣ret. following is added this historie of the saide virgin Margaret. The gouernour Olymbrius hauing grieuously tormented her, comman∣ded her to be bound hand and foote, and put into a great vessell of water. The virgin praied that that water might be made a fountaine of baptisme vnto eternall life. Then was a great earthquake, and a doe came from heauen, and set a crowne of gold vpon her head. By this sight, fiue thousand men were conuerted, besides women and children, all which by the commandement of Olymbrius were be∣headed:
and he seeing her constancie com∣manded her in like māner to be put to death. Beeing brought forth therefore to the place of execution, shee desired the hangman to giue her leaue to praie. This graunted, and her praier made, that euery one that should write her sufferings, or reade it, or heare it, or make mention of it, might merit pardon of This maketh well for me that write this histo∣rie, so also for all them that shall read it, &c. his sinnes, &c. This praier (I say) made to this effect, and more largely, there were great thunders, and a doue came from heauen, say∣ing, Blessed art thou, O spouse of Christ Marga∣ret; behold Christ hath graunted all thy petitions, come therefore into the rest of thy heauenly coū∣trey. Then shee lifting vp her selfe, badde the hangman execute his masters commaunde∣ment. But he saide, God forbid that I should kill thee. Shee answered, if thou doest it not, thou canst haue no part with me. Then he trembling, cut off her head, and falling at the feete of the virgin, he gaue vp the ghost. 5 Many other like fabulous things are re∣ported in the same booke of other the like saints: as of Saint Osmond, Saint Kenelme the King of the seauen sleepers, of whome they The 7. sleepers. read likewise for a lesson in the church, that they fleeing persequution, and laying them downe in a caue to sleepe, continued there sleeping 362. yeares. Likewise of Saint Os∣wald the king: of Saint Laurence: Saint Dio∣nis. and his fellows: Saint Edward the king:
of Saint Wenefred the virgin: of these, I saie, and many other the like saints, many fabu∣lous things are there reported, which I might here haue added: but hauing beene long al∣readie in these seruice bookes, I dare not pre∣sume further vpon he patience of the reader. For this cause also I forbeare further addition of many most foule and blasphemous pray∣ers in the feast of the exaltation of the crosse, the rather also because I haue noted the like before. 6 Nowe it may be, some will here ob∣iect against these things thus gathered out of their seruice bookes, that albeit it be most true indeede that sometimes there haue beene such praiers and such pardons annex∣ed vnto them, yet now the church of Rome hath vtterly disclaimed and reuoked them, and likewise reformed such bookes as now especially they vse. To this I answer first, that if there be any such reuocation and refor∣mation of the foresaide ridiculous toyes and horrible blasphemies, because they were ridiculous and blasphemous, then thereby it is graunted, that the time hath beene when the Church of Rome was a foolish and blasphemous Church, and their religion likewise foolish and blasphemous. For other∣wise, what needed they to haue reuoked such things or to haue made any reformati∣on of them? Secondly, I demand where this reuocation and reformation is. They wil per∣haps
wonder at this demaund, sith I my selfe haue before named their late booke intitu∣led, officium beatae Mariae virginis nuper re∣formatum, & pij quinti pontificis maximi iuss editum, that is, the seruice of blessed Marie the virgin lately reformed, and by the comman∣dement of Pius the fift high priest published. They will perhaps referre me to this booke it selfe, as pretended to be reformed; and espe∣cially to the preface thereunto prefixed by the said pepe Pius, wherein is a kinde of reuoca∣tion of some former seruices of the virgin. 7 Touching the booke it selfe, I doe one∣ly repeat my answer before made, namely that this booke is but onely said and preten∣ded to be reformed, and not reformed in truth at the least of the substantiall points most to be regarded. This is manifest by such ridiculous & blasphemous praiers, as I haue before noted out of the same booke, still re∣maining therein. Therefore in setting this ti∣tle before the booke, The seruice of the Virgin lately reformed; they doe but as many a false taylour doth with the garment which he hath marred in making: and as some careles cooks with the meate which they serue vnto their masters table, not throughly rosted or boiled. As the taylour beeing blamed for the fault of the garment, promiseth to mende it, & taking it home with him, bringeth it againe facing out the owner that he hath mended it, when he neuer did any thing more vnto it then at
the first, at least to any purpose: and as the cooke beeing rebuked for his negligence, oftentimes notwithstanding sendeth in the meat the second time as better rosted or boi∣led, when either he neuer did put it againe on the spit or into the pot, or if he did that yet it had neuer a turne more nor any more seething: euen so the church of Rome being iustly blamed for the grosse and foule blottes of their former seruice bookes, haue taken it againe into their shoppe or kitchin, but yet returned it vnto vs, or rather vnto their mi∣stris and ladie, onely giuing this word refor∣matum, reformed, that is, facing vs or rather their mistris and ladie, omnia esse bene, that is, that all things are well, when in truth the chiefe and most principall absurdities and blasphemies doe yet remaine. 8 Concerning the preface vnto the for∣mer booke so pretended to be reformed, I graunt that therein seemeth to be a kinde of reuocation or disanulling of some former ser∣uice The auncient popish seruice bookes before mentioned, are not now disanul∣led or reuoked by the church of Rome. bookes, but not of such seruice bookes, as out of which I haue gathered the things before set downe. For in the same preface, af∣ter the reuocation and disanulling of their former seruice bookes which it doth reuoke and disanull, followeth a very large excepti∣on of three branches: the first, is of bookes printed in the latin tongue: the second of bookes whose institution was expressely approoued and allowed by the Apostolike see: the third of bookes
that had beene in vse for two hundred yeares be∣fore. The reuocation therefore and inhibition is onely of bookes published in the vulgar tongue, whose first institution was not al∣lowed by the apostolike sea, and which had not beene vsed aboue two hundred yeares. 9 Now the bookes out of which I haue gathered the former stuffe, are not within the compasse of the saide inhibition, but doe still remaine in force by the former exceptions. For although the titles and pardons prefixed to the praiers in them contained be in the en∣glish tongue, yet the praiers themselues and the other subiect matter of the saide booke is all in latin. Againe their first institution was allowed by the Apostolike see: otherwise they would neuer haue had such publike vse and sufferance, especially in Cathedrall churches as they had. Lastly although some few prai∣ers (as one in king Henrie, and an other the pardon whereof was graunted at the instance of Queene Elizabeth wife to king Henrie the seauenth, and a fewe more perhaps (al∣though I say some such praiers of late edition, are here and there inserted, yet as touching the principall substance of the bookes, that they haue beene in vse, farre aboue two hun∣dred yeares, it may euidently appeare to them that will compare the diuers bookes of diuers impressions together. Wherefore as I haue heard that some great men in their last will and testament, haue sometime made a
gift vnto their wife of all their houshold stuff, all their plate, all their golden chaines and bracelets, all their rings and iewels whatsoe∣uer, and yet afterward haue excepted so ma∣ny of the former things, and giuen them to their other friends, that their former gift to to their wife, hath not come to any great va∣lue, notwithstanding all the former great words: euen so, although the foresaide pope Pius the filt, see me at the first to make a large Inhibition, yet the exceptions following make the former inhibition in a manner no∣thing worth: because there were scarse any former seruice bookes, which might not chalenge their former vse and allowance, by some of those exceptions. Now further al∣though in the same new booke aboue menti∣oned, Pius quintus doe also admonish all cō∣stantly to beleeue, that in some former books not within chose former exceptions compi∣sed, many faigned praiers are interlaced, sub falsis & confictis sanctorum nominibus, vnder false and counterfaited names of saints, and that there is no certen authoritie of the church for indulgences and pardons of sinnes graun∣ted vnto them that say many of those praiers so interlaced; although (I say) this admoniti∣on be giuen by that holy father, yet this ma∣keth not against those praiers and titles by me before expressed. For many of them are made to God or Christ Iesus himselfe o to the vir∣gin Marie; & the other (at least for the most
part) to such saints, as whose names are not counterfaited, but most certenly knowne to be such saints as the Romish church hath al∣waies worshipped. This therefore shall suffice to haue noted out of their bookes of com∣mon seruice. THE THIRD PART. NOw I come to note something like∣wise out of some of the principall po∣pish Doctours. Here I will doe as the marchant doth in selling his wines vnto the vintener. For as he giueth not a taste of euery vessell, but onely assuring the vintener the rest to be like vnto those whereof he giueth a tast; so likewise will not I giue the reader a tast of euery popish vessell (for that were infinite to me to write, and to him to read) but onely I wil deliuer him a tast of some few, that ther∣by he may see what all the rest are, beeing of the same vintage, or at the least of the grape of the same countrey. But what? doe I com∣pare popish bookes to vessels of wine, which is in price with all men, and which is saide to delight God and man? Iudg. 9. 13. nay rather I may compare them to vessells of filthie and fustie vineger, whereby many haue beene & are deceiued, as the which they haue bought in stead of most wholesome and delectable wine. As therefore a faithfull friend that would haue his friend to take heede of being
so deceiued, doth not giue him a tast of eue∣ry such vineger caske, but onely of some and those of the best, assuring him that such or worse are all the rest: so likewise will I giue the reader a tast of the doctrine and writings of the greatest and most famous popish wri∣ters, whereby he may know the other to be like or worse. Here first I will begin with the works of one Bernardine de Bust: and that all men may know that this man was no ob∣scure person, but of high account for an ex∣ceeding profound clarke, and his worke like∣wise in as great reckoning in the popish Church, before I goe downe into the cellar it selfe to giue a tast of the liquour in the vessels therein, I thinke it not amisse to point the reader vnto that, which for the drawing of customers to buie the ware it selfe, is written as it were vpon the doe. 2 This writing is double. The inscription, or title written (as it seemeth by the author himselfe,) and the approbation, allowance, and commendation thereof by other. The first written with great letters, that all that passe by may read the same, as it were run∣ning (as the Prophet speaketh in an other matter) is this. Mariale eximij viri Barnardini de Busti, ordinis seraphici francisci, de singulis festiuitatibus, beate virginis per modum sermo∣num tractans, omni theologia copiosum, denique vtrius{que} iuris authoritatibus, applicatum, & ar∣te humanitatis effectum in omnibus allegationi∣bus
promptissimum. that is in english. The Mariall of the renowmed man Bernardine This worke set∣met to haue bin pulished anno dom. 1480. as ap∣peareth by the date of the Apo∣stolike writing of Poetu he 4. forth allow∣ance o the ser∣ice o the virgin therein contai∣ned. see the 49. lease . of Busti, of the Seraphicall order of Francis, intreating by waie of sermons, of all the feasts of the blessed Virgin, flowing with all diuini∣tie, and finally with the application of autho∣rities of both lawes, replenished also with the skill of humanitie, and most readie in all allegations. In this title the word Mariall sig∣nifieth onely a worke made in commenda∣tion of the virgin Marie, as it is manifest by the whole booke following For although the whole booke beeing in a large quarto, and printed with a small letter containe 407. leaues, which is aboue a hundred sheetes of paper, yet through the whole booke is God skarse named, except onely for the further magnifying of Marie. The word Seraphicall, is taken for Seraphim, which signifieth bur∣ning or shining, attributed in the scriptres to angels, to signifie their excellencie. Yea the Papists making nine degrees of angels (as we shall afterward he are) doe make the Se∣raphims the highest degree of all. Therefore this tittle here attributed to this Bernardine, doth signifie that he was not onely such a do∣ctour as they accounted angels, but also such an one as they esteemed angelicall and excel∣lent in the highest degree. All the rest of the words in this inscription, put vs in great hope of most profound learning of all sorts in the worke it selfe.
3 Thus much for the inscription. The ap∣probation of the worke by other is set down in the ende of the table, thus: Quia secundum constitutiones, &c. for onit the whole latin, as beeing too long. The english theof is this: Because according to the constitutions of the Order of Minoritie fryers, especially of obseruants, no new worke ought to be prin∣ted, except it be first diligently examined and allowed by some learned and approoued brother, specially thereunto appointed by the generall prelate of the same Order. Ther∣fore the most reuerend father fryer Angel of Clanasi beyond the mountaines, by his lt∣ters hath deputed the venerable father fryer Dominike de Ponzon of the same order an a∣postolike preacher, to see and diligently to examine the worke vnder written: who ha∣uing diligently read the same, hath not onely allowed it, but also exhorted the author thereof to cause it to be printed, writing vnto him these verses vnderwritten, Bernardine ideo Bustina, a gente vetusta, te tulit omnipotens veneranda ad septamino∣rum, &c. The rest of the verses for breuitie I omit. The summe of all is, to encourage him to publish the learned worke, and to assure him of euer∣lasting praise thereby throughout the world. After these verses follow other of the same author to encourage all men to the reading of the booke. By these things we see in what
acount both the man and the worke is with the popish church. 4 In the worke it selfe there are first of all nine sermons for the immaculate concepti∣on of the virgin Marie, that is, to prooue her conception without sinne. All these are so impious and blasphemous, that I cannot tell what speciall thing almost to note, except I should set downe the whole sermons. The cheefe matter it selfe of these sermons beeing so iniurious vnto Christ Iesus, and so contra∣rie to all the scriptures, which with full con∣sent condemne all flesh of sinne (Christ him∣selfe onely excepted) how can the sermons themselues be free from impietie? Notwith∣standing euen of these first nine sermons I will giue the reader a tast, that thereby he may discerne the great diuinitie, and other learning, both of the foresaid author, and al∣so of the popish church which so allowed of them. In the first therfore, the partition therof beeing learnedly made into three parts: 1•. oppositionis, 2•. responsionis, 3a. confirmationis, in the beginning of the second leafe; after∣ward in handling the third of those parts in the 7 leafe, at the letter L. he laieth this groūd, that bonus filus tenetur diligere matrem, a good sonne is bound to loue his mother, & eam ab omnibus periculis & damnis secundum suampossibilitatem liberare, and to deliuer her from all perils and dangers according to his power; then he setteth vp this peece of buil∣ding
vpon the foundation, Concludendum est, quod ipse cui omnia futura erant presentia, a cunctis malis & damnis peccati originalis eam voluerit prescruare, vt boni silij debitum adim∣pleret, &c. that is, it is to be concluded that he to whome all things are present, would pre∣serue her from all euills and dangers of origi∣nall sinne, that he might performe the dutie of a good sonne. Is not this learnedly conclu∣ded? Nay what boie seeth not how doltish and blockish an argument he maketh? For first of all, Christ was not the sonne of the vir∣gin Marie till he was conceiued and borne of her: therefore neither was he bound to performe any dutie vnto her till that time. Secondly Christ was not the sonne of the vir∣gin, as he was God, but as he was a man, and the mediatour betwixt God and man. As he had no father according to the flesh, so he had no mother according to the Godhead. Againe by the same argument he might haue concluded, that Christ should also haue pre∣ferred her to the vttermost of his power in earthly things: for this is also the dutie of children as well as to keepe their parents from euils. Lastly so also he might haue proo∣ued the virgins mother and other friends to be conceiued without sinne. For children are not onely bound to their next parents, but also to their forefathers, and other kindred to keepe them from all euills, & to helpe them touching all good things what lieth in them
to doe, and so in the end it would follow that no flesh is conceiued in sinne. For by progres∣sion we should come at length to the first parents not of the virgin onely, but also of all mankinde, &c. 5 The second sermon beeing made of these words, psal. 87. 1. fundamenta eius in montibus sanctis, her foundations are in the holy mountaines, and this scripture spoken of the Church generally beeing applied vnto, and chosen to speake particularly of the vir∣gin Marie: this second sermon (I say) is diui∣ded into the very same three parts that we haue heard of the former. Notwithstanding to shew his learning and rhetoricke, he cal∣leth these three parts by other names: Prima (saith he) dicetur argumentationis. 2. satisfa∣ctionis. Note his rheto∣icall copia ver∣borum.  3. probationis. The english of these parts, as likewise of other such words of art afterward, I leaue to the learned reader. In the second of those parts, thus he writeth in the 9 leafe at the letter P. Licet propter pecca∣tum originale, clausa sit ianua regni celestis, ta∣men no seqtur necessario, quod quicun{que} abs{que} peccato original moriebatur ane passionem Christi, debet illam nitare, quod sibi esset aperi∣enda. Nm Hieremias & Iohannis Baptistam vtero matris sanctifia, mortui sunt sine peeca∣to originali, & non intrauerunt tamen ianuam rgni celestis. that is, Although by originall sinne the gate of the kingdome of heauen be shut, yet it doth not follow, that whosoeuer
did die before the passion of Christ without originall sinne did enter therein; because it was to be opened vnto him. For leremie and Ieremie and Iohn the Baptist borne without o∣riginall sume. Iohn the Baptist beeing sanctified in the wombe of their mother, died without origi∣nall sinne, and did not enter into the gate of the kingdome of heauen. 6 The third sermon is vpon a text out of the Macchabees. This sermon he also diui∣deth as the former: but still he she weth his e∣loquence, as though he had a well of words in his head. For thus he setteth them downe: The yong schol∣ler may doe well to note the great varietie of Syno∣nima in this do∣ctour. Here for breuitie I haue omitted certaine autho∣rities quoted out of their po∣pish distinctiōs. 1. dicetur contrarietatis 2. veritatis. 3. stabili∣tatis. In the third part of this sermon thus he writeth, Cum papa sit Christi vicarius, &c. & gerat vicem dei in terris ex quo sequitur quod habet plenitudinem potestatis, &c. & illud quod facit presumitur facere authoritate dei, &c. ideo ipso approbante aliquid & nos approba∣re debemus. Immo ipsitis sententiamagis est stā∣dum quam sententie totius mundi. that is in english: Sith the pope is the vicar of Christ, & Gods vice gerent vpon earth, from whence it followeth that he hath absolute authoritie, and that which he doth is to be presumed that he doth by authoritie of God; therefore that which he alloweth we ought to allow, yea we are to stand more to his sentence then to the sentence of all the world, &c. Then vpon those premises he concludeth the ap∣probation of his seruice, made for the imma∣culate conception of the virgin, &c. whereof
I will also giue the reader a tast after that I haue deliuered him the tast of these nine ser∣mons. 7 The fourth sermon hath the three parts of the former sermons, but set downe with new words (it a inexhausta erat huius doctoris eloquentia) thus: 1. dicitur impugnationis. 2. defensionis. 3. corroborationis. In the first of these he maketh this obiection against the immaculate conception of the virgine. Om∣nis homo qui per concubitum viri & mulieris natus est, est in peccatis conceptus. Euery man that is borne by the copulation of a man and a woman is conceiued in sinne. This he proo∣ueth as by the testimonie of Augustine in the first place, so also in the second place, by the testimonie of our Sauiour Christ, Math. 7. eue∣ry good tree bringeth forth good fruit, but an euill tree bringeth forth euill fruit. Then he addeth, that forasmuch as the parents of the virgin were euill, therefore it must needes fol∣low that shee was conceiued in sinne. How doth he answer the former argument in the second part of the sermon, which he calleth defensionis? Alas poore signie, he is so troubled with it that he cannot tell what in the world with reason to saie to it. For first he saith that God that gaue that law, that all that were borne of sinnefull parents should be concei∣ued in sinne, might chage that law about some particular person; and this he prooueth by the testimonies of certain former school∣men:
then he addeth that the former testi∣monie of Augustine applied to confirmation of the former argument, is to be vnderstood with this caution, nulla special gratia interue∣niente, cui oppositum fuit in casu nostro: that is, no special grace comming betweene, where∣of the contrarie is in our case. But this contra∣rie he onely affirmeth without any proofe at all, yea without any one word more. Then he addeth an other answer to the testimonie of Augustine, as fearing the former not to be sufficient. vel dicere possumus quod Augustinus loquitur, de his qui concipiuntur interueniente concupiscentia parentum, quali modo non fuit concepta mater dei: that is, or else we may say that Augustine speaketh of those which are conceiued with the concupiscence of their parents, in which manner the mother of God was not conceiued. How also doth he prooue this? forsooth he referreth vs to the second part of the worke, and the first sermon there∣of, and third part of the first sermon. And what haue we there? verily nothing but a long tale out of the Legend of the virgin Marie, to this effect. That her parents loachim and Anna hauing liued for the space of xx. yeares without issue, did at the last vow that if God A pretie tale of the manner of the virgins con∣ception. would giue them issue, it should be the Lords. Afterward according to their yearely man∣ner, comming to the feast of the dedication of the temple, Ioachim offered his offering. But the priest reiected it, and rebuked him
for presuming to come to the altar, beeing  man vnder the curse of the law, for want of issue. Ioachim beeing put to this shame, re∣turned not home but went a side to his shep∣heards, where hauing staied a while, the an∣gel of the Lord appeared vnto him and com∣forted him, telling him that the former re∣proach was not well obiected against him, because God was a reuenger of sinne, not of nature: and that when the wombe of any is shut, God doth it that he might open it the more miraculously, and that that which is so borne, might be knowne to be divin mune∣ris, non libidinis, of God his gift, no of lust; this that angel prooueth by the examples of Sara, Rahel, and mothers of Sampson and Sa∣muel. In fine the angel telleth him that his wife should haue a daughter, which should be called Marie, and that shee should be san∣ctified from the wombe, and that according to their vowe shee should be the Lords, not liuing abroad with other men and women, but keeping alwaies in the temple, and that shee should also bring forth a sonne which should be called Iesus, and which should be saluation to his people, &c. This is the summe of that matter whereunto he doth referre vs. Now what proofe is this of that whereunto it is applied? First of all, this is taken but our of the Legend of lies: and if it had beene  truth, would not the Scripture as well haue mentioned the same, as it doth matters of
farre lesse importance? Againe though it should be graunted for a truth, yet it maketh no more for the conception of the virgin, without lust of her parents, and without ori∣ginall sinne, then for the like conception of Isaac, of all the children of Rahel, of Samp∣son, and of Samuel. And by the same argu∣ment might all those be prooued to haue bin conceiued without originall sinne, as well as the virgin Marie. Lastly if this tale were truth, then either the parents of the vigin Marie brake their vowe, or the virgin her selfe did not like of it, or both. For the scripture teach∣eth no such thing, yea it teacheth the contra∣rie, namely that Marie liued not in the tem∣ple continually at Ierusalem, according to the former word of the angel, and vow of her parents, but at Nazareth in Galile, many miles distant from Ierusalem, Againe if there had beene any such vow of the parents of the virgin, or any such reuelation of the angel, would the virgin haue betroathed her selfe vnto an husband? or could shee so doe with∣out actuall sinne. And if the angel had before told her parents, that shee should be concei∣ued by the holy Ghost, and bring forth a sonne, whome shee should call Iesus, would shee haue so wondered at the second decla∣ration thereof by the angel Gabriel to her selfe as shee did? Luk. 1. 3. would shee haue saide, how shall this be seeing I know not a man? Thus much for the learning of the great do∣ctour
in his fourth sermon of the immaculate conception of the virgin. 8 For his fift sermon, he seemeth to take foure texts: 1. certaine wordes of Anselmus, Candor est lucis eterne, &c. 2. certaine wordes Foure texts for one sermon. of Ambrose, quid nobilius dei matre, &c. 3. cer∣taine wordes of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 44. pul∣chritudinem candoris eius admirabitur oculus. 4. certaine wordes of Salomon (but I cannot tell where) Candor est, &c. then proceedeth to the parts of his sermon, saying, Super quibus verbatres considerationes faciemus. primadici∣tur ostensionis. 2. testificationis. 3. appellabitur figurationis. Are not these parts (O ye learned readers) learnedly set downe? and may not the learne dest of you all, learne some what by this old learning? yea but marke as great lear∣ning also in the handling of euery one of these parts. For he telleth vs touching the first part, that the conception of the virgin without sinne, may be prooued by 14. argu∣ments. O wonderfull; had not a iust dosen beene sufficient, especially with one odde ar∣gument to haue bound vp the rest together? But what are these 14. arguments? they are thus set downe. 1. dicetur appellationis. 2. equationis. 3. concessionis. 4. filiationis. 5. salu∣tationis. 6. verificationis. 7. verisimulationis. 8. approbationis. 9. presumptionis. 10. nobililati∣onis. 11. subiectionis. 12. parturitionis. 13. libe∣rationis. 14. superationis. Sutable also to these tearmes of arguments, is the matter it selfe.
For to omit other things, thus he expoundeth and handleth the seauenth argument. Sexta (saith he) dicitur verificationis. vt enim veri∣ficentur, verba que dicuntur, in missa beate vir∣ginis & habentur proverb. 8. necesse est dicere illam sine originali peccato conceptam. Ibi enim dicitur in eius persona. Dominus possidet me in initio viarum suarum. quod non esset verum, si in conceptione sua fuisset beata irgo a diabolo per peccatum possessa. Nihil enim potest per du∣os dominos sub perfecto domino possideri. that is, The sixt reason is said to be of verifying. For that the wordes may be verified, which are said in the masse of the virgin, and are also in the 8. of the Proverbs, we must of necessitie say, that shee was conceiued without origi∣nall sinne. For there it is saide in her person, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his waies, which were not true, if the blessed vir∣gin had beene possessed of a deuill through sinne in her conception. For nothing can be kept in perfect gouernment by two lords. Who seeth not how foolishly and blasphe∣mously he applieth that to the virgin Marie which is spoken of wisdome? Might he not haue eased himselfe of much labour about the immaculate conception of the virgin, and by the same argument haue as well prooued her not to haue beene conceiued at all, but to haue beene eternall? it cannot be denied. For in that place Salomon speaketh of the eterni∣tie of wisdome, by wisdome also vnderstan∣ding
Christ Iesus himselfe, the wisdome of his father. Yea this Bernardine himselfe also doth so vnderstand wisdome, in his sixt ser∣mon de anunciatione Marie, leafe 189. the first side and 35. line. The like learning the same seraphicall clarke sheweth in the third part of that sermon, where he prooueth the immaculate conception of the virgin by 12. figures. The first whereof he maketh the first woman in the first creation, Gen. 3. inimiciti∣as ponam inter te & mulierem & semen tuum & semen illius & ipsa conteret caput tuum. I will put enmitie betweene thee and the wo∣man, and betweene thy seede and her seede, shee shall bruise thy head, &c. Where (accor∣ding to their manner) most falsly and impi∣ously that which is spoken of Christ, they ap∣plie to the woman, saying shee shall bruise, for he shall bruise. The third signe they make the arke of Noe. The fourth the arke of the olde testament, Exod. 25. the fift certaine wordes out of the 24. of Ecclesiasticus, (Vbi (saith he) in persona virginis dicitur, Quasi pal∣ma exaltata sum, &c. I am exalted as a palme &c. The sixt out of the same place,  quasi plantatio rose in Hiericho, and as it were the planting of a rose in Ierico. The seuenth out of the same place, quasi myrrha electa, &c. as pretious myrrhe. The eight out of the song of Salomon, chap. 2. 2. Ʋbi (saith he) celest:s sponsus inquit de sponsa sua virgine benedicta, Sicut lilium inter spinas, sic amica mea inter fi∣a.
where the heauenly bridegroome spea∣keth of his spouse the blessed virgin; like ali∣lie amongst the thornes, so is my loue amōgst the daughters. Where that which is spoken of Christ his whole Church, they interpret onely of the virgin, so making her both the mother and also the wife of Christ. The ninth figure they take out of the same song, chap. 6. Que est ista que progreditur, quasi aurora that is, according to their translation, Who is shee that goeth forth in the morning? Here also they commit the same fault that before. The tenth they take out of psal. 192. dies diei eru∣ctat verbum, &c. that is (as they speake) daie speaketh vnto daie. The 11. figure is out of the same psalme, vers. 4. in sole posuit tabernaculum suum; that is (as they also interpret) he hath set his tabernacle in the sunne. The 12. out of Num. 24. orietur stella ex Iacob, there shal arise a star out of Iacob. Who reading all these things, will not admire their monstrous learning? 9 The sixt sermon following is of the same stampe, diuided into these three parts: 1. dici∣tur rationabilitatis. 2. authoritatis. 3.  vltima appellabitur exemplaritatis. The reasons of the first part are ten: 1. mendationis. 2. perfectionis. 3. reportationis. 4. concursionis. 5. demonstratio∣nis. 6. figurationis. 7. medicationis. 8. locatio∣nis. 9. destinationis. 10. affirmationis. 10. For the 7. sermon he taketh his text out of Gen. 1. God said let there be light, and there was light. This and that which followeth, and
God saw that the light was good, and God diui∣ded the light from the darknes; that also Ioh. 1. 5. And the light shineth in darknesse, and the darknes comprehended it not. All this, I say, he and many other whome he nameth (if he lie not, for I cannot examine all his authorities) applie to the virgin Marie. Then he commeth to the diuision of his sermon, where of againe he maketh the three parts thus: 1. dicetur fundationis: 2. operationis. 3. fructificationis. The arguments of the first are as followeth. 1. gratificationis. 2. desponsationis. 3. preseruati∣onis. 4 optationis. 5. punitionis. 6. mediationis. 7. exaltationis. 8. euitationis. 9. similationis. 10. a∣ctionis. 11. liberationis. 12. debellationis. 13. con∣iunctionis. 14. deuiationis. 15. renelationis. In the handling of the fift of those arguments, thus he writeth: Si beata virgo fuit conceptain peccato originali, sequitur quod ipsa fuit plus o∣dita a deopro illo tempore, quam Ca aut Iudas vel quicun{que} alius damnatus, quod est impium & nefarium dcere. & probatur predicta conclusio, sequendo doctrinam predictorum doctorum, &c. Nam quanto pena includens culpam est maior & grauior, tanto talis peccator a deo magis odi∣tur, sed pena virginis fuit maior, quia plura bona perdidisset, & non propter aliud nisi quod deus ipsam in peccato concipivoluisset. Igitur llo tem∣pore illam deus plus quam alios odio habuisset. Non enim est aliud odium dei quam subtractio gratie. Sicut dilectio ipsius dei nihil aliud est, quam gratie communicatio, &c. that is: If the
blessed virgin had beene conceiued in origi∣nall sinne, it followeth that shee was more hated of God then Can or Iudas, or any other that is damned, which is impious and wicked to say. And the former conclusion is prooued by following the doctrine of the foresaid do∣ctours, &c. For how much the punishment, including the fault is greater and heauier, so much the more is such a sinner hated of god. But the punishment of the virgin had beene greater, because shee should haue lost more good things, and for no other cause then be∣cause God would haue her conceiued in sinne. Therfore at that time God should haue hated her more then others. For the harred of God is nothing els but the withdrawing of grace, as his loue is nothing els but the com∣municating of his grace. These things shall uffice for a tast of those nine learned sermōs, the which in truth haue almost as many bla∣phemies as they haue words. THE FOVRTH PART. 1 AFter those sermons followeth offici∣um beate virginis, that is, a seruice for the blessed virgin. This seruice consisteth of many dishes of meat made rea∣die for the virgin by the former cooke. But before this seruice, according to the manner of Princes, is sounded a trumpet of great com∣mendation, by no meaner person then the
most blessed father Pope Sixtus the 4. For the foresaid seruice beeing presented to his ho∣lines, The seruice must be honourable that hath such a trumpet sounded before it, & that by such a trum∣pottour. that he might appoint some other of his wisest and grauest diuines to examine the same, and vpon examination taken to be trū∣pettours for the proclaiming of the praises thereof, he answered that he himselfe would doe it. Hauing therefore examined it, he al∣lowed it, first by his word of mouth commā∣ding it to be published, and secondly by a short apostolicall writing, ratifying and con∣firming the same, with these word in the end of that aification and confirmation, for the better credit thereof, Non obstantibus constitu∣tionibus & ordinationibus apostolicis, ceteris{que} contraris quibuscunque. The meaning where∣of is this, that no other constitutions and ordi∣nations apostolicall, neither any other co∣trarie seruices whatsoeuer, should let or hin∣der the same, leafe 49. B. Then followeth a other solemne commendation of that se uice in the inscription or title thereof: and after all this solemnitie commeth he serui it selfe to the table, the first dish where is this: 2 Dixit dominus dominemee, sede a dextr innocentie mee: that is, The Lord said vnto m ladie, sit thou on the right hand of my inno∣cencie. Again, Laudate pueridominā super om∣nes gentes in conceptu gloriosam. O childre praise ye the ladie aboue all nations, gloriou in her conception. Againe, Letatus sum in
que dicta sunt mih, concepta est hodie regina ce∣. I reioyced in those things that were saide vnto me, to daie is conceiued the queene of heauen. Againe, Laudate Hierusalem domi∣nam, quia non fecit taliter vlli nationi, sicut fecit dilectissime matri. Praise the Lord, O Ie∣rusalem, because he hath not dealt so with any nation, as with his most beloued mo∣ther. 3 The second dish is this. Dominus posse∣dit me in initio viarum suarum, antequam quicquam faceret a principio. ab eterno ordinata sum, & ex antiquis antequam terra fieret. nec dum erant abyssi cum ego tam concepta eram. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his waies, before he made any thing at the beginning. From euerlasting was I ordai∣ned, from of old before the earth was made. There were no depths, and I was now con∣ceiued. 4 Betwixt these dishes and those that fol∣low, our ladie must haue a little musicke, and there is the hymne or song:
Gaude mater saluatoris magni vells Gedeonis; Rubus igne qui non vris verum templum Salomonis. Sponsa dei, stella maris porta celi tu vcaris; Mundi salus seuientis caput cedens Holofernis. Mare sicco calle transis currus mergens Pharaonis; In{que} Son dominaris pulsis inde Iebuseis. Asuexi regis sceptrum Caput tangens virgo tuum; mori fecit laqueatum Aman sanctis inimicum. Babilonis rex in predam non abduxit te captivam; Philistei nec Golie es transfixus pugione. Sicut suum sol nitorem nunqūaem per dit nec decorem; Primipatris sic tu labem nullam sentis nec fetorem. Tu soloccasum nesciens Iuna{que} semper rutilans; Tusydus lucem pariens, delicti nubes profugans. Nūllus in te conidentes vnquam vidit infelices; Vere tibi nam deuotus est necesse sit beatus.
Ad te ergo nos clamantes in hac valle lacrymantes; Adnuptias eternales fac venire triumphantes. Reioyce of Iesus mother deere Thou fleece of noble Gedeon: Thou bush that burnest not with fire, Thou temple of true Salomon. Of God the spouse, of sea the starre, Of heauen the gate thou called art. To raging world thou didst giue health, To Holofernes deadly smart. In sea thou walkest as on drie land, Drowning Pharao with his rout: In Son also dost thou raigne, By chasing Iebusites thence out. The scepter of king Assuere, Touching, O virgin, head of thine; Did cause proud Haman hangd to be, Who against thy saints did still repine. Of Babylon the king in praie Did not away thee captiue lead: No Philistine Goliah stout, With sword could kill or lay the dead. As sunne his brightnes doth not loose, But still his beautie keepeth well: So thou of first father no staine Dost feele, or any filthie smell. Thou art the sunne that goest not downe, Thou art that moone which stil giust light: Thou art the starre which alwaies shines, Thou cloudes of sinne driuest out of sight.
None such as once doe trust in thee, Did euer see vnhappie man: But he to thee that is deuout, Must blessed be as any can. To thee therefore we loud doe call, And in this vale with teares doe crie: That to the eternall marriage We may once come triumphantly. 5 Then followeth an other dish with an o∣ther fitte of mirth: after which follow many other dishes, which they call by the name of lessons, because they were to be read vpon the seueral daies of the feast of the conception of the virgin, as we read certaine portions of scripture for seuerall lessons of seuerall daies. These lessons I had thought to haue set down both in latin and english for the better credit of them, but because I see they would be too long I wil therefore make choice of some of the most daintie of them, and those alo I will set downe but partly in latin, and wholly in english for breuitie sake. 6 This therefore following was the fifth lesson for the second daie of the feast of her conception. Beatus Bern. post mortem suam, &c. that is in english, Blessed Bern. an abbot after his death appeared all shining to one of his brethren. Now all his apparrell beeing The word tran∣slated brethren, may also be trā∣ted riars, &c. white in his breast onely there seemed a spot of a very blacke colour. His brother inqui∣ring where he had receiued that blacke spot, he answered; I thought good to appeare vnto
thee with such a spot, because whilst I liued, I was in an errour, thinking the mother of our In quadam exti non vir opnion Lord to haue receiued the Originall staine. Therefore my sonne, tell vnto the faithfull people, what things thou hast seene. 7 The sixt lesson for the same daie is this, In reuelationibus beate Brigtte habetur, &c. that is in english. In the reuelations of bessed Bridgit it is reported, that a certaine chaplin of hers, a famous doctour of sacred diuinitie named Mathias, entreated blessed Bridgit, Si benedicta virgo Maria ab originali fu∣ viio detur pata. saying. I beseech thee, O daughter, vouchsafe to reueale vnto me, if the blessed virgin Ma∣rie were defiled with originall sinne. Blessed Bridgit answered, I did once desire the most pure virgin to shew me the māner of her most holy conception, and she answered; Know that I cōming of my parents Ioachim & An∣na was preserued from all pollutiō of sinnes. The foresaide brother hearing these things, presently laied aside his opinion, and yearely preaching, he did most deuoutly celebrate the feast of the immaculate conception. 8 For the fourth lesson of the third day of her conception, they read this: Legitur in quo∣dam beati dominici opusculo, quod cum regularis esset canonicus, &c. that is, It is read in a certain work of blessed Dominick that when he was a regular Canon in the Bishoprick of Tholos∣sa, he disputed with certaine heretiks, which affirmed many conclusions contrary to truth. Now amongst other opinions they preached
this vnto the people, namely that the virgin was not preserued from original sinne. When blessed Dominicke saw that he could not perswade them the truth, he tooke this order with them; that both sides should put their conclusions together in a burning ouen, and Taliter cum is conuenit. that those should be accounted for true, which should not be consumed by the heate of the fire. They put therefore their conclusi∣ons in the middest of the fire, amongst many other things, saying that the virgin Mary was defiled with originall pollution. Blessed Do∣minick affirmed the contrarie. Presently therefore the deuouring flame consumed the false conclusions of the hereticks. But the most true sayings of blessed Dominick, re∣mained in the middes of the burning flame, for three daies togither without any hurt at all, and no signe of fire appeared in them. 9 For the fifth lesson of the same day they read this tale following. In regno Vngarie qui∣dam This might well herfor the papists haue a thousand waies to poison and secretly to murther their owne catholike Kings▪ yea and their own popes. Might not they therefore much more secretly take away the life of one that so openly op∣pugned such a chiefe principle of their religion. theologie magister, &c. that is, In the king∣dome of Hungarie a certaine master of diuini∣tie, preached before the King against the cō∣ception of the vndefiled virgin, saying, that shee was sanctified, but not conceiued with∣out staine: who so soone as he had thus vn∣reuerently spoken these things, receiued the punishment of this boldnes, and presently gaue vp the ghost. In the citie also of Tholo∣sa a certaine frier feared not to preach in like manner. But hauing ended his sermon, he
came to a certaine chappell to say masse. In this chappell there was an image of the glo∣rious virgin grauen in marble. When there∣fore the fier presumed to goe vp to the altar, the blessed mother of God the virgin shew∣ed him a very terrible and angrie countenāce, and turned (Was this pos∣sible in the ladie of pitie. Here seeme to want these words, from sinne: but this de∣fect is in their latine it selfe.) her face from him: and so shee continueth to this daie. 10 For the sixth lesson of the same day, they read this, In ducatu Subaudiensi iuxta mō∣tem sancti Bernardi, &c. that is, In the duc hie of Subaudia, by the mount of S. Bernard, a certaine frier seeing the women going to the preaching of the conception, rebuked them, saying, that the most pure virgin was not in her conception preserued by her beloued sonne: and he addeth, If it be so, I desire this miracle to be shewed vpon me by the blessed virgin, that I may die before the euening. So therefore it came to passe. For in the same houre the other friers found him hanged by the feete and dead. 11 In the fourth daies seruice for the fourth lesson, there is a trimme tale of a very elo∣quent frier in Tholosa, who for preaching a∣gainst the conception of the virgin, was pre∣sently rent in sunder & deuoured of a wolfe, &c. 12 In the fift and sixt lessons for the same day, there is a long tale out of Anselmus for iustifying the immaculate conception of the virgin. This tale beeing too long to set downe
word for word, I haue thought good to set downe the summe onely threof in this man∣ner. The Danes taking it grieuously that Wil∣liam the Conquerour had taken England from them, and that so they were as it were depriued of their inheritance, made all prepa∣ration that might be for expelling the aide William and his forces. VVilliam the Con∣querour therefore hearing thereof, sent one Elfinus a man of excellent wit, abbot of the monasterie of Rhemes, into Danske to en∣quire the truth. This Elfinus hauing dispat∣ched his masters busines, in his returne home∣ward, was with his whole companie in great daunger vpon the sea. In the middes of which daunger, hauing commended themselues to the blessed Virgin, and expecting nothing but death, suddenly amongst the waues nere vnto the shippe, they did see a very Venerabilem virum pontisi∣ciali insuls de∣coratum con∣spexere. The deuill can transforme him∣selfe into the likenes of an angel of light, much more into the likenes o a bishop. reue∣rend man, adorned with a Bishops mytre, who said vnto the Abbat thus, Vis periculum euadere? vis sanus ad patriam redire? wilt thou escape this danger? wilt thou returne in safe∣tie to th countrey? To whome when the ab∣bat had answered with teares, that that was his desire, then he that had so appeared spake further. Scias (in quit) me ad a domina nostra Dei genetrice Mria directum, quam dulciter reclamasti: & si dictis meis obtemperare volue∣ris, sanus cum comitibus tuis euades seuientis periculum maris. Promitte ergo Deo & mihi, quod conceptionem purissime virginis Marie
solenniter celebrabis & celebrandum predica∣bis. that is. Knowe thou (saide he) that I was directed vnto thee by our Ladie Ma∣rie God his mother, whome thou hast sweetely called vnto: and if thou wilt obey my sayings, thou with all thy companions shall safely escape the daunger of the raging sea. Promise therefore vnto God and vnto me, that thou wilt solemnly celebrate and preach to be celebrated the conception of the most pure Virgine Marie. VVhen Elfi∣nus had promised to performe that before en∣ioyned him, presently the sea was calme, and he with his companie safely ariued in England. 13 For the seruice of the fifth daie, and for the fourth and fifth lessons they read these toyes following. For the fourth lesson this, In pago gallico canonicus erat quidam, &c. that This miracle is the 60. example in the booke of miracles: yet some difference there is betwixt the narration of it there & here. is, In a countrey parrish of Fraunce, there was a certaine man, by order a canonicall priest, which was wont with no small affe∣ction to sing the night houres of the bles∣sed Virgin. This priest in a certaine village ioyned himselfe in fornication with another man his wife. Once therefore hauing satis∣fied his sacrilegious lust, when in the deade of the night he made hast to returne to the towne in which he aboad, beeing desirous to crosse a certaine sea, and entring alone into a shippe, in sayling hee be ganne to sing the houres of the blessed Virgine the mother
of our Lord. Now whilst he said the inuitati∣on, Hale Marie full of grace, the Lord be with thee, and he was now come to the middes of the streame, behold a multitude of deuills Whether of these speake truth? Bernardine that saith he had deserued this, or the virgin which rebuketh these deuils, as hauing dealt vniustly therein? threw him and his boat headlong to the bot∣tome of the sea, and so tooke his soule (as he had deserued) vnto torments. The third day commeth God his mother Marie accompa∣nied with innumerable lights of the saints, vnto the place where those maligne spirits did vexe him with diuers torments, (Est{que} talibus iniquos demo∣nes conuiis allcua. The virgin is not afraid to goe downe to hll it selfe and chide and rate the de∣uils at their owne dores and in their owne houses.) and with these reproches spake vnto those vniust spirits. Why doe yee vniustly afflict the soule of one that serued me? The deuils answered, we (saide they) ought to haue it, because we found it occupied in our workes. If (saide the virgin) it be his whose works it did, then cer∣tenly it is manifest to be mine, because it sang my matters when yee tooke him: wherefore yee are guiltie of a great crime, because yee haue dealt so vnrighteously towards me. 14 Then it followeth in the fifth lesson, His ita{que} dictis, demonbus{que} huc illuc fugienti∣bus, &c. that is, The deuils hauing heard these things, and taking them to their heeles, some this waie and some that waie, the most holy virgin reduced the soule of that priest vnto his bodie, and the man beeing raised from both graues shee toke from the bottom of the sea, and brought him to the port. But he beeing full of ioy and exceeding gladnes, presently fell downe prostrate at her feete. My verie
good Ladie (saide he) and most gracious vir∣gin▪ what shall I giue vnto you for the great benefits you haue bestowed vpon me? I praie thee, said Marie God his mother, fall no more into the sinne of adulterie, and declaring the feast of my immaculate conception, procure it to be kept yearely with all solemnitie. Af∣ter that the most blessed virgin had said these Ad thereas polorum sedes (angelis com∣tata) prorexit. a loftie phrase. words, shee departed (beeing waited on by the angels) into the heauens. But that canoni∣call priest liuing an heremitic all and single life, tolde what things had befalne him to all that were desirous to heare: and his whole life-time he ceased not with speciall solem∣nities to celebrate the conception of the vir∣gine. 15 Many other the like iunkats follow in the same booke, which I doe the rather here omit, because I purpose in the ende of this booke, to be so bolde with our ladie, as to make the reader a short banket with a few of the choisest of her miracles, which I hope I may the better doe, because I thinke they haue stoode so long vpon the table before her, and shee hath beene fedde so often with them, that now shee careth not greatly for them: or if shee make any account of them, yet there is such great store, that if there be neuer a blabbe and pickthanke to tell her, shee will not greatly misse the taking away of a few of them: or if shee doe it, yet such is her liberalitie and bountie, that shee will not
grutch them: yea such is her power and au∣thoritie, that shee can quickly commaund new dainties as good as those for her seruice. THE FIFTH PART. 1 NOw therefore leauing the seruice of the Virgin, I wil here adde some things out of the rest of the booke, namely out of the sermons following of her Nativitie, &c. But first I will remember this one thing, before those sermons in the 57. leafe, and second side thereof. O pulcherrima virgo, vulnerauit formosit as tua cor diuinum: attraxit puritas tua creatorem, ad vterum tu∣m. that is, O most faire virgin, thy beautie What vnchast words are these to be spoken vn∣to the chast vir∣gin. hath wounded God his heart▪ thy puiti hath drawne the Creator vnto thy wombe. Then follow the sermons of the Natiuitie of the Virgin. 2 The first of these sermons hath these three parts or mysteries. Primum (saith he) appellabitur necessitatis. 2. nobilitatis. 3. iocun∣ditatis. The necessitie of the virgin he shew∣eth by three reasons: 1. reedificationis. 2. suc∣cessionis. 3. subventionis. In the third reason he hath these words, Sicut per mulerem pecca∣tricem a diabolo deceptam, &c. that is, As by a sinnefull woman deceiued and ouercome of the deuill, mankinde was lost and deiected from his state: so on the contrarie by a wo∣man beeing innocent, pure, and most hol, A montrous blaspemie.
and conquering the deuill, it ought to be re∣stored and repaired. Otherwise the father himselfe of lies the deuill should haue gained by his lie; which ought not to be. For none ought to haue profit by a lie, according to those things which are noted C. 1. ff. &c. In the third part of the same sermon, thus he writeth: Exalabat Adam videndo lignum The virgin Ma∣rie is the ree of lie which Adam did see in para∣dise. vite, scilicet Mariam disponi ad fructum produ∣cendum vite eterne in medio paradisi that is, A∣dam reioyced to see the tree of life, to witte, Marie prepared to bring forth fruit of eter∣nall life in the middes of paradise. A little af∣ter are these wordes: Ipsa est fenestra celiper quam eus oculo suo misericorde nos respecit. The virgin the window of hea∣uen. Shee (he meaneth the virgine Marie) is the window of heauen, by which God with his eye of mercie doth respect vs. Agane pre∣sently after, dicere autem potest virgo benedi∣cta, que est ostara, &c. that is, But the blessed virgin which is the dore keeper of paradise, The virgin is the dore spoken of Ioh. 10. 9. may say that which is, Ioh. 10. I am the dore if any man enter in by me he shall be saued. Therefore, O ye sinners which are banished men from your heauenly countrey, enter in by this gate. Goe yee that are sicke to the physitian. Come yee fatherlesse to your pa∣rent. Proceede yee that are blinde to the light. Make hast yee afflicted vnto comfort. Walke O yee virgins after the glasse of cha∣stitie. Make speede O yee mothers vnto the mother of God.
3 In the beginning of the next sermon, he saith, ipsa virgo beata deum iratum placat, quia est nostra aduocata. The blessed virgin pa∣cifieth God beeing angrie, because shee is The virgin our aduocate. our aduocate. To the same effect and some∣what more largely he writeth in the third part of the sermon. Sicut ipsa mediante sedata est lis, que est inter deum & homines, ita etiam per ipsam terminantur questiones inter homines & diabolu. As by her mediation the contro∣uersie And our media∣tour both with God and the deuills. betweene God and men is compoun∣ded, so also by her are questions determined betweene men and the deuills. This he proo∣ueth by a most forcible argument, namely by one of the miracles of the virgin, touching that great sinner which in a visiō was drawne A great disputa∣tion in hell be∣twixt the virgin and the deuill. to the iudgement of God, where the deuill by many allegations prooued him to be his: but alwaies by the virgin Marie wisely an∣swering, he was foyled. But at the last, the deuill obiected against him, that the euill things which he had done, were more then the good things: when therefore at the com∣mandement of the iudge, both his goodnes and his euills were laide in a paire of ballance, and the skoale towardes the left hand in which were his euills did ouerwaie the other, on the suddaine the glorious virgin put her hand to that skoale where were his few good works, and drew it downe to the ground, and by this meanes made it ouerwaie the other Tune diabolu confusus ab∣scessit. skoale. So the deuill went away with shame,
&c. In the same part he saith that the virgin is the booke mentioned in the right hand of God, Rev. 5. 1. In the same part he saith a∣gaine, Hec benedicta virgo non tantum est liber generationis, &c. that is, This blessed virgin is The virgin is the gospel of Saint Matthew, &c. not onely the booke of the generation of Ie∣sus Christ the sonne of God, but shee is also the booke of the generation of all that are to be saued. And therefore we may also iustly say that which is written, Act. 17. namely, that we are her generation. For the blessed virgin is our mother. 4 In the fifth sermon he sheweth tenne conditions of the virgin Marie, which he saith euery spouse of euery great Emperour ought to haue. These he setteth downe by these tearmes. Prima (saith he) dicetur, integritatis. 2. virtuositatis. 3. generositatis. 4. formositatis. Daintie latine. 5. gratiositatis. 6. fecunditatis, siue fertilitatis. 7. copiositatis. 8. timorositatis. 9. pudorositatis. 10. & vltima appellabitur honestatis. If I should note all things worthie to be laughed at, &c. I should cause all his whole booke to be new printed. Omitting therefore a thousand and ten thousand absurdities and blasphemies in that great clarke, I will hereafter note the most principall. 5 In this third sermon of the nomination of Marie, in the ende of the fourth excellen∣cie of her name, thus he writeth. Quarto (saith he) licet ad ipsam appellare, si quis a dei iustitia se grauari sentit, &c. that is, Fourthly it is law∣full
to appeale vnto her, if any man feele him∣selfe oppressed with the iustice of God, which The court of Ma∣rie aboue the court of God. O horrible blas∣phemiel was signified in the 5. of Hester, where it is saide, that when King Assuerus was angrie with the Iewes, Queene Hester came to ap∣pease him. To whom the King said, Although thou shalt aske halfe of my kingdome it shall be giuen vnto thee. This Empresse therefore figured the Empresse of heauen, with whom God hath diuided his kingdome. For where∣as God hath iustice and mercie, he hath re∣serued iustice to himselfe to be exercised in the world, and mercie he hath graunted to his mother. And therefore if any feele him∣selfe greeued at the court of Gods iustice, let him appeale to his mothers court of mercie. 6 In the fourth part of the booke, and ninth sermon of the graces of Marie, he affir∣meth, that shee was able to heale diseases onely by her word leafe 143. and anon after, Marie able to heale diseases by her word onely. Shee knoweth the Mathema∣ticks and allo∣ther things. that shee hath all Mathematical knowledge, yea that shee knoweth all things. For thus he writeth. De scientiis quoque Mathematicis quod in beata virgine fuerunt, probari potest secundum Albertum, &c. that is, Concerning the mathematicall sciences that they were in the virgin Marie, it may be prooued by Al∣bertus, &c. for shee was most perfect accor∣ding to affection, therefore also according to vnderstanding. Sith therefore shee loued all things that were to be loued, it is to be con∣cluded
that she knew all things to be known. The same he amplifieth afterward by an in∣duction of the particular mathematicall sci∣ences, applying many sentences of the scrip∣ture & Apocrypha to the virgin Marie, which are spoken onely of the infinite knowledge and wisdome of God. In the same sermon in the beginning of the 145. leafe thus he wri∣teth, Beata virgo non solum totum hominem sa∣num facit in anima & corpore, &c. The blessed The virgin hea∣leth the whole man, both in this life and after death. virgin doth not onely make the whole man sound in soule and bodie, and cureth all incu∣rable diseases (as appeareth before) but also after death shee worketh cures, and putteth death it selfe to flight, and whom she cureth shee healeth to immortalitie. Therefore shee excelleth all in the gift of healing, and there∣fore shee saith in the 8 of the Proverbs: He that findeth me findeth life, and shall receiue fa∣uour of the Lord. 7 In the first part of the 6. sermon of the Annunciation of the virgin (which is long af∣ter the former) which part he calleth Deter∣minabilitatis, in this part, I say, he telleth such a tale, as would make an horse (as we speake) breake his bridle to heare it. The tale it selfe is very long, but the summe thereof is this, The fathers which died before Christs com∣ming in the flesh, beeing in Limbo, and wea∣rie A notable tale. of that place, because it was so long ere he came that should fetch them thence, at length consulted among them selues, and
at the last agree to sende an ambassage vnto An ambassage by the fathers in Limbo sent to God in heauen. God to entreat the hastening of Christs cō∣ming. In this ambassage they send these 20; 1. Abel, 2. Noc, 3. Abraham, 4. Isaac, 5. Iacob, 6. Moses, 7. Iosua, 8. Dauid, 9. Salomon, 10. Eliia, Elisha, E∣zechia, and many other taried per∣haps at home to keepe Limbum. Isaias, 11. Ieremie, 12. Malachias, 13. Agge∣us, 14. Zacharias, 15. Abacuc, 16. Iob, 17. E∣zechiel, 18. Daniel, 19. on the 19. name there is some er∣rour. Ezechiel, 20. Eccle∣siasticus. Euery one of these vrge God with seuerall arguments. Some with sentences of scripture, some with verses of Virgil, Ovid, and such like Poets, and some with the au∣thoritie of the ciuill and canon law. But the deuill vnderstanding of this ambassage, went also himselfe before God, and pleaded hard against the former ambassadours, reasoning mightily from the iustice of God, &c. for their The devill saide, Absit à Deo impietas. continuance still in Limbo. God therefore (not that he needed so to haue done, but that he might giue an exāple of righteous iudge∣ment) consulted with the angels what was to be done. Then was there great silence in heauen for halfe an houre, that they might the better deliberate what to say. The halfe houre beeing ended, euery order of Angels spake largely their minde for the fathers in Limbo. Then God hauing heard all their al∣legations, gaue sentence, approouing the counsaile of the angels, and reiecting the sug∣gestions of the deuill. Therefore he answered the ambassadours of the fathers very grati∣ously, telling them that he shortly in mercie
would thinke vpon them. The ambassadours hearing this were filled with ioy, as it is saide of the Iewes, Hest. 8. Then the three persons of the Trinitie consulted togither, and con∣cluded the sending of Gabriel to the virgin Marie, &c. This briefly is the summe of the tale which that great doctour Bernardine doth handle farre more largely, writing so largely thereof, as beeing written againe in latine without any abbreuiations, would fill two sheetes of paper. And was it not paines thinke you well taken? yes, yes, without all doubt. For so we see more touching the sen∣ding of the angel Gabriel to the virgin, then is contained in all the Scripture, or then agre∣eth with any truth. An hundred such merrie tales their are in the same booke, the which I forbeare to mention, thinking this to be suf∣ficient for a tast of the rest. 8. In the tenth sermon of the same mat∣ter, at the 209. leafe, about the letter K, he cō∣mendeth the humilitie, fortitude, and boun∣tifulnes of the virgin most highly. For refer∣ring vs to some one of his former sermons, thus he writeth: Probatum est quod super om∣nem creaturam fuit humillima atque fortissima, Yet for all that shee feared when Gabriel spake vnto her: but who euer read that the angels feared any other creature. deo quod vicit mundum, &c. that is, It was prooued that shee was most humble and va∣liant aboue euery creature, so that shee hath ouercome the world, God, and the deuill. Also shee was most bountifull: for shee hath giuen the world vnto God, and the king∣dome
of heauen and God him-selfe vnto man. 9 In the second sermon of the visitation of Marie, leafe 234. at the letter V, thus he spea∣keth to the virgin Marie: Profecto si fas est di∣cere, tu secundum quid maiora fecisti deo, &c. that is, Truly if I may be so bold as to speake, thou in some respect hast done greater things The virgin hath done more for God, then God for her and all mankinde. for God, then God himselfe hath done for thee, or for all mankinde. I therefore will speake that, whereof thou in humilitie hast held thy peace. For thou diddest onely sing. He that is mightie hath done great things vnto me: but I sing and say, that thou hast done greater things to him that is mightie. For God formed man of the clay of the earth, but thou most blessed virgin hast brought forth God of thy most pretious blood, and hast couered and cloathed him with thy most pure fleshe so that thou maist say that of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 24. I haue caused light to rise in the hea∣uens that will neuer goe out, and haue couered all flesh as it were with a cloud, and thy most pure flesh excelleth all things in the world. Againe God brought vp man with the fruits of para∣dise, but thou hast nourished God himselfe with thy breasts full of heauen, of which milke one droppe is of more value, then all the trees in paradise, or then all the fruits of the whole world. God also hath cloathed man with a garment of skinnes, but thou glo∣rious virgin hast wrapped the sonne of God
in thy cloutes, and afterward diddest put vpon him a seamelesse garment, which is farre more better then all the coates in the world. 10 In his second sermon, de festo nivis, leafe 290. after the letter N, thus he writeth: Cum beata virgo sit mater dei, &c. that is, Sith the blessed Virgin is the mother of God, and God her sonne; and euery sonne naturally is inferiour to the mother and her subiect, and the mother preferred vnto and aboue the sonne: it followeth that the blessed vir∣gin God inferiour to the virgin. is aboue God, and that God is her sub∣iect in regard of the humanitie taken from her. In the same sermon the beginning of the 292. leafe thus he writeth, Legitur quod predicantibus Apostolis, &c. that is, We reade that the Apostles preaching but not beeing able to conuert some, they sent them to the blessed virgine who admiring the beautie of the mother of God and her most wise spea∣ches, were conuerted to the faith. In the same sermon leafe 294. a little before the letter I, hauing compared, Marie to a ladder, and called her the ladder of heauen, he bringeth in Bernard speaking thus to the Virgin, C profecto scalae Dominus innixus est, &c. that is, The which ladder God vsed, because God The virgin a lad∣der betweene God and mano. would not haue vs to haue any thing that should not passe through the hands of Marie, & that none of our works are acceptable vnto him, except it be offred by the hāds of Marie.
Therefore that little that thou wouldest offer vnto God, prouide tho deliuer it into the hands of Marie, if thou wilt not haue the re∣pulse. Then he addeth his owne wordes, Hoc etiam patet exemplo quod legitur in Chronicis nostris, &c. that is, This also is manifest by an exāple that is read in our Chronicles, namely that on a certaine daie S. Frances did see two ladders, one redde vpon which Christ stoode, and an other white on the which was the virgin. And when as by the admonish∣ment of blessed Frances, the brethren assai∣ed to ascend by the redde ladder, whilst they beganne to goe, many fell backeward and could not ascend. At which thing S. Frances did grieue with weepinge to whome Christ saide, Cause thy brethren to runne to my mother The virgin a better ladder for heauen then Christ. and to the white ladder, that they may ascend by it: which when the brethren did, they were entertained of the virgin with a cheerefull countenance, and then with ease they went vp to heauen. 11 In his second sermon of the 9. part of the booke with this title, Maria terra, leafe 303. at the letter R, thus he writeth, Si quis querat quareoum diabolus tempore Tobie 7 vii ros Sare strangulauerit, &c. that is, If any man The word eum is superstuous, or els should be cum. aske why the deuill in the Time of Tobia did strangle the seauen husbands of Sara for their sinne, as it is Tob. 2. and yet now doth not kill all whome mortall sinnes doe giue into his hands: I answer, that this proceedeth frō
hence, that God hath giuen vnto men this most mightie virgin, which hath in her hand The virgin giuen to keepe men from the deuills, &c. a rodde of iron to driue away all infernall beasts, and to put to flight the deuills them∣selues. Wherefore he saith vnto her in the 2. psal. Thou shalt rule them with a rodde of iron, and breake thē in peeces like a potters vessel. And this power of the glorious virgin, is figured in the 7. of Exod. in the rodde of Aaron, which was turned into a serpent, and deuoured the roddes of the inchanters. In the same ser∣mon leafe 304. he applieth many thinges spoken of the power of God, of Christ, &c. to the virgin. As, Thou canst doe all things. If thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane. Thou art The virgin is omnipotent. stronger then all. He hath deliuered me from the mightie aduersarie. All things are possible with thee. Neither is there any thing that is not in my power. Thou rulest the raging of the sea, and the surging floods thereof thou doest miti∣gate. God hath giuen him power ouer the things that are in the earth. In Ierusalem is my power. Thy dominions is to the ends of the whole earth. His authoritie is an euerlasting authoritie from generation to generation. We have heard the fame of his power, and wonderfull is his power. All these things that I say, and many other the like, partly blasphemously and partly foolishly he applieth to the virgin Marie. In the ende of that sermon, he applieth many things also to her, that are spoken of the book The virgin is the booke of life, &c of life, exhorting such as desire to attaine vn∣to
eternall life to studie this booke daie and night. In the same sermon leafe 308. a little before the letter G, thus he saith, Beate igitur virgini quae omnes demones superauit & debel∣lauit, dici potest illud Isaij, vulnerasts dracones: & illud Apocal. 20. Apprehendit draconem antiqaum serpentem. that is, To the blessed virgin therefore which hath ouercome and subdued all the deuills, may that be saide of Esai, Thou hast wounded the dragons: and that in the 20. of the Revelation, Shee tooke the dragon that olde serpent. Againe in the same sermon leafe 309. Habet etiam solicitu∣tudinem in custodiendo, quia sub alis, &c. that is, She is also very carefull of keeping because shee keepeth vs vnder her wings, and prote∣cteth Her two great wings. vs from the snares of the deuill, for shee is that woman to whom are giuen two great wings, Revelat. 12. one is the wing of mercie, vnder the which sinners doe flie, that they may be reconciled vnto God: the other is the wing of grace, vnder which the iust do stand, that they may be preserued in grace. 12 In the fourth sermon of the same 9. part, all (almost) spoken in the scripture of light, is applied to the virgin: so also that which is spoken of the citie of God. 13. In his first sermon of the Assumption of Marie, thus he saith, Omnis natura a deo est facta, & deus est ex Maria factus. Deus omniū factor se ex Maria fecit, &c. that is, Euery na∣ture is made of God, & God is made of Ma∣rie.
God the maker of all things made him∣selfe of Marie. 14 In the second sermon of the same matter leafe 363. he telleth vs, that the vir∣gin standing at the feete of her sonne, desired him to shewe her the order of the Angels and Saints in heauen, because (saide shee) Moses & alij prophete de hoc nihil dixerunt. Marie desireth to know more then Moses and the prophets had taught. The nine orders of Angels. Moses and the other prophets haue said no∣thing of this matter. To whome the sonne shewed first touching Angels, that there were nine degrees or orders of them, and that euery order was tenne times more ex∣cellent then other. 1. of angels, 2. of archan∣gels, 3. principalities, 4. powers, 5. vertues, 6. dominions, 7. thrones, 8. cherubins, 9. se∣raphims. Here note before I proceede any Repugnance be∣tweene Bernar∣dine and other Papists. further, let the reader obserue that this a∣greeth not with that which some other Pa∣pists write of this matter. For he saith that Christ himselfe shewed these things vnto his mother: but other Papists, and namely Saint Vincent in his sixth sermon for the ninth Lords daie after the feast of the Trinitie, saith that Dionysius learned this diuinitie of Paul, and that to Paul it was first reuea∣led, when he was rapt vp into the thirde heauen. After that Christ had shewed his mother these orders of the Angels, then he proceedeth to shew her further the seue∣rall places of the Saints, which were these t first, that in the first order of Angels before
mentioned, are placed those which shall re∣pent of their sinnes. In the second order of Archangels shall be placed, they that ouer and aboue their repentance shall haue actual deuotion, which he saith is more then repen∣tance. Thirdly that with principalities shall be placed, they that are mercifull in corpo∣rall and spirituall workes. Fourthly that with powers shall be placed, they that are pati∣ent, and which beare much aduersitie pati∣ently. Fifthly that with vertues shall be pla∣ced the peacemakers, and they that as much as in them lieth haue peace with all men. Sixth∣ly they with dominions shall be made bles∣sed, prelates as well ecclesiasticall as secular. Beatificabūtur prelati, tam ec∣ciesiastics quam seculares. Seauenthly that with thrones shall be placed, they that perfectly for saking the world shall obserue wilfull pouertie. Eightly that with Cherubims shall be placed the wise teachers of soules, which shall not onely liue well themselues, but shall also by their wisdome and doctrine bring other to eternall life. Ninthly that with Seraphims shall stand they that shall be perfect in burning loue aboue all other, as the Apostles and other like vnto them. When shee had heard all this shee said further, Et ego fili in quo ordine collocabor? And in what order, O sonne, shall I be placed? He answered, because thou art perfecter then all the former, therefore thou shalt not be in any of the former orders, but shalt be exalted a∣boue all angelicall spirits. Nam due cathedre
& sedes fulgentissime sunt nobis preparate in ce∣lo, &c. for there are two chaires and seates most fulgent, (or bright) prepared for vs in heauen. One for me wherein I shall sitte as king of heauen, and an other for thee at my right hand, wherein thou shalt sitte as the Queene of Angels, and of all the Saints, which was figured 3. King. by Bathsheba & 1. King. 2. Salomon, &c. These things are much more largely set downe by him in his booke, then by me in this place, because I hasten to an ende. Now who seeth not the vanitie and follie of these mysteries? 15 In the first sermon of her coronation, leafe 381. thus he writeth: O igitur regina no∣stra serenissima &c. that is, O therefore our The virgins kingdome vni∣uersall and euer∣lasting. most excellent Queene, thou truly maist say Ezr. 1 that, The Lord hath giuē me all the king∣domes of the earth. And we may say vnto thee that Tob. 13. Thy kingdome is throughout all ages. and psal. 144. Thy kingdome is for all a∣ges. Psal. 145. 3. and Dan. 2. A kingdome which shall neuer be broken. Come therefore and take thou the kingdome ouer vs. Iudg. 9. for of thy kingdome may that be said, psal. 105. And his kingdome shall rule ouer all. and Luc. 1. And of his king∣dome there shall be none ende, &c. 16 In the second sermon of her corona∣tion, O how much adoe is there of the great singing in heauen by the angels and saints, &c. euery one hauing a seuerall antheme? leafe 386. Afterward he telleth vs that shee
was crowned with three crownes, as the Em∣perours are wont to be crowned. One crown is of iron, in signum fortitudinis, in token of her fortitude and strength; the second was of Her three crownes. siluer, ratione purit at is, in regard of her puri∣tie; the third crowne where with shee was crowned, was of gold, ratione superioritatis & sufficientie, in regard of her superioritie and sufficiencie. In the same sermon leafe 391. he saith, that in glorie shee doth as much ex∣cell the nature of angels and men, both bee∣ing ioyned together, as the circumference of the firmament doth in greatnes exceede his center; that is, (to speake more plainely) that her glorie is as much greater then the glorie of the angels and of men, as the whole high∣est heauen is greater then the earth. In the same lease thus he speaketh vnto her, O femi∣na ab omnibus & super omnia benedicta, &c. An heape of the virgins titles. that is, O woman of all, and aboue all blessed. Thou art the nobilitie and preseruation of mankind. Thou art the breadth of merit, and the perfect power of all things created. Thou art the onely mother of God. Thou art the Ladie of the whole earth, and the Queene of the world. Thou art the dispenser of all gra∣ces. Thou art the cōsummation of the whole world, and the beautie of the holy Church. Thou art out worthie satisfaction before the giuer of all gifts. Thou art the incomprehensi∣ble greatnes of all vertues, gifts, and graces. 17 It were infinite to note the cithe one∣ly
of the foolish and blasphemous speaches concerning the virgin Marie, contained in that one booke so highly allowed by the Popes holines. To omit therefore the gathe∣ring of any more out of this Bernardine, I come now to the sermons of Saint Vincent. THE SIXTH PART. THis Vincent was no obscure person, but like wise of great account in the Romish Church. For he is not onely called by the name of a Saint, but also in the beginning of his Estivall sermons, he is called Divini verbi preco, interpres & professor subti∣lissimus, that is, a most subtile or sharpe prea∣cher, interpretour and professour of the word of God. In the ende also of the same booke, he is called Iluminatissimus & acutis∣simus sacre theologie professor, a most illu∣minated and acute professour of sacred di∣uinitie. Let vs therefore see what pretious ware this great marchant hath in his shoppe. 2 First it is to be obserued that as Bernar∣dine did, so doth this man also beginne all (or at the least most of) his sermons with a de∣uout salutation of the Virgin. Touching the speciall matter of his sermons, it is as follow∣eth. In his first sermon for Easter daie, he no∣teth chiefly and principally three points, wherein consisteth (as he saith) all the pra∣ctise of the blessed resurrection of Christ. These three points he setteth downe thus, Resurrectio Christi fuit celebrata affectuose,
demonstrata gratiose, publicata virtuose. The resurrection of Christ was celebrated with great affection, shewed with great grace, published with great power or vertue In the same sermon speaking of the virgin Marie he saith, that shee had prepared against the re∣surrection of Christ, cameram a chamber, and Camara is vsed for a chamer by the same author, erm. 2. pro Do∣minic. 1 post fe∣ nnitatis. cathedram a chaire: and that she said, Hic se∣debit filius meus, & hic loquar et. Here shall my sonne sit, and here will I speake vnto him. What word is there of any such thing in the Scripture? Then he addeth, that when Christ and his mother met, and Christ was set in the chaire, he told his mother what he had done in hell, how he had bound the deuill, & shew∣ed her the holy fathers which he had taken from thence, who did to the virgin great reue∣rence. Then he setteth downe particularly the words of Adam and Eve, of the Prophets and Angels, &c. to the virgin Marie. 3 In his sermon for the fourth holy day of Easter, hauing read his text which he saide was the gospel for that daie, and hauing sa∣luted the virgin, he addeth these words: In sa∣cro euangelio sunt quatuor moralia circa appa∣ritionem quam fecit Christus discipulus suis, sci∣licet, Occasio necessilosa, Operatio miraculosa, Cognitio virtuosa, Refectio gratiosa. I leaue the english to the learned. 4 His first sermon for Dominica in albis he maketh on this text Ioh. 20. Post dies octo i∣terum venit Iesus. After eight daies came Ie∣sus
againe. These eight daies he doth thus in∣terpret in the beginning of the 19. leafe. Hic octo dies sunt opera penitentialia, quibus comple∣tis iterum venit Christ us. Primus dies est pec∣catorum cognitio. 2. cordis contritio. 3. oris con∣fessio. 4. vite oorrectio. 5. iniuriarū remissio. 6. debitorum restitutio. 7. fame reparatio. 8. eucha∣ristie communio. that is, Here eight daies are the works of penance (or rather repentance) In his first sermō for the 14. Lords day after Trini∣tie, he speaketh often peniten∣tiall works. which beeing complete Christ came againe. The first day is the knowledge of sinnes: the second the contrition of the heart: the third the confession of the mouth: the fourth the a∣mendment of life: the fifth the remitting of iniuries: the sixth the restoring of debts: the seauenth the repairing of credit: the eight the receiuing of the eucharist or communion. Is not this a subtile, a lightsome, and an acute or wittie, and sharpe manner of interpreting the scriptures, according to the titles before gi∣uen to this Vincent? and was he not well worthie to be sainted for such interpretati∣ons? but let vs see further. 5 His fifth sermon for the same day is vp∣on these words, Noli esse incredulus sed fidelis. Be not faithles but beleeue, Ioh. 20. Intrea∣ting of these words, thus in the beginning of that sermon he writeth: A principto mundi semper fuit necessarium ad saluationem, habere fidem, &c. From the beginning of the world it was alwaies necessarie to saluation to haue faith, &c. but diuersly, quoniam tempore legis
naturae, &c. because in the law of nature that explicite faith was sufficient, which might be What faith Saint Vincent maketh alwaies necessary to saluation. had in the naturall vnderstanding with out a∣ny bookes, namely to beleeue, first that there was one God, which may be knowne by na∣turall vnderstanding, as the power of a lord is knowne by the building of a great house. Se∣condly, that he is a iust god & a rewarder, &c. Then for the time of the law of Moses, he saith that it was necessarie to beleeue three articles of faith, namely the former two, and for the third, that God would send his sonne to be a sauiour of the world. And he addeth, Alia se∣creta fidei non tenebantur scire, nisi magni lite∣rati. The other secrets of faith none were bound to know, but onely the great learned men. Lastly now in the time of the law of grace, he saith that men must beleeue the 12. articles of faith, &c. Who seeth not but that by this doctrine, before the law of Moses a man might be saued, first onely by naturall vnderstanding without any other grace, yea without the helpe of any booke: secondly without any faith at all in Christ euen to come. And then what needed the Lord, Gen. 3. 15. and often elswhere before the lawe of Moses to haue made any promise of Christ Iesus? yea how is it said that Abraham belee∣ued and it was accounted vnto him for righte∣ousnes? yea that Abraham did see the daie of Christ and reioyced? 6 In his third sermon for the first Lords day,
post octa: Paschae, thus he writeth, Nota quod Christus in cruce, &c. leafe 33. that is, Note that Christ vpon the crosse did especially sustaine sorowes in fiue parts of his body; namely first in his whole bodie, when it lay vpon the hard & heauie crosse; 2. in nailing of his right hād; 3. of his left hand; 4. of his right foote; 5. of his left foote. Here let the reader note, how wittily this great Saint Doctour maketh the whole bodie of Christ a part of his bodie. 7 To passe by many other things, for his first sermon of the bodie of Christ, leafe 97. he taketh this text, Ego accepi a domino quod & tradidi vobis. I haue receiued of the Lord that which I haue deliuered vnto you. Then he sheweth his auditors where he had this text, verbum istud habetur textualiter, 1. Cor. 11. &c. In the beginning of this sermon he hath some pretie things indeede worth the obser∣uation, as that he saith, that the heart of man is not to enlarge it selfe to beleeue more, nor the mouth to speake, nisi quantum habemus ex sacra scriptura, but as much as we haue out of the holy scripture. And againe, The holy scrip∣ture is the mouth of god, hauing two lippes, name∣ly the two testaments: the upper lippe is the new testamēt; & the nether the old testamēt. But pre∣sently he returneth to his old fashion, & shew∣eth the cōmō learning of those times, adding, Inter cetera mirabilia & secreta huius sacramē∣tisunt quing, principalia, &c. 1. est mutatio sub∣stantialis. 2. operatio sacerdotalis. 3. habitatio sa∣cramentalis.
4. perreptio sensualis. 5. receptio vsuoe∣lis. that is, Amongst other miracles and se∣crets of this sacrament, fiue are principall, &c. The 1. is a substantiall chaunge, the 2. the priestly operation, the 3. a sacramentall dwel∣ling, the 4. a sensible perceiuing, the 5. an v∣suall receiuing. In handling the second of these, and magnifying the operation of the priest, by the place from whence he fetcheth Christ into the sacrament; he setteth downe first diuers places from whence Christ is not drawne into the sacrament, namely, nor out of the aire, nor out of the sphere of the fire, nor out of the heauen of the moone, nor out of the heauen of Mercurie, nor out of the heauen of Venus, nor out of the heauen of the sunne, nor out of the heauen of Mars, nor out of the heauen of the starres (O wonderfull elo∣quence:) at last he sheweth that he fetcheth him out of the highest heauen. Then he ad∣deth his rhetoricall acclamation, Ecce opera∣tio sacerdotalis: behold the priestly operation or working. Then followeth this goodly si∣militude. Sicut quod quando virgo, &c. For as when the virgin Marie beeing saluted by the angel Gabriel, did giue her consent and said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, Luk. 1. at the last word heauen was opened, and the sonne of God descended into her wombe, and the angel and the virgin did worship him in the wombe, and as the mouth of the virgin ope∣ned heauen: so doth the mouth of the priest,
and that in a more excellent manner, (it shall not offend the virgin Marie if I speake the The priests work in the masse, greater then the virgins in concei∣uing of Christ. Habuit dicere octo verba. Neither the vir∣gin nor Christ spake any latin. truth) because the virgin to open heauen had to say eight wordes, the 1. Behold, the 2. the handmaid, &c. till shee had saide all, for then was heauen opened and shee conceiued: but the Priest speaketh fiue words onely, and when he speaketh the last word. to wit, Me∣um, then is heauen opened, and Christ is in the host. Againe the virgin Marie did open hea∣uen but once: but the priest euery day and in euery masse. Againe he descended into the virgins wombe but little, not so bigge as an ante, and passible also and mortall: but into the host he descendeth as great as he is in heauen, and as he was vpon the crosse, neither passible nor mortall, but glorious and impas∣sible. 8 Neare vnto the beginning of the next sermon, leafe 99. thus he writeth, Sicut Chri∣stus fuit eleuatus & crucifixus inter, &c. As Christ was lifted vp and crucified betweene two theeues: so the host beeing consecrated is lifted vp by two hands, the right and the left, which signifie the theeues. And as then the bodie of Christ was white by shedding A fitte and ex∣cellent smiliuda forth blood: so the host is lifted vp white. The former of these similitudes is very apt, espe∣cially if in the application thereof, and like∣wise in the interpretation thereof of the two hands of the priest, he had said which are, and not which signifie. For they are indeede two
theeues robbing God of his glorie, and men of many a penie. 9 In the beginning of the fourth sermon of the bodie of Christ, he sheweth how the masse is remembrance of Christs death. This he sheweth thus: Altare significat crucem, &c. The altar signifieth the crosse: the reason is, How the Masse is a remembrance of Christs death. because on the altar the bodie and blood of Christ are sacramentally consecrated: so vpon the crosse he was really sacrificed. The cuppe or chalice signifieth the sepulchre of Christ; because as in the chalice the bodie and blood of Christ is contained: so in the sepulchre the bodie of Christ was really con∣tained. By the couer is vnderstood the stone which was laide vpon the dore of the sepul∣chre to couer it: so is the couer to the chalice. By the corporall wherein the bodie of Christ is put, are vnderstood the linnen cloathes in which the bodie of Christ was wrapped. Is not this trimme stuffe? what word is there in the scripture of an altar at the first institution of the supper? Againe here is no mention at all of the host: neither is the host put into the chalice, as the bodie of Christ was laide in the graue. How also will they prooue that the cuppe that our Sauiour blessed at the first institution of the supper, had a couer? Lastly the linnen cloathes wherof they speake, were not vsed in the first supper, neither at the suf∣fering of Christ, but after his death, for the bu∣rying of the bodie, when the soule was depar∣ted
frō it: neither was the body of Christ wrap∣ped in linnen clothes by the Apostles whose successours they boast them selues to be, but by Ioseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. 10 His first sermon for the first Lords day after the feast of the Trinitie, is vpon these wordes, Habent Mosen & Prophetas, audiant llos. Here he exhorteth his auditours to sa∣lute the virgin, and saith, First let vs present to the virgin Marie the ie well that shee most Iocale. loueth, namely, Haile Marie, &c. then he sheweth what things are contained in the text. Sctendum quod euangelium hodierum, &c. We must know that this daies gospel doth declare 4. things very necessary to be knowne for our auisement. Et sunt haec, Mundanalis Auisamento. conuersatio, Diuinalis retributio, Infernalis di∣spositio, Scripturalis confirmatio. And they are these, Worldly conuersation, diuine retributi∣on or rewarding, infernall disposition, scriptu∣rall confirmation. 11 The text of his second sermon for the same daie is this, In domo patris mei habeo quinque fratres. In my fathers house I haue brethren, Luk. 16. Then he addeth, that for declaration of the word House, we are to knowe that the whole generalitie of crea∣tures, as well heauenly as earthly, is called the house of God. The reason whereof he maketh to be this, namely, that as in the palace of a great prince, aboue are cham∣bers, Who euer saw any such palace? beneath a stable for cattell, and vn∣derneath
within the earth a prison for male∣factours: so in the house of God, aboue, that is, in the highest heauen are chambers, to wit, By this reckning Christ hath no friends in the world. the 9. orders of angels, where dwel the friends of Christ, &c. beneath in the world dwell beasts, seruitours, and clients; but the prison for male factours, is in the heart of the earth, namely the infernall perpetuall prison. After Where is purga∣torie now be∣come? this because his text speaketh of fiue brethrē, he sheweth fiue fraternities in the house of God, which are these, Fraternitas humanalis, & ista venit per naturam. Fraternitas spiritua∣lis, & ista venit per gratiam. Fraternitas demo∣nialis, & ista venit per culpam. Fraternitas an∣gelicalis, & ista venit per amicitiam. Fraterni∣tas diuinalis, & ista venit per misericordiam. An humane fraternitie or brotherhoode, and this commeth by nature. A spirituall frater∣nitie, and this commeth by grace. A diuelish fraternitie, and that commeth by offence. An angelicall fraternitie, and this commeth by friendship. A diuine fraternitie, and this com∣meth by mercie. 12 In his one sermon. In octava corporis Christi, he saith, that he found that Christ said two masses in his life time. One secretly with Christ said two masses in his life time. Solenniter in pontificalibus. his disciples when he ordained this sacrifice, the other solemnly and in his pontificalibus on good friday. Of this he writeth thus, leafe 109 Altare fuit crux, mitra fuit, &c. His altar was the crosse, his mitre the crowne of thornes, his rings on his hands were nayles, his san∣dalls
on his feete were nayles, his redde hood Such hoodes would soone wearie the po∣pish priests. was of his blood, his staffe was the speare, the deacon was the theefe on his right hand, the subdeacon the theefe on his left hand, his a∣colytes or waiting men the virgin Marie and The theeues in higher office thē the virgin Marie and Iohn. Iohn the Euangelist. Who will not wonder to heare these toyes? yea, who will not smile, or rather laugh right out? for what can be more childish and foolish? 13 In his first sermon for the second Lords day after Trinitie, in the same booke the se∣cond side, hauing laid the foundation, he cō∣meth to build (as he saith) quatuor cameras, foure chambers. Which are, Largitas gloriosa, Charit as gratiosa, Equitas rigorosa, Pietas co∣piosa. the english of which tearmes I leaue to the learned reader. 14 In his second sermon for the same day, Three villages in the other world. lease 112. he saith that he found three villa∣ges in the other world according to the scrip∣tures, much differing in conditions. Prima est superius celestialis & glortosa, Secunda infe∣rius infernalis & tenebrosa, Tertia est in medio purgatorialis & dolorosa. The first is aboue ce∣lestiall or heauenly and glorious, the second beneath infernall and darke, the third in the middes purgatoriall and painefull. 15 In his fourth sermon for the same daie he noteth three waies, after which men goe Three waies of going to heauen. to heauen, leafe 155. Aliqui, saith he, vadunt currendo vigorose, Aliqui vadunt ambulando spaciose, Aliqui vadunt tracti rigorose: that is,
Some goe running stoutly, some goe walking largely, some goe beeing drawne rigorously or violently. 16 In his next sermon he telleth vs that he hath found in holy scripture, that by defect of loue towards God, quatuor mortes venerunt generi humano, &c. foure deaths haue come Foore deaths of mankinde. vnto mankinde, &c. Prima mors spiritualis quam debemus fugere. Secunda corporalis quam debemus prouidere. Tertia gehennalis quam de∣bemus precauere. Quarta eternalis quam debe∣mus horrescere. The first death is spirituall which we must auoide, the second corporall which we must foresee, the third of hell fire which we must take heede of, the fourth eter∣nall which we must feare. The 2. last he doth thus distinguish, making the third of the soule onely till the day of iudgement: the fourth of soule and body for euer after the day of iudgement. 17 His text for the 7. Lords day after tri∣nitie is this, Misereor super turbam, &c. I pitie quiae triduo me sustinent. Poterit habere abundantiam & prouisionem de omnibus sibi necessariis. the multitude because they haue sustained me these three daies. His text diuided, &c. he saith, quilibet cuiuscunque sit status, &c. Euery one of what degree soeuer, may haue abun∣dance and prouision of all things necessarie for him, is he sustaine Christ three daies. Thē he noteth 7. degrees of men, 1. Dominum, Seauen degrees of men. temporalium, of temporall lords. 2. prelatorū, of prelats. 3. religiosorum, of religious persons. 4. clericorum, of clerks or learned men. 5. con∣iugatorum,
of married persons. 6. viduarum, of widowes. 7. virginum, of virgins. Then he noteth three daies to be three vertues, which euery one of those degrees of men ought to haue. 1. est iustitia generalis, gene∣rali Three vertues necessarie for e∣uery degree of men. iustice. 2. modestia personalis, perso∣nall modestie. 3. reuerentia diuinalis, di∣uine reuerence. These are for temporall lords; for prelats he noteth these three, pre∣sidentia spiritualis, spirituall presidence. Pro∣videntia pastoralis, pastorall prouidence. Sanctimonia personalis, personall sanctimo∣nie. For religious persons he setteth downe these three, Paupertas apostolicalis, apostoli∣call pouertie. Castitas angelicalis, angelicall chastitie. Obedientia vniuersalis, vniuersall o∣bedience. The fourth triduum, that is, the fourth 3. daies he maketh these three, Dili∣gēter officiare, to setue diligently. Deuote cele∣brars, to celebrate deuoutly. Honeste conuer∣sari, to liue honestly. The fifth three daies he maketh these three vertues, Amor cordia∣lis, cordiall or heartie loue. sides coniugalis, marriage faithfulnesse. sedulitas doctrinalis, spirituall deuotion. Afflictio corporalis, bo∣dily affliction. Miseratio fraternalis, bro∣therly compassion. The seauenth three daies are these, Verecundia in facie, bashfulnesse in the face. Silentium in voce, silence in voice. Obedientia ad parentes in opere. Obe∣dience in worke to parents. To all those that haue these three vertues, he saith that
Christ will say, Misereor super hanc turbans, quodecce iam triduo sustinent me, &c. 18 In his fourth sermon for the 9. Lords daie after Trinitie, he noteth foure occasions Foure occassons of falling into sinne. whereby deuout persons fall into sinne, leafe 160. B. Prima est per diabolicalem tentationē. 2. per familiarem affectionem. 3. per deliciosam conuersationem. 4. per negligentialem operatto∣nem. The first is by diuellish tentation, the se∣cond by familiar affection, the third by deli∣cious conuersation, the fourth by negligent working. 19 In the next sermon but one he saith, that as in an apple there are certaine houses wherein are the kernells: so in the foure parts of the earth there are foure chambers. Prima Foure chambers in the earth. est infernus peruersorum. 2. est limbus pueronū. 3. est locus purgandorum. 4. est lmbus patrum. leafe 136. A. The first is hell for the froward, the second the limbe or well of children, the third is the place of them that are to be pur∣ged, the fourth is the limbe or well of the fa∣thers. Where finde they this diuinitie in the Scripture? 20 In the second sermon for the 11. Lords daie after Trinitie he saith, that he found the soules of purgatorie to haue foure conditions Foure differences betweene vs and them in purga∣torie. very differing from vs so long as we liue in this world, leafe 174. A. Prima est stabilit as in gratia. 2. est securit as de gloria. 3. acerbitas de pena. 4. paupert as nimia. The first is stabilitie in grace, the second is securitie or certentie of
glorie, the third sharpnes of punishment, the fourth extreame pouertie. By the two first of All in purgatorie, are beggers. these, that is manifest that in my former trea∣tise I haue saide in the seauenth argument thereof, namely that in peoperie there is no sound ioy and comfort. For what sound ioye and comfort can there be without stabilitie in grace, and certentie of glorie? verily where these things are doubted of, there can be no∣thing but feare. 21 HIs text of his first sermon for the 14. Lords daie, leafe 189. is this, Are there not tenne clensied? Luk. 17. In the ende of this ser∣mon he deliuereth vs this deepe point of di∣uinitie. In his 1. sermon for Dom. in all is he mentioneth but & penitentiall workes. As (saith he) this word Innocentia or obedientia hath tenne letters: so this word pe∣nitentia. Because as the forme of baptisme, Wherein innocencie is giuen to the partie baptised, consisteth of tenne words, and obe∣dience in tenne commaundements: so doth penance in tenne workes of penance before mentioned: therefore our theame saith, Are there not? that is, ye acertenly there are tenne, to wit, that are clansed by the workes of pe∣nance. 22 In the next sermon, that text beeing Goe shew your selues to the priests, after the rea∣ding thereof, thus he writeth For loue of this word, I haue sought in the scripture, as well in the old as in the new testament, how ma∣ny waies God hath obserued for healing the leprosie: and I finde he hath cured it 5. waies.
Primo per ablutionem corporalem, by bodily washing. 2. per tactum manualem, by touch∣ing Fiue waies of cu∣ring the leprosie. with the hand. 3. per ostensionem visua∣lem, by visible shewing. 4. per absconsionem sinualem, by bosome hiding. 5. per separatio∣nem personalem, by personall separation. The third of these he saith that his text speaketh of. Vnto the fifth he applieth the wordes of God vnto Moses touching Miriam, after that he had stricken her with the leprosie, Let her be shut out of the host seauen daies, Numb. 12. where, vpon the words seaven daies, he noteth that by them are vnderstood seauen things, wherein standeth perfectiō of religion. These seauen he setteth downe thus. Obedientia ge∣neralis, generall obedience. Paupertas aposto∣licalis, apostolicall pouertie. Casttas angeli∣cas, Seauen things in which standeth the perfection of religion. angelicall chastitie. Devotio in officio, de∣uotion in seruice. In ore silentium, silence in the mouth. Penitentia corporalis, bodily pe∣nance. Et patientia virtualis, and virtuall pa∣tience. Will not any man thinke all this to be profound diuinitie? 23 In his fourth sermon for the 16. Lords daie after Trinitie, leafe 209. A. he hath these wordes, Transeuntes primam & secundam cu∣stodiam, &c. When they had passed the first Act 12. 10. and second watch, they came to the yron gate, that is, to purgatorie, because as yron is harder and wood; so the paines of purgato∣rie is harder then yron, and the paine of pur∣gatorie exceedeth the paine of this world.
But there is comfort for them, that this pur∣ging time beeing finished, they enter into the citie of paradise. Wherefore it followeth in the foresaid authoritie, which opened vnto them by it owne accord. Is not this as profound diui∣nitie as the former? what comparison is there betwixt the iron gate where by S. Peter had no paine, and purgatorie, of the paines where∣of S. Peter in purga∣torie. the Papists doe so often complaine? A∣gaine if the iron gate were purgatorie, then Peter went through purgatorie. Will the Popes beare this that Peter whose successors they all boast themselues to be, should passe through the fire of purgatorie? Againe how doth this similitude agree with it selfe? for Peter had first beene in prison, and beeing released out of prison, he came vnto, and pas∣sed through the iron gate, whence it is eui∣dent that Peter had beene in the hardest con∣dition before he came to the iron gate: but this great and learned Doctour telleth vs the contrarie, namely that the paines of purga∣torie are greater and harder then all former paines. Lastly this iron gate was hard by the citie, whereby he vnderstandeth para∣dise or heauen: but purgatorie is as farre distant from heauen as the earth, yea some∣what further then the vpper part of the earth, because by their doctrine it is within the earth. 23 In the 2. sermon for the 19. Lords day he hath this sweete latin, the english where∣of
I doe omit, as not beeing greatly materiall. Modo in vnaparva summa, ego epilogavi om∣nes rationes, quibus eleuatur & excitatur cor creature ad confidendum in creatore, & sunt sep∣tem. Prima est fidelis integritas. 2. cordialis pu∣ritas. 3. lachrymabilis vbertas. 4. timoralis seru∣pulositas. 5. misericordialis largitas. 6. doctrina∣lis sedulitas. 7. virtualis firmitas. 24 The like latine is in the first sermon for the next daie, where he setteth downe haec tria puncta multum notabilia. Primus est humi∣litas diuinalis. Secundus est peruersitas huma∣nalis. Tertius est indignitas meritalis. 25 The text of his third sermon for the 22. Lords daie is this, Patientiam habe in me, &c. Haue patience towards me, and I will pay thee all, Math. 16. In the ende of this ser∣mon thus he writeth, Sciatis quod modo pote∣rimus, &c. that is, Vnderstand that if we can paie him with ten works he will be content; which is signified in this word patientia, wher∣in are ten letters: because as we haue offen∣ded against the ten commandements, so we must satisfie with ten penitentiall workes. Here to omit the diuinitie of the doctour in this place, let the reader obserue how foully he was deceiued in Arithmetike, euen in nu∣meration. S. Vincents arith∣metike faileth him in numera∣tion. For if he had remembred to haue taken a sticke (as men speake) to haue tolde the letters of patientia, he should haue found but nine. If any shall answer that he meant the accusatiue case patientiam, as it is in the
vulgar latin text, I obiect againe, that he him∣selfe saith not so much, but plainely setteth downe the nominatiue case patientia: and fur∣ther to the latin word, which is arbitrarie ac∣cording to the minde and vnderstanding of the translator, I oppose the originall Greeke word (which is most authenticall) , where are twelue letters. 26 Thus much shall suffice for a tast of such soure liquour as is in S. Vincents vessell; yea let this suffice for a tast of all the rest. Such as we haue seene these two Doctours to be, such for the most part are the other popish writers of that age, and of these times of po∣perie. I had indeede thought to haue giuen the like tast of some other of their writings, but because I thinke this alreadie giuen to be sufficient (if not more then sufficient, except the matter were sweeter and pleasanter) I will therefore here spare the further paines of my selfe and of the reader. 27 These thinges I haue thought good thus to write, for the auoiding of all aduan∣tage against me by any actions of slaunder, for obiecting so much ignorance (besides the blasphemies) to those times wherein poperie did weare the garland. If I had not thus laide downe their owne wordes, it may be many would haue thought, that there had not bin so high blasphemies, neither so foule and grosse absurdities with such rudenes and bar∣barisme, as by these few things I haue shew∣ed,
and might haue shewed more largely, if I had had conuenient leasure, & had thought the patience of the reader would haue borne the reading of more such vnsauorie stuffe. 28 By these blasphemies thus discouered, farre beyond the opinion (I thinke) of all that vnderstand not the latin tongue, & that haue not bin acquainted with these deepe myste∣ries of the iniquitie of poperie, I wish all chri∣stians, that as now they see poperie to be more blasphemous thē euer they had thought it to haue beene: so For euer here after they hate all poperie both the head and the taile, both the substance and all the accidents, with a more perfect hatred then they haue done. 29 And because I doe verily thinke, that many papists themselues did neuer imagine so high abominations to be contained in po∣perie, as hauing beene learned to beleeue as the Church beleeueth, that ignorance is the mother of deuotion, and such other like princi∣ples, and hauing not therefore euer truly vn∣derstood the substance of poperie: I doe ther∣fore also againe earnestly exhort them, as they loue Gods glorie, which now they see alto∣gether impaired & disgraced by poperie so for the time to come, they loath this religiō as much as euer ignorantly they haue loued it: and that they thinke it as beastly, as filthie, and abominable, as euer hitherto, they beeing de∣ceiued haue esteemed it reasonable, amiable, and acceptable in the sight of God.
30 All such as loue learning, let them in like manner abhorre this Romish religion. For although now all kinde of learning doe flourish by the meanes of the gospel: yet if e∣uer poperie preuaile as it hath done, and reco∣uer the former strength (as I hope it shall ne∣uer doe) doubtles all learning will wither and decaie againe. In the time of the Apostles, & in the age of the primitiue church, the gifts of Gods spirit did much more abound then now they doe: yet as poperie spread it selfe ouer the face of the earth, so those gifts decaied, vntill there was as much barbarisme, as po∣perie. Let the like therefore be feared if po∣perie should againe ascend the staires of her former dignitie. 31 If any shall obiect against these things that I haue noted out of popish writings, for the disgracing of poperie, that in many of our books like wise there are some vanities & ab∣surdities: I answer that though this should be An answer to an obiection touch∣ing the former popish testimo∣nies. graunted, yet first the matters are not so blas∣phemous, so grosse, so rude, and so ridiculous, as these that I haue noted, & a thousand yea ten thousand the like. Secondly the number of them is not so great. Thirdly the persons that haue written such vanities, are not of that credit in our whole church as these and other are with their Church. Fourthly our mens books are not published by such high autho∣ritie & solemne allowance, as the bookes be∣fore mentioned and other the like writings of theirs haue bin.
THE SEAVENTH PART. IT remaineth now, that according to my promise, I make the reader a litle banquet with some of the Virgins miracles. Herein I will be the briefer, by how much the larger I haue bin in the former. I will not therefore take all, neither the largest dishes, least I should leaue her table bare: but I will onely make choice of the least but yet the daintiest iun∣kats, that so the taking of them away may be the lesse espied. Yet what neede I feare the missing of any thing from her table? her pow∣er is such, that as they say of the crosse vpon which Christ suffered, that whatsoeuer is ta∣ken from it, yet it is not diminished, but re∣maineth as ample as it was at the first: so we may like wise say of these her iunkats, that though we should take neuerso many of them, yet her table would be nothing the ba∣rer. And therefore whereas the booke, or ra∣ther the closet and storehouse of her mira∣cles (for so it is called, Promptuarium discipuli de miraculis beate Marie virginis) containeth but 99. miracles, this may well be added vn∣to them for an other to make vp the whole hundred, that whatsoeuer a man taketh a∣way, yet her table remaineth as fully furnish∣ed as at the first before any dish was touched. And that no man may thinke these miracles to haue beene of meane account in the po∣pish Church, let him first vnderstand that
both they were solemnly read in the chur∣ches for lessons in their publique seruice, vp∣on such feastiuall daies as they did obserue vnto the virgin; as also the great diuines of the popish Church did commonly alleadge thē in their sermons for authorities to prooue and confirme many of the points of their re∣ligion. Both these things I haue made mani∣fest. Againe, the gatherer together of these miracles, in his prologue to the whole worke, doth commend the dainties following to be Omni melle dulciora, sweeter then any honie. What is this but to compare them with the written word of God, which is in like manner commended? psal. 19. 10. 2. Now for the manner of setting downe these miracles, I will for the more breuities sake altogether omitthe latine (except now and then some speciall word or phrase which I will put in the margent) and content my selfe onely with the english faithfully transla∣ted. And in case the whole miracle be very long, I will onely set downe the summe ther∣of briefly. The contents of each example or miracle shall be placed in the margent. And all this I will doe so faithfully, that no Papist whatsoeuer shall be able iustly to charge me with any false dealing. 3 To come then to the miracles them∣selues, I will passe by the first and second ex∣ample, and beginne with the third, the text whereof is this. There was a certaine woman
of honest conuersation, who although being Marie deliuereth a woman from damnatiō, whichin her confession wittingly concea∣led a great sinne. maried she did weare a secular habite, yet she liued a regular life. Notwithstanding in her youth she had committed a great fault, which for shame she durst not tell any man. When she confessed her selfe to the priest, cloking Palliato crimi∣ne sic conclusit. Reddo me cul∣pabilem. her sinne thus she concluded. Of all that I haue said or not said, I yeelde my selfe guiltie, and saying this, oftentimes she sighed grie∣uously. The priest perceiuing this, did cun∣ningly Calide tentabat trie to draw from her that which laie hidde: when he could not, he admonished her to reueale her conscience to the Prior of the next Monasterie; and he aduised him wa∣rily Et ipsc caute eū investigae persuasit.  to aske her: but neither could he wrest a∣ny thing from her. Notwithstanding this wo∣man was wont dailybefore the altar or the image of the blessed virgin, with weeping to open her foresaid fault. At the last when she died in this manner, and her daughter which dwelt in a village some what farre of, was loo∣ked for at her buriall, she at the length com∣ming with howling and mourning, and her haire spread abroad, embraced the bodie of her mother, and cryed out, Alas mother why dost thou forsake me a wretched creature? then with her lamentation she mooued the standers by: and the soule of her mother pre∣sently returned, and waking as it were out of sleepe, said, The Lord commanding I am re∣uiued: One raised from he dead to con∣fesse vno a priest a sinne be∣fore concealed. take away the things wherewith I am couered, and let me arise. When she was thus
set at libertie, a priest was called for, and the fault opened. And she testifying that by the intercession of the blessed virgin she was de∣liuered, saide vnto all them that flocked vnto the miracle, I beeing deliuered to the tormen∣tours was drawne to punishment: but the blessed virgin succouring me said, and asked thē that did lead me, why they durst presume to lead her handmaid, and bad them quickly Et vs cito do∣nec a domino sententiarer me deponerent ai. So the deuills were very hastie to take her be∣fore sentence. to let me goe, vntill I had sentence of the Lord. The which beeing done, she comming to her sonne praied, saying, I pray thee, O sonne, let not that soule be damned, which did so often bewaile her sinne before me. To whome the Lord said, thou knowest mother, that without confession she cannot be saued: but because I can denie nothing vnto thee, let her returne and confesse, and so she shall be deliuered. An angel therefore beeing present∣ly sent, hath brought me back again. Hauing therefore made my confession I will returne. Quo dicto fig∣uans se, capite in sevetro incli∣nato spiritum exhalauit. This said, she signed her selfe & bowing her head vnto the beere, she gaue vp the ghost. 4 The next miracle is said to be the third: but here the memorie of the author or of the printer failed. For the former was the third. And so by this meanes there is an errour in the number of the miracles following. For they are said to be but ninetie nine, whereas indeede if they had beene numbered, they are a iust hundred, besides that which before I spake of, namely, that take we away what
of, namely, that take we away what we will of them, yet the number will be perfect. Now although this errour haue escaped the writer or the printer, yet I will follow the same, that if it should please the reader to trie my faith∣fulnesse by hauing recourse to their owne booke, he might the sooner finde that which he seeketh for. The summe of this twise∣third miracle is this. 5 A certaine woman with a straunge dreame, when shee did awake was depriued The wife of a soldier hauing lost her wits, is holpen by the virgin. of her sense, so that shee thought that the faith which before shee had, was betwixt her paps and did continually issue out. Her friends bee∣ing full of heauines for this misfortune, tooke her and lead her through the place of the Saints, to trie if by any meanes they could re∣couer her. So they lodged in a Church of the holy Trinitie, but the holy Trinitie would not restore health, but reserued the gift for the virgin, &c. Then was holy water made adiured with many coniurings, but the wo∣man A woman the worse beeing put into holy water. put thereinto was the worse and mad∣der then before. At length the yeare com∣ming about, and the feast of the Purification of holy Marie approching, shee was brought to a certaine Church built in the honour of the virgin, and in fashion farre vnlike other Churches, yet good enough for the Heremit Satis tamen congrua ad ha∣bitandum he∣remitis. to dwell in. Whilst therefore she lodged here at the foresaid feast, she was made as whole as if she had neuer beene euill, &c.
6 The fourth example is of a certaine monke that beeing much ouercome of wine, The virgin deli∣uereth a drunken Monke that had bin deuout vnto her. and afterward recouering his senses, retur∣ning home ward was met withall by the de∣uill: first in the likenes of a great bull, second∣ly in the likenes of a foule dogge, thirdly in the likenes of a cruell lyon. But alwaies a cer∣taine faire virgin with her haire hanging ouer The Papists make the virgin a friend to drun∣kards. her shoulders, beeing present chased him a∣way, and the last time tooke the monke by the hand and signed him with the crosse in his forehead, and bad him goe to an other monke and confesse his sinne, and doe what∣soeuer he should enioyne him, &c. The fifth miracle is as followeth. 7 There was a notorious and most wic∣ked theefe minding nothing but the seruice A certaine theefe did fast the vigils of Marie, and he could not die without the sa∣craments. of the deuill: yet this good he had, that he did deuoutly fast the vigils of blessed Marie with bread and water: and when he went about his theft, he saluted her with the deuotion that he could, desiring her that she would not suf∣fer him to die in his mortall sinne. Now whē beeing taken he was hanged, for three daies he hung and could not die. He called there∣fore to them that passed by that they should bring him a priest. The priest comming with the Iudge and the people, he was taken from the gallowes, saying, that the blessed virgin had sustained him. So he was set at libertie, and a while after he finished his life lauda∣blie.
8 To omit the 8. next miracles, the summe of the 14. is this. A certaine deuout woman Marie deliuereth the sonne of a certaine woman from captiuitie. Inconsolabiliter flebat. had a sonne taken captiue in warre. Shee therefore wept most vncomfortably, and made many praiers for her sonne to the vir∣gin Marie. At length profiting nothing, she said vnto the virgin, O blessed virgin Marie, I haue often entreated thee for the deliuerāce of my sonne; and thou hast not heard me: therefore as my sonne is taken from me, so The woman cri∣eth quit with the virgin. will I take thy sonne from thee, and I wil put him in custodie as a pledge for my sonne. Then taking the image of the childe out of It was high time for the virgin to helpe this womā to her sonne that she might reco∣uer her owne. the lappe of Marie, she went home, wrapped it in a cleane linnen cloath, and shut it dili∣gently in her chest. And behold the night following blessed Marie appeared to the cap∣tiue young man and deliuered him. So vpon his returne, his mother restored the image of Iesus to Marie, &c. 9 The fifteenth is somewhat like the for∣mer, in this manner. A certaine Matrone ve∣ry deuout to the virgin, had a little daughter which shee had put forth to nurse (as it see∣meth) Marie deliuereth a litle girle frō a woolfe. in a village next by. It fell so out, that as this infant was playing in the streete, a woolfe came and ranne away with it, nei∣ther could any man stay the woolfe or saue the childe. Newes of this beeing brought to the mother, as shee sate at the table, shee a∣rose and went into the chappell and tooke the image of our Sauiour out of the bosome
of his mother, and with many teares brake forth into these wordes: Thou shalt neuer Nunquom re∣habebis filium tuum, nisi mihi restituas filiam meam. haue thy sonne againe, except thou restore me my daughter. Vpon this the virgin com∣maunded the woolfe, and presently some following the woolfe recouered the childe, &c. So the woman restored the virgins sonne, &c. 10 The summe of the 16. example is this Marie preserueth a child from fire. A certaine woman that daily saluted the vir∣gin with Aue Maria, one daie hauing none to send to the field with her husbands dinner, she was constrained to goe her selfe. Hauing therefore a little sonne, she left him at home, and saluting the virgin with an Ave, she committed him vnto her keeping. In her ab∣sence, her house and all therein being burnt, at her returne with many teares shee expo∣stulated the matter with the virgin. Then they sought the childe, and found him alto∣gether without hurt. 11 Here passing by the sixe next, the 23. Marie deliuereth an innocent wo∣man from death. is this. A certaine adulterer had an honest wife and much deuoted to the blessed virgin: but the miserable adulterer did hate her ex∣ceedingly. By the inconstancie of her hus∣band, she came to such want, that she was constrained to nurse the childe of a certaine soldier. The adulterer for enuie of his wife, came very secretly and cutte the childes throat, & departed earely. When the woman awaked, and would haue giuen the child suck,
she saw his throat cut. Then she brake out into so great a crie, that all in the lodging did awake. But this was vnknowne to the father and all in the citie. The woman apprehended is brought vnto iudgement: and when shee was iudged to die, hauing no bodie to speake for her, shee looking vp to heauen, saide, O Marie, thou knowest mine innocencie: to thee I commend my selfe. These words en∣ded, Metibi recom∣mendo. there came one ladie which did beare a faire boy, and with these wordes spake vnto all; Stay your selues, O Iudges: because this Sustinete vos iudices. boy shall be iudge this day. Then presently the child said vnto the iudge, So ought iudge∣ment to be of a murtherer; let the person mur∣thered be brought, and let the answer of the woman be heard. All men maruailed at the wisdome of this child, and presently the child killed was brought. Then said the childe in iudgement, Iudge tighteously, O ye sonnes of men: and he said to the childe murthered, In the name of the Lord arise, and name him that killed thee. Immediatly the childe that was killed arose, and hauing neuer spoke be∣fore, then he beganne to speake, and with his finger did shew the murtherer. So the wo∣man was dismissed and the murtherer appre∣hended. In the meane time the ladie with her child vanished away: and the adulterer beeing bound to an horse taile most misera∣bly died. 12 The summe of the 25. miracle is this.
In a certaine monasterie of Nunnes, there was a very deuout virgin named Bettres, which for her deuotion beeing Wardnesse, Beatrix facta nutrix. did discharge this office so much the more deuoutly, by how much the more freely shee did it. At length a certaine priest entising her to filthines, shee withstood him a long time. But beeing in the ende ouercome, shee came to the altar of the blessed virgin which there was Patronesse, and resigned her keyes, as not beeing able any longer to abide the tentati∣on: so shee secretly followed the priest. But within a little time he forsooke her, by which meanes shee came to great pouertie; and be∣ing ashamed to returne to her cloister, shee became a common whore: and hauing liued many yeares publikely in that sinne, at length she came vnto the gate of her Monasterie in a secular habite, and asked the portresse whe∣ther she knew Bettres sometime Wardnesse of that Monasterie. To whome the portresse answered that shee knewe her well, and that shee was a good ladie (or mistresse) and holy, and that without rebuke shee had liued in Domina proba. that monasterie from her infancie to that day. Notans sed non obseruans. The virgin sup∣plieth an harlots place for 15. yeares. All which time the whole church of Rome erred in praying to her in heauen, she beeing here in earth. This Bettres noting these wordes but not ob∣seruing them, would haue departed. But the mother of mercie appeared vnto her in the shape of a woman, and said, I haue supplied thine office for fifteene yeares of thine ab∣sence: now returne into thy house & repent, for no man hath knowne thy going out. For
in her forme and habite, the virgin the mo∣ther of God had executed her office, &c. so she was restored. 13 The 27. in summe is this. A certaine soldier a yong man, dwelling with an other soldier by whome he was maintained, being A quo infeuda.tu erat. in his flourishing age, but flourishing more in virginitie, by enuie not with standing of the deuill, beganne to be grieuously tempted and to burne in lust towards his mistresse. This in modestie he concealed a whole yeare, but at the last ouercomming shame, he opened his desire vnto her. Shee beeing honest & faith∣full to her husband repelled him, whereby he was the more afflicted. Then with teares ma∣king his temptation knowne to a certaine Heremite, this holy man faithfully answered, Fiducialiter re∣spondit. Sound counsell against tentation. that he would giue him sound counsaile, which was, that for a whole yeare he should salute the virgin euery daie with an 100. Aue Maria. The young man willingly perfor∣med this, and when he had done it the last time, as he came out of the Church, he saw a most beautifull Matrone farre excelling all the glorie of man, getting vpon his horse and holding the bridle. He maruailing what shee should be, shee answered, doth my person please thee? then he saide that he had neuer seene one fairer then her. Shee answered a∣gaine, I will be thy wife, come vnto me and I will giue thee a kisse: she saide also, Now is The Papists make the virgin to loue kissing. the marriage begunne; such a day before my
sonne, it shall be finished. By this word he knew her to be the Lords mother. From that houre he was freed from the tentation: and he reported all this to the Heremite, who reioy∣ced greatly, and said he would be at the mar∣riage. The day comming, and the Heremite beeing present, the foresaid soldier beeing in an agonie gaue vp the ghost: and so entred agonizans spi∣ritum exalauit. the heauenly brid-chamber to celebrate the promised marriage. 14 Now because I promised to make the reader but a short banquet, with these iun∣kas: A man deliuered from condmna∣tion for offering one candle to the virgin. I will therefore passe by many other, and come to the summe of the 49. which is this. A certaine soldier a young man, much giuen to the world, had a deuout wife that praied often to the virgin Marie for his conuersion. Now in a certaine night, her husband in spi∣rit was brought to the iudgement of God, and there accused of all his sinnes. And bee∣ing forsaken, the iudge asked; if there were none of the saints whom he had honoured at any time. The virgin Marie answered, that once in reuerence of her he had giuen a great waxe candle; so at her request he was dischar∣ged. Whē therfore the deuils would haue laid on him, with a burning candle he burned the, combussit eos, & viriliter se defendit. and manfully defended himselfe. Thus with feare and trouble he laboured & swet mighti∣ly in his bedde, and so howled that his wife Inuenit ontem haspidam quasi corticem de ar∣bore. heard him. In the morning therfore she foūd his skinne rough, as it had beene the barke
of a tree, his haires long, graie, and hard, and suspecting adulterie, she cried out. The ser∣uants running to their weapons, he awaking could not speake, but made an horrible noise as if it had becne an oxe. At last recouering himselfe, he reported the whole matter, and was conuerted, &c. 15 The 50. miracle. There was a certaine man in name only religious, but to all things a drop of Christs blood waieth more then all the sinnes of the world. that concerned religion hard and negligent. This man not with standing accustomed him∣selfe to piaie vnto the virgin, and once a daic to say an 100. Av Maria. Being brought vnto extremitie, and taken into a transe, the Duclus ad ex∣trema, raptus est ad extasin. deuills presented him to the highest iudge, crauing sentence that he might be iudged as their owne. God therefore knowing his sinnes many waies, saide he should be damned. In the meane time came the blessed virgin, offe∣ring The virgin brin∣geth a writ of er∣rour to ruere the former iudge ment of her sonne. the rolles in which were contained all his Ave Maria: desiring her sonne the second time to proceede to iudgement. But the de∣uills brought many bookes of his sinnes: so on both parts the bookes were put into the ballance, but his sinnes waied heauier. Then the blessed virgin seeing that she did not pro∣fit, did most deuouly make supplication to her sonne, saying, Remember, deare sonne, of my substance thou tookest substance, visi∣ble, palpable and passible: and therefore giue me one droppe of thy bloode which was shedde for sinners in thy passion. Then saide
he, It is impossible to denie thee any thing: yet know that one droppe of my blood wai∣ethvp all the sinnes of the whole world. Take therefore that which thou hast asked. The which she taking put it into the skoales, and it ouerwaied all the sinnes of the foresaid re∣ligious man, as if they had beene but light ashes. Then the deuills departing consoun∣ded, Tanquam sa∣villam. cryed, saying, The ladie is too mercifull to Christians, therefore we faile so often as she putteth her selfe into the conflict. His soule therefore was brought againe to the bodie, and he recouering told all these things, and Monkerie a re∣ward of lying. was made a monke. 16 Like vnto the former is the 51. the The virgin a friend to encro∣chers. summe and effect where of is this. A certaine secular man occupied in countrie busines, as he was many waies euill; so in plowing of his ground he would encroch vpon his neigh∣bours, and steale from them. Not with stan∣ding he had sometime the virgin in his minde, and did often deuouly salute her. When he was dead, the deuils gathered them selues to∣gether hoping to haue his soule. The angels also were present, & she wed the good things that he had done: the deuils like wise brought forth his infinite euills. Here upon they triū∣phed, as thinking they had gotten the day: but one of the angels pleaded that he was wont with great deuotion to salute the vir∣gin. The vncleane spirits hearing these things left his soule, and went away ashamed. So
was his soule deliuered from the power of his aduersaries. 17 The 53. example is of one that hauing learned of a virgin, that cuery one that fasted How good a thing  is to fast on saterdaies in the honour of the virgin. on saterdaies in honour of the virgin Marie, should neuer die without the sacraments, did therefore obserue the same: and beeing be∣headed, his head when it was cut off cried, Confessiō, confessiō. The 54. is like vnto this. 18 The 57. A certaine soldier did daily salute the blessed virgin Marie with an Aue One saued onely by saluting daily the virgin Matir, without doing any other good thing. Maria, when he arose in the morning, and at night when he laied him downe to sleepe. He did no more good, and by the grace of the virgin he was saued. Like vnto which is the 45. example of a notable theefe that ne∣ner had done any good thing, but onely fa∣sted on saterday to the blessed ladie, and pro∣uided her one masse, yet by the grace of the virgin he spake fiue wordes at his ende, by which he was saued. The like is also in the 60. example, of a certaine priest that was a notorious sinner, and drowned as he went about his sinne, or after he had committed it: and yet saluting the virgin he was saued. But this was mentioned before in the seruice of the virgin made by Bernardine de Busti. Lastly, like vnto the former is the 72. exam∣ple, which is of a grieuous sinner that neuer had done good, but onely saluted the virgin euery daie: and yet beeing dead, and chalen∣ged earnestly by the deuills to be theirs, the
virgin Marie rescued her, and saued her. 19 The summe of the 78. example is this. A priest desireth to see the virgins beautie. A certaine priest of Paris very deuout to the Virgin, entreated earnestly to see her beautie. At lēgth he was certified by an angel that his praiers was heard by the virgin, and that on such a daie and houre shee would come vnto him, and he should see her but withall that af∣terwards he should be blinde. The priest was glad of this ridings, and willingly accepted the condition. But after the departure of the angel, he began to thinke with himselfe, that if he should loose both his eyes, he should be vtterly vndone, a miserable person, & a beg∣gar, as being vnfit for any thing. There fore he determined with himselfe to behold her but The priest cose∣neth the virgin. with one eye, and to shut his other eye, and that if he might keepe the sight of one eye, that would be sufficient. When the day ap∣pointed came the virgin appeared, and he put his hand before one of his eyes, and with the other did behold her, seeing so much of her beautie and glorie, as can be expressed with wordes, or thought in heart. So he lost the The beautie of the virgin. sight of one eye: not with standing he was so rauished with her beautie, that he greatly la∣mented that he had not beheld her with both his eyes, and reprooued himselfe for shut∣ting of one eye, wishing that he were wholly blinde, so as he might see her more fully. Wherefore he praied more earnestly, that hee might see her the second time. The
angel therefore was sent againe to certifie him of the second comming of his ladie. The priest said, that if he had a thousand eyes, he could be content to loose them all for euer, vpon condition that he might see her againe. Then the angel signified that he should see her againe, and that he should not onely en∣ioy that eye which alreadie he had, but also haue the other eie restored. And so it came to passe: whereby we may consider how ex∣cellent the beautie of the virgin is, and how delectable a thing it is to beholde the same with our eyes. 20 The 83. example. A certaine painter painted the deuill with hornes and other Marie vpholdeth a painter from falling. members as fouly as he could, to make him the more horrible: but he painted the image of the blessed virgin Marie, so comely and so faire as he could with diuers colours. The deuill therefore was very angrie with it, and enuied it: and in all hast came to the painter, and questioned with him, saying, Why hast thou made me so horrible and euill fauoured, and the blessed virgin Marie so faire and so comely? He answered, because the thing was so in truth, as the picture made, shewed. The deuill being angrie, vpon a certain day would haue throwne the painter downe headlong from a lost, where he painted the image of the blessed virgin Marie: and he brake the confregit ligna in quibus sta∣bat. scaffold whereon the painter stood. But as the painter was falling, presently the image of vt casum petijt.
the most goodly virgin put forth her hand to the painter, and held him strongly that he If her image be so strong, how strong thn is her selfe? might not fall: & so kept him from the deuill. 21 The summe of the 84. miracle. In a certaine church built to the honour of S. Mi∣chael, in a mountaine called the tombe of Michael, there was the image of the virgin made of woode, with a vaile on her head in manner of a mitre. This church by lightning was once set on fire and burned. But when The image of the father and the sonne no doubt were in that Church: might not they also as well haue beene preserued? the fire came to the place where the virgins i∣mage was, as though it feared the image, it did not so much as touch the same: yea the white vaile vpon her head had not so much as any sauour of fire. 22 The 93. in summe is this. A certaine ignorant priest that knew no masse but the An ignorant priest suspended by a bishop. ladies masse, beeing complained of to the Bi∣shop, was by him suspended from saying masse afterward. By this meanes therefore beeing after this in great necessitie, and pray∣ing for helpe to the virgin, she bad him goe The virginpatro∣nizeth an igno∣rant priest: why then doe puri∣tans condemne such ministers? to the Bishop, and will him in her behalfe to restore him to his office. The priest obiected that he was poore and a despised person, and that therefore he should not be heard, nei∣ther haue any accesse to the Bishop. Yet goe (said the virgin) and I will make the way for thee. But, saide the priest, he will not beleeue my words. Shee answered, thou shalt tel him The virgin too kinde to doe so much for a priest that had so litle faith. for a token, that in such an houre and in such a place, as he was sewing his sackcloth, I held
it on one side and holpe him; then will he pre∣sently beleeue thee. In the morning therefore this priest went to the Bishop with this mes∣sage. The Bishop hearing it maruailed, and admitted him againe to his place. Let these dishes suffice the reader for a banquet: by these he may discerne the rest. THE EIGHT PART. I Haue not gathered these, neither written any other thing of the deuotion of the pa∣pists towards the virgin, to disgrace her: farre be it from me, and from all other Christi∣stians: whome God hath cōmended as bles∣sed, him or her must no man disgrace. Yea, as God hath pronounced her blessed aboue all other women, in regard that he honoured her with being mother to our Sauiour: so must all men yeeld her that prerogatiue. Not with stan∣ding as we must not denie her any thing that God hath granted her; so also must we take heede, that we be not more liberall vnto her, then God himselfe hath beene. Especially we must beware, that we make her not rich with the spoiles of God. And this is the great fault of the Papists, both towards the virgin & al∣so towards her saints, yea towards them that were neuer sanctified: yea sometime towards such, as whom they can not prooue by good demonstration, euer to haue bin in the world. All these they thinke that they neuer honour sufficiently, till they take the crowne from Gods head, and from the head of his sonne
Christ Iesus, & set it vpon their head. And so, as they doe most extreame wrong to God & to Christ Iesus: so also they doe not honour, but highly dishonour them, whom they pre∣tend most to honor. For what greater disho∣nour can there be then mockerie? and what greater mockerie is there, then to giue to a∣ny person greater honour, then of right be∣longeth vnto him? 2 As this is manifest of them by many o∣ther things, so especially the same appeareth most euidently by these miracles which I haue here set downe, & by many other part∣ly contained in that booke from whence I took these, & partly dispersed in other books, & not comprehended in the former. For we haue seen how they make the virgin a patro∣nesse of many notorious sinnes & impieties. We haue seene how they make her to make more account of one Aue Maria, and of one waxe candle offered vnto her, then of all duties belonging vnto God, in as much as she hath saued them (as they say) that haue honoured her, though they had committed neuer so many, and neuer so great and hai∣nous sinnes against God. We haue seene how they make God to be mutable, in as much as he hath at her word oftentimes reuersed his owne sentence, & saued them whō before he had condemned. Finally we haue seene, how flatly they contradict the Scriptures in most of these miracles: for the Scripture ex∣pressely Luk. 16. 26.
saith, that betwixt heauen and hell is such a great gulfe or distance, that they which would goe from one place to an other can not: but they make this to be an ordina∣rie matter, both for the virgin Marie, & also for the angels, yea likewise for the soules of men. 3 Further concerning those miracles, which the Papists so falsly ascribe vnto the virgin Marie, they are to be considered, not onely as a part of the matter of poperie: but also as a meanes and chiefe pillar whereby especially the worship of the virgin in pope∣rie, hath bin vpholden and maintained. The same is likewise to be saide of the like mira∣cles of their other saints. For wherefore haue they read them, and preached them in their churches? hath it not bin to keepe the peo∣ple in the more deuout worship of them, and to make them to thinke them halfe as good at the least, as God himselfe? verily it can not be denied. 4 Now what vse are we to make of all these things thus added to my former trea∣tise? The vse of the ddicion. Are we onely to laugh at them, and to make our selues merrie with them in a carnal maner? It may be some will make none other vse of them; it may be some will buie this whole booke, onely for that purpose: but truly such shall greatly peruert my meaning. We may indeed (as before I haue said in the trea∣tise) laugh at them in some sort, so we doe it in an holy manner with the spirit of Eliah, as
he skorned the foolishnes or rather extreame madnes of the priests of Baal: but besides this, we are to applie these thinges many other waies, which I will onely briefly note, lea∣uing the further consideration of them to the godly reader. 5 First therefore, sith all these things doe most liuely shew the extreame follie, & high abominatiō of poperie: how ought all papists to be ashamed of their religion? How ought all Protestants that sometimes haue bin pa∣pists, to be grieued for their poperie? How ought they likewise to mourne for any of their friēds, yea for any other yet remaining in that estate, & yet shut vp in the shadow of death? How ioyfull likewise and thankfull ought we to be, that God hath opened our eies to see these things, that he hath not sent his angel onely into our houses (as sometime he did in∣to the house of Lot, to take him & guide him out of Sodō, before fire came frō heauen to de∣stroy that citie) but also hath giuē vs his holy spirit in our hearts, & thereby deliuered vs frō so ridiculous, so grosse, & so horrible a religiō. 6 Further we see by these things, how dan∣gerous it is not to beleeue the truth, and how blockish we are, if we be left vnto our selues. Verily there is no errour so foolish, so absurd, so grosse, so abominable, & so monstrous, but that if God doe forsake vs, if he take his spirit from vs, if he leaue vs to our selues, we are rea∣die to beleeue it as truth; yea to be zealous
therein; yea farre more zealous, then any of Gods owne children are in the truth. 7 O therfore let vs not deceiue our selues: late vs hate poperie as such a monster ought to be hated: let vs make that account of the truth, & giue such credit & obediēce therūto, that for our contēpt & light account thereof, God neither giue poperie any returne againe vnto vs. Let vs earnestly pray, let vs keepe watch by night & ward by day, let vs alwaies with all carefulnes looke vnto our selues, let vs take heede of all Iesuits, seminatie priests, yea of all papists, and likewise of all other meanes, whereby we may be entangled with this filthie & sottish religion, and be drawne thereunto. Let vs delight in the communion & fellowship of al them that loue the truth, and are able to confirme, strengthen, & helpe vs forward in this religion which now generally we professe; vsing all other good means com∣mended vnto vs for the same end. Let vs take heed, not onely of the maine stock of poperie; but also of euery bough, branch, twigge, yea of euery leafe; for there is dungerous (if not deadly) poison in th least patch of poperie. And as the whole substance of popish do∣ctrine was not hatched all at once, but now one egge laide laide and then an other; now one chicken, and then an other; now one opinion and then an other; vntill all the whole brood was come forth: and when it was throughly hatched & brought forth, it had not all the sta∣ture,
nor all the feathers, nor all the strength the first day, but crept and got vp by litle and litle: so the deuil being stil as subtil as he was, and seeing poperie now to be banished, and grieuing that it is forced to liue so long in ex∣ile, therefore daily laboureth (as alas by too great experience we daily see) by litle & litle againe to winne vs thereunto. Priuately in∣deede in many places of this land (and it is to be feared in too many. I pray God also that it be not in too great places, and with too great persons) he laboureth, where the whole body of popery doth remaine, there to vphold it; and where it is not, there also wholly to bring it in againe. For we see many now to be Papists, euen of both sexes, yea some to be recusant papists, whose fathers: were little more then borne in the beginning of the raigne of her most excellent Maiestie. But al∣though Satan the olde aduersarie, where he thinketh he may be bold, and where he hath fitte instruments to worke by, hath in some priuate places, euen in this flourishing time and bright light of the gospel, drawne some to the whole doctrine and religion of pope∣ie: yet he will not as yet be so bold as to at∣tempt this publikely. Notwithstāding he go∣eth about it by degrees, & by litle & litle tun∣ning (as it were) and filling his vessels here & there, one with strōg popish drink & an other with small, that is, one with a maine point of poperie, & another with a smal point; yea not
onely tunning & filling thē ther with, but also tapping & broching thē so filled, & giuing of the drink of thē by whole kannes to other to drinke. And this he doth according to his old subtiltie, hoping the more easily to bring in & to broach all againe & so to make all drunkē againe with the cuppe of fornications that is in the hād of the whore & strumpet of Rome. 8 Wherefore in the feare of God, & in the tender loue that I beare vnto the soules of all, I doe admonish all to take heede of this euil. Whatsoeuer hath bin accounted poperie, & by good reason shewed to be repugnāt to the truth, & cōmon consent of all churches refor∣med held as erronious & heretical: let all dili∣gētly take heed they neuer cōceiue any good liking thereof again. If we feare any more to embrace all poperie, let vs take heede that in the mean time we neuer entertain any one o∣pinion therof, though neuer so litle. If we feare to be drunken with the strōgest drink, or with many cups of poperie, let vs refraine from ta∣sting therof. For as with them that delight in strong drinke, one cup draweth on an other; so also may we feare it wil be with thē, which begin to smel of any one point of poperie. It is dangerous, it is dangerous to drinke in any one errour of poperie, though neuer so small, especially to persist in the liking thereof & to say when we haue tasted it, This is good: and most dangerous it is to cōmend the same to other, & to make them to drinke of the same
cup with vs: all this is very dāgerous, whither we doe it for some good liking of the thing it self, or in regard of our own estimatiō, or in any other respect whatsoeuer. For we may feare, least the Lord harden our hearts, euen to like of those errors which as yet our soules abhor. 9 I write not this to gal or gird at any, or to disgrace any one particular person (my heart hateth all such hatred, & delighteth in loue & peace, & as wel in the credit of other, as of my selfe) but in a general loue, I do generally ad∣monish all to take heede in this behalfe. The Apostle speaketh in the like generall māner, not admonishing some onely, but also euery one to take heed, least at any time there should be in any an euill & vnfaithful heart to fal away Hebr. 3. 12. frō the liuing Lord. Yea after that he had testi∣fied vnto thē that he was perswaded good things Hebr. 6. 9. of thē, & such as did accompanie saluation; yet he speaketh as generally, exhorting thē to take heede that no man did fall away frō the grace of Hebr. 12. 15. God. Adding further as a special means to take heede thereof, that they should not suffer any roote of bitternes so much as once to spring vp amongst thē: where by the root of bitternes all men know he meaneth errours and heresies. Finally he addeth these reasons, fitst that such roots or root would trouble thē, & secōdly that it would defile thē. There is none therefore so strōg in the grace of God, but that he may fal (though not finally as hath bin shewed in my treatise) if he be secure, & take not great heed
himselfe. There is none so well  with the sweet & precious liquor of Gods truth, but that he may becom bitter, by suffering such bitter rootes to spring vp in his heart. There is none at such peace with men and with his owne conscience, but that he may be disquieted, disturbed, and troubled. There is none so well was washed & clensed by the pure water of Gods holy spirit, but that he may be polluted & defiled. There is none therefore that may thinke this mine admoni∣tion of taking heede vnto himselfe, to be su∣perfluous and needles for him. 11 To conclude, I do again in all hūble mā∣ner beseech all whōsoeuer, both all the reue∣rend fathers & gouernours of our church, & also all other my learned and good brethrē, as well remaining vnder our mothers wings in the Vniuersities of Cambridge and Oxenford, as also alreadie called forth to labour in the mi∣nisterie of the word in particular churches, all these, I say, I doe hūbly beseech, & earnestly exhort, to be feruent in spirit in behalfe of the truth, and with all zeale to vpholde, defend, maintaine, and daily in the places where we liue, and in the hearts of the people ouer whō the holy Ghost hath made vs ouerseers, to fur∣ther, to encrease, and to enlarge that sound and wholesome doctrine, which hitherto hath bin taught by vs, and heard like wise and in some measure receiued by those amongst whome we haue laboured. THE ENDE.
