24603 99854244 19653
MOST APPROVED, And Long experienced VVATER-VVORKES. Containing, The manner of Winter and Summer-drowning of Medow and Pasture, by the aduantage of the least, Riuer, Brooke, Fount, or Water∣prill adiacent; there-by to make those grounds (especially if they be drye) more Fertile Ten for One. As also a demonstration of a Proiect, for the great benefit of the Common-wealth generally, but of Hereford-shire especially. Iudicium in melius perplexus cuncta referto, Vera rei, donec sit manifesta fides. By ROWLAND VAVGHAN, Esquire. Imprinted at London by GEORGE EID. 1610.
A PANEGYRICKE, In the deserued honor of this most profitable worke, and no lesse renowned then much-desired Proiect. I Sing of him that is as deere to mee As to the World; to whom both aye are bound; Then briefe, for Bond so long, I cannot be; Vnlesse my Loue were (like my Lines) too round. Proportion doth so please Witte, Will, and Sense, That where it wants, it grieues Sense, Will, and Witte: Then by Proportion of his Excellence, Thus must we shape our praise of Him, and It. When as the Earth all soild in sinne did lye, Th'almighties long-prouokt inraged-HAND Emptied Heau'ns Bottles, it to purifie; And made that Noahs floud. FLVD that mud to countermand. So, for like crimes, of late, we plagu'd haue bin With like The Inun∣dation caused by the boiling vp of the sea in Munmouth and Glamor∣gan shire, the yeare 1607. O'reflowings, washing all away That lay the Earth vpon, or Earth within, Within the limitts where this Deluge lay!
Which Inundations were for Earth vnfit: But hee whose Hand and Head this WORKE compos'd, Shewes how to drowne the Earth to profit it: And beeing Ill, to make it Well-disposd. Some with their Lands, doe oft so sinck them-selues, That they to it, and it to them yeeld nought, But, in the Ocean what doe yeeld the Shelues; VVhich when they see, they Fevv Had∣lands take pleasure to behold the lands they had. flee, with pensiue thought. But in His Drownings, He makes Lands arise, In grace and goodnesse to the highest pitch; And Meades, and Pastures price he multiples; So, while some lies, He rise doth in the Trenches, by which his workes are affected. Ditch. His royall TRENCH (that all the rest commands) And holds the Sperme of Herbage by a Spring) Infuseth in the wombe of sterile Lands, The Liquid seede that makes them Plenty bring. Here, two of the inferior Elements (Ioyning in Coitu) Water on the Leaze (Like Sperme most actiue in such complements) Begets the full-pancht Foison of Increase: For, through Earths rifts into her hollow wombe, (VVhere Nature doth her Twyning-Issue frame) The water soakes, whereof doth kindly come Full- By equiuo∣cation it may bee taken for Infants as wel as Barnes: Barne being the name of Infant in some places of England. Barnes, to ioy the Lords that hold the same;
For, as all Womens wombes do barren seeme, That neuer had societie of Men; So fertill Grounds we often barren deeme, VVhose Bowells, Water fills not now and then. Then, Earth and Water, warmed with the Sunne, Ingenders what doth make Man-kinde ingender: For Venus quickly will to ruine runne, If Sine Cerere & Baccho, friget Venus. Ceres and her Bacchus not defend her. Then looke how much the Race of Man is worth, So much is worth this Arte, maintaining it; Then ô how deere is hee that brought it forth, VVith paine and cost for Man-kinds benefit! Though present Times (that oft vngratefull prooue) May vnder-valew both his Worke and Him; Yet After-times will prize them Price aboue, And hold them Durt that doe their glory dim. For He by Wisedome, ouer-rules the Fates, By Witt defeating passions of the Ayre; VVhen they against his well-fare nurse debates, VVhile fooles (ore-rul'd by each) die through dispaire. In dropping Sommers, that do marre the Meads, His Trenches draine the Raines superfluous Almes; And when heate wounds the Earth (The Sunne exhaling all radicall moy∣sture from thence by the wounds or chaps which are made by summers heate. to death that bleeds) Hee cures the chaps with richest VVater-balmes.
So, when Heau'n (ceaselesse) weepes to see Earths sinne He can restraine those Teares from hurting him; Vntill his Teares the Heau'ns to The teares of sinners, are the wine of Angels. ioy do win, While other Grounds are torne, the life from limbe. And when the Earth growes Iron, for Hearts so growne, Hee can dissolue it straite (as Waxe it were;) Mantling the Meadowes in their Summer-Gowne; So ioyes in hope, while others grieue in feare. "Thus wisemen Ars domina∣bitur astris. rule the Starres, as Starres doe fooles; "And each mans manners doe his Fortunes square; "Arte learnes to thriue in Natures practick Schooles; "And Fortune fauours men of actions rare. Such one is this rare Subiect of my Rimes, Who raignes by mirry motion, 'ore my Spleene; Such is this Or cleare Mirrour. Water-glasse, wherein these Times Do see how to adorne their Meades in Greene. Hee from a Mole-hill (from whose hollow wombe▪ Issu'd a From the obseruation whereof, pro∣ceeded the rest of his workes, as in this his booke more at large is expressed. Water-fount) a Mount did reare; A Mount of large Reuenues thence did come; So, a Mole-hill great with yong a Mountaine bare! How many Riuers, Founts, and Water-prills, (Tendring their seruice to their Lords for Rent) Are nere imployde but in poore Water-mills, While the drye Grounds vnto the Bones are brent.
To Tantalus I can resemble those That touch the water that they n'ere doe taste; And pine away, Fruite being at their Nose, So, in Aboundance, they to nought do waste. The Brookes runne murmuring by their parched Brincks (Pure virgin Nimphes) and chide against the Stancks, When as their sweetest profer'd seruice stinkes, So coyly kisse the chapt-lippes of the Bankes. And (weake as water) in their Beds do stretch (As t'were to yeeld their Ghost for such disgrace) Their Christall limbes vnto the vtmost Reach; And In dry Sum∣mers the Ri∣uers grovv lowest. shrinke from th'Armes that (vselesse) them imbrace. When as the Meads, wherein their Beds do lye, Make towards them, and fall by lumpes therein; Who (of the yellow Iaundise like to dye) Creepe to their When the Bankes are chpt, they (cleeuing) fall by mammocks into the Ri∣uer. Beds, their loue and health to winne. O Landlords see, O see great Lords of Land These sencelesse creatures mou'd to eithers aid But for your helpe, who may their helpes command: Then well command, you shall be well obaid. Helpe Nature in her Workes, that workes for you; And be not idle when you may do good: "Paines are but Gaines take away the thought of Paines. Sports when earnest gaines insue: "For, Sport, in earnest, lies in Liuelihood.
The Golden-age is now return'd againe, Sith Gold's the God that all commands therein; By Gold (next God) Kings conquer, rule and raign; With Gold we may commute, or grace our sinne. Briefly, by Him we may do what we will, Although we would do more then well we may: For He makes ill too good, and good too ill; And more then God, the ill do him obay. Then if ye would be eyther Great or Good, Or Good and Great (all which he Wealth helps Vertue in her operations; whose hands were else bound from ouert action. can you make) Take pleasure (ô) to saue your Liuings Bloud And streame it through their Limbes, for Profus sake. This Esculapius of diseased Grounds, (Casting their Water in his Vrinalls) (His Trenches) sees what Humor ore-abounds, And cures them straight by Drought or Water-falls. This little-great-great-little Flash of Witt. This Soule of Action, all compos'd of Flame, (Mounting by Action to high Benefit) Exalts his State, his Countries, and his Fame. He well deserues to be a Lord of Land, That ore All gauly & too dry grounds re∣bell against nature, and mens profit rebellious Lands, thus Lords it well: O that all Lords that can much Land command Would so command it, when it doth rebell.
But Pleasure, Pompe, and inter-larded Ease Possesse great Land-lords; who, for rebell Groundes, Do Racke their Rents, and idely liue on these Or spoyle their Tenants Cropp with carelesse Houndes. But this rare Spirit, (that hath nor Flesh, nor Bone, But Man euen in the Abstract) hunts for VVealth VVith Witt, that runnes where Profit should be sowne By wholesome Paines; so, reaps both VVealth, & Health VVhether the Cost, or Time, which he hath spent Be most, it's hard to say: for, twenty yeares His Pounds, by thousands, he his Grounds hath lent, VVhich payes now vse, on vse, as it appeares. The Place wherein is fall'n His happy Lott Hight Golden-Valley; and so iustly held: His Royall TRENCH, is as his melting Pott, Whence issues Liquid-gold the Vale to gild! O that I had a VVorld of glorious wordes, In golden Verse (with gold) to paint his praise, I would blinde Enuies Eyes, and make Land-lords By this Sunnes rising; see their Sonnes to raise. But ô! this is not all thou dost behight Deere Vaughan, thy Deere Country for her good; For, thou resolu'st to raise that The Coun∣tries good. benefit Out of thy priuate care; and Liu'lyhood.
Thy many trades (too many to rehearse That shall on thy Foundation stedfast stand) Shall with their Praiers, still the Heauens pierce; And blesse their Founders rare Head, Heart, and Hand! That publike Table which thou will erect (VVhere forty euery Meale shall freely feed) VVill be the Cause of this so good Effect To plant both Trades and Trafficke there with speed. There shall thy Iouialist Mechanicalls Attend this Table, all in Scarlet Cappes; (As if they were King Arthures Seneschals) And, for their paines shall fill their Chapps and Lapps. For, neuer since King Arthurs glorious dayes (VVhose radiant Knights did Ring his Table round) Did euer any such a Table raise As this, where Viands shall to all abound! Nay this, shall that franke Table farre exceed If we respect the good still done by each: For, that fedde none but such as had no need; But this (like God) shall feed both poore and rich! This Table then (that still shall beare thy Name In Hyrogliphicks of the daintiest Cates) As oft as it is spread shall spread thy Fame Beyond the greatest conquering Potentates!
They spill with spite, what thou in pitty spend'st; They onely great, thou good, how euer small; Subuersion they, Erection thou intend'st; They foes to most, but Thou a friend to all. Thy vertuous care to haue thy God ador'd (Among thy Paines and Pleasures) all will blesse Thy Pension for a Preacher & Curate for daily seruice. Preacher of his Word, Shewes thou seek'st Heauen, and earthly happinesse. A Chappell and a Curate for the same (The one maintain'd, the other built by Thee For Gods Diurnall praise) shall make thy Name In Rubricke of the Saints enrold to be. Thine Almes-house for thy Any way mischanc't in their Bodies, So that they cannot work. haplesse Mechanicks Shall blaze thy charity to After-ages; And longer last in Brests of men, then Bricks; Increasing still thy heauenly Masters VVages. If holy Dauid had great thanks from Heau'n But for the Thought to make the 2. Sam. 7.2.16. Arke an House; Then thanks of all, to Thee, should still be giu'n VVhose purpose is to all commodious. O happy Captaine! that hast past the Pikes Of sharpest Stormes, still wounding Soldiers states, To end thy Dayes in that which all men likes, Ioy, Mirth, and Fellowship which ends debates.
Thy Drummes and Trumpets (Mars his melodie) That wonted were to call thy foes to fight, Shall now but call a friendly Company (For honest ends) to feasting and delight. Glory of VVales, and luster of thy name, That giu'st to both sans Parralel'd renowne, Vpon the Poles inscribed be thy Fame, That it to Worlds vnknowne may still be knowne▪ That they may say a Nooke but of an Isle That North-ward lies, doth yeeld a rarer Man, Then larger Lands by many a Thousand Mile, Who can do What is be∣fore expressed. Thus, and will do what He can. But many Monarches, many Worldes haue wonne, Yet, with their Winnings haue not wonne that praise As this great-litttle Lord of hearts hath done, For good-deedes done to These, and After-dayes. Now Enuy swell, and breake thy bitter'st Gall With ceaselesse fretting at these sweete Effects, Th'eternall good which he intends to all His Fame (well fenc'd) aboue a Foile erects. Liu'd He among the Pagans, they would make His glorious Like Mars, Iupiter and Saturne. Mansion some auspicious Starre; And make their Altars fume still for his sake As to a God, to whome still bound they are:
For, Bacchus but for planting, first, those Vines. Plants VVhereby mens Wealth, and VVitt are oft ore'throwne VVhich wanton Nature rather craues, then wants, They, as a God, with Gods do still enthrone. But let vs Christians, though not yeeld Him this, Yet giue him Loue and Honor due t' a Man, That makes men liue (like Gods) in Wealth, and Blisse, And heaue his Fame to Heauen if we can. Vaine Hanno taught his lesse vaine Birds to say Hee was a God: and then he turn'd them loose That they abroad might chaunt it still; but they (So gon) with silence prou'd their God, a Goose. Then, though no God he were, yet might He be A right Geese (by reason of their vigilancy) kept the Pagan Gods in the Romaine Ca∣pitoll. God-keeper in the Capitoll: They Geese (at most) and so (at least) was He; Or, if ought lesse, his God-head was a Gull. But what I say, none taught me but thy VVorth; Nor shall it (like those Birds) thy Fame betray: But these my Lines shall then best sett thee forth VVhen thou art worse then VVormes, and lesse then Clay. As well thy Crest, as Coat (ó wondrous thing!) A Serpent is, about an Infants Necke: VVho was thine Ancestor, as Bards do sing, So borne (aliue) the Fates to counterchecke.
From him thou cam'st; as one, in him preseru'd; (By way of Miracle) for this good end, As, by thy skill, to haue so well deseru'd Of all the Kingdome, which it much will mend. This praise (perhaps) which thy deserts exact, By Enuy will be thought poeticke skill, Playing the Vice, but in a glozing Act, And so wrong Witte to sooth an erring will. But yet if Arte should leaue true Arte vnprais'd, (The only Meed the Time all Arte affords) VVhat Spirit by Art, would then at all be raiz'd (From this VVorlds hel) if Art should want good words? Then, be the mouth of Enuy wide as Hell Still open in thy spight, yet say I still Thy praise exceeds, because thou dost excell In these thy works, that worke Good out of Good Grasse out of ill ground. Ill. If I be lauish of good-words; thou art As lauish of the good which thou canst do: Then, must thy praise be greate-good, like thine Arte, That goods thy praisers, and dispraisers too. In short (sith on thy praise I long haue stood VVhereon my verses Feete do freely fall) As thou dost worke by Flouds, so th'art a Floud Of working, running to the Good of all.
For as the Sunne doth shine on good and bad; So doost thou (Sunne of Vse-full Science) still: Then, Floud, and Sunne, thou art the ground to glad, And make it fruitfull to the good and ill. But sith th'obscurest Sparke of thy bright Descended from his An∣cestors. Tribe Speakes thus of Thee, (thou small-great man of worth) It may be thought I praise to thee ascribe As part mine owne; so falsely, set thee forth: But those, so thinking, when thy Worth they prooue, With mee, will thee both honor, praise and loue. Your poore kinsman, and honorer of true vertue in whome so-euer. IOHN DAVIES of Hereford.
In praise of this no lesse pleasant then most profitable worke. LOe heere a worke; a worke? nay, more then so, A worke of workes: for all it doth containe, Makes wealth by Water, ouer Land to floe, Where-to workes runne, that reach to honest gaine. Then, hast thou Land? and Water there-with-all? A little Land and Water so may stand, That Land shall rise by that small Waters fall To high esteeme, and raise thee with that Land. This is no Dreame; or if a Dreame it bee, It is a Golden one; and shewes by It That golden Worlds of wealth shall compasse thee If, in this dreame, thou art this worke of Witte. Then shalt thou (waking) see (for thine auaile) Thy Grasse all Golde as in the Golden-Vale. Iohn Strangwage.
In Libri Auctorem. THe Bee is little, yet esteemed much, (With no lesse cause) for Workes as sweete, as rare: Who, but with Dewes, doe make their owners rich; And, but for others, worke with ceaslesse care. Then here's a hony-Bee, that, but with Dewes, (Exchequer'd in some Trench, as in a Hiue) Sowre grounds with Milke and Hony ouer-flowes. Whereon both Hee and Others sweetly liue. Which, not so much for his owne good, he gets; (Though (like a Bee) at need, hee feedes thereon) But to fill others too, with honyed Sweets; So, with a Bee, holds iust comparison. In this they differ; Bees for this doe dye, But Hee, for this shall liue immortally. Robt Corbet.
In praise of this most profitable worke. NO Plant can prosper if it water wants, Nor Herbage flourish in a thirsty soile; But giue that Drinke; with water ply your Plants, And both will yeeld you profit for your toyle. Some Grounds yeeld Cellers, wherein Nature putts Her choisest liquers to refresh the Mould; There, Founts, and Channels, for their Streames, she cuts, To cheere the Grounds where they their course do hold. But Natures prouidence but little bootes, Where water runnes at waste along the Land; None giuing drinke vnto the thirsty Rootes, Out of those Cellers, being hard at hand. Then to the Common and the Priuate weale, How deere is hee that doth this arte reueale? Henry Fletcher.
To the worthy Author and his worke. VAVGHAN, thou hast a Soule surmounting Soules, In high Conceit, and Action; whose bright fire Mounts to the Spheare, that Gaine to Glory rowles, Which Men still seeke, and Gods them-selues desire. Who, for thy countries profit, doest not spare Thy Paines, thy Meanes, thy Body, and thy Minde; VVhose will is bent to make all well to fare By honest labour, in a diuerse kinde. A Proiect heere thou hast (in pleasant phrase) Obiected to the worlds Desiring-eye, That while some practise, some it doth amaze, To see men mar'd, soone made againe thereby. Then sith (like God) thou canst make Men of Clods, VVe needs must ranke thee with the Semy-gods. Richard Harries.
In praise of these most praise worthy Water-workes. BY Fire-workes many haue exploited things Past all beliefe, and made the World admire; Which Element, beeing on her flaming Wings, So Actiue is, that all it strikes is Fire. That comes to nought, that so is ouer-come: But, these rich Water-workes worke leisurely Most quick increase, in Earths most barren VVombe, VVhich beares what One doth ten times sextuply. Then who beleeues by Fire to finde that Stone Proiecting Gold, much erre in that their Creede; Sith it is Earth, that's kindly ouer-flowne, That is the Stone (indeed) that does the Deed: Then would'st thou make pure Gold? ore-flow thy land; So, shall thy Soile be turn'd to golden Sand. Siluanus Dauies.
In praise of this as pleasant as profitable worke. WOuld'st haue great pleasure? then take paines to read This little Tract: which little paines will doe: Look'st thou for profit? then, thou heere maist speed; VVhere pleasure great brings forth great profit too. Vpon a Subiect rude, as is the Earth, Neuer was Pleasure so predominant: Nor ne're so blithe was profit at her birth As here, sith here, she is so puissant. All famous Writers still directly shott The Shafts of their Indeuours at these two; For hitting these, they gaine and glory gott; The gaine of Loue, and Learnings glory too. Then loue and laud him, who hath close compact Pleasure and profit for thee in this Tract. Tho: Rant.
In the praise of the Author and his effectuall workes. DEere Rowland, let thine Oliuer haue leaue, Among thy Lauders, his short Breath to spend, To helpe them so, to Heau'n thy fame to heaue; VVhose Workes are Meanes t'an Earthly-heau'nly End: Then, Rowland, take me with Thee Here, and There; That Rowland still may haue his Oliuer. Oliuer Maynson. In praise of the VVorke and Author. MY little ROWLAND you may looke that I (All things considered) MVCH should say of you: Then, this your WORKE (to say that MVCH in few) Shall worke the Workers endlesse Praise: and why? "A worldly Witt, with Heau'nly Helpes indow'd, "Getts Ground, and Glory of the Multitude. Iohn Hoskins.
Once more for a Farewell. In deserued praise of this neuer-too-much praysed Worke. GOod VVine doth need no Bush: (Lord! who can tell How oft this old-said-Saw hath prais'd new Bookes?) But yet good VVater (drawne from Founts and Brookes) By Sluce (the Signe) makes dry Groundes drinke it well. Men may haue store of VVater, and dry Land; Yet, if they draw it not through Trenches fitt, (By Sluce, that shewes how (well) to vtter it) It idely runnes, while scarse the Owners stand. Good Water, then by Sluce, through Trench must passe For good returne; that else runnes to no end; VVhich Signe doth draw it in, it selfe to spend On dryest Grounds, that (drunken) cast vp Grasse; VVhich giddy Simily, in sober Sence, Shewes the Effect of this VVorkes excellence. Iohn Dauies.
THE AVTHOR. I Would not feare with Cinick Doggs to fight Came they in Front: But, this will ill be borne; Perhaps some Curres behind my Backe will bite: But that's their shame, my glory it to scorne. ROVVLAND VAVGHAN.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE VVIL∣IAM EARLE OF PEMBROOKE LORD HERBERT OF CARDIFFE, MAR∣mion and S. Quintin; Lord Parre of Rosse, and Kendall; Lord Warden of the Stanneries: Captaine of his Maiesties Garrison-towne of Portesmouth; and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter; My most honoured and re∣spected Lord. MOST HONOVRABLE, and my Noblest Lord: I haue out of my liues experience, prepared a Watry workeman∣shipp, which I thinke the Gods forbad the excellent crea∣tures in former times to han∣dle; but I haue performed That, that hath begott a world of worke in Me (which some men say will either impayre my witt, or hazard
my estate (they said so in the execution of my water-workes) but they ouer-said them-selues, and the most part haue giuen mee satisfacti∣on by maine submission or reconciliation) I doubt not but the rest, in my mechanical vn∣dertakings, will doe the like, because some haue subscribed, and many offer conditionall perta∣kings. What blessing soeuer Inuention doth raise, your Lordshipp knowes is subiect to a hotch∣potch of speach; and vntill it bee performed, Enuy, Mallice, and all spightfull detraction fol∣lowes; so is it with me. But (my good Lord) see∣ing that Custome is a great Lord of command. Lordly custome wils that great Lordes should patronize inuention; I doe most humbly beseech your Lordshipp (on my behalfe) so to doe; you beeing (next vnto my deare Soueraigne and His) heire apparant to my heart; hauing intaild my dutifull seruices to the heirs male of your body; and for want of such issue, to the heirs male of my Lord of Mongo∣mery, for euer, without reuocatiō: these affections, proceed not (my honourable Lord) from any sini∣ster respect; these following consideratiōs be the cause: The remembrance of that worthy Prince your Father, and more worthy (if might be) your Grand-father, and great Grandsiers, from the battels of In these se∣ueral battels, the Vaughans mine Ances∣tors followed yours. Cressy, Poytiers, Egincourt, and Banbury, with many others before, and since.
Where the many seruices of mine to yours hath bene such as Tradition will tell your Lordshipp, and I tell you with all, tha aboun∣dant fauours we found, makes mee thinke my selfe bound to your Lordship in recognisance of duty, and you tyed (by honourable and parrall couenants from them, to protect me and all my indeuors, laboring for the good of the common-wealth, and your glory. Now, if I make it not appeare a most flourish∣ing common-wealth; and such as neuer poore Subiect in the Kingdome did raise, put me by with your hand, as vnworthy of any fauora∣ble respect. Your Lordshipp shall finde no Monopole required; but, this I require at your handes: In matters of common-wealth, Expedition is alwayes of the Quorum; It is one of the chiefest friends (my Lord) the Suter (except he be a wrangler) hath in all the Kings courts: therefore I can require no lesse then that your Lordship command I may haue conueni∣ent accesse, without restraynt to performe my common-wealthes desires, with these li∣mitations and due obseruance, that I dis¦turbe not your Lordships quiet, nor confe∣rences, with honourable persons, & others of accompt: watching, & taking the aduantage-of Time, and Place; a word at one time, and
two at another. Thinke not (most Noble Lord) that I am eyther insolently saucy, or too bold. Your Lordshīpp shall here-after vnderstand the quality and condition of my vndertakings will admit little delay; I speake partly out of the complaint of an old seruant of your Grandfather Pembrookes, my Vncle Thomas Vaughan: who was to take his tryall for his life at Kings-bench-Barre at tenne of the clocke in the morning, hauing forgotten my Lords remembrance to some good friend, prayed passe of the Groome of his chamber being French: who with hard wordes stopped his passage; but he putting one of his Armes betwixt the French-mans twist, the other about his necke, threw him at my Lordes feete, and told his Lordshipp the cause was, he came for his life: My Lord hearing that, al∣lowed this his comming with a vengeance, in respect of his necessity to preuent a mischief, and with patience priuiledg'd the offence, bea∣ting the Groome for his ill respect: So good my Lord, make me free of your presence; and command your principall Attendants (as Se∣cretaries, but especially the Gentlemen of your Chamber, and Groomes) to take speciall notice, My comming is to doe you all honour. If I should attend Houres, Times and Seasons, I should bee in that case as if
I weare to deale with your Lordship by Petiti∣on, & to purchase your speach with a price, so ye memory of three hundred yeares dependan∣cy should be troddē vnder foot as of no value. As Lawyers not fedde euery Tearme, breeds neglect of their Clients, with discon∣tinuances and cessations; so, your Lordshipp may handle the matter, and post me ouer by discontinuance, that you will forgett I haue not done my duty this two yeares and more. But your greatest and dearest Seruants can witnesse my appearance: Though happily not furnished with such glittering Garments as might light my way to you: for, Scarlet of Bilth (VVelch frizes other name) hath now little grace amongst great ones: But the Hood makes not the Fryar, not a braue Coate a braue man. Now be it knowne to your Lordship, and to all men (with the helpe of my Lord God, the Kings most excellent Maiesty, and you my deare Lord:) I purpose to raise a golden world (for common-wealth) in the Golden-Vale in Herefordshire (being ye pride of al that Coun∣ty) bordering on Wales, ioyning to Ewias La∣cy (from whence your Lordshipp is descen∣ded) being the richest: yet (for want of im∣ployment) the plentifullest place The richest Countrey breeds the idlest (there∣fore the poo∣rest) people. of poore in the Kingdome, yeelding two or
three-hundred-folde▪ the number so increa∣sing (Idlenesse hauing gotten the vpper hand;) if Trades bee not raised; beggery will carry such reputation in my quarter of the coun∣try, as if it had the whole to halues. Therefore (my honorable Lord) put not onely your hands, but all your will and all your strength hereto, praying my Lord of Moungomery to assist your Lordship (if there bee cause.) Let it be Vaughans supplication of Beggers vnto his Royall Maiestie, that they may haue meanes to worke, and so to liue. There bee within a mile and a halfe from my house euery way, fiue hundred poore habitations; whose greatest meanes consist in spinning Flaxe, Hempe, and Hurdes. They dispose the seasons of the yeare in this man∣ner: I will begin with May,How the poore of the country dis∣pose of the seasons of the yeare. Iune, and Iuly, (three of the merriest moneths for beggars) which yeeld the best increase for their pur∣pose, to raise multitudes: Whey, Curdes, Butter-milke, and such belly-prouision, a∣bounding in the neighbourhood, serues their turne. As Wountes or Moles, hunt after wormes, the ground being delue-able: so, these Idelers liue intollerablie by other meanes, and neglect their painfull labours by oppres∣sing the neighbourhood. August, Septem∣ber and October, with that permision which
the Lord hath allowed the poorer sort to ga∣ther the Eares of corne, they do much harme. I haue seene three hundred Leazers or Glea∣ners in one Gentlemans corne-field at once; his seruants gathering & stouking the bound∣sheaues, the sheaues lying on the ground like dead carcases in an ouer-throwne battell, they following the spoyle not like souldiers (which scorne to rifle) but like theeues desi∣rous to steale; so this army holdes pillaging Wheate, Rye, Barly, Pease, and Oates: Oates, a graine which neuer grew in Canaan, nor Aegypt, and altogether out of the allowance of Leazing. Vnder coulour of the last graine, Oates, it being the latest haruest, they doe (with-out mercy in hotte bloud steale,The Beggers good hus∣bandry of my countrey. robbe Or∣chards, Gardens, Hop-yards and Crab-trees: so what with leazing and stealing, they doe poorely maintaine them-selues Nouember, December, and almost all Ianuary, with some healps from the neighbourhood. Thus your Lordship sees (before God and the world) the principall meanes of their maintenance. The last three moneths, Fe∣bruary, March, and Aprill, little labour serues their turne: they hope by the heate of the Sunne, (seasoning them-selues like Snakes vnder headges) to recouer the month
of May with much pouerty, long-fasting, and little-praying: and so make an end of their yeares trauell in the Easter holy-dayes. There is not one amongst ten that hath fiue shillings to buy a Bale of Flaxe, but forc'd to borrow money to put vp their trade, and runne to Hereford (loosing a dayes worke) to fetche the same: This done, they bee driuen to buy halfe a bu∣shell of corne three or foure miles off, and in their returne attend the grinding of it; which if a better Customer come, they are sure to be serued last. Withall, they spend one day with the Weauer, and after it is woue, be∣fore they can sell, they make many iourneyes to markets, and honest mens houses: And thus many dayes are mispent in most mise∣rable maner. The meanes to amend the Countries misery.Now (my Honourable Lord) to helpe all these miseries; I haue, out of a yeares con∣sideration, put a foote a Remedy which can∣not well bee done, vnlesse your Lordship doe promise to countenance my discouery; if you do, Ile make your glory shine as farre aboue all other Subiects, as my Plot is hatefull to ma∣ny enuious persons. The first worke is the Mill.My Mill is my first Worke, gouerned by a little Bastard-Brooke, fedde with eight liuing Springs, built with no desire to intertaine
Customers, but onely to grinde mine owne corne. In my first Foundation, the Countrey said I should neuer bee able to performe the same. They said with-all, I could not com∣mand the water; and that I should want custome to counteruaile the charge. I haue built my Mill, and acquainted the water with his course. Vnto this Mill, I build all Offices and necessary roomes seruing my Mecha∣nicals. The dining roome to entertaine Knights and Gentlemen:The vse of the dyning-roome. Buttry, Pantry, Kitchin, Lar∣ders, Pastry, Surueying-roome, Back-house, Brew-house, Sellors, Killning for Malt, Slaughter-house, Sellors belonging to the Slaughter-house, Vting-roomes,Officers. Garnars, Malting-roomes. Officers; the Clarke, Miller, Loder, Mault-maker: Butcher, Chandler, Cookes, Bakers, Brewers,Trades. Tanner, Shoo-maker, Cobler, Glouer, Currier, Sithe and Sickle-maker, Nayler, Smith, Ioyner, Cooper, Carpenter, Gardiner, Mercer, Cutler, Barber, Stocking-knitters, Hosier, Lant∣horne-maker, Fletcher, Bowyer, (hold breath) The Taylor, Sempster, Launderers, Wheeleer, Card-maker for Spinners, Hatter, Point-maker, Sheapheards, Hindes, Dairy-people, Swinheards; two Vittelers, and a noyse of Musitions with the Greene-Dragon and Talbot.
If I mistake in marshalling my Mechanicals, your Lordshipp must vnderstand I am no He∣rold: they be a disordered Company; the offence not great to place one knaue before an¦other. All which be appointed Attendants to maintaine and furnish Twenty broad loomes imploide for fine cloth. twenty broad Loomes for the finest cloth; tenne narrow Loomes for courser Wooll, Flax, Hemp, and Hurds. Tenne Fustian Loomes, with such Silk-loomes as necessity shall require: A Walker, Di∣er, Cottoner, Sher-men, Spinners, Carders, Sorters of wooll, pickers, and Quill-vvinders; which number wil rise to some Two thou∣sand imploide in the vnder∣businesse of the Co∣mmon-wealth. two thousand and vpward. For all which (except Spinners and Carders) I find conuenient house-roome. They shall neuer loose an houres time to prouide for such meanes as the backe or belly requires: bread, beefe, mutton, butter and cheese of mine owne prouision, shall attend their appointed houres, without their trouble or losse of labor to any Market or other place, at the best rates of the Kingdome, vnlesse it bee in the Moun∣taines, where Owen Glindovr was shutt vp: A place vnfit for Trades. There, a Crafts-man may haue twenty Eggs a penny, a good round Bullocke for two Markes, and other necessaries rate-ably. But I speake of the Golden-Vale, the Lombar∣dy of Herefordshire, the Garden of the Old Gal∣lants
and Paradice of the backside of the Prin∣cipallitie.The Golden Valley is the Paradise of al the parts be∣yond Seuern. I protest, had I foure little Liuings ioyning to some I haue, I would not change my poore estate to bee great Duke of Musco∣uia, where the flesh falles from the face in a frosty morning, like Lime from a Seeling soaked with Raine. But to prosecute mine ar∣gument, and that your Lordship shall not thinke I forget my selfe, I must let you know they shall neither Roste, Bake, nor Boyle: mine owne Range, Ouens, and Furnesse, shall euer doe them that seruice with-out their trouble or charge, with little losse vnto mee. All Trades vnder my obeysance, shall bee at their election, whether they will buy their flesh Rawe, Roasted, Boyled, or cold. No Trades-man shall rate his owne commodity, but the Clarke, Recorder of the company, (be∣ing of the quorum) shall say to the Tanner: you bought so many hundred Hides of my Maister, you may affoord a Dicker of Leather at such a price: and Shoo-maker, you, your shooes at such a price. You Glouer, bought so many thousand Pelts; you may afforde your Gloues at such a rate. And so euery Artificer shall bee limitted to Marchandize each to other,The com∣merce of the Company. at rates reasonable agreeing with their good gaine. But for all out and In-commers that will traffick with my Mechanicals, I leaue
them subiect to their fortune. I will haue but one of each trade:But one of each Trade. as a Tailor, with as many seruants as his Tailorship thinkes good: and the rest, as each trade requires. I hope (my Lord) I haue told you comfortable newes: yet I will increase your comfort, with com∣fort vpon comfort: and so comfortable, that all our company will turne their Songs, and Carrols, into singing of Psalmes and Himnes to the honour and praise of the liuing Lord, the Kings most excellent Maiesty, and your Lordship. But before we shall bee able to sing in tune, you must bee Maister of the Musick, and Organist with-all. Now I haue made knowne vnto your Lord∣ship my morrall and Mechanicall mysteries, you see what preparation I haue made for the body: If care be not had for the saluation of the soule, all my buildings and foundations bee shuttle and sandy. I am by the vertuous and honest Gentlemen, and others in my neigh∣bourhood, importuned to raise a famous Prea∣cher amongst them.A famous preacher shall be maintaind. Their importunity shall not need, I will desire onely their assistance with but a little more helpe then my owne; your Lordships fauour euer assisting vs. The case stands thus. There came vnto mee, a do∣zen yeares since, a yong Minister, hauing a good witte, a good memory, and a pritty
dribble of learning: who made him-selfe fitte to teach children. Hee was intertained like a Leuite; and had the liberty of a Leuite; but with-in short time hee became a counterfeit Puritane. Vnder coulour whereof he ingros'd halfe the good opinions of the Parish, to re∣taile them to his profit and aduantage, and though him-selfe were presisely giuen, yet hee did little harme: I know not that hee hath reconcil'd any to that quick-siluer-brain'd pure faction (as good happ is.) I had euer a good hope, that hee would-subscribe, and obey the Cannons and Institutions of our Church, as hee did. A Benefice being voyde neere vnto mee (in her late Maiesties gift) an honorable kinsman of mine, gaue mee the presentation for this counterfeit. Hee had Institution and Inducti∣on according to the common course: but (my honorable Lord) as euery licquor serues not to coullor all coulors: so, euery soyle fitts not euery person. Hee had no sooner receiued the benefit of this Benifice, but the principall of his parishoners told mee I had planted a Machiuel amongst them; a cunning Pollitician, and an horrible vsurer,Three speciall vertues to withstand the Flesh, the world and the Deuill. making complaint to the Bi∣shop therof. But (my good Lord) because he had bin my seruant, I praide the Bishop with pati∣ence to heare his defence, and for that time
preuented the likely-hood of his disgrace. Where-vpon I wrought with him to depart with that thing, and had agreed for his re∣mooue, with a purpose (as the Bishop doth know) to plant a famous Preacher there, and told him all my intendiments: and to that end I most humbly praide the Bishop that it would please his Lordship, to giue liberty to one of his Chaplins, a learned and vertuous man, (Maister Best) to bee the man. That one li∣uing of his, not able to maintaine a preaching Minister, there was one other ioyning there-vnto, which wee purpose to vnite: Hauing gotten the consent of the Lord Bishop, with promise of his best indeuour. But (my honora∣ble Lord) here comes in the hindrer of the sal∣uation of soules, this counterfeit Puritane, this Machiuillian, this politician, & Vsurer, by the gift of a friendlye Patron, hath as yet gone be∣yond the vniting of these Churches; and dis∣apointed vs of our Preaching-Minister, (as I learnt) by plaine symonie; and some treachery (withall) to his old Maister.Policy, in wordly busi∣nesses, pre∣uailes more then Piety. There were not two Sermons in the Golden-Vale this 500. yeares, vnlesse some Circumselion came by chance, vntill my Lord his Grace, that now is, of Canterburie his comming to that See. Now, whether we deserue to haue a Preaching Minister or no, we appeale to the VVorld.
There was an old Monke vppon the dissolution of the Abbey of Doier, that was cast from thence, came vnto the place where this Mini∣ster serues: Hee did expound without licence, deuide and seuer the corps of the word, from the Spirit; so spoyling the Scripture with idle inuentions, that at his end he left neither Pro∣testant, Puritane nor Papist; but a few of the sim∣pler sort, more inclined to Masse then to sound Religion. And of late, the late Canons do straightly appoint foure Sermons, yearly. In this manner (My Lord) this Machiuilian, Polititian, and Vserer hauing gotten two Beni∣fices, thinks it sufficient with his eight-quarter Sermons in his two Churches, to cleare the in∣fection which the old Monke bred: Hee not cunning ynough to dresse and cure the crazed of his flocke, hath onely iudgement with his Hooke to catch and hold a sheepe; which by ouer-hard handling hee doth so bruize, that now they can by no meanes indure that all-catching-fast-holding Instrument. And of late hath lent a young Preacher (be∣ing his prime practise) ten pound in money to make eight A most vn∣holy-holy kind of Vsury. quarter-sermons yearly: which Preacher venters his life sixteene-times ouer the great Riuer of Wye, and as many more vpp and downe a huge hill lying in his way; the danger of the least of which is able so to
distract a good Schollers memory, as to for∣gette a Sermon well pend, and no worse cond. I haue wondred many times of the young Preacher, who did but learne to preach the other day, how hee was furnished with one in the fore-noone, and another in the after: Heerein shall I vse your Lordshipps meanes, that wee may haue this Vserer re∣moued. It must bee done; and I thinke this to be the best meanes: Your Lordshipp may commend him to some strange Ambassadour out of Asia or Africke; not in Europe, hee will learne the Language instantly: Hee is fit for any strange Religion. Hee will serue for an Intelligencer to execute any cunning Strata∣gem belonging to matters of State. When your Lordshipp hath vnderstood the trunesse of all my inuention (which happily you will runne ouer withall expedition, like an old Priest Swift rea∣ding an ene∣my to like vn∣derstanding. reading an Homily to taske, (which I wish not.) Then will you vndo all the hopes I haue, in with-standing the pride of many ill speakers. If you doe not particularly examine, that you may bee able to defend, and report that wee build no Monasteries, nor succor Semina∣ries, nor much respect vn-preaching Mini∣sters. Wee build our Church which is downe: A
Chappell for Prayer for all my Mechanicals:Chappell built, and a Curate main∣tained. A famous Preacher to rectifie their hearts and shew them the way to Heauen: These, with an Almes-house (my Lord) to prouide for the ouer-aged persons, lame, blinde and all such as necessity doth cause to for-beare their own gettings. Your Lordship doth see I am no Papist, nor Puritane, but a true Protestant ac∣cording to the Kings Iniunctions. And where the Puritans babble against one Minister to haue two Liuings, lett the Superintendant of them, with some other of their purified num∣ber, come to the Hundred I dwell in,Twenty foure Parishes in Webtre Hun∣dred, and not one able to main∣taine a Prea∣ching Mini∣ster. (which is Weabtre) I will shew them foure and twen∣ty parishes; not any one of all able to maintain a Preaching Minister. If these be they whome they call Puritans that speake against a Prea∣cher to haue two or three Liuings together in my Hundred; I wish I were a poore Burges of the honourable house of Parliament, then would I indeauor to diet them so for Li∣uings, that I would make them fast Extem∣pore, as well as pray, and preach as the Spi∣rit prompts. The most men now doe say, if I hadde mo∣ney ynough, I might performe my vnder∣takings▪ So (my Lord) if a man had mo∣ney ynongh (with the LORDS permission) Hee might build a Towre of Babell. I cannot
see how mony can be wanting, I haue so ma∣ny honourable friendes; Lords Spirituall and Temporall, Bishopp Babington, Bishopp Be∣net, and Bishoppe Parrie, graue and venera∣ble Prelates of the Kingdome. Lords Tem∣porall: Your Lordshippe, my Lord of Mont∣gomery, with many other great Lordes (my Kinsmen) I meane not to trouble: Only my deare Lord the Lord cheefe Iustice, and one Iudge more, who is a Lord in West∣minster Hall, I hope to see him a Lord to the last: And doe tell your Lordshippe (betwixt you and mee bee it spoken) Hee is one of the best Lawyers in the Land; else very good ones are deceiued; and though hee bee so, let him vse what dilatory Plea hee list to putte me off, I meane to putt his Pursse to the push of the pike: Hee sayd hee would doe nothing therein: but, hee sware not; or if hee had, I know hee makes a dif∣ference betwixt Mee, and a Rash oth. But to our purpose; Your Lordshipp is now become Generall of that Army; and I your Lieutenant; If any muteny against our Common-wealth, or speake (out of a hott brain'd humor) that that they vnderstand not: My Lord, silence them with your wisedome, or defie them with your power, which can neuer bee better imploid in worldly respects, then for the pro¦tection
of a Common-good. Though all the world should say I should want money in my first beginnings, yet I thanke God they cannot say I want honorable friends, such as the Lord Bishops, your Lordships with others; which may lend me money (if please you and them) I wil not for a million anger any of you, to make a motion to borrow money: if lendings come in out of your honourable dispositions, I would I might neuer put vpp my Trades,Beginning is halfe the whole. if I refuse any for a yeare, two or three. Its a better course (tenne to one) then to take money to vsury; knowing what I know: and I know as much (perhaps) that way as any poore Gentleman in VVales (without vaine glory bee it spoken.) First (my Lord) hee that will take money vppon vsury, must deale with the Scriuener in Dialogue man∣ner; thus for example: Sir, haue you any money? What is your name (saith the Scri∣uener) Sir Brute Bankcrout Knight, late of Had∣land in the County of Cumberland. Who bee bee your sureties? Sir Alexander All-spent, and Sir Lancelot Little-left: I know them well; worshipfull Gentlemen: But I tell you (Sir Brute) you must finde Cittizens: The Scriuener (withall) rounds the Knight in the eare, saying The World is dangerous and full of iniquity, but if your worship can procure such
and such Townes-men, you shall commaund my paines from sixe to sixe months. Now it may bee sir Brute, with Sir Alexander, and Sir Lancelot, may spend sixe times sixe dayes (vnlesse they meet with a deare friend to fur∣nish them after twenty in the hundred) before their turne bee serued. Once (my Lord) I thought to borrowe a hundred pound at a Pinch, but the Gentlman that ow'd the money would not traffick with me because I dwelt be∣yond Seuern. A foule indignity to your Lord∣shipps Hauings, hauing such royal Liuings in Monmouth and Glamorganshire. I beseech your Lordship order may be taken yt we may be as free of ye Vserers Courts of Requests as other Shires be; we are out of the principallity, and the Kings Subiects: then to bee barred from those Benefits & Immunities which the Law doth alow, were lawlesse and vnreasonable. Our Shire is a Shire-royall; and we pay as roy∣ally for our vsury as if we dealt with Vserers as Iewes by their trade. Iewes, the cursedst Generation of all Adams children. Another time I dealt for a hundred pound with an Vserer Hold-borne-ward; and hauing neglected my Houre, his VViues Sheet-trauell with him by night, gaue (O course fortune) my dayes labour the Canuase: & driuen to become suter to her mightines (great Princesse of dar∣knes) so what by meanes of som ells of Lawn, a
Sugar-loafe, and a paire of silke Stocks (Woode ones being much more meete) I was beholden to neither of them, thankes be to my meanes: But missing my day, wt this consideration-Taker he set Sentinell, two Sergeants, on the height of the Hill neare Paules; I shall neuer forget the fashion of their faces, two Orange-tawny-beards, in a bloody field (Gules my Lord:) they walked as if they would haue ouer-walked me; but, hauing gotten my broad-side, they sayd stand. I had the word ready, at whose sute? (thin∣king I had bin in the wars, & they Sentinels to giue passe) they brought me to a Counter in the Poultry. Garrison neare the Exchange garded with a number of Varletiers. God knew my heart when I saw all Halberds, and no Muskets, for then I thought the dispatch in mine execution would be the slower: howbeit I did with as much speed as I could, ransom my selfe: I speak not as if it ten∣ded to prouok any of your Lordships to pitty me; but to lesson such young Gentlemen, as (at careles liberty) serues vnder your Lordshpps coulors, that they accept of no office vnder the Vserers or Brokers check: your Lordship shal heare many of the Nobility (out of their hono∣rable zeale to publik profit) commend my Cō¦mon-wealth: yet if any of thē (like Puritans) burn with zeale to lend me money to so good a purpose, the heauens fore-fend that I should
quench it; no, it is good to bee zealous in a good matter. Thus hauing tyred your Lordships attenti∣on, I thought to haue made an end; but my loue to you exceeding the ordinary loue of men, drawes me on to trouble you further for your Strange Pa∣radox, yet true if a mans in∣crease of e∣state tends to his ease. ease. Once I heard your Fathers name (beeing my Lord and Maister) ill spoken off by a world of people, and two other great Earles, three Knights, and diuers Genlemen, ill spoken off by the inhabitants from Tintarne to Comtyder, on both sides Wye, threescore miles a head; I being a seruāt, the Cause stood so strong with the Countrey, I could by no meanes deuise how to make a quarrell to defend my Lords honour. I little thought I should haue beene in place to haue heard so many ill-speakers, and so few defenders, against so many honourable persons and others of account, and durst doe nothing. I praid to heare their Greeuances: They said time out of minde, as appeared by their Records (Kept in the Castell of the Hay, burnt by one Owen Glindovr) the Riuer of Wie (their free & Mother-Riuer) was (in the troublesome times, betweene the houses of York & Lancaster) so Weared & fortified, as if the Salmons therein (on paine of imprisonment)
had beene forbidden their vsuall walkes; and on paine of death (as in case of high treason) not to trade with any of the Earle of Marches men. The humble request of foure or fiue shires will be, that your Honors (with the rest) will take pitty on a whole country, groning vnder the burthen of intollerable Weares; which (for priuate) are the very Dammes and Letts of publike profit. Your three houses, with one Lords more, hauing more interest in those shires (vnder his Maiestie) then all other Land∣lords. The Countries reliefe rests al-most in your Lordships hands: the duty you owe my Lord of Shrewsbury, and his deare respects of you, commands that Weare. My Brother and my selfe being Commissioners in a Commission of Shewres, not daring to doe our duties with∣out my Lord your Fathers priuity, (hee hauing one Weare on the Riuer, being Lord President of Wales, and our Lord and Maister:) wee ac∣quainted him with the Commission, and vp∣on my saluation (I protest) he commanded vs that his Weare should bee puld downe, if it ap∣peared profitable to the country. That noble Earle of Worcester, with his Ho∣norable and vertuous sonne the Lord Harbart, how their Weares will be dispensed with-all in
these daies, all the shires will referre vnto their honorable dispositions.Pacience per∣force. For Sir Edward Win∣ter; there is nothing (I take it) but true ho∣nor in him: My acquaintance with him is but small: yet if I bee not much deceiued, hee re∣spects more the common-good, then his owne priuate; although (indeed) hee was (to say the truth) vpon the last Commission a Commis∣sioner very bitter against the Weares ouer∣throw. I saw the reasons thereof; and did al∣lowe of his vnreasonable prosecution. Hee shewed much witte therein, and did vs more harme then all the rest: God forgiue him, and make him as firme to the ouer-throwers of Weares, as he is fast to their vpholders. Sir Iohn Scudamore, hath alwayes beene the comfort of the country: Nurse to the Infancie of many young Gentlemen bred therein, and cheri∣sher of the rest, that were not aduerse. Hee hath euer said,A good of∣fer of a good heart. if there were any hope that the ouer-throw of the Weares would make the Ri∣uer (VVye) Nauigable, Portable, or Sammon∣able, hee would pull downe his first, to giue an instance to others. I beseech your Lordshipp beare wit∣nesse, I saye nothing of Sir Roger Boden∣hams Weare; nor of none of the Weares aboue Hereford Bridge. But this I say, it's a pit∣tifull thing that any of your Lordshipps
Weares with the rest, (built like Babell threat∣ning the skies with their eminence) should hinder the Salmon-fishing, which gaue that sustenance to fiue or sixe shires, as many thou∣sands, were a thousand times better sustei∣ned and comforted then now they are, or can bee. All that can be said, why the Riuer cannot bee made Port-able is; Some Fords when they are at the lowest will want water. A poore and needy speech! As if there were not meanes enough to chanell such shallows, in Summer they being at the smallest, and peaceablest time to bee wrought. Good my LORD, downe with the VVeares, let vs haue VVine with our Venison. the carriage of it from London by land,Bristoll better serued with Sacks then Gascoine wine. makes a cup of Claret looke like a weake leane wench that hath the greene sicknesse. And such as we haue from Bristowe, is fitter to be drunke with a Welsh Goate, then an English Buck. Wee are barde of our Meate, bound from our Drinke, and many other prouisions, which almost all other shires haue. During your Fathers life-time our hopes were a foote, wee had the Vantgard in the warre: But, since his death, put to the Reare, by occasion of your nonage, and such accidents as bee∣fell.
But now seeing your sacred Soueraigne puts his hands on your shoulders (without which the greatest Subiect cannot put his hand on his heart, for want of one) forget not (my no∣blest Lord) to fall at his feete in fauour of your Fathers fauorites. If a Commission of Shewres happen amongst vs (by Gods visitation) then I hope you will most earnestly beseech his Maiestie, that his Supersidias knock not out the braines of the Commission of Salmon-fishing. The fore-said Supersidias hath alwayes beene our vtter ouer-throw. My good Lord, com∣pare all the Riuers in the Kingdome together; and you shall see and heare by all antiquitie, the Riuer of VVye, did exceede all other for Salmon. These Weares your three fore-menti∣oned Lordships, with the rest doe owe. They doe you and them but the least seruice; they bring some fewe of your Salmons in season to your Table: and a hundred thousand bee ser∣ued vnseasonably. In my memory, it hath bred an inbred murmure amongst vs, which hath made the most so melancholy, as I thinke the braines of many be not setled in their true si∣tuation. They confesse their error, and report their mistaking:It is manly to erre, beastly to continue in error. first, to bee from a worthy old Gentlemen, Maister Philip Iones, who out of a blind zeale (like Papists that goe on pil∣grimage) yet wanting the true length of the
three Lords legges, (but held a true course a∣greeing with all actes of Parliament) did put a foote the Commission of Shewres, not thinking the Earles of the Land to bee the Gods of the Earth. His yeares worne out, and memory decayed, foure-score odde yeares drawing on the day of his death, neuer trained at the Counsell-table, durst not presse into the pre∣sence, and (like a dotard) did neuer New-yeares-gift ye Ladies of the Priuie & Bed-chamber: then what with illiberality of breeding, some mise∣ry and vntidy handling, suffered to be shuffled into the Commission of Shewres, friends and foes: so, by often meetings and ouer-long delayes, harazed and wore out all his hopes in dooing any good. The first Commission hauing made a peaceable end by Supersidias; the death of which Commission bred more lamentation in three Shires,The priuate is more re∣spected then the publike weale, of men priuate. then the death of three Earles (best common-wealths men) would doe in all England. The last Commission might be played on the Stage: The principall persons were Commissioners; all which had Weares on the Riuer: and all had reason enough to ouer-rule Baby-Commissioners. As at a quarter Sessi∣ons, one great man will vnder-take the mana∣ging of matters belonging to all the Bench. If poore I, should but speake to countenance a cause (for a wench made woman before her
time.) Hee lookes on the one side, as if I were put in Commission onely to certifie Recogni∣sances for Ale-houses: or to giue a respectiue voyce if a faction happen to arise: so, these Baby-commissioners for the Riuer of Wye, hold their Hattes in their hands, the one legge low∣er then the other, ready to doe all their duties at once: and the grand Commissioners (like Bishop Bonner) with Riding-rods,Alluding to that in mai∣ster Fox his Acts and Monuments. threaten dis∣pleasure, or vtter destruction, to all that were not of their deuotion towards the VVeares. This hath beene the common course and cu∣stome of the Commission of shewres, to out∣countenance the cause by the greatest per∣sons: but, the LORD of Heauen euer so wrought, that the Weare-owners were more beholden to the supersidias then to twelue men: twelue men hauing giuen their Verdit, a Iudgement against the Weares & after all this a supersidias! Ó! The consideration of it would haue made old Ployden (had hee beene liuing) forsweare the Law in his latter dayes. Maister Blonden being of counsell with the Country, it so mooued him (being ouer-come with puf∣fing and blowing) that hee wrought vpward and downward, as if hee had taken a vomit or a purgation.A Trinity of Ladies able to worke miracles. I remember in Queene Eliza∣beths dayes my Lady of Warwick, Mistresse Blanch Parry, and my Lady Scudamore, in little
Laye-matters would steale opportunity to serue some friends turnes; but where and in whome the supersidias rests at command, this mystery I would my good Lord would learne; because none of these (neere and deere Ladies) durst intermeddle so farre in matters of Common∣wealth. Twenty Commissioners attend the ser∣uice, whereof foure to be of the Quorum, euer in place: the greatest men of the number, ha∣uing no desire to proceed: Many dayes mee∣ting disappointed for want of appearance: the Iewry sworne, their appearance, by penal∣ty, appointed twentye miles off: the twenty Commissioners present, some to vphold and some to ouer-throw. In this manner, for a long Summers day (which dured sixe months) wee bare the brunt of all opposition. Our last meeting was at Chepstovv, and at the mouth of ye riuer Wye, the Iewry (hauing day giuen for their verdit, riding ouer the bridge) vpon a so∣daine saw the water swolne with a sea of Sal∣mon. The Inquest enquiring of them what news? they answred by signes (sith they were as mute as fishes) they were bard of their natiue country, where all their ancestors were bred and borne:An assault to∣wards, against Chepstow∣bridge by Salmons. & in their infancy nursd, till they came to Salmons estate. This moane they made by in∣stinct of nature: the Iury praid they would cō∣mit no ryot, but indure the day of the Iuries
verdict with-out their further approach; and order should happily be taken for egresse & re∣gresse as of old: The Bridge being in a dange∣rous case meane while; for it seem'd their so neere cōming, tended to no other purpose but to strike vp the heeles of the Bridge, not laying his glory in the dust, but the water: For feare whereof (as if the Bridge had lost his heart of Oake) it fell downe (heartlesse-lubber) of it selfe within one yeare following; and for the Salmons further comfort, the Iewrie told them the great Lords were Lords of the stickes and stakes, not of the Riuer; the Riuer was the Kings: no prohibition lay against them, but that they might lawfully enter into their old habitations and places of resort: onely the great Lords will say, they haue three yeares possession, or it may be, chalenge prescription; which cannot bee; you being the Kings Te∣nants, no time going beyond the King. I am not satisfied,It is most strange, and yet most true. how after such a world of Labour and Toyle by the Commissioners and Iurors, that the bare Information of a VVeare-owner (per∣haps) could annihilate all our painfull Inde∣uours for the good of sixe Shieres with a super∣sidias. If I should forget to tell your Lordshipp it hath beene in the memory of many yet li∣uing, that the Riuer of Wye did yeeld Salmon so
plentifully as Sturgeon in some partes of Ger∣many: & that a Hereford-shire seruant would surfet on fresh Salmon as oft as a North-Hamp∣ton-shire-man on fatt Venison: and since my natiuity, till yeares of discretion had ouer-ta∣ken mee, I could not Learne this lesson. For my Foster-mother Woodhill, old mother Webb, and mother Spooner (such Mothers there are (my good Lord) though you know not their Fathers) telling the Wonders of the Weares so pittifully, as if they hadde beene in the captiuity at Babilon: How thirty Salmons were taken such a morning at a draught, and thirty three, at another time! The Supplication of Beggers so moued the heart of that famous King Henry the eight in his later dayes, that hee did nothing else but platforme Foundations for true and sound Religion. If these Weares had bin in his daies in such manner as they be now, he would haue taken the like order with them as hee didde with Abbeyes and Monasteries.Behead them like Traytors. As an Heresie is bred and hatched amongst those that vnder∣stands no true Religion soonest; so, in the tender time of that sweete and gratious King Edward the sixt, these Weares had their bree∣ding and increase. But GOD determining his time vntimely,
the Weare-owners gott a descent against vs: and on a sodaine wee fell into the handes of a King of a strange Language; then wee (being Brittaines) could speake no Spanish; hee and his queene too too much troubled in establi∣shing their owne Religion, wee had ynough to doe to defend our bodies from Bishop Bon∣ners Bon-fiers: and deferred all our intended Supplications to a hope-fuller time. Our late, and blessed Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth (Englands ioy, defender of the faith, & faithful establisher of true Religion; (whose matchlesse Princely vertues, the world didde, and euer shal admire) yet her aged yeares trou∣bled with a discontented warre That of Tyron. forced vs to silence with many a sorrowfull heart. Now (my Lord) the time is come to exhi∣bite our supplications: the King of glory hath sent vs his sacred seruant King Iames, to∣gether with a fruitfull Queene and royall Is∣sue, according to our owne heartes: A King that can teach Religion; a King from beyond his Cradle, and free from strange deuotion; succeeding a most religi∣ous Maiden-Queene. Time is now most oppor∣tune. Now, is our time most humbly to be∣seech your Lordshippe (you hauing imme∣diate grace and fauor from his Maiestie, wee poore wretches not daring to speake, beeing
people of the quietest and peaceablest dispo∣sitions of the Kingdome) not to neglect our Common-wealth. Remember the loue your Fa∣ther and Grand-father bare their-our Coun∣trey: remember wee were their kinsmen, and seruants, and of the dearest respect of any what-soeuer with them. Wee desire but passage of the Law of the Land; and that your Lordship wil not speak in fauor of your owne Weare (O super-naturall vertue!) nor my Lord of Shrewsburies, nor any of the rest, no, nor suffer a supersidias to land neare Chepstows∣bridge least it make it shake for feare, of a second Commotion of Salmons against it. I haue acquainted your Lordshipp with this matter-mechanical, & made known vnto you the raising of our Church, the planting of our Preacher, the Chappel & Almes-house with the rest apendant: if your Lordship take but a superficial view of this giddy Inuention (as som of your late seruāts term'd it) it wil satisfie me, it being but a particular plot, not able to be per∣formed by any whose estate exceedes mine a million; because the place of my Residence af∣fords Meddow, Pasture, all kinde of Corne, Wood, Water near at hand; & especially blest with such a number of Beggers as are able to vndoe a Countrey. But my Lord, I doe most humbly pray, yt in the reading & viewing of my VVater-workes,
you will vnite your heart and eyes to read respectiuely, for retention sake, to the A gainfull end of paine∣full reading. end you may call to account, your Stewards and Suruayors of your Lordshipps Mannors, Lands and Tenements; What Riuers, Brookes, Fountaines and Springes do inhabite the com∣passe of your command, and that your Lord∣shipp will spare sporting-times for some few houres, that I may giue you such information, and precepts withall; that (at your pleasure) you may charrecter what profit this VVatry Element will raise you, more then euer was rai∣sed. I do not say I wil; but I could, in your Mon∣moth and Glamorgan shire-countrey single out (in a short time) all the Riuers, Brookes, Foun∣taines and Springs which owe duty or speake well of any of your Lordshipps Lands. If my Labors bee in that manner commaunded, it will cost your Lordship Warrants for Bucks, and Letters of Priuiledge, that your Tenants raise not Feare of pri∣uate harme makes publike hatred often to arise from long-laid▪ rest. head against mee: weening my comming to bee the ouerthrow of their Posterity. I protest thats not my purpose, but to put a foote the Mistery of Winter and Sommer-drownings, to the comfort of the Countrey, and present profit of the present Inhabitants: humbly praying your Lordshipp, as you shall
receiue a great increase: so, you do not (ac∣cording to the new fashion) by extreme rac∣king, ransake the succeeding Issue of the faith∣full Followers of your eldest Ancestors, whose old gotten-glory, at Rodes and Malta (in de∣fence of the holy-land) the Brittish Traditions and Recordes, in great aboundance, doe te∣stifie. I haue done with my Mechanicals, and the hopefull riuer of Wye; only I will fixe this ac∣cidentall merryment in the Frontispice (or broad-brow) of my Preface to my Water-workes: signifying the cause of these excursions to proceed from vnbeleeuing creatures, posses∣sed and puf-pasted with pride and peeuish op∣position. An act of Parliament will bee required for ioyning of Peter-Church, Vou-church and Tor∣neston, there distance beeing not a mile a sun∣der; Torneston hauing onely one inhabitant to make a Congregation; the liuing extending it selfe but vnto ten pounds yearely; two of them straining them-selues to make forty in the whole. A most miserable alowance for a Preacher and his Curate; and most miserable the time when Ignorantes (out of heate of a prepo∣sterous zeale not able to render a rea∣son of the faith they hold, nor well
know wherof they do affirme) will aduenture (with libellous Articles) to informe (against men conformable) a reuerend father, Bishop Bennet (Bishop of the Diocesse) whose heart was prepared with all his power to the high∣er house of the Parliament to settle this pre∣sident (viz: to vnite three Parishes into one) in the Border of the principallity; Yet a new fangl'd fellow, presumed to falsefie the testi∣mony of the Inhabitants of those three Pari∣shes, and sought a Preaching Minister of pur∣pose to alter the antiquity of their religion, and change the true ceremonies ther-vnto incident, vnto a strickt obseruation of quick∣siluer-brain'd Discipline: and cause mee to bee questioned before the Bishopp for these misdemeanors, as if Heresie or Sacriledge had beene the ground. But the Bishop (most iudiciously) quitte mee as no way taxable. I desir'd by Acte of Parliament to vnite these Churches into one body (being patron of two of them, the third vnder a prebend of the Cathedral Church:) but they wrought with the Ecclesiastical state by principall men, that an homily audibly red would be as edifiable vn∣to the simpler sort as a presician-Sermon vnto the reformed phantastiques. These troubles, the African-Politician hath raised: And I feare a further mischiefe, that he will inforce those Lunatikes to stirr vpp the Patron Prebend to a
higher pitch; his infirmity offering nothing lesse then all the likelyhoods of discontent∣ment. But hauing gotten a fee-simple in the Bishop, a free-hold in the Deane and chapter; an inheritance in the rest of the Cathedrals, we beg at your Lordshipps handes to add the Act of Parliament to put vs in possession. In following which Acte, it is necessary your Lordship warrant my descent from gladis de gam Daughter of S. Dauid Gam, slaine in the vangard of the battell of Egincourt; who beeing sent by Henry the fift to discouer the force of the French; Answered, they were y∣now to be slaine, e-now to be taken prisoners, e-now to run away: which speech continues to his euerlasting praise: this Gladis being mo∣ther to your Lordships Ancestors & mine: the Earle of Pembrook, Sir Richard Herbert, Vaughā of Bradwardin, Vaughan of Hergest, & Vaughan of Tretowr hir 5. sons-al 5. brethren & al 5. o∣uerthrown at Banbury field. Fiue such brethrē out of one woman, ye 13. shires of Wales hath seldom yeelded: my Lord, I am By Gladis, kin to most of the Old Nobility: which aged de∣scent is almost worn out, yet not so worn, but either by consanguinity, or affinity, I can light on a Howard, a Herbert, a Somerset, a Carew, or a Knowles, euer ready to assist an Act of Parlia∣mēt to raise a preaching Minister. These tur∣bulent ouer-frighted, stir'd vp ye harts of the poorest peo¦ple
to a dangerous mislike with inuectiue breathings, that they must goe aboue a mile to a sermon; that their Church would not containe the three Parishes at a Sermon time; that it could not bee done by Law, and that forty pound was sufficient for a Preacher, and that I did it not out of zeale, but out of ambiti∣on; seeking mine owne glory & gaine, wherin (God is my iudge, my Lord) they wrong me as much as their own charitable iudgements. NOw my (honorable Lord) I come to the point: to make rehearsal, and to demon∣strate my vnder-takings; setting forth the Clo∣thier (with his twenty broad Loomes) for the finest cloth, to be the worthiest. Ten narrow Loomes for course Wooll, Flaxe, Hempe, and Hurdes. Some Fustian-loomes, with such silke-loomes as shall bee needfull: Two thousand poore Spinners, Carders, Wooll-pyckers, Quil-winders, with the Broad and Narrow-weauers; Fifty Habitations with Shops, Chambers, Chym∣neys, and Cesterns for washing their hands; for seuerall Artificers, that neither Clothiers, VVea∣uers, Pyckers of VVoll, Quill-winders, Spinners and Carders, shall euer loose an houres labour. No women, children, nor Prentises, shall be free
of this place, but all selected Iourney-men of the best ability of body and Arte that may be had. I giue fifty pound yearely and perpetually vn∣to a Preacher; twenty pound yearely and perpe∣tually vnto a Curate; who shall alwayes attend the Artificers, to read morning and eue∣ning prayer in their Chappell. An Almes-house for such as (I sayd before) necessi∣tie doth cause to for-beare their owne get∣tings. Many Honorable Gentlemen finding mine ability such, as not sodenly able to raise the same: they wisht I would prepare a number of beneuolent Contributers, persons of the grea∣test worth, best affected, and knowne to bee most comfortable to the Common-wealth: out of which Number, I doe most humbly inuite your Lordship, with my Honorable Lord of Mountgomery to this beneuolent pre∣paration. I likewise inuite some venerable and reue∣uerend Bishops (my especiall good and lo∣uing Lords) the Lord Bishops of Worcester, Hereford and Gloucester. I inuite my Honourable Lords the Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England, and that worthye Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the Common-pleas: the Lord Chiefe-Baron, and my Lords the Iudges in generall.
I inuite the Knights of the Bathe, Knights of the Field, and Knights of GREAT BRITAINE, Maister Talbott of Graf∣ton, Maister Sheldon of Beley, Maister Dutton of Sherborne, and Maister Harley of Bromp∣ton-brian, with-all Esquires and Gentle-men of all the Counties of the kingdome. I haue seperated your Lordshipps (with the rest) from the society of the sullied leier of Subiects: so respectiue haue I beene in the ex∣ecution of this Inuention. If your Lordshipp will know what hath induced mee to these purposes: beeing ouer-questioned by the Tag-ragg-rable of dull-pated Ignorants; that I had protested and promised to publish my Water-workes long before this: And euer-hoping to reduce it into that forme which might bee pleasing to all po∣steritie, and not quarrelled at by anye, it beeing so full of difficultie and varyetye of forme and matter. Not possible to giue it his Ornament with-out this that followes; hauing ney∣ther President nor Example, to stirre mee vppe any waye to the like labours: Euer desirous to vse a correspondencie: So as a Souldier I will leaue some testimonie or Relicke of that Honourable rancke where∣in
I had my breeding: and end my dayes with a Souldier-like fare-well. BEeing one of hir Maiesties Captaines, raisd in eighty-eight, hauing my directions from my Honourable LORD and Maister your Father: I haue spent that small Talent & skill: Neuer curious in concealing from my Lieutenant, Ancient, Seriant, Corporalls, and Drumme, the worthynesse of the warre: vnto which I am much inclin'd. Most humblye beseeching your Lord∣shipp, if you heare any say, I am fantasti∣call, say you (my deere LORD) I am but curious; so excuse mine Imperfections the best you may, and I will euer honour you. The time is spent, and I must spende some time with the Printer: and a little more in sorting, cowching, and planting my dyning-roome, free from all disorder. In what manner my Table shall be furnished;
What attendance the Mechanicall Artificers shall performe; how industrious my Ancient and Serieant shall bee in preparing all these Artificers for his Maiesties seruice, into what place it shall please his Highnesse to command them. Now (my Lord) I end with this materiall circumstance beeing extracted out of mine owne meanes. I signified in mine Epistle to your Lordshipp, A dining-roome to enter∣taine a world of worthy beneuolent Contribu∣ters: The Table perpetually furnished to in∣tertaine forty of those Contributers dayly in expectancy; A hundred Artificers subiect to the Seruice of the Table: Twenty fiue atten∣ding at Dinner, and twenty-fiue at supper: fifty more on the morrow: and so the hundred Ar∣tificers shall attend the Table in this man∣ner Dayly and Perpetually. In recompence whereof they receiue the benefit of the Reuersion with all the com∣fort I can afford them. All the Artificers to attend the Preacher to Sermon and home againe. The Visitor of the Negligencers Attendant to informe their mis∣demenors to the chiefe of the Company, if there bee cause that no common Swearer, Drunkard nor Swaggerer shall liue within the limits of my allowance. His first offence warned, the
second punished, the third discharged for euer from the place: Euery Artificer shall vnto euery Contributor (at their comming thether) humble them-selues with (all respectiue obe∣dience) acknowledging them by word and deed to be the Founders of their well-doing, and happy Common-wealth. The Dining-roome wainscoted, and fairly hang'd with Arras. Touching the Fare to bee serued to the Ta∣ble dayly and perpetually, forty full dishes of variety of meats; with a Pasty of Venison to Dinner, and another to supper, when they are in season. A Sentinell sett from ten to eleuen in a Turret, for discouery, to see what Contributer comes: If a Foot-man dwelling in the neigh∣bourhood; he giues the Larum by the toule of a Bell, signifying him to bee a Foot-man; which heard, then the Drumme soundes. If a Horse-man, by the Larum hee signi∣fies him to bee a Horse-man, and then the Trumpet soundes And vpon their comming into the Dining-roome, All Officers of the company intertaine the Contributers with all ioy and merryment: the wind Instrument, with all sortes of Musicke plaies Dinner and Supper: and to adde all the comfortable contentment to all Contributers, from
Bartholomew day to Mid-may. The Groome of the Chamber shall at his pe∣rill prepare a good fire with Ashe, Hawthorne, and Char-cole. My LORD, that honourable and most worthy Iudge the Lord Chiefe Iustice Pop∣pham hearing of my Drownings; said Cousin, how dost thou drowne? I told him by helpe of a Riuer or Brooke; by Weare and sluce to take part, or all, into my Trench-royall. Whats thy Trench royall (saith hee?) The Trench-royall is a Cesterne that serues al offices in a Noble∣mans house.As a Cesterne in your Lordshipps house, that serues all Offices: My Trench-royal serues my Counter Trenches; my Defending-Trenches, my Topping or Brauing-Trenches, my Winter and Sommer-Trenches; my Double and Treble-trenches; a trauersing-trench with a point; And my Euerlasting-trench, with other troublesome trenches, which in my Mapp I wil more exactly demonstrate. The good Lord hearing all these wordes, (able to raise a Spirit) sayd: Cousin art thou out of thy witts? My Lord for distinction sake (said I) I must giue them significant names, such as my ser∣uants attending my Winter and Sommer-Drow∣nings may vnderstand to execute my com∣mands. So, my Lord, I hauing giuen satisfaction to ye
honourable person, I will make it most plain∣ly appeare to your Lordshippe how fecible this Worke is: that all Cynick-Doggs or Lamb-biters, may with shame be silenced, and their foule Mouthes muzled. It is yet wondered at, by almost all, how a particular and priuate Gentleman should bee able to bring all this to passe. But my good Lord (on my behalf) I humbly pray you to pray all of the better sort,To speake what we know not, is to thinke what we should not. to bee sparing of their censures herein; for artlesse-Aimes seldome hitts the marke. I would that no man should say, I doe it out of ambition or other sinister respect: for the Rule of Charity is: in cases doubtfull, wee should iudge the best. But if any (notwithstanding) should bee so iniurious to say so, then (my LORD) they may say the Clothier; the habitation for Arti∣ficers, the Chappell, and Preacher, Curate, Almes∣house; My Table for the benefit of poore Ar∣tificers, and whatsoeuer else is good (yea a Com∣mon-good) is out of ambition. I hope (my good Lord) I shall heare no more of such Obiections; if I doe, though I am no Poet yet I can make Ballads, To the tune of vp-tayls-all: For Ile lash them Ifayth with Rimes that shall make it rancle where they fall.
But to take away the wonder of the World, and to giue satis-faction to the enui∣ous-vnsatisfied I can keepe three hundred Kine, three hun∣dred young Cattell,This I mince thus for ill di∣gesting sto∣macks. three thousand Sheepe, all these Winter and Sommer: Hauing be∣sides ten Plough-Land, all hard at hand; foure Milles as neare, and within two mile of the place Tymber sufficient for all my Buildings. And Fire-wood ynough for all the Arti∣ficers, the Inholder and the rest; Wall∣stone, Tyle, Lime and Bricke, as necessary as any man liuing. My good LORD, I doe not thus Inuen∣tory my Estate,A iust excuse. and paint forth the Particu∣lers, as if I were to sell it by the Drumme; or as looking thereon with Vaine-gloryous Eyes. No, no, my good LORD, nothing lesse (for there is no such cause, I am the more sorry.) But I doe it (perforce) to giue the doubtfull Inquisitor satisfaction for the setling of his beleefe herein, That I attempt nothing with out the limmitts of mine owne strength. But now your Lordshippe shall heare an end of the VVonder. All men wil confesse, three hundred Kine wil raise, Braunes, Bacons, Porks, Piggs, Geese, Turkeis, Capons, Hens, Chickens, Ducks, & the like. They wil confes
ten Plow-land in seuerall places, all with-in a myle, with my Tithe-barnes, will do the like. They will confesse my foure Milles beeing within a flight shoote one of another, will doe the like: They will confesse my Brew-house, my Backe-house, my Kitchin, my Beare-seller, my shambles; and the water from my Vting∣vats will doe the like. Besides in a Mste-yeare I can feed a world of Hogges. Your Lordship sees I am forc'd to doe, and ouer-doe, as one that must doe All, else no∣thing will bee done▪ I thinke I haue besturd my selfe pritty well, to make the whole world wonder at mee. Your Lordshipp shall now see what benefit I receiue for the perpetuall continuance of this Table.What benefit can be raised. The Butter and Cheese of my three hundred Kine, I sell, and furnish the Clothyer, his Broade∣weauers, Spinners, Carders & the rest; with all the Mechanicalls there-with. The Corne of ten Plowlands, Wheate, Rye, & Malt made in my own Killing; I grinde at my owne Milles: Bak'd, & Brewed in my Bake-house and Brew-house; and sold to the foresaid persons: My Wooll, my Mut∣tons, Lambes, and culld-sheepe, of my three thousand I sell to the sayde persons: I sell yearely one hundred of my eldest Oxen, Kine, and my cul'd young Cattell fatte to the persons
aforesaid: I sell yearely one hundred of my eldest Oxen, Kine, and my cul'd young-cattell, fat to the persons aforesaid: I finde all Artificers; and In-keepers wood, which will bee ten times more profitable vnto me then now. Let Men iudge what benefit I may make of my Brew-house, and what of my Bake-house, what of my shambles, my Haye & Prouender; my Chandlers-shopp, my Barke vnto the Tanner: to whom I sell all my Hides; the Glouer hath all my Pelts: what prouision my owne estate will not af∣foord, the neighbourhood can prouide it, that neither want nor scarsitie shall afflict any of his Maiesties seruants and subiects. My good Lord, let it not seeme irkesome to you, nor cloy your dainty eare, that thus I be∣labour your attention with repetition of these countrey-commodities, and common-wealths Requisites; so to season your courtly pleasures, as sharpe sawce doth sweete meates, but when you bend your regarde to these things (as I doubt not but you will: For actiue witte in short time turnes to working wisdome:) The worlds obseruation will then know, you waxe ripe for the highest imployments: For it strong∣ly argues youth is then well mellowed, when it begins to looke into these necessaries for mans life with Ages eyes. Pleasures, that tickle our sences, make vs but spoile Pretious-time; while
they betray our Reason, that should rule rebelli∣ous affections that ought to obey. The sooner these enemies▪ to mans dignity, are shaken off from the Minde, the sooner will the Minde ad∣uance the Body to dignity. It is a glorious (how euer troublesome) thing to haue a chiefe Oare in the Shipp of a well-gouernd state. The benefit of life in great men cannot be better imployde then to the benefit of good men. For the Back and Belly is Natures chiefe care; these beeing prouided for, shee sweetly takes repose. What is ouer & beside, is for Ornament, which shee wants not: for pompe which she requires not: or for pleasure, which if shee wanted, shee would the more abound in all goodnesse. Now, (my good Lord) these Indeuoures and Workes of mine (tending to thee full supply of the Back and Bellyes wants) are to be heedfully respected in their particulers, by you that one day may haue this care cast vpon you, by God, King, & Countrey, to see to the necessities of All, while you consult but with a Few. Its merry in hall, when beards wagge all, (saith the old Pro∣uerbe). And it's a merry Weale-publick, where euer-enough is as good as a feast, suffizing all by good gouernment.
The manner of my Drownings. AFter I had spent some yeares in Queene Eli∣zabeths Court, and saw the greatnes and glory therof vnder the com∣mand of Mistres Blanch Parry (an honorable & Vertuous Gentlewo∣man, my Aunt and Mistresse) my spirite beeing too tender to indure the bitternesse of her hu∣mor; I was by her carefull (though crabbed au∣sterity) forced vnto the Irish wars, where I cō∣tinued three or foure yeares some-times twist deep in that country-water: & what with long fasting and ill diet, I was possessed with the Country-disease:Flix. the extremity whereof hasted mee to returne to my Fathers home in the County of Heref. for recouery of my health:
which within sixe months I obteined. After it pleased GOD to giue mee recouery, I re∣solued for the Lowe-countrey-warres againe: and hauing begun my iourney thetherward, I happened on a Country-Gentlewoman, who was seized of a Mannor, and ouer-shot Mill: which conuerted all my martiall endeuours and hopes of honor, to these country-labours: Hauing soiourn'd two yeares in my Fathers house, wearied in doing nothing, and fearing my for∣tunes had beene ouer-throwne in putting by my Martiall occupation; I began to expostulate with my selfe what was best to be done to pre∣serue my reputation with my martiall compa∣nions, and with-all to giue contentment to my vertuous and louing wife. And while I was to settle a resolution, comparing these desires together, my Wiues importunity caused mee to quitt their ordinary familiarity, yet with li∣mitation; at such times as conueniency might afforde. This restraint of hers, drewe mee to the at∣tendance of home-labours; who prayed mee with-all in my walkes abroad, to haue an eye to her Millers true dealing. I prayed her to put ouer that seruice to some seruant of hers: for of all trades I had least confidence in their truth: and therefore required the more paines to be taken in watching their water, & looking
to their fingers, which I was loth to vnder∣take: not-with-standing, (vpon better consi∣deration, least shee should haue held me care∣lesse of her good, and so ill deserue her loue) I obeyed her will, as many doe, and many mi∣series do ensew thereby. So, in the month of March, falling (with the streame) to the milne∣ward within my Meade (with no desire I pro∣test) to fashion or forme Husbandry) I happe∣ned to finde a Mole or Wants nest, raised on the brim of the Brooke, like a great hillocke; from which nest or hillocke, there issued a little streame of water, (drawne by the work∣ing of the Wante) downe a sheluing or des∣cending ground, one pase broad, and some twenty in length. The running of which little Streame, did, (at that time) wonderfully content mee, see∣ing it pleasing Greene; and that other on both sides full of Mosse,The first cause that the work was vnder∣taken. and Hide-bound for want of water. This was the first cause I vnder-tooke the drowning of grounds. Now, to proceede to the execution of my vvorke (beeing perswaded of the excellen∣cie of the water) I examined how many foote∣fall the Brooke yeelded, from my Mill to the vpper-most part of my grounds, beeing in length a measured Mile. There laye of old Meadow-ground thirty
acres ouer-worne with age, and heauily laden with Mosse, Cowslips, and much other imperfit grasse, betwixt my Mill-streame, and the maine Riuer; which (with two shillings cost) my gran∣father, and his gransire, with the rest, might haue drown'd at their pleasures: But from the beginning, neuer any thing was done, that either tradition or record, could witnesse, or any other testimonie. Hauing vewed the conuenientest place, the vpper-most part of my ground would afforde for placing a Commanding-Weare, or Sluce, I espied diuers Water-falls on my neighbours grounds, higher then mine by seauen or eight foote; which gaue me greater aduantage for drowning of more ground, then I was (of my owne power) able to doe. I acquainted them with my purpose: the one (being a Gentleman of worth and good nature) gaue mee leaue to plant the one end of my Weare on his side the Riuer▪ the other (my Tenant) beeing very aged and simple) (by no perswa∣sion I could vse) would yeeld his consent: al∣ledging it would marre his ground: yea, some-times his Apple-trees: and men tolde him water would raise the Rush, and kill his Cow-slipps, which was the cheefest Flower that his Daughters had, (beeing many) to tricke the May-pole withall. All which with
scilence I past ouer for a time, knowing his simplicity to exceed his discretion; yet in the end I re-enforc'd my perswations, and tolde him (next vnto the King) I was to bee obeyed in matters reasonable: and that it became him not to prouoke his Land lord; nor to stand at the staffes end with his Commander. Yet these Buggs-words would not mooue him. Then gaue I a fresh charge, and to draw him on with a Baite which hee would soone bite at, tould him I had a Meddow-plott in his neighbour∣hood, worth ten pound, which I would part with on reasonable termes: but before I could make him beleeue hee was a foole he gott the Fee-simple thereof.For no simple fee. Which President doth fal∣sifie the old-said-Saw, Thou art an old doting foole. After I had wrought this farre, I caused my seruant (a Ioyner) to make a leuell to dis∣couer what quantitie of ground I might, (from the entry of the Water) obtaine: allow∣ing his dubling-course, compassing Hills to cary it plym or euen: which fell out to bee some three hundred Acres. After I had plimmed it vpon a true Leuell, I be-tooke my selfe to the fauour of my Tenants, Friends and Neighbours, in running my maine-trench (which I call my Trench-royall) I call it so, because I haue with∣in the contents of my worke, Counter-trenches, defending trenches, topping, or brauing-trenches.
Winter and Summer-trenches, double and treble-trenches, a trauersing trench with a point, and an euer-lasting trench, with other troublesome-trenches: which in my Map I will more liuely expresse. When the Inhabitants of the country wher∣in I inhabit, (namely the Golden-Valley) saw I had begun some part of my worke, they sum∣moned a consultation against mee, and my man Iohn the leuellour: saying our wittes were in our hands, and not in our heads: so, we both for three or foure yeares, laye leuell to the whole Country-censure for such Enginors as their fore-fathers heard not of, nor they well able to endure with-out merryment. When my labours tooke beginning, they became subiect to discourse: Diuerse Gentle∣men with others, inquired from whence I had my Examples; and where I saw any such worke? I could not answere them but with an other question: namely, where sawe you any such? They said, no where. Truly nor I. In the running and casting of my Trench-royall, though it were leueld from the begin∣ning to the end, vpon the face of the ground, yet in the bottome I did likewise leuell it to auoyde error. For the Breadth and Depth, my propor∣cion
is ten foote broad, and foure foote deep; vnlesse in the beginning, to fetch the water to my drowning-grounds, I rann it some halfe mile, eight foot deepe; and in some places six-tenne-foote broad. Al the rest of the Course, for two miles and a halfe in length, according to my former proportion. VVhen my VVorke began, in the Eye of the Countrey, to carry a shew of profit, it pleased many (out of their courtesie) to giue it com∣mendations,Ignorants praise good endings, but doubt, or dis∣praise their beginnings. and to applaud the Inuention. The Ioyner hearing the commendations to bee generall, and hee the Leueller (which was (he thought) the cheefe Agent in the Acti∣on) there grew a brabble betwixt vs. Hee began to insult and arrogate as a Coadiu∣tor, by reason of his leuelling, and desired hee might bee signified a principall party to the Inuention. I bad him haue patience, the Inuention was mine, together with the dignity: and told him withal the ambition of soldiers would not indure society with men of Mechanicall trades: I only imploy'd his hand, and not his head. So hauing compounded the brabble be∣tweene vs, I fell into the handes of an vn∣skilfull Carpenter, in planting my commaun∣ding Weare or Scluce, crosse the maine Riuer. Hee gaue mee such assurance for the safe con∣tinuance
thereof; that hee vndertooke to maintaine it with twelue pence a yeare, during his life. After hee had prepared it ready for the foundation, hee planted some thousand stakes in the bottom of the Brooke to carry the maine Syll. When the Syll was lodged vppon the Pile of Stakes, I began to suspect the foundation, and told him a great part of the water would vndermine the Syll, and that I should hardly indure the want ther∣of at my Drowning-times; especially in Sommer. Hee grew teasty, hott, and peremptory; and sayd it was not the Maisters manner to controule; but, to examine: and that all his VVater-workes were according to the Veneti∣an foundation, built altogether vppon Piles: but the Venetian-fashion forced mee to want water ten yeares space, which was out of my way two thousand poundes. The reason was this; the water vndermi∣ning the Syll, it forced the Earth beyond the postes, which were placed in the firme ground; and hauing gotten the vpper hand of the main-Land it could not bee holp vntill the Sylle were rais'd againe. I hadde a continu∣al purpose to re-edifie it, but that I was inte∣rupted by the ordinary course of Processe
out of the honorable Courts of Starre-cham∣ber, Chancery, and Wardes; the last of the three bredd more white haires in my head in one yeare, then all my Wetshod-water-workes did in sixteene. Not that I had cause to com∣plaine of Iniustice; but, because I vnderstood not the course of the Courts, being pusled with an old Feodary, and a foolish Escheter, (the life and death of my cause resting in their mercy.) Twelue Iurors who passed against mee, lawe, equity, and conscience. Vpon which Verdit, I was, by Iniunction, comman∣ded to deliuer the body of a Warde I had in keeping, which I refused to doe: It happe∣ned my Councell found Error in the Office, and ouer-threwe the former proceedings, which was the ouer-throwe of my Water-workes for fiue yeares space. The ouer-throwne-Office was a stolne Office, and found before I had notice of it. But beeing ouer-throwne, matter of greater consequence followed. The Queenes Atturney commanded the Feodary, who had gotten a grant of the Ward, to exhibite enformation against mee in his name: wee had Commission vpon Commissi∣on: wee indured heauye and chargeable examinations. Vppon which Examinations I had a
Hearing in that Honourable Courte; and though it could not passe against me, yet it passed not with mee. One other Commission came downe, A lury impanalled, Witnesses re-examined. That Iury found with mee, & (in my conscience) not one of the number vnder∣stood his euidence: All which I shew to satis∣fie the Inquisitor, why so long I neglected my begunne Water-workes. When the Escheator, Feodary, Commissioners, and Iurors hadde putt their hands & seales to the Office, I prepared my self to my forsaken Water-works; hauing left my wanton Ward in London in the custody of a Precisian or Puritan-Taylor, who would not indure to heare one of his seruants Sweare by the Crosse of his Sheares, hee was so full of Sanctity in deceipt. But the first newes I heard,Holy fraud is the falsest fraud. hee marryed my Welch Neece to his English Nephew; and at my returne I was driuen to take his word that hee was neyther priuy to the contract, nor the marriage. I desir'd but his oth for my satisfaction; hee badde mee haue patience, it was not his fashion to forsweare him-selfe. Thus hoping I had beene quit of the cause, I pray∣ed recompence of the Offender: But with∣in sixe months a new Commission came downe; and a new Office found against mee: which manner of proceeding (I thinke) was
able to breede white hayres in a Brittaines beard. SINCE THE FIRST Time I vndertooke the drowning of my groundes, I (as carefully as I could) sought to better my vn∣derstanding by other mens labours: yet in the whole Kingdom I neuer found, nor heard of a work worthy obseruation: Hauing so many Riuers, Brooks, Fountaines and Springs, which run idely vnto the Sea: without Weare, Sluce, stay, stanke or dam, to turne some part of them vpon grounds that need them, or to containe the substance of plow'd lands and dunghils, which by violent showers washe away,As good no running, as running for no good. and runnes ranging by those grounds that hun∣ger and thirst for want of moisture. Our Husbandmen brag of raising Corne: How? out of ther painfull labours, but (if they want compost) their increase is but barren, and for ought I haue seene (except some few Soiles which yeeld plenty of Hay, by often o∣uerflowing of fresh Riuers, or the Tide staying vppon them as it were by damm) those fresh-waters
yeeld their increase by nature, without industry. I would aske how many Shires bee in England, and in euery Shire how many Ri∣uers, Brooks, Fountaines, and Springes? If the number be great, I would know how they be imployed, and what our Corne-maisters (which carry the reputation for good hus∣bandry) will say to it? They will say (per∣aduenture) and so will all Husband-men (with∣out peraduenture) it is easie to raise Corne with store of Compost: but (wanting Hay;) I would learne how compost may bee raised? The question betweene errable conuerted to medow, and errable not conuerted, wilbe this: some will say, there is no reason to put good errable to bad pasture. So say I too, Others will say, ordinary errable exceedes ordinary Pasture. It may bee true: but I speake of good errable appointed to bee drowned: I will giue no estimat of English Errable; scituate neare London or Hauen Townes, or to places more vendible then the country wherein I inhabite. Yet this will I exempli∣fie out of my experience, if the Principality were duly imploied, & each acre handled ac∣cording to some plots begun, I would hope to liue to see Wales called the Garden of England: for our Welch-mountains yeelds infinit Foun∣tains & Springs, the Grounds Fearny & broomy,
it being of as a excellent temper to intertaine water as heart can wish; vnlesse wee flye to the maine Sandy-grounds, which are but sparingly found in Wales; the Country lying in a hotte quarter of no cold Climate. Now, to speake of drowning, At what time, with what water, & how long you ought to downe your Grounds. at what time of the yeare, with what water, how long it may continue on the ground, and what ef∣fect it will worke, you shall haue all I know to the vttermost; at least if I remember all. Now, fixing your fancy on this Misterie, you must pry into euery Fallow-field, Dung hil, and Water-course in your neighbourhood: then compare the quantity of ground vnto the quantity of water you can draw vnto it, and if you find water ynough to answer your desire, then in the beginning of your ground, plant your weare or scluce in height leuell with the Bankes, or exceeding it one foote (or there a∣boutes) ore-thwart the Riuer or Brooke: and carry your Trench-Royall (which is your grand∣maister-Trench) so farre as your ground ex∣tendes plimm or leuell: that from the mouth of your Weare, or Scluce, to the end of the ditch or trench, your water may flow backe againe ouer your scluce into the Riuer or brooke. In so doing, you haue a full command forward and backward (without any descent) to drowne at your pleasure: though your
trench royall rise in the end twenty, or forty foote from the mouth of the scluce. Hauing prepared your drowning-course, bee very Looke well to the leuel∣ling of the grounds that are to be drownedcarefull that all your ground sub∣iect to the same (whether Medow, Pasture, or Errable) bee as plaine as any garden-plott. If you leaue any forrow, reane, or slade, vn∣leuelled, you shall finde that forrow, reane, or slade, will receiue the most part of your wa∣ter idely: which otherwise would disperce ouer the whole; and comber you with the care of new plowing it to make it the more plaine: which will hinder you two or three yeares at the least. Hauīng made your weare or scluce, your Drowning-course or Trench, your ground leuelled or plimmed, thē followes your attendāce: in flood-times see you suffer not your floud-water by negligence to passe away into the brooke, riuer & sea; but by your sluce, com∣maund it to your grounds; and continue it playing theron so long as it appeares muddy: and finding the substance decaying (from a fat floud vnto cleare water) take vpp your sluce or floud-gates, and suffer the cleare water to haue his course vnto the maine brook or riuer again, vntill new or fresh-flouds appeare; and still as it riseth muddy, imploy it on your grounds du∣ring the winter-season. When you haue spent the winter in muddy-floods, and your grounds
seasoned by sucking the substance of each fallow,In the begin∣ning of March cleere your grounds from cold cleare∣water. and dung-hill: be sure, in the beginning of March, to cleare your ground of cold water; and keepe it as dry, as a child vnder the hands of a dainty Nurce; that the continuance of cold water in the body of your ground in the spring, breed neither Rush, Boult, nor Spiery∣grasse: but grasse much more profitable, thick, long, and fine; voyde of all Mosse, Hard∣heads, Cow-slips, or any weede what-so-euer. Obserue respectiuely your soyle, whether clay, or sand: for, sandy-grounds will endure tenne times more water (being naturally hotte) then the cold clay: yet some washers of grounds, (in their owne conceits) will imagine it's be∣hoouefull to turne the water at all times on their lands; or as long as they (in their discre∣tion) thinke good. But so may (with indiscre∣tion) surfeit a clay-ground with a drunken-dropsie,The best hus∣bands or husband▪men as all the Phisitions in the neighbour∣hood, with all their visitations, will hardly heale in two yeares space. Hauing sufficiently sped your clay-ground in the drowning-time, (I meane Winter) you may (by negligence, or ig∣norance) suffer colde water, in the heate of Summer, to coole your ground so much, that the vitall spirits will bee decayed: and that moisture hauing gotten the vpper-hand, the Sunne workes, out of that drunken-dropsie
ground, the Rush, and all other ill-pleasing stuffe, and vnprofitable trash. I said in the Spring, you must keepe your grounds drye. If March follow his kinde, and Aprill drye, ouer∣flowe it with Cleare-water, that it receiue no drought: for, all men know, if the Spring bee drye in May, it's two to one Haye neuer goes a begging. Amongst other things, an olde Drunk∣ard once warned mee, I should not suffer the roofe of my mouth to bee drye: yet I neuer followed his example: I remember the cup was neuer from his mouth, and hee in the end dyed of a dropsie: so, in claye-ground, in the heate of Summer, drowne it moderately: and, (it beeing once sufficiently seasoned in May) you need not drowne it vntill a day, two or three before you mowe. At which time you prouide for mowing, if sufficient showers, haue not quallified the drought of your ground; let downe your sluce into your trench-royall, that there-by you may command so much water to serue your turne as you desire. Which Trench-royall running on the plimme or leuell, suffer it to discend, where you meane first to mowe, and you shall finde this manner of drowning in the morning of your mowing so profitable and good, that
commonly you gaine ten or twelue dayes ad∣uantage in growing:How profita∣ble to drowne a little before mowing. for, drowning before mowing a day, two, or three, so supples the ground that it doth most sweetly release the roote of euery particuler grasse, although the Sunne bee neuer so extreame hotte: other∣wise, if you drowne not before you mowe: you mow one day, you ted an other, you spend one in gathering it into winde-cockes: and with-all, stand vpon the vncertainty of the weather, whether you dare aduenter to breake your cockes or no. Beeing broken, they must haue a drying time before they can bee put into greater cockes; and then opening them againe into the last and greatest, by tedding, gathering, cocking, recocking, and treble-cocking, your haye continuing aboue a weeke on the ground; the ground being bare, and induring the heate of the Sunne at Mid-summer (in the hottest time) it doth so drye and parch the ground, that if the heauens yeeld not more raine then is necessary for a Common-wealth, your later-mates will prooue vnprofitable: where drowning before mowing, will make good a second mowing: and in walking ouer grounds I will tread as on Veluet,Signes of well seasoned grounds▪ or a Tur∣key Carpet. This Drowning before Mowing, puts wormes to execution, or forceth them to flye from
their habitation: for sure I am that that ground will not bee troubled with them vn∣till they raise a new generation; and that can∣not well bee in those grounds with-out great store of heate? which if it happen, to what end serues your water, but to season the ground againe. The Summer may bee so ex∣treamly hotte as the feruencie thereof may force you to double or trebble drowning; yet I would wish all those that haue not the true vnderstanding and vse of the water (before they put this in execution) to enquire where any such worke is; and hauīng found the place, to obserue the Weare that commands the Riuer, and to note the length of the trench-royall, and plimme thereof: what stankes, lists, or trenches bee within the contents of the grounds: and, hauing found your drowning, and fore-recited trenches, obserue what height euery stanke or damme is: and if you can see the flouds playing against the damme, your experience in beholding it goeth farre be∣yond mine. I will not forgett the two-foote-trench, top∣ping your Maine-riuer, with-in foure, or fiue foote from the Banke, as occasion is offered. The vse of which Trench so neere the Riuer, many may wonder at (as many haue done) why it should bee drawne so neare the
maine-riuer it being but two foote broad and one foote deepe. I know not how all Riuers and Brookes runne else-where, but in that which I labour, the ground is much higher on the Riuer side, then the maine-flatt-bottome, and, where by sluce I drowne some thirty Acars vpon a reasona∣ble leuell; yet vpon the Riuer side the height is such, as my sluce will doe no good, if I suf∣fer the water to descend into the flat bottome, not taking the aduantage in the beginning of my Topping-trench. A fault to drowne some, and to leaue some of the same ground vndrowned.If part of your ground bee drownd, and some part forgotten, there is a fault some∣where; either by ignorance, or negligence, or both: but to helpe both; I pray you forgett not to runne this trench, topping and brauing your Riuer, that in the Winter, you drowne that with the rest. In Summer, your commaund is more abso∣lute, it beeing sheluing or descending to your flatt-bottome-ground; you may with a boord of two foote broad, and one foote deepe, stay that water, and suffer it to play vpon the face of the ground, halfe a quarter of an houre, or little more, vntill it meete with your flatt bottome. And thus you may handle the braueing-trenche, by drowning the sheluing ground
euery morning in the heate of Summer, be∣fore and after mowing; so long as you finde the Sunne forceable. Your flatt-bottom ground, beeing, in the heate of Summer, drownd, suffer the water from your sheluing or descending Trenche, but to kisse the hand or soote of the same: for it beeing claye, and once drowned, be∣fore mowing in the extreame heate, it will not endure a second drowning with-out dan∣ger: vnlesse the heate doe so extreamlye in∣crease, that one extremitie must incounter another. So,You must double drown in the summer if there bee cause. you may fall to double drowning (if there bee cause) which you shall easilye finde by trying the temper of your ground, thus: If a riding rodde (beeing some-what stiffe) will enter into the ground two foote deepe or more, it sheweth it hath had moysture sufficient by the former drown∣ning; If the rodde will not enter in, but by dif∣ficultie, or forceable handling, you may iudge it to bee ouer-dryed: And in this manner make tryall in what state your ground stands, whether too drye, or suffi∣ciently seasoned.
If to drye, giue it watry sustenance to nourish and reuiue the dying roote: and, hauing satis∣fied your ground, suffer your two-foote-trench to haue a continuall course of water, Winter and Summer, for these reasons following: That is to say; In Summer, when you would drowne, your trench beeing full, you neede not staye the letting downe of a sluce out of the maine Riuer: for, so shall you staye the time vntill your water rise to the highest of your sluce; and beeing risen, must haue a time to come into your two-foote-trench, to execute what you would haue done: where other∣wise, your trench beeing continually full, you may (as I sayd) appoint your seruant with a boord to stay or stoppe the trench; and so from place to place, drowne your sheluing or descending ground from the beginning of your trench, to the end thereof both day lye and hourely. This Topping or Brauing-trench; hath this excellencie with-all, that it running conti∣nually in the trench,VVants will not worke in water, nor where it soakes. frees your grounds from Moules or Wants: for they will not worke in water. If they desire to fall into the midst of your other Meades, they must vnder-mine the Trench, swimme the Trench, or some way shuffle ouer.
If they do; see their danger: they being once found to worke in the belly of your Mead, they bee subiect to death, by your comman∣ding the water from your two-foote-trench to descend on the rere-ward; the sodaine course whereof comes so fast vppon them, and they wanting foot-manshippe to rescue their liues, are ouertaken, to their vtter ouer∣throw. Suffer not one Moule, or Want to liue be∣tweene your two-foote-trench and the maine Riuer, which is not far distant. They hauing no great scope to worke, will so vndermine from the brink of the maine Ri∣uer to the brimm of your Trench, that in your drowning-time, in the heate of Sommer, you shall finde so many Springs from their working∣holes into ye Riuer, which if you stop not, with great care,The Offiers of the Brauing Trench. in finding the places of breach, the most part of your water will runne into the Riuer idely. To speake of the brauing-trench: Be∣ginning at the Commanding-weare, or Scluce, it works this effect: if the violence of the flood should bee such, as vppon a sodaine, your hay at Midsomer should be drowned by ouer-flow∣ing the banke, or in your After-math-time the like should happen, it is at your choise whe∣ther you will suffer that inconuenience or no:
for the Earth taken out of your two-foote-Trench, beeing throwne on the one side of the same, raiseth the Ground higher then that beyond the Riuer, by two foote at the least: which forceth the Floud altogether, on the other side, and keeps your Hay and Af∣ter-math euer in safety. This Topping or Brauing-Trench must runne to the lower part of your Groundes, as a hand∣maid to the maine Riuer, to attend your plea∣sure Winter and Sommer. I would haue you suffer some VVater to runne therein continually: VVhich con∣tinuall running will scowre your Trench, and lett all filth from falling therein: and if it should fall you are driuen to often clean∣sing it. Beeing sometimes with VVater and some∣times without, the Mole or VVant instantly possesseth the same, and workes along the Trench an Arrow shoote in length: And it beeing so exceeding moist, makes ma∣ny Holes, cleane through into the maine Riuer, and at your next turning in of the VVater will it issue out at euery particular Hole; and your Trench, beeing but foure or fiue foote from the Riuer, the Ground beeing too much moistned, falleth or calueth downe into the same.
It's not sufficient when you haue conueyed your Water from your first Sluce into the Bo∣dy of your ground or brauing-trench, then to giue it liberty to runne a head: for so will it fall into the lowest part;How to go∣uerne and lead the Water from your brauing Trench ouer your grounds. but you must gouern and lead it, beginning at the highest of the ground, vnto rising places, and so suffer it to descend against some Stanke, or Damme; which you must raise as occasion shall bee of∣fered: As this; if your ground falls so much that the course of the water offers to runne into the maine Riuer againe, before you haue done with it: Raise a Stanke a foote, two, three, foure, or fiue, or so many as may stay it to the height you desire, and force the same against the Ground vnto your lower Grounds; and so continue it playing from Stanke, to Stanke, from the beginning to the end thereof. So, shall you bee sure by raising of these Stankes or Damms, to stay all the substance of substantiall Waters which is forced by your Weares, or Sluces, into the body of your ground, there to remaine: where if there were no Stanke or Dammne, the water (running head-long into the lowest part) carrieth the sub∣stance so mainly forward, that little or nothing at all wilbe left vpon the face of the ground to nourish the same.
How to make your Stanks or Damms.Now to furnish you with the present vnder∣standing, how to make your Flanks or Dams; in what place, and how farre you would haue it drowned; repaire into the lowest part in the beginning of your vppermost ground; where if you desire to pound it to such a hight; pitch your Leuell there; which Leuell (or Instrument) I will make knowne more fa∣milarly vnto you in the Mapp of my Worke, (which you shall find in this booke incerted) and commaund your seruant to hold some staffe with a paper bound about, some two in∣ches broad: and looke through your Leuell from the lowest part of your Ground, vnto your desired place. In this manner your Leuell will assure you how to cast your ground to an inch. And when you haue truly learned to Leuel, which in one hour I will vndertake to teach you, you may range ouer the Kingdome as principall suruayors of Riuers,Water works, be most char∣geable to the Ignorant. Brookes, Foun∣taines, and Springs, and accuse the best wits of the greatest negligence, in matter of the grea∣test Common-wealth. It hath beene sayd by some, Water-Workes be chargeable and dangerous. They bee so; for if you aduenture to commaund maine Riuers, as Thames, Seuerne, and the like: you may iudge with what difficulty it will bee done. In their beginnings
Breadth and Depth is increased by a num∣ber of small Brookes, the Commaund therof goeth beyond the estates of the most men: yet there is no Riuer in the Realme (be it Thames, or Seuern) where there is any descent, but that I wil steale, by Counter-trench (when the muddy floud is leuel with the bank) so much water as I desire. If you aske mee how broad,Your Trench must be made great or small according to the quantity of ground you are to drown. and deepe the Trench must be: I would know what quantity of ground you haue to drowne if much, your Trench must be the wider and deeper. I need not putt you in minde to raise a sluce on the mouth of your trench; if you do it not, common inconuenience will compell you. You will neuer drowne so oft as the floud riseth to the height of the banke, because of your hayand after-math in Sommer: Therfore as I sayd, you will be compelled for your safe∣ty-sake to Sluce your trench. As your Trench-royall feedes your sheluing-groundes and falls into the flat-bottome, and ri∣sing to the height of your first, second and third stanke with the rest; take heed the wa∣ter exceed not the height of any of your stanks or damms a hayrs-breadth: for the force of the water and violence of the winde in a furious tempest, will ouer-throw it, as if the Canon plaid against it.
I haue forborne to speake of my Stank-Royall, which is of purpose prepared to inter∣taine the Trench-royall: which Trench-royall, in the continuance of his running, vnder∣takes the safe conduct of three Brookes and some Springes withall to the Rendez-uous or place of generall Consultation, where their im∣ployment shall be; whether against the Stanke-royall, the Maine-stankes, the Counter-Trench, or the rest. But indeed the Stanke-royall inter∣taines all commers, the Trench-royall and her Hand-maid Brookes: and forceth them seauen foote in height. The aduantage wherof, drowneth sixe-score Acres in three houres,Six-score A∣cres may be drownd in three houres. and twenty Acres in the returne backe. In a Counter-trench forty Acres; in a Trauer∣sin-Trench twenty more; in Sommer and Winter-Trenches, twenty; in double and treble Trenches (and the rest) twenty more. Take vpp the Sluce which commaunds the Stanke-royall, and in one houre, my Euer-lasting Trench conueyes the Trench-royll and all the hand-maid Brookes, into the maine Riuer: and (for ought I haue heard) after I gaue it passe, it had peaceable progres into Seuerne without examination. I will acquaint you with a manner of drow∣ning which you may very well like off.
If you will handle two or three hundred Acres of Ground you shall dayly drowne Winter and Sommer for euer, some part shel∣uing or descending and the rest Flat-bottome, deuides by Defending-Trenches: For, cleare VVater will supple your Sheluing-Ground if it continue thereon sixe or seauen dayes; But, ther's a discretion to bee vsed; There∣fore I aduise, as you drowne the Sheluing-Ground with cold and cleare Water in the cold of Winter, suffer none to fall into the Flat-bottome; but, your Muddy-flouds: For you well know, that the water passing downe∣ward, doth indure most violent labour in running: and beeing sodainly taken away, it doth sodainly drye, and none at all remaines to infect the ground. If it steale into the Flatt-bottome, the cold∣nesse of the cleare-water with the coldnesse of the ground, in the cold of Winter, wanting the heat of the Sunne to dry it vp (it being lodged in so plaine and pleasing a place) will venture life to raise the rush.The Rush will be raised by ouer-much moisture. Now, seeing I haue spoken of the excellen∣cy of drowning, I will speak som-what of mine ambition therein. THer was neuer General of an Army-royall,
nor Admirall of an Armado, more ambi∣tious, then I haue beene in brauing my Trench-Royall: And wearied with ouer-wal∣king my selfe therein, I repayred to my stank-royall; and I beeing raised seauen foote in height, I was so possest with the pride of my walke, that I thought my selfe fit∣ter to bee Gouernour of a Towne of Warre, then Commaunder of a hungry VVater-worke. But remembring (within the compasse of my age) a Greate Person stood to bee Ge∣nerall of an Armie, that neuer saw the face of the Warre nor neuer fought Combat with an Enemy; A Councell of Warr beeing cal∣led, it was answered, by a Grand-Captaine, hee had neither the Words, nor Art of VVar: Therefore dangerous for the States to aduen∣ture the Kingdome to try his experience. The rest more vnder-valued him, Saying hee were fitter to bee Chauncellor to a Lord-Bishoppe then Generall of an Armie-Roy∣all. Sharp censures made me fal blountly to my workes.These their censures, fortified mee in mine old labours: So by little and little, I for∣gatt the Ambitious Resolutions of the Ho∣nourable VVarrs, and the Pleasures of a Parke (withall) wherein I yearely killed at least twen-Buckes and Sores.
The loue of my Water-workes, stole my desire from thence, that in the whole number of twenty yeares, I cannot say I was at the killing of one Bucke, although my Parke-pale came within twenty foote of my trench-Royall, ha∣uing some yeares twenty Buckes, killed with a kennell of Hounds, and louing the sport as much as he that lou'd it most. The Maister of a Water-worke may well bee compared to the generall of an Armie, which hauing beleagred a Towne, it behooueth him for their safetie to fortifie and block all passages and In-rodes, that the Enemies sodaine Alarum annoy them not: So, must the Maister of a Water-worke attend euery shutt, and shower that threatens excesse (whether in mid day, or mid night) commanding his Centinell-Seruant to search the sluces, whether they bee vp or downe. If it happen before mowing, or in your after-math-time, take vp the Sluce, and giue it pas∣sage into the maine Riuer: for, the sodaine ouer-plus, your Trench-royall, will conuoy into your euerlasting-trench; vnlesse, your desire be to ouer-flow some parcell of pasture or meade thats ouer-eaten. I protest it hath beene more grieuous to mee in Summer-season, to see a muddy-floud run idle with-out command, then to see a lustie
wanderer quarter the country, with-out being put to worke.The seuerall offices of the sluces. Touching the offices of my number of sluces; the first commands the main-riuer in the beginning of my Trench-royall. The second, commands the maine Riuer into my brauing-trench some halfe mile lower. The third, commands the same Riuer a mile below, at the lowest part of my ground: So, you see, that within the running of two miles, I plant three sluces; the maine Silles being forty foote long. The reason why I planted so many with∣in the length of two miles, was this: the riuer being thirty foote broad, and ten-foote deepe, my Trench-royall beeing but ten-foote broad, and foure-foote deepe, it receiued no more water then the breadth and depth would giue leaue. Not-with-standing the quantity of water my Trench-royall receiued, I did not find the want of any in the maine-riuer; which caused me to raise those two other sluces: grieuing so com∣modious an Element, so rich and substantiall, should fall into the Bowels of the sea, with-out profit. I call that a Trench-royall,what a trench royall is. where part of the maine-riuer is commanded by sluce into it. I call that a counter-trench,What a coun∣ter trench is. where part of the riuer is stolne in by the rising of the flood to the leuell of the banke with-out sluce.What a top∣ping and bra∣uing trench is My topping or brauing-trench is that which hand-maides
the maine-riuer (side by side) vnto the end of the worke. The Winter and Summer-trenches,What the winter and summer trench is. bee those that water the grounds in the Sum∣mer-time. Hauing drownd with cleare water a parcell of ground, it being satisfied and for∣saken, I furnish the rest of my Trenches with that water, vntill a Meade of thirty or fortye Acres bee sufficiently seasoned. You must know, you cannot drowne so many Acres, not hauing the aduantage of these many Trenches and Lists, vnlesse your ground bee all flatt-bot∣tom; hauing a stoute and strong water with-all. My double and treble-trenches,What double and treble trenches require. require a par∣cell of plaine ground containing fortye Acres or more. At your turning-water in, it will hard∣lye dispeirce ouer the whole; the weakenesse thereof is such in Summer-season if it bee not holpe and assisted with Summer-lysts, that runne the length of the land you labour in. You may raise the Liste in this manner; In the middest of the Meade, in place of best aduantage, force a couple of Furrowes of each side with your Plowe, encountring each other; cleanse those Furrowes, and place the earth aboue: by this meanes your List falls out to be a foote-path, when both sides of your ground are drownde, Summer and Winter. This manner of speaking may seeme strange
vnto you; But, if you did see the manner of the worke, you would say it could not bee otherwise exprest. The trauersing-trench, is, that which receiues the water from the counter-trench;What the trauersing-trenche is. and the Stanke-royall (running on a whorle, his sluce be∣ing taken vp) is receiued by a Bastard-sluce, which doth disperse on both sides the Treneh; and that's the cause I call it a Trauersing-trench. What the euerlasting-trench doth.My euerlasting-trench endures more trou∣ble then all the rest: the Trench-royall running at a floud-time (as a shipp vnder-saile, beeing Admirall of the rest) and hauing determined of all the duties of the seuerall Stankes, Tren∣ches, and hand-maide brookes, they humble them-selues to the Stanke-royall; and prayes no longer continuance there, then they prooue profitable to that place▪ which is so long as they carry filth in their fore-heads, (I meane a muddy floud) and declining to a cleere water, the euerlasting-trenche receiues it to his com¦mon course, with as much ioye to the Maister as may bee. I cannot well giue significant names to all those Trenches, which I call troublesome; there∣fore I pray I may bee forborne to speake of them at this time. I had almost forgotten to make a true report of the euerlasting-trench:
it's but a bastard-brooke, falling from my Parke into the mouth of my trench-royall, and his course stopt by a Weare or sluce, not inferiour to any in the maine-riuer. This bastard-brooke is commanded by that sluce to attend the trench-royall to the rendez-uous, or place of imploy∣ment, drowning altogether, which descen∣ding against the stanke-royall, is forced into his euer-lasting-course againe. Against another Weare or sluce (comparable to any of the rest what-so euer) you shall vn∣derstand why these two maine Weares or sluces bee planted vpon so beggerly a brooke:Wherefore the Weares or sluces are planted. the trench-royall crossing the brooke so farre as the ground extends, must either haue passe in the end (which cannot bee with-out leaue of the inhabitant belowe) or forc'd backe againe ouer the first Weare, three mile aboue; which may bee: but the purpose is, the euerlasting-trench shall haue an euerlasting continuance, to receiue the Surplus of the floud-water for defence of your Hey, and after-math. The an∣cient bredth and depth is inlarged: for, that the floud being drawne into the Trench-royall, must fall into this euerlasting-trench: and be∣ing inlarged, the trench-royall intertaines it without preiudice to any of the grounds. My lasting discourse hath almost done with my euerlasting-trench. As the trench-royall
commands the euerlasting-trench to the ren∣dezuous or Consultation-place: so the counter-trench hath the like command else-where. And as the euerlasting-trench is sluced to giue passe to the trench-royal to the lowest part, so I place one other Bastard fluce more; which receiues the counter-trench; and many times, both royall and counter-trenches meete against that sluce; which to his power, doth yeeld as much profit as any in all my workes. If your grounds, at any time, be so hard fro∣zen, as the hardnesse thereof is like to conti∣nue, such a snow may happen vpon your frozen grounds,What is to be done in hard Frosts, and great snowe? as may remaine thereon so long as the extremity of wether indures: or so long as you and your cattell will be weary off, which to preuent, let downe your sluces, drowne the frozen grounds when the snow begins to fall: so shall you release the grasse being bound, and spend the snowe, which threatens your preiu∣dice, and free your grounds, that all kinde of cattle, (Sheepe especially) may haue sufficient sustenance therein. My trench royall, from the beginning to the end, is three miles long; it runnes so precisely on the plimme or leuell that euery fifth yeare I am driuen to cleanse the channell: such store of muddy-substance is forc'd by my first sluce therein. As the Riuer Nilus drownes Aegips
from the Abissine Mountaines, enriching the couutrey, to the wonder of the world: so doth the muddy▪ flouds from the vpper part of the Golden Valley, (as from a Golden Mountaine or Fountaine) improoue my estate beyond be∣leefe. It's not vnknowne to my neighbourhood my demeasnes at New-court was set and forsaken at forty pound by year, besides my Parke. I set it so my selfe, & let any man, that hath an vpright iudgment and equall eyes in his head, view and reuiew it, hee will say it will yeeld within three yeares, three hundreth pounds yearely, besides my Parke. Many haue said to me, no other mans grounds lie so conuenient to drowne as mine at New-court.The Golden Valley is but seauen miles in length, and one mile broad. I answred them, yes: for, three other liuings of mine, affoord the like aduantage for drowning. The Vale is but seauen mile in length, and not a mile ouer any where. Yet there be diuerse Gentlemen therein, whose li∣uings might bee bettered, some a hundred, some two hundred pounds yearly: amongst the rest, there's one that dwells on my right hand: the Riuer deuides our demeasnes, who might stock his grounds with stankes, trenches, lists, ba∣stard-sluces, and such inuentions as the ground requires; being all flat-bottom: and I truly take it, he may drowne foure hundred Acres with lesse charge tenn times then mine: not hauing one Maine-Weare or Sluce to rayse: For, those I
haue planted, serues for both grounds: but whether it be his ignorance in not vnderstand∣ing, or negligence in forbearing, I know not; but, I am sure, it's out of his way an hundred pounds a yeare. There is another Gentleman, who dwells on my left hand, makes shew of vnderstan∣ding it; yet are his grounds ouer-howed with the like neglect: but seeming to excuse it by some vnexpected troubles (which indeed hee indured) & that his weighty occasions would not giue him leaue to vnder-take, nor suffer his seruants to attend it, hee hauing in the eye of his house, a hundred Acres of errable land, worth not aboue three shillings an Acre, which amounts but to fifteene pound a yeare. Yet I made him this offer, if he would bee pleased to make it plaine, as plaine might bee, for foure yeares, I would giue him fifteene pound a yeare, beeing the true valew of his land: and after the end of the foure yeares, I would take it for one and twenty, yeelding him a hundred pounds a yeare, the charge wholy mine, in raising sluces; stankes, trenches, and what else so-euer:A liberall of∣fer refused, which if takē, had benefited the offerer more then the offered. so, during the foure yeares, hee should receiue fifteene pound a yeare; and euer after, a hundred pound yeare∣ly to him and his heires for euer.
I did not require any thing vntill the foure yeares were expired, and then my demaund was but three hundred pound. The yeare following, one hundred came in vnto him againe, the second, an other hun∣dred, & the third he receiued another; so in 3. yeares, he receiued his three hundred pound. He offered me nothing, and hee hath done nothing; so this is but an accusation for neg∣ligence, setting it forth in as friendly manner as I may. O! if the Lord of a Mannor did but know what an offence it is to plant an vn∣der-shot-mil vpon a Riuer, where the scituation of the soile affords drownings: He were better to put his wits aworke to make VVindmils in plain ground, if hee would consider what hee looseth by it. For example; my right-hand-neighbour ha∣uing such a Mill as I speake off, worth some tenne pound by yeare, and four hundred Acres of excellent ground to handle: hee forbeares his Winter and Sommer drowning, to giue sa∣tisfaction to this vnsatisfiable glutton the Vn∣der-shot-mil, where, in the trunesse of husban∣dry, hee should dayly drowne three hundred Acres for euer. As the Sun shines euer once a day in Alex∣andria, by reason whereof the Land yeelds sweete increase; so might he say he dwelt daily
in the Land of Canaan, which euer flowes with Milke and Hony. And as the greatnesse of the Turke obscures the Persian-glory, or as the Hungarian forces are the only Obstacle, hindering the Turkes descending to the conquest of the Christian Kingdomes; so should his stankes or Damms incounter the downe-fall of the Muddy flouds from the Mountaines of great Cadwalleder. Thus much to incourage my neighbour for the vndertaking of Water-workes.The length of the Trench Royall. My Trench-royall beeing three miles long, and running plimm or leuel forward and back∣ward; I plant diuers Bastard-sluces crosse the Trench-royall, for Winter and Sommer drow∣ning. If any man will bee so phantasticall as to carry his wife leuell by water to her Dairy, or build Barnes and Cattell-houses ouer the same for ease of his Oxen, I refer my selfe to his consideration whether it be not possible; the Trench royall beeing tenne foote broad,The breadth and depth of the Trench-royall. and foure foote deepe. Likewise if by Boate you will carry Compost, Corne, Hey, Wood, Stone, Milke, or any other Prouision, its referred to your like consideration. I made two litle Ones for the carriage of earth, which I found to doe mee such seruice, as I know two Teames in a day could not counteruaile any of them.
Their burden beeing but two load a peece three seruants commaunded them both, in; their charging and discharging: their length being twenty foot; the breadth but three: Had I a Boate with a Keele fiue or six & thirty foot long,The good seruice of a Boat. and nine foot broad, I would carry sea∣uen or eight load of Compost at a time; Corne in Sheaues would conueniently bee carried; but how many load of Hay, at a time, I can but gesse: You must at al times examine how your Trench royall is stored with muddy-substance; it beeing furnished by the main Riuer, euery flood, euery second, or third yeare it riseth in the bottom 2. foot at the least; especially for a mile or two comming in at the mouth of the Trench, it doth fil the fore-part of the same: & vnles you cleanse those parts you cannot re∣ceiue so much water by 10. foot broad. and 2-foot deepe: the want whereof you shall find in your lower grounds. As the finest husband-mē be most prouident and studious to make their profit answer their labor; so let not the charge of clensing the Trench-royall be greeuous vnto you: in respect the recompence shall (much more then the greatest vsury) outgo your lay∣ing out. In the yeare 1601. I was forced to cleanse my trench-royall, being almost fil'd to the leuill of the Banke, and for the excellency of the
substance therein conteyned, all the dung-hils in the countrey can witnesse it was their very quintessence: the quantity thereof may be esti∣mated by the breadth and depth; and I know fiue hundred honest Yeomen, Husbandmen, and Laborers would say, the Substance would ouer-counteruaile the charge beeing imploy∣ed for Wheat, Onyons, Cabiges, Carets, or any other Rootes agreeing with the nature of that Residence of the Trenches. Which Muddy substance beeing put on the one side of your Trench-royall, you may by Boat, carry to your wheat-land, to your Garden, or to better any other barren ground that yeeldes no profit: For, I will drowne Winter and Sommer at my pleasure, a thousand Acres of Medow. I will sustaine no inconuenience at any time, vnlesse the negligence of my seruants suffer the Sluces to be vpp when they should be downe; or some enuious, lewd, or malitious person, in the night-time loose them downe of purpose to harme me. No Subiect in the Kingdome can certainly say hee hath the like Groundes, vnlesse he daily drowne as I doe. And for these thousand Acres I shall bee able to Mowe them twise a yeare.
If I please: The rush, the Mosse, the boult, the hard head, and many other vnprofitable wedes craues mercy at my handes for their life in respect of their former offences; with pro∣testation neuer to trouble the ground againe. I doe not see why the cowslip should haue more fauour then the rest, vnlesse it bee to countenance the May-pole. I haue not done all I can doe, I can Graze my mowing Meades, vntill the first of Maie. I would see who can doe the like, without the hazard of his Hay that Sommer, vnlesse hee follow my example. It may bee sayd by some among them-selues that you (neighbour) and I,In Lumbardy grasse growes apparantly twice a day being cut twice a day. may doe the like: But then, that You, and I must liue by the Riuers of Leadon, Dow∣banke, Frommey, or in the Land of Lombardy, where grasse groweth apparantly twise a day. Those young Gentlemen that haue scarce liuing ynough to maintaine them-selues in the misery of this Age; should (if they did well) learne to leuell and quarter a ground: then sell that little they haue; and afterwards exa∣mine the Records in the custody of the Clarke of the Statutes; there shall they finde that Clarke to haue more Clyents (in my conscience) then any Councellor in the Kingdome.
And for mine owne part (without vaine-glory bee it said) I am as well knowne in that Office as a better man. Thus, by taking paines, following the Ordi∣naries, and being acquainted with the Vnder-Sheriffs, & Atourneies of euery County; those Gentlemen for a quart of Canauary-Wine, wil giue you a Kallender of all Yronicé. ye Land-lords, that are before-hand with the World: In which if they deale not iniuriously with you, you shal find my name. This done, examine the Riuers, Brookes, Fountaines and Springs in euery County, whether they bee imployed or no. If they run idle, make your match in the countrey you best like off; & I assure you, you shall find more Land to be sold vtterly neglected (while the water runnes at wast) then a thou∣sand such young Gentlemen I speake off, will buy. I do aduise all men that wilbe Vnder-takers in this Husbandry, to bee perfect in the true Sur∣uey of the number of Acres that may be drow∣ned; and that they make choyce (as neare as they can) of errable-land: which commonly exceedes not two or three shillinges an Acre yearly. Old Pasture couered with mosse, that nature hath forsaken, and Medow-ground (if there bee any) that takes more pride in the company of the Cowslipp, then
the gilt-cupp which carrieth the garland from the rest. And for your comfort, (bee this spoken) if in the laying out of fiue hundred pound, at the end of foure yeares, you make it not two or three thousand pound,Nota. your choyce is bad, and lucke worse. During those forty yeares you cannot receiue lesse then the rate you buy it att; which is twenty yeares pur∣chase, or as you can agree: And so from fiue hundred to a thousand, two, three, or as much as your estate will stretch too; the more the better. If you finde difficulty in my discourse; any Easter or Michell-masse Tearme you shall finde me in the house of a true Brittaine (maister VVotton a Scriuener) in Fleet-street, ouer against Saint Dunstans Church. And for a Supper, at Iohn Gents you shall haue your Belly-full of Water-workes. For my Drownings, my name hath beene so scandalliz'd in open Ordinary, by a Westerne Gentleman, who, since the Kings Maiesties comming, is become a Knight of account, but rash censure deserues little reckoning in mine account: Many men spake diuersly of my labours for a long time, because the Honourable Courts (as they thought) had brought mee to Beggers-bay: and failing in the true execution of my workes,
in not placing a Planke of foure inches thicke, and twenty inches broad, vnder the maine Syll, to preuent the water from vndermining the same, and withall fayling to lay my Groundes (by the indiscretion of my Seruants) leuell or plaine, and not vnderstanding of what strength my Stanks should be to with stand the weight of the VVater that playes against them, & what alowance to giue each Stanke in his Foundati∣on; and forbearing the running of my Trench-Royal to the end of his Course for many yeares, and not thinking Stankes to bee necessary for the commaunding of Grounds disoebeying my desire, and withall (lately) running Coun∣ter-Trenches, which next the Trench-royall, haue place aboue any; which were not drempt off before; many sluces, and for many yeares, were forborne in places most conuenient, and much profit lost thereby:Twenty yeares practise in these VVorkes. my speculation hauing continuance in practise aboue twenty yeares. But were it now to beginne againe, I would performe it in one: and raise it to the greatest profit in foure: so hard a thing is it for any mortall man to perfitt any profi∣table inuention, without paines, cost, and con∣tinuance of time. They say now, if Maister Vaughan had these & these grounds he would doe This and This.
This opinion haue I gotten in the countrey where I dwell. There is a Shropshire Gentleman (Maister Hoord) a famous man, his labours (I know) haue taken tryall at Enuies Barre, by igno∣rant Iurors and vniust Iudges for a worke hee performed. It was chargeable vnto him; the situation thereof was such as it could not be otherwise handled. I saw it, viewed it, and examined it; and I know it doth much more then counteruaile the charge. But had I beene acquainted with him, in his first beginning, he should not haue spent his time to so small pro∣fit: not that he mistooke in the handling ther∣of; but knowing my owne errors, and by cost∣ly experience able to instruct him; I found no want of Arte in him, but the want of Winter and Summer-water to serue his turne. I would haue perswaded him to haue forborn that barren vnder-taking, & to haue gotten fiue or sixe thousand pound with ten times lesse labour, in the choise of a thousand places else∣where, where hee might haue drowned dayly for euer. Muddy-flouds doe often happen in Summer-time. If the running of them idle bee so vnto other men as it is vnto mee,Muddy flouds often happen in Summer-time. let them doe as I doe; euer haue one pasture bare eaten: and as
you keepe one speciall Chamber in your house to entertaine a stranger, so, you alwayes haue one Pasture for that muddy-floud, which will pay you after twise twenty in the hundred. It's confessed by all in the Golden-Vale, that that lit∣tle land which wee haue would be bettred fif∣teene hundred pounds a yeare. If the like were done through-out England,Note the profit of drownings. it would profit the kingdome in a yeare two Millions: which would maintaine an army-royall, to the honour of Great Brittaine, and be most comfortable to all honourable Souldiers, Crest-falne for want of warre and military imployment. It pleased maister Hoord to view the place where my Water-workes were performed, ac∣companied with three iuditious and vnderstan∣ing Gentlemen, namely, Maister Brainton, Mai∣ster Pearle, and Maister Wolridge; what their beleefe was, I referre it to those who haue a desire to be informed. Any Gentleman or other hauing performed a worke, and brought it to his absolute perfecti∣on; should not sit downe by it: but hauing fi∣nished that Worke, and being Maister but of one Liuing,Note this aduice. I would (as I formerly said) aduise him to sell it: and at the end of foure yeares make good account by purchase, to gaine sixe, if not ten for one. I haue a Meade called nine dayes-math: an exellent Meade, and approued for such of all my neighbours. I sold the her∣bage
thereof diuerse yeares for fiue pound per Annum: but within few yeares, after the flouds plaid vpon it, I solde the Hey for ten pound yearely: and the latter or after-math was richly worth fiue. I will graze this Meade vntill May: yet notwithstanding the Hey will yeeld me ten pound, and the after-math fiue. Now hauing (I hope) profited the intelligent Reader, thus far: al the fauour I desire at his hands, in lue therof, is this, That I may haue leaue to giue new names vnto mine old grounds, without beeing laught at in ordinaries by scarce ordinary vnder∣standers. Some they must haue; for, those they had by drowning are couered with new earth. And with-all, they bee inlarged aboue two hundred Acres. I cannot call that the nine-daies-math, which now is aboue 30. (vnlesse I should forget my counting-craft) nor that a Moore which is firme and pleasing ground; nor that the rushy-leasow, which is reduc'd now vnto a more fruitfull and profitable plot, if the rush ap∣peare there againe, he forfeits the Fee-simple of his life: so hauing my grounds deuided into 12. parts, their names (vnder fauour) be altered and now called in this manner: the Pinck, the Gille-flower, the Carnation,The nevv names of the Meades and Pastures. the Rosemary, ye Mary-gold, the gilt-cup, the Honysuckle, the Daysy, ye Garland, the Eglentine, the Cowslip & the Primrose. Some do say their Kine doe yeeld more milke hauing often change, then those that graze in only one pasture.
I say nothing to it: but, beleeue those dairy wo∣men that affirme it. This I can say, for any that desire often change, (as the most part would haue fresh and fresh pasture) if they (being cu∣rious) will not bee coy to handle a Cow-shore in his kinde: then thus; When the Kine bee put ouer to some other ground, you know their staine or dung by heate of the sunne will grow hard: and within short time, will force a proud and insolent grasse; such as the Kine in their returne will not touch. When you turne out your Kine into fresh feeding; bee sure to disperce and seuer those Cow-shares, that the place be, not stained with any polution. They being dispersed; drowne your ground with cleare water: or mudd (if a floud happen) the ground being bare, two Bles∣sings incounter each other, and purifie the place where the Cow-shores were falne: so, at the next turning in of your Kine, some fort∣night after, they shall finde nothing to distem∣per or offend the taste: the water doth cleanse and cleare all annoyance to the beast, and breeds perfect life in euery growing grasse. This last Summer 1604. in Trinity terme, be∣ing aboue at London, I came not downe till after Mid-Summer: hauing grazed my mowing Meades too too long after May. Vpon my re∣turne, I enquired in what state my grounds stood,
my seruants answered they were sufficient∣lye seasoned;Eye-pleasers are often liers. but (in deed) they did (as many) seruants doe) report the best of the worst, to excuse their negligence: the Meades were not so sufficiently drownd, as the necessitie thereof required: They being neglected before mow∣ing, not trying their temper with a riding-rod, (my beliefe was so great in those greater Liers) but after mowing, the truth appeared, the quantity of Meade (in one place) being three score and ten Acres, by reason of the mowing, making, and cariage, before the ground were free to drowne, the extremitie of the heate was so great, that the grasse turned yellow; being tainted, as a sheepe on a drye rotte: or, as a man inlye sick, and newly recouered faules into a relaps againe. In this manner my grounds had gotten the greene-sicknesse or a buruing-feauer (I know not well whether) If in the extreame heate you would drowne with Iudgement, you should not drowne in the heate of the day: but in the night from sunne to sunne. But being forc'd, I suffered the water to worke night and day; the season of the yeare falling out to bee dry: the sunne extreamly hotte; the ground hott, dry, and hard: so what betweene the heate of the sunne, and heate of the ground, the water be∣came luke-warme, and faild to effect that good
which by Nature other-wise it would haue done. And if I be not deceiued, the infection of the earth, had poysoned the water: or made it so sick, as it was not able to endure the ground. As a scudding shewer of raine,The quality of ground distempered with heate. doth raise vpon a dung-hill-poole great bubbles (like an Oxe-eye) by falling of the drops thereon; or, as water in a pott, by the heate of the fire, doth labour, and shew distemper: so, did that water-worke, play, and bubble on the face of the ground, shewing (for a quarter of an houre) nothing but discontent. The ground being qualified, the grasse did not instantly grow (as at other times, being or∣derly fedd) the coullour being changed, the grasse standing at the point of death, being in that case as a sicke pacient hauing taken a pur∣gation, who must haue a time of recouery: so did the grasse, for diuerse dayes, shew nothing but sorrow, heauinesse and all discomfort. It beeing once made yellow by the heate of the Sunne, and recouered of the Yellow-Iaundies, although the comfort of the water put life in∣to it; yet, during the season, it had neuer his perfect complection againe: the point euer carrying a shew of poysoning; which error (with Gods helpe) I will neuer committ hereafter
Let all men drowne before they Mowe, and after Mowing, your grasse will not bee yellow, but as greene as a Leeke. You must alwayes keepe your grounds in a true temper; they must neuer be too wet in the Winter, but when you drowne; nor too drye in the Summer, hauing water enough. I had almost forgotten this; be∣fore you raise your stankes, bee sure to cleare your grounds from Moles or Wantes,Moles are mischieuous vermin in or about such water-works they bee dangerous creatures (like a Vsurer that's hard∣ly gotten out of a mans land, wherein hee hath gotten footing,) if they haue possession in a stanke. You know when all other grounds be drownd some part of the stanke will bee free; they will not faile to rend and teare your stanke like Rabbets in a sandy soile. I protest two or three Wants in my stanke-royall, was out of my waye twenty pound a yeare, for many yeares. I put a fumbling fellowe to attend their walkes, who (not beeing cunning enough to destroy them) vtterly plagued me; vntil I hapned vpon a good worke-man, who hath cleared my stankes & my brauing-trench. And were it not for my brauing-trench and my stankes, I should neuer need the vse of a Want-killer; because I do so oft drowne in Winter-time; which often drowning doth force them to forsake the soile. I would desire no better pastime then the
hunting of a Wante in a plaine Meade. My bra∣uing-trench being close by the maine Riuer: my trench-royall lying on the height of the ground: my seruant seeing her cast, if neare the trench-royall hee commands water into a descending trench; and doth force her on the face of the ground with much submission, praying her Clergie: her offence being Burglary in break∣ing my stankes, although she were the first meanes that occasioned all these vnder-takings, yet I could not bee drawne to yeeld her a par∣don: had she wrought in any other part of my grounds, I had not taken it so grieuously: but, in spoyling my fundamentall parts, with work∣ing cleane through my stankes, and forcing them, by the extremitie of the water altoge∣ther doune, she was vncapable of pardon. If he that hath an ouer-shoote-Mill would enter into an account with him-selfe, whether it were more profitable for him Winter and Summer to drowne grounds, or to grind corne, it would put him to a pussle. I know many men that haue Mills, who for a desire to gaine a peck of corne a daye (and many dayes failes to get any) so that by a true computation,Drowning more profita∣ble then Mills. in the whole yeare, the Mill may bee worth some foure or fiue pound: and in drowning, foure or fiue acres of barren ground, I will raise a farre greater benefitt.
But because he wil giue reputation vnto his demeasnes, or information on the marriage of his sonne, that hee hath such a Mill; hee had rather suffer muddy Flouds in the VVinter, and cleare VVaters in Sommer to breake their limbs on his Mill wheeles, then exercise his wits (by Drowning (to attaine a world of wealth. It is grone to a kinde of prouerbiall speech, in the Golden-Vaile, that hee that doth drowne is a good Husband: hee that may and wil not, is figured out with the sillable, Fu. I know, I haue as good an Ouer-shot-mill for VVater ynough as this Kingdome yeeldes: yet rather then I would grinde my owne Corne at a floud-time, or in my drowning times in Sommer, I would carry it tenne mile off to be ground, though the Miller told the one halfe. Beeing requested by many Gentlemen of the best quality, to putt these VVater-workes in Print: I praied those ingenious Gentlemen, (Sergeant Louell and maister Coulthurst) to speake what they thought concerning the same. They both (vnder their handes by way of subscription) said; it would bee very profitable to the Kingdome to be put in execution: being of late a common thing in Deuonshire; but, not in so ample manner.
For drayning of groundes Maister Louell is Serieant-Maior of the same;Drayning of Grounds, cou∣sine-Germain to Drowning. yet Ile say as the meane Counsellor saith to the Serieant at Law; vnder fauour (maister Serieant) Ile declare what I didde in your Element of Drayning, beeing but Cousin-Germaine remoued to mine of Drowning. A Ring of ground (some foure-score Acres) scituate stirrope-wise; a Brook in the vpper-part crossing the same, in the smaller point of his extent, there running from Adams dayes in likely-hood: the greater quantity of the ground from the Creation neuer sound: but stain'd with the Boult, the Rush, a Quagmire coherent, wt many other Improfitables, neuer mowed, nor grazed in the driest daies, but knee deepe in water. It lay at the gaze for fiue thousand six-hundred and six yeares, and by general opinion it stood in state of damnation; as if it hadde beene curs'd like Mare-mortuum for the sin of Sodom. When I hadde deuided my sounde Groundes from those infected with leprosie; with as many maister-trenches as were neeed∣ful to conduct my Drayning, Sucking, Working, & Searching-trenches into the maister-trenches; hauing but two foote descent to procure a passage; all this beeing performed; that spungy bogg draind, dryed and made fitt
for any vse: I drew the Brooke which crossed the vpper point of the Ground downe into the belly of the bogg, to make priuy search in euery particuler Trench, what filth fell therein. Liuery and Season taken,Liuery & Sea∣son taken by the Brooke. Atornement of Tennants, Fealty, with all other Ceremonies that Littelton layes downe to raise Vses, Cus∣stomes, or Estates of Inheritance, with pay∣ment of pence, and the strongest Fortifica∣tions my skill could afford for an euerlas∣ting continuance, and cleare keeping of the Drayning, Sucking, Working, and searching Trenches. I protest I had almost forgotten this insuing most necessary Inuention.A necessary Inuention for suppling hard Groundes for easinesse of Trenching. I was in the Parish of Peter-Church to runne a Trench-royall some mile on the plimm: The Countrey-people made them∣selues beleeue it would cost mee a thousand Markes. Before I ran any part of my Trench: I planted my Sluces crosse the Riuer, at such time as my Sluces were downe, the Water did rise to the leuell of the Greene-sward: the Sluces beeing vppe, the Water suncke vn∣to his ordinary course againe. So hadde I the commaund of the Slu∣ces to ryse and sinke the Water at my pleasure.
Hauing leuelled the Trench: I put eight La∣bourers to worke therein, who, (during the whole day) wrought but one Pearch, which was but sixe foote broad, and three foot deep: To whome I said (when I perceiued how little they had done in a day) I see now it's true, as the Country saith:Countrymens Coniectures ar not alwaies Oraclces. It will cost me a thousand Markes ere I effect this VVorke, if it go no bet∣ter forward. They said vnto me they did their best indeauor: But after they had taken some halfe a foot of the greene sward (or face of the ground away) they could not force their spades or spittels one inch deepe, the hardnesse of the Earth was such: and wish'd mee to giue ouer that vnder-taking. It was some-what before Michelmas (the Winter-raine not hauing suppled or mollified the ground any whit at al) I commanded them to attend their labour on the morrow; then did I cause them to run forty pearches in length, six foot broad, & but halfe a foot deepe; which halfe-foote deepe the spades did easily enter: And so for that day, I ended with them Then they demaunded what imployment I would putt them to the next morrow? I bad them good night: and willed them to bee there ve∣ry early in the morning. After they were gon, I caus'd my man, to let downe the sluces, and raise the VVater to the height thereof, and
Sodainly the Trench flowing, it entred with such puissance as if it would haue dissolued the very Bowels of the Ground. Then early be∣fore their comming my Seruant tooke vp the Sluces,A notable so∣daine effect of Water on hard ground vneasie to bee Trenched. sunke the VVater, and gaue it the liber∣ty of the maine Riuer, that they the next day, easily forced their spades two foote deepe and more. And in this manner, with the water, I suppled the Trench from the beginning to the end, & saued thereby a hundred pound at least. Many worthy and expert men haue written of the breeding of Cattell,The manner of breeding Calues. whose indeauours I much reuerence, and referre them to bee commended by Posterity: Yet, will I venter to lay downe mine experience in the youn∣ger sort, for the Falling, VVeaning, and Raising of Calues: which (breefly) is this: Those Calues you meane to breed: a month before they fall, lett your Cow or Kine bee well fed with good Hay, that she or they may be the better able to bee deliuered of them, and to yeeld plenty of Milke: Vppon their first Caluing, suffer them not to haue too much milke for three or foure dayes: For in ouer-sucking them-selues, they will bee so glutted with the plenty and newnesse of it, that nature in them will bee ouercome, & be subiect to Gillying or Scowring, which wil hinder them for a long time. VVhen they
bee fiue or sixe dayes old, let them sucke as much as they can: When they come to bee a month old, prouide a Cratch for fine Hay, and a Trough for cleane Water, although you haue no meaning that they shall sustaine them-selues thereby: but to prepare and ac∣quaint them (in a wanton manner) to learne to eate Hay,How to learne them to eat Hay & drinke VVater. and drinke VVater. Dayly they will bee nibling with the Hay and VVater as desi∣rous as some idle persons bee of Tobaco and Ale. VVhen they bee eight weekes old take away the Milke of one Teat from your Calfe in milking your Cow before the Calfe bee suffered to sucke: the want of which Teate (for hunger and thirst) will prouoke both your Calfe to eate Hay, and drinke VVater. Continue him so for foure dayes; then take away, or milke one other Teate from your Calfe as aforesaid, which is halfe the Milke; so, will you force your Calfe to a greater de∣sire of Hay and VVater: After this, take away the milk of another Teate within foure daies after; and so after that take away all. Hand∣ling the matter in this manner, your Calfe will neuer mourne, for want of Milke or losse of Damme, but will cheer∣fully fall to eating of Hay and Drinking of
water immediatly. Let your Seruants be very carefull to lit∣ter them with cleane Straw dayly, and keepe them sweete with good Hay: and let them neuer want cleare water. If you haue good scope of House-roome lett them run and play their fils: VVhen you purpose to turne them to grasse,What you must do when you purpose to turne them to Grasse. keepe them in the House vppon Hay and VVater vntill Mid-may: If you turne them out (as the most do) in Aprill, you vn∣doe them: the nights being cold, the grounds cold, the grasse weake and raw: they neuer acquainted with the ayre, will mislike with your vnkinde dealing: in token whereof the heyre will turne; and their bellies loose, scowre, or gilly, that they neuer will be them∣selues: because the Sun hath not wrought suf∣ficiently with heate to comfort the ground that should feed and comfort them. VVhen they haue beene some month in your best Meads in Mid-may, and after re∣couered their strength: put them into some higher Groundes where there is Grasse, water, and shadow ynough: Lett them rest there vntill Bartholomew: then put them ouer into your After-maths before the time of the yeare growes cold, and then it wil so puffe them with pride yt al the winter following they wil scorn ye
malice of the hardnesse of the Season if they may haue their fills of Hay, and fogg with a Houell or House in the extreamest cold daies to shelter them. The first yeare beeing spent, euery man knowes how to handle them: If you will haue them principall cattell, giue them hay ynough the second Winter. But what a Calfe am I to teach Countrey∣men to breed Calues by Art, when they (good Husbands) breed them fast ynough by Na∣ture;Husbandmen breeds Calues by Nature. I therefore bequeath this Doctrine to Gentlemen that can better tell how to breed a Hound then a Calfe; and referre what else might be spoken, to the discretion of the ex∣perienced. Thus haue I toucht what I handle with as much breuity as I could: ommitting nothing that may giue euidence on the behalfe of those Perticulers, which will fall out to bee as true in effect as in apparance when euer they are put to their strictest Triall. THerefore, now nothing remaines more to be said; but to intreat thee (friendly Rea∣der) to beare with my merry-sorry Stile, if ther∣in any where I haue not obserued a precise scholler-like Decorum: for Mars his Vniuersity (wherein sometime I haue bene matriculated,
and proceeded to some degrees of command, according to my study and time spent therein) affoords no rules of speaking in Print, yet Sol∣diers (in their Element) best speake in Print: and can expresse what else lies in the compasse of their spacious conceits, like men of Wit, Arte, and Courage; which they that speake altogether by the Booke, oft faile to performe. But how∣soeuer, as this Worke, now finished, is published for thy profit, and exprest in such manner as I thought would yeeld thee most pleasure: so thou wilt accept it kindly, and thereby giue me cause to be euer studious of thy benefit. Principally, though lastly, I am humbly to in∣treate you (my good Lord of Pembrooke) to looke on my plainenesse, and winke at my bold∣nesse: the first, proceeding from my Nature, the last, from my Education: Yet, what is here blunt∣ly expressed, was first of all sharply conceiued, with much whetting of Witt, and no lesse filing of Inuention. But what it is, it is all Yours, as he is, that will no longer bee, then he remaines Your Lordships euen beyond his vttermost. Rowland Vaughan.
Those that are desirous to see a Mill sawing Timber, there shall their desires bee fully satis∣fied, seeing a Mill by a Water-course, keepe a do∣zen Sawes on worke together. As also by the like streame of water, a dozen Spitts or Bro∣ches turned at once. Which turning, turnes all Turn-spit Iacks out of coūtenance, though they be neuer so sawcie, and their tongues runne on Wheeles, yet, this Water-worke, workes them out of all fauour with the Cooke, that loues to doe much with little labour, whom the Iacks distemper (which often happens) soone makes hott as a Tost, because (like a Cricket) he liues euer about Fyre.
The Conclusion. THus runnes our Water-workes vnto this end, That all that worke by them, by them may play▪ For, if they Mossy-grounds by them amend, For paines and pleasures (then) they'l freely pay. This WORKE consists not (like some idle Tracts) In shew alone, or Speculation: No; this is practicall, faire shewes in Acts, To make the poor'st, the richest Nation. Then, chiefly aym'd I not at publick-good, I would not thus divulge my priuate skill: But, bee'ng free-borne, my Natur's like my Blood; Which would do good to all, and no man ill: Then, All (I hope) or of that All, the best Will wish me well: as for the rest, I rest. Theirs as they giue me cause, Rowland Vaughan. FINIS. In praise of the Worke and Author. TO praise a worke of such a worth as this, That shews the way t'inrich both earth & man: Deserues a witt that rare and excellent is, And all to short, excell in what it can. The Author, and his worke do merit fame; VVith-out the glory of a Poets name. Anthony Dauies.
