3526 S120939 99856130 21653
A SHORTE TREATISE, OF the crosse in Baptisme con¦tracted into this syllogisme. No humane ordinance becomming an Idoll, may lawfully be vsed in the seruice of God. But the signe of the crosse being a humane ordinance is become an Idoll: ergo. The signe of the crosse may not lawfully be vsed in the seruice of God. Amsterdam Printed by I. H. 1604.
The latine avthorities Englished. 1 They which will treat of all sortes of I∣dolatrie, must needes take the name of an Idoll in a larger signification. By the name therefore of an Idoll is vnderstood: what∣soeuer besides the true God a man doth pro¦pose or frame to himselfe to be worshipped, either simplie, or in some respect. 2 For Idolls or images haue greater power to corrupt a silly soule, in that they haue a mouth, eyes, eares, nose, handes, feete, then to correct it, in that they neyther heare, smell &c. 3 The signe of the Crosse which is made in the forehead, or in the ayre, is sacred and venerable. 4 We adore the signe of the Crosse, by which we haue receaued the Sacrament of saluation. 5 The christians from Christs time hi∣thervnto haue worshipped with the high∣est loue, both the woode of the Lords crosse, & the signe of the crosse: with which they
dayly fence themfelues. 6 Defend me Iesu, from all euill vices past, present: and to come, by the signe of holy crosse: and by the in estimable price of thy iust and precious bloud. 7 If thou seeke any law for this in scrip∣ture, thou shalt find none. Tradition is a∣vouched to be the author, custome the con∣firmer, and faith the obseruer. 8 At euery passage, at euery setting for∣ward, at euery cominge in and goeing out, at putting on of our clothes, shoes, &c. We stampe our forhead with the signe of the crosse. 9 And with often crossinge guard thy for head, that the destroyer of Egipt find no place in thee. 10 Christs followers doe by the signe of the Crosse, shut out the vncleane spirites. 11 The Crosse guardeth the minde, it ta∣keth revenge on the deuill, it cureth the de¦seases of the soule &c. 12 Whose vertue, perfecteth all sacra∣mentes:
without which signe nothing is ho∣ly, nor any consecration takth effect, and whosoeuer are the Ministers of the Sacra∣mentes, whatsoeuer hands doe dypp or annoynt the comers to Baptisme, out of whatsoeuer mouth the sacreed word doe proceed, the authoritie of ope∣ration doth by the signe of the Crosse, make effectuallall Sa¦craments.
OF THE SIGNE OF THE Crosse in Baptisme. The vse of the Crosse in Baptisme is not a thing indifferent, but vtterly vnlawfull. For this reason. IT is against the Apostles precept 1. Io. 5.21.PROOFES OF THE MAIOR. Babes keepe your selves from Idolls. For the explanation wherof two thinges are to be scanned first: what is meant by an I∣doll. Secondly: how farr we are to keepe our selues from the Idoll. An Idoll iswhatso euer besides God is worshiped with divine honor. quicquid preter deum diuino colitur honore: and though some restraine an Idoll to a visible forme: because it is deriued of apotou eidous et as a learned writer obseruethZanch. de re¦dem P. lib. 1. cap, 17, Ths. 5: Qui de omnibus Idolatrie generibus acturi unt, latius nomen Idoli accipiant ne¦cesse est Idoli igitur nomine intelligi∣ur quicquid homo tanquam deum vel mpliciter vel katati sibi extra verum Deum proponit fingitque colendum. Neither is this spoken without good rea∣n, for nothing is properly an Idoll,as it is a visi∣ble forme▪ but as it is religiously worshiped. quate s est visibilis forma, sed quatenus reli¦ose colitur If therefore it be worshipped it
my be an Idoll though it be no visible shape otherwise the worshipping of Angells and the soules of the iust men were no Idolatry, see∣ing these are invisible spirites. and therefore the signe of the Crosse. If it be religiously worshipped, may proue an Idoll though it be transiens quiddam a thinge vanishing in the Ayre and no permanent forme. For as that learned Zanche speaketh there is a du∣plexA twofould Idol the on reall the o∣ther imagi¦narie con¦ceiued only in the minde Idolum, the one reall the other imagi∣narium et tantum mente conceptum. For answer to the Second question. Men may keepe themselues from Idolls two wayes viZ. a cultu, et ab vsu Idoli from the wor¦shipp, and from the vse of the Idoll. For the first,How farr we are to keepe our selues from an Idoll, 1 Cor. 10.15, to 23. S. Paule is so strict that he alloweth not the christians so much as to be present in the temple at the Idolatrous feasts, though they did it without any internall opinion, or externall action of worshippinge the Idoll. But Iohn in this place doth not speake s much of the worship as the vse of the Idoll for (as Aug. in psalme 113. well obserueth) th
Apostle commaundeth vt caueant non tan¦tum a cultu simulacrorum, sed a simu∣lacris ipsis. that they a voyd not only the worshipp of the Images, but also the images or Idolls themselues. Now the vse of an Image, or Idoll, may be ciuill or religious, and both of them publike or priuate. That an Image, even such an Image as is Idolatrously worshipped, may be made & re∣tained for cyvill respects of ornament, sto∣ry or such like: we make no question. though the tollarating of them in open and publick places, even extra cultum be offensiue and turne into a snare, as Gideons Ephod was to his posteritie: when it was abused to Idola∣trie. And vppon this ground we yeld, that though the Crosse be apparantly an Idoll, yet in Princes Banners, Coronations, Coyne, Crowne, or any other cyuill respect it may haue a lawfull vse. But that any thinge of mans deuisinge being worshipped as an Idoll should be used religionis ergo & in the wor¦shipp
of God, seemeth directly against S. Io precept, for, how doe I keepe my selfe from the Idoll, or how doe I sheew my Zealous d¦testation of that filthy Idolatry: when I r¦tayne it: and vse it so honorably, as in th Temple, in the Sanctuary, in the service o God. Which interpritation of this place of S. Iohn, the Church of EnglandHomil. ga, perill of Ido¦latrie part 2 doth on th warrant of Tertullian approue & comend. And this poynt is further strengthened by the second commaundement:Exod. 23 & 34 13 Deut▪ 7.5, Ps, 16, 4 which forbid∣deth not only to worshipp: but even to make any Image, or any similitude whatsoeuer, to witt, ad cultum, or for religious vse: as ac∣cording to the scripture the bestCaluin, insti. li : 1 cap. 11 V in. cathe. in expost, se¦cundi, pre∣cept. Petr. Martyr loc com∣clas 2 cap 5; sect 22 Hooper in 2 precePt. Zanch: de re¦demp . lib 1 cp. 5 interpret¦ors, partly against Images in Churches, part¦ly on the words of the precept doe most natu∣rally expound it. for suerly, if Idolatry it selfe as amost execrable thing be forbidden, then all occasions and meanes leading there∣vnto are likewise prohibited. And what stronger prouocation to that spirituall whor¦dome: then erectinge Images in the place of
Gods worshipp? PlusBabington on the 2. commaunde¦ment. Perk. set: caus. ca, 21 Allen on the 2 Com. Dod on the 2. com, enim vt rectu Av∣gustinus in psal. 113. Valent simulacra ad¦uruandam infelicem animam, quod os abent, oculos habent, aures habent, ares habent, manus habent, pedes ha∣ent, quam ad corrigendam quod non oquentur, non videbunt, non audient, on odorabunt, non tractabunt, non mbulabunt. And therefore without doubt the mea∣ing of the commaundement is to bynde he Church: from all such snares and al∣uerments to sinne, and therefore doth Au∣ustyne in quest. su{pro} Leuit. q. 68. well onclude from this commaundement that uch making of an Idoll can neuer be iust or awfull. Now if no similitude at all be tollarable n Gods service, then much lesse any that ath bene and is worshipped Idolatrously. Tertullian against the Gnostickes: ac∣ompted them Idolaters not only which wor¦hipped, but those also which made and re∣tained
Images (nemppe ad cultum or for ho¦ly vse) and in his booke de Idolatria, he ve¦hemently reproued the very makers of Ima¦ges, though they did not themselues wor¦shipp them, which sheeweth in what execra¦tion the primitiue Churches held any reli∣gious vse of an Idoll. The like we may finde in Epiphanius ad Iohannem Epūm Hicrosal. Where he repor∣teth, that finding an image of Christ, or some Saint, hanging at a Church dore, he¦rent it in peeces, avouching that to hang a picture in the Church of Christ, was con∣tra autoritatem scripturarum contra re∣ligionem christianam: contrary to the authoritie of the scriptures and the christi∣an religion. From hence I conclude, that if the godly fathers were so vehement against erecting Images of Christ, and of Saintes, even a that time: before any worshipp was giuen vnto them. Much more would they with¦stand it now after men haue made Idolles of
them. And if they would not suffer an Idoll so much as in the place of Gods worship: would they endure themselues to vse such an doll as the Crosse: in the seruice and sacra∣mentes of God. Their Zeale against that spi∣rituall fornication: would neuer permitt hem so highly to honor, such an execrable thing: neither was their Zeale herein with∣out ground of knowledge: For the spirit of God in Psa. 115.8. speaking of Idolls, They (saith he) that make them, are like vnto them, and so are all they that trust in them. Where a plaine difference is made: betweene makers: and worshippers of Idolls: and both condemned, as curssed transgressors of the law, shall any then make the Idoll of the crosse and that religionis causa and yet be innocent? Qustionlesse by DauidsPsa 16, 14 example we must make no mention, that is keepe no hono¦rable memory of an Idoll, and therfore with out doubt: not giue it so much honor as to vse it: or the memoriall thereof in the house
of God, and in his holy worshipp, but as Isai saithIsai 50.22, We must pollute the reliques: and the very couering, and ornament of the I∣doll, & cast them away as amenstrous cloth, and say vnto it gett thee hence. PROOFE OF THE MINORNow if any doubt whither the signe of the crosse be adored: and so made an Idoll, lett him well consider the tract of Bellarmine de a doratione crucis, where distinguish∣ing the Crosse on which Christ was hanged, from the similitude thereof he saith,other cros∣ses like to this, are ac∣counted sa∣cred Images cetere cruces illi similes inter sacras imagines numerantur and after he distinguisheth those similytudes of Christes Crosse into the Image and signe of the Crosse, so that if the Image of the crosse be taken for an Idoll (& who knoweth not that it is the vniuersall I∣doll of popery: and to be adored, euen cultu¦latrie (which worshipp as they themselues hould is due only vnto God) the signe of the crosse must needes be taken for no better. Be∣sides the same,De Image lib, 1 3. Bellarmyne hauing as is said distinguished the crosse: into three sortes: the
crosse, the Image of the crosse, and the signe of the crosse, he layeth downe this doctrine generally of them all, omnes cruces ado∣ramus and perticulerly of the signe of the crosse he saith,we adore all crosses de Imag. lib, 2 cap. 29. signum crucis quod in fronte vel in aere pingitur esse sacrum et venerabile. To this agreeth Portiformus Sarisb: 4 where it is thus professed adora∣mus crucis signaculum per quod salutis sumpsimus sacramentum. And that the Image and signe of the crosse is of one, and the same account with papists, appereth evidently as by diuers: so perticu∣larly by Hart: For Docter RaynoldesConfer: with Hart Cap; 8: diuis-4 sheewing that the Church of England, hath iustly left the signe of the crosse out of the sup¦per for the Idolatry thereof, doth proue that it is worshipped as an Idoll, by such testimo∣nies as indeede belonge to the Image of the crosse, which Hart no way excepted against, doth imply, that looke what estimation they haue of the Image: the same they haue of the signe, and what honor is due to the one: is
due to the other. For in very deed, they care∣fully teach,Andra. or∣thod: epli lib 9. Bellarm. de imag, lb, 2 cap, 0 Tho. Aquin part 3. q. 2 art. qart. & duers other that it is not in regard of th matter, wherein the crosse is painted, or th couler whereby it is shaddowed, but only an simply for the expressing of the liknes o Christes crosse, and for the representing o Christ crucyfied (which the signe perform¦eth as well as the Image) that the adore th crosse with the same honor, that is due vnt Christ himselfe. And this no doubt was th meanning of Aquinas when he saith th every effigies or liknes of the crosse (wher¦of the signe is one) is to be adored cul¦latrie and Costerus doth avouch that th same worshipp is due to the signe,Ibidem as belong¦eth to the very crosse of Christ, when  saith (though falsly)Coster. En∣h, cap 11, christiani a Chris temporibus semper summa venerati¦ne coluerunt ipsum signum dominic crvcis et signum crvcis qvo se qvotidi maniunt Marke that the signe of the cro is worshipped summa veneratione with t highest degee of honor, and asOthod. ex∣plce. lib, 9: Andra¦s
in expresse words saith in the same man∣er, that the Image of Christ himselfe is orshipped, then the which what can be ore clere to proue that not only the Image: ut the signe of the crosse is by the papistes ost Idolatrously worshipped? Yf any say that to the signe of the crosse one boweth the knee or vaileth the bonnet, nd therfore it is not adored. I answer. First hat adoration is interne and externe: and he externe adoration is therfore Idolatry, ecause it proceedeth from the interne, as ancheusZanch: de re¦dempt. lib 1 ca: 17 Thes: 5 very learnedly, and largely, eeweth. Yf a man invocate to an Angell or giue a y honor internall to a creature, shall it not e called Idolatry,Ephe. 5.6 Colos. 3 5 exceept he bowe outward∣ vnto it? How then doth Paull say that co∣etousnes is Idolatry? For a rich man doth ot outwardly worshipp his goodes, yet be∣ause he giueth vnto it interneMark 10 24 1 Tim 6 19 Luke 12: 15 confidēce hich is due vnto God, it is truely called his doll, as vnto the SardanapaliPhii 3.19 there belly
is termed there god: Right so the Papistes a∣scribinge to the signe of the crosse, that ho∣nor and confidence which belongeth to God, doe make it an execrable Idoll: and so most vnfitt to stand in the sanctuary, or to be an∣nexed to the holy thinges of God. For first they ascrybe vnto the signe of the crosse: power and vertue, to mcryt pardon at least for veniall sinnes,quest, dispu∣tat, de venal pecto as appea-reth by (r) Tho. Aquinus (s) Bellermine and (t) Rhemistes. de effect sa∣crument. li 2 1 Tim 4 sect 13.14 Bellar. de ef∣fect sacr. lib 2. cap, 31 Vnto a rude clowne whos dull vnderstand∣inge cannot reach to hig¦her thinges, this only (saith h) sufficeth for his sauatiō.Also it is held to partake of power effici¦ent, and imediatly (v) operatiue, and that t conuert sinners Marshal de cruce fol. 114 115. yea to gaine saluation, Hosius (x) contra Brent. p. 227. and generally the whole rabl of Romish Doctors do teach to putt great af∣fiance in this signe for chasing away deuils, and curinge diseases, and sanctifiynge both man, and other creatures, to the vse of man. Secondly, I say indeed they doe giue out∣warde, aswell as inward worshipp to the crosse. For it is apparant that they invocate
it in the same manner, that they invocate saints whē they say per crucis hoc signum fugiat procul omne malignum by this signe of holy Crosse let euills all flie farre frō vs. Againe, by the signe of the holy Crosse,In officio sanct. cruce printed in English an∣no 1599. from our enimies dcliuer vs o Lord our God Also in another place, victorious Crosse and admirable signe, make vs triumph and ioy: in heauenly courtes divine. Yea in prayers they ioyne it with Iesus Christ, as in officio missae is to be seene, where they supplicate:By the mer∣cy of Iesus Christ, by the ade & signe of the crosse, by the intercession of the bles∣sed virgine, per mise ecordiam Iesu Christi, per aux ilium et signum crucis, per intercessio∣nem beate Mariae &c. They couple it also with the bloud of Christ in these words defend me Iesu ab omnibus vitiis, malis preteritis, presentibus et futuris, per sig∣num sanctae crucis,hor. present ad usm sa∣rum Parisijs impres. an∣no 1498. et per inestimabile pretium iusti et pretiosi sanguinis tui. All which doth most manifestly proue, that amonge the Papistes it is religiously honored oth with inward confidence, and outwarde reuerence. And therfore if their Idolls may
in no sorte be annexed to the seruice of ou God, the crosse in Baptisme ought necessari¦ly to be crossed & cursed out of our liturgy Neither is it a sufficient answer to say, tha the crosse amongst vs is neque numero n¦que vsu, the same that theirs is, and thoug their crosse be an Idoll, yet ours is not. Fo when God commaunded his people to break downe the Images of the heathen and to ex∣tinguish the very name of them, had they performed that charge if they had burnt al the Idolls of Canaan, and afterwarde mad newe of the same forme, and to another vse though not Idolatrous: yet religious? or how haue we discharged our dueties and sheewe our detestation of that filthy Idolatry, if ha∣uing defaced all the popish crucifixes and I∣dolls, we erect them newe in our Church though not to worshipp them, yet to any o∣ther holy vse whatsoeuer. It is true that our crosse and theirs is the same, both in name, and forme, but not in vse, for then were it I¦dolatrous, now I doe not say that the church of England, doth commit Idolatry: but that
it ought to absteine not only from the Idola∣try or worshipp, but euen from all religious vse of such humaine ordinances and inven∣tions, which others haue and doe Idola∣trously adore. For, if to erect crucyfixes, and other popish Images for holy vse be (cōtrary to the commaundement) a keeping of an ho∣norable memory of the Idoll,Exod: 23.15 Deut: 12:3. Hos. 2.17. howe can the religious vse of the crosse in Baptisme being aswell an Idoll as any of their Images be re∣teyned without breach of the law, Babes keepe your selues from Idolles. obiection. The signe of the crosse in the first institu∣tion was free from superstition and Idola∣try, and if the abuse which grewe after be re¦mooued why should it not recouer his aun∣cient vse & indiffrency, like as as the bread in the Lords supper which the Papistes doe religiously adore? Answer.Of this na∣ture are Churches, Pulpets &c. thinges of necessarie vse and war¦ranted by God him∣selfe. but the reteyning of the brazen serpent was noe where commaund∣ed. There is great difference betweene that which God hath created and commaunded
and that which man hath ordeyned, for  one is necessary and no abuse can alter t nature of it, the other indifferent and by ¦buse may become vnlawfull; and therefo Hezekia did worthely breake the brasen se¦pent not seekinge to redresse the abuse of i Now howsoeuer Bellarmyne would insinu that the crosse is founded on scripture, y the weaknes of his argumentes doe bewray the vnsoundnes of the matter,aut enim sg¦num crucis habere vim speritualem Potissimum ex instituto Dei li. 2. de effect: sacra. et li. 2. de Imag ca: 29 conatur ve∣nerationem, crucis scrip¦ture autori¦tate stabilire de corona¦mi!. and therfor Tertullians iudgment is to be preferre which plainly saith, that there is no warran in scripture for it horum inquit (7) si le¦gem postules scripturarum nullam in v¦nies, traditio tibi pretenditur autrix co¦suetudo confirmatrix fides observatrix Nowe it is further to be noted that a dou¦ble vse of the Crosse is mentioned in antiqu¦tie, one ciuill, the other religious, against th former we doe not dispute yeldinge all reue¦rence, to those christians which by that not sheewed their reioycinge and glory, in that which the heathen counted their shame, bu
now, that abuse hath turned both the Image and the signe of the Crosse into an Idoll, it seemeth thereby to be made execrable. For Gideons Ephod beinge first a ciull monumēt of victory, when the people went a whoring after it, was it lawfull for the Magistrate to erect in the tabernacle or sinagogue though not the same, yet the like, both in name and forme to any religious vse? would it haue sufficed to say this is not the same Ephod that Israell maketh an Idoll of neither is it sett heere to be worshipped (for your brethrē doe grevously sinne therin) but only to keepe n minde they great victory that God by Gi¦deon gaue to Israell? Right so the crosse vsed by the auncients to sheew that they were not shamed of Christ crucified being meerely yuill, and yet expressinge a most christian esolution, hauing bene abused, yea, continu∣ng to be worshipped, both in imagine and n signo, it seēeth that this filth hath made t vnfitt, on any pretence of restoringe it to his auncient vse to be annexed to the holy
thinges of the sanctuarie: especially wh their are so many papists that superstition ause it among vs. Now for the religio vse of the crosse by the auncientes, it was n¦uer free from sinne and superstition as afte¦wardes is sheewed, and if it were, yet it bei an humaine ordinance, and now not only ¦bused to Idolàtrie, but becominge it selfe  most abominable Idoll, no water can clen it, nor any pretext purifie it for the holy se¦vice of Iehouah. But in very deed to spea as the truth is, the crosse is reteined among vs with opinion very superstitious and er¦nious, for in the late Canons it is said, th the childCanon 30. is therby dedicated vnto the s¦uice of him that died on the crosse. What  this but to equall mans ordināce with God and to ascribe that vnto the crosse, which  due vnto Baptisme? a conceite fitter for ig¦narant papistes, then learned christians  assent vnto. Neither doe we vse it as the au¦cientes did, for Cyprian, Augustine, Chris¦stome & others,Turtul. de bapti; ca. 7.8 Euseb. li 6, ca. 48, Inno∣cent 1, epist, cap. 3. Rab. made insti. cleric. cap, . Durand. de ritib. eccles. li. 1. cap. 20, it is apparant that thos
times did consecrate the elimentes therwith nd did not crosse the childs forhead at all, ut referred that vnto the Bishopps confir∣ation, so that our crossing the Infants for∣ead and not the element of Baptisme, is a eere noueltie without any warrant of that ntyquitie,Our vse of the crosse a Noveltie of some 60-yeares stan∣ding. neither will that place of Tertul∣ian de resurrectione carnis proue the con¦rary. The flesh is washed that the soule may e purged, the flesh is annoynted, that the soule may be consecrated, the flesh is signed, hat the soule may be guarded, the flesh is hadowed by the imposition of handes, that he soule may be by the spirit inlightened, he flesh doth feed on the bodie and bloud of Christ, that the soule may be filled and far∣ed of God. In which wordes he ioyninge to∣eather diuers cerimonies of the christians, oth indeede mention the signinge of the aithfull, but it may as well be referred to onfirmatiō expressed by imposition of hāds s to Baptisme, vnderstood by the washinge f the body, and that one better reason, for it
is more than probable that the signe of t crosse was not yet vsed in Baptisme, seing Iustin Martyr in defens. ad Antonin a & Tertull. de Baptismo et de corona mil¦tis,As for Mar∣tial his epist are iustly suspected: doe describe the forme of Baptisme vse in those times and yet make no mention o the crosse therin, which in all liklyhood the would not haue omitted if it had bene vse therin especially Tertullian, who in that ve¦ry place speaketh of the crosse, as vsed out o Baptisme in the ordinarie blessing of them selues. obiection. But the signe of the crosse is not vsed i Baptisme, but when baptisme is ended. Ans. Yf you take Baptisme only for tha dipping & sprincling of the partie it is tru and so none of the popish additions, whereby they defile that holy sacrament are in bapti¦me, for those which Apud Bellar. Baptis comitantur are not impious, but if you tak baptisme as indeed we doe: for the admini∣stration of that sacrament, then both th prayers before and the prayers after, the ac∣tions
after the dipping: doe all indifferently belong to one and the selfe same thinge, yea it is all vna et)on continual action of the administrati¦on of the a¦crament. continua actio admini∣strationis sacramenti. Sure it is that it must be said to be, either in baptismo extra baptismum aut nullibi, if it be out of baptisme,In Baptisme or out of Bapr. or no where, how is it by common consent of all, said to be signum crucis in baptismo. Obiect. The signe of the crosse is very aun∣cient. Ans. So are many other popish traditions. And if on that ground we are to retaine it, why doe we not giue the baptisedmilke & ho lactis et mellis concordiam. Why doe we not bring offrings for the dead. For Turtullian the first of the Fathers that euer mentioned the Crosse: doth establish these, and the signe of the crosse by one and the selfe same war∣rantie. Besides, if vpon the fathers traditi∣on we vse the crosse, then must we receaue and vse it as they haue deliuered it vnto vs that is, with opinion of vertue and efficacie,
not only in the act of blessing our selues, an in the expelling of diuills, but even in t consecration of the blessed Sacramente For the first, Tertullian is wnesde coron mil  omnem progressum, ad omnem promotum ad omnem ad  ad vestitu et calce atum, frontem crucis signaculo ferimi For chasinge of deuills, Ierom councelle Demetrius to vse the crosse.Epstol. 1 ad Demetriam. Et crebro 9 inquit signaculo crucis munias frontem tua¦ne extermmator Aegipti in te locum reperia Lactantias (de hoc signo scribens)lib. 4 cap. 17 ait clirit sactatores, inquinatos spiritus, signo passioni excludere Chrisostom: in psal. 108. (11 crux inquit munit mentem: ea Demones v cilcitur ea tollit morbos anime. But these superstitions are small in regard of that efficacie which in the sacraments, a¦tiquitie ascribed vnto the crosse, for Cypr¦an (being the auncientest that maketh me¦tion of the crosse in Baptisme) speaking of  (12) cuius vertus omnia peragit sacramenta sine quo signo nihil est sanctum, neque aliqu consecratio meretur effectum. & againe,Cyprian de paoe. Qui cunque sunt sacramento ruin ministri, quale
cunque sunt manus que vel mergunt acceden∣es ad baptismum vel vngunt qualecumque ectus de quo sacra exeunt verba, operationis utoritas in figura crucis omnibus sacramentis rgitur effectum, Augustine in Ioh: tract. 18. Quod signum inquit nisi adhibeatur siue ontibus credentium siue ipse aque qua regene antur fiue oleo quo chrismate inunguntur siue crificio quo aluntur nihil eorum rite perficitur t were superfluous to reherse the rest. But ereby it is evident that the religious vse of he crosse, was even at the first sinnfull and uperstitious, neither can it be sheewed,without ad∣mixtvre of supertition: that uer it was vsed by the Fathers, religionis, go sine admixta superstitione, and this in∣entiō did noe sooner creepe into the sacra∣ent but it drewe vnto it selfe such supersti¦ous conceite of efficacie and necessitie, that ithout it, the meanes which God appoin∣d for the consecration of the elements see∣ed over weake, yea, vnauailable according s someLatly in Su∣rey a child rebaptised because the crosse was omitted, amongst vs account not theire hildren lawfully baptised, yea, will haue hem rebaptised, if the crosse haue bene omit¦ed, out of which may be obserued, first how
dangerous a thing it is to bring in any h¦mane inuention into the seruice of God, si in the very pure age of the Church, it w punished with such a spirituall curse of ho¦rible superstition. Secondly, though at this time popery w not hatched, yet the misterie of iniquity w then a working, and the begining as it wer of the whorish fornications was found eve in the Fathers times, so that, as worshippin of Angells in Paules time,Colos: 2.18: prayers & oblati¦ons for the dead in Tertulliās time, be righ¦ly counted popish and Antichristian, thoug as yet that monster was not borne. So this & other Ceremonies ratified by the popish Ca¦nons & constitutions, may well be taken for popish & Antichristian, euen in the Father times, seeinge they then made away for th beast, and since haue receaued further impl¦etie and autoritie from him:Esai. 52, 11, wherfore to co¦clude as Isai exhorteth Gods people, to keep themselues from the rites and pollutions o the heathen, saying, depart depart ye, goe o
from them & touch noe vncleane thinge. So the spirit in the same manner chargeth the Church not to medle with the corruptions of Antichristian Babilon,Apoc, 18,  but goe out of her my peoplc saith he, that ye may not be parta∣ker of her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues. The feare of which curse doth keepe us from all the superstitious and Idolatrous cerimo∣nies of that whorish sinagogue. Faultes escaped. pag. 10. signum, for lignum, pag 11. inuocate to, for inuocate, 15 inuen∣tions of, for inuentions.
